

GUATEMALA
HONDURAS
BELIZE
NICARAGUA
COSTA RICA
PANAMA
JAMAICA
PANAMA
CANAL
EL
SALVADOR
CENTRAL AMERICA
CENTRAL AMERICA
(SEE INSET)
ATLANTIC OCEAN
PACIFIC OCEAN
CUBA
THE
BAHAMAS
DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC
HAITI
PUERTO
RICO
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
MEXICO
BRAZIL
VENEZUELA
COLOMBIA
PERU
CHILE
ARGENTINA
GUYANA
SURINAME
FRENCH GUIANA
BOLIVIA
PARAGUAY
ECUADOR
URUGUAY
BARBADOS
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
GUADELOUPE
0
500
1000 miles
Income status, 2011
Source: 
Low income
LATIN AMERICA
Lower-middle income
Upper-middle income
High income
World Bank, http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-classifications
/country-and-lending-groups

0
500
1000 miles
IRAQ
IRAN
SAUDI
ARABIA
BAHRAIN
UNITED
ARAB
EMIRATES
OMAN
REPUBLIC
OF YEMEN
DJIBOUTI
ERITREA
JORDAN
SYRIA
LEBANON
ISRAEL
EGYPT
SUDAN
LIBYA
CHAD
NIGER
ALGERIA
TUNISIA
MOROCCO
MAURITANIA
MALI
NIGERIA
CÔTE
D'IVOIRE
GHANA
GUINEA
LIBERIA
CAPE
VERDE
CAPE
VERDE
SENEGAL
THE GAMBIA
GUINEA-
BISSAU
SIERRA
LEONE
BENIN
TOGO
EQUATORIAL
GUINEA
CAMEROON
GABON
REPUBLIC
OF CONGO
THE DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF THE
CONGO
ANGOLA
ZAMBIA
NAMIBIA
BOTSWANA
BURKINA
FASO
CENTRAL
AFRICAN
REPUBLIC
TANZANIA
MOZAMBIQUE
UGANDA
RWANDA
BURUNDI
KENYA
ETHIOPIA
SOMALIA
MADAGASCAR
MALAWI
LESOTHO
SWAZILAND
KUWAIT
CABINDA
(Angola)
SÃO TOMÉ
AND PRÍNCIPE
SOUTH
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
QATAR
COMOROS
SEYCHELLES
MAURITIUS
Co
n
g
o
 
R
. 
N
i
ge
r 
R
.
 
Nile R.
Red Sea
Gulf of Aden
Caspian
Sea
Black Sea
Persian
Gulf
A T L A N T I C  O C E A N
A T L A N T I C
O C E A N
I N D I A N  O C E A N
M
ed
it
er
ra
nean
 S
ea
 
Income status, 2011
Source: 
Low income
AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST
Lower-middle income
Upper-middle income
High income
World Bank, http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-classifications
/country-and-lending-groups

ECONOMICS OF 
DEVELOPMENT
Seventh Edition


E C O N O M I C S  O F 
D E V E L O P M E N T
Seventh Edition
Dwi ght H. Perkins
Harvard University
S te ve n Rad elet
U.S. Agency for International Development
Da vi d L. Lind auer
Wellesley College
S teve n A. B lo ck
Tufts University
B
W. W. Norton & Company
New York • London

Editor: Jack Repcheck
Assistant Editor: Hannah Bachman
Manuscript Editor: Candace Levy
Project Editor: Rachel Mayer
Electronic Media Editor: Nicole Sawa
Marketing Manager, Economics: Sasha Levitt
Production Manager: Sean Mintus
Permissions Manager: Megan Jackson 
Permissions Clearing: Bethany Salminen
Text Design: JoAnn Simony
Art Director: Rubina Yeh
Composition: Jouve North America—Brattleboro, VT
Manufacturing: Quad Graphics—Taunton, MA
Copyright © 2013, 2006, 2001, 1996, 1992, 1987, 1983 by W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. 
All rights reserved. 
Printed in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Economics of development / Dwight H . Perkins . . . [et al.].—7th ed.
    p. cm.
  Rev. ed. of: Economics of development / Dwight H. Perkins, Steven Radelet, David L. Lindauer. 
6th ed. c2006.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-0-393-93435-9 (hardcover)—ISBN 0-393-93435-7 1. Developing countries—Economic 
policy. 2. Economic development. I. Perkins, Dwight H. (Dwight Heald), 1934- II. Perkins, 
Dwight H. (Dwight Heald), 1934- Economics of development. 
 HC59.7.E314 2013
 338.9—dc23
 
2012029688
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110-0017
wwnorton.com
W. W. Norton & Company Ltd., Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London W1T 3QT
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  0
W. W. Norton & Company has been independent since 
its founding in 1923, when  William Warder Norton and
Mary D. Herter Norton fi rst published lectures delivered
at the People’s Institute, the adult education division of 
New York City’s Cooper Union. Th e fi rm soon expanded 
its program beyond the Institute, publishing books by 
celebrated academics from America and abroad. By 
midcentury, the two major pillars of Norton’s publishing 
program—trade books and college texts—were fi rmly 
established. In the 1950s, the Norton family transferred
control of the company to its employees, and today—with
a staff  of four hundred and a comparable number of trade,
college, and professional titles published each year—
W. W. Norton & Company stands as the largest and oldest 
publishing house owned wholly by its employees.

Brief Contents
PART ONE  Development and Growth
 
1 
Patterns of Development 
3
 
2 
Measuring Economic Growth and Development 
23
 
3 
Economic Growth: Concepts and Patterns 
55
 
4 
Th eories of Economic Growth 
89
 
5 
States and Markets 
129
PART TWO  Distribution and Human Resources
 
6 
Inequality and Poverty 
165
 
7 
Population 
217
 
8 
Education 
257
 
9 
Health 
299
PART THREE  Macroeconomic Policies for Development
 
10 
Investment and Savings 
349
 
11 
Fiscal Policy 
391
 
12 
Financial Development and Infl ation 
421
 
13 
Foreign Debt and Financial Crises 
455
 
14 
Foreign Aid 
499
 
15 
Managing  Short- Run Crises in an Open Economy 
545
PART FOUR  Agriculture, Trade, and Sustainability
 
16 
Agriculture and Development 
583
 
17 
 Agricultural Development: Technology, 
 
Policies and Institutions 
619
 
18 
Trade and Development 
665
 
19 
Trade Policy 
709
 
20 
Sustainable Development 
757
v


Contents
Preface 
xv
International Development Resources on the Internet 
xxiii
PART ONE
Development and Growth
 1 
Patterns of Development 
3
Th ree Vignettes  | Malaysia  | Ethiopia  | Ukraine  | Development 
and Globalization  | Rich and Poor Countries  | Growth and 
Development  | Diversity in Development Achievements  | Approaches
to Development  | Th e Study of Development Economics  |
Organization  | Summary  
 2 
Measuring Economic Growth and Development 
23
Measuring Economic Growth  | Measuring GDP: What Is Left Out?  |  Exchange- 
Rate Conversion Problems  | Economic Growth around the World: A Brief 
Overview  | jared diamond: guns, germs, and steel  | Economic Growth, 
 1970–2010  | What Do We Mean by Economic Development?  | Measuring 
Economic Development  | human development defined  | why use 
logarithms?  | What Can We Learn from the Human Development 
Index?  | Millennium Development Goals  | targets of the millennium 
development goals  | Is Economic Growth Desirable?  | Summary 
 3 
Economic Growth: Concepts and Patterns 
55
Divergent Patterns of Economic Growth since 1960  | botswana’s 
remarkable economic development  | Factor Accumulation, Productivity, 
and Economic Growth  | calculating future values, growth rates, and 
doubling times  | Saving, Investment, and Capital Accumulation  | 
Sources of Growth Analysis  | Characteristics of Rapidly Growing 
Countries  | 1.  Macroeconomic and Political Stability  | 2.  Investment 
in Health and Education  | 3.  Eff ective Governance and Institutions  | 
v i i

viii   C O NTE NTS
institutions, governance, and growth  | 4.  Favorable Environment 
for Private Enterprise  | 5.  Trade, Openness, and Growth  | 6.  Favorable 
Geography  | Summary 
 4 
Th eories of Economic Growth 
89
Th e Basic Growth Model  | Th e  Harrod- Domar Growth Model  | Th e 
 Fixed- Coeffi  cient Production Function  | Th e  Capital–Output Ratio and the 
 Harrod- Domar Framework  | Strengths and Weaknesses of the  Harrod- Domar 
Framework  | economic growth in thailand  | Th e Solow (Neoclassical) 
Growth Model  | Th e Neoclassical Production Function  | Th e Basic 
Equations of the Solow Model  | Th e Solow Diagram  | Changes in the 
Saving Rate and Population Growth Rate in the Solow Model  | population 
growth and economic growth  | Technological Change in the Solow 
Model  | Strengths and Weaknesses of the Solow Framework  | Diminishing 
Returns and the Production Function  | explaining differences in growth 
rates  | Th e Convergence Debate  | Beyond Solow: New Approaches to 
Growth  | Summary 
 5 
States and Markets 
129
Development Th inking after World War II  | market failure  | Fundamental 
Changes in the 1970s and 1980s  | ghana after independence  | the 
declining effectiveness of government intervention in the market: 
korea, s–  | Structural Adjustment, the Washington Consensus, 
and the End of the Soviet Model  | Soviet Command Model to Market 
Economies: Th e Great Transition  | Was the Washington Consensus a Success or 
Failure?  | Summary 
PART TWO
Distribution and Human Resources
 6 
Inequality and Poverty 
165
Measuring Inequality  | Patterns of Inequality  | Growth and 
Inequality  | What Else Might Cause Inequality?  | Why Inequality 
Matters  | Measuring Poverty  | Poverty Lines  | national poverty 
lines in bangladesh, mexico, and the united states  | Why $1.25 a 
Day?  | Dissenting Opinions on the Extent of Absolute Poverty  | who 
is NOT poor?  | Poverty Today  | Who Are the Poor?  | Living in 
Poverty  | Strategies to Reduce Poverty  | Growth is Good for the 
Poor  | Sometimes Growth May Not Be Enough  |  Pro- Poor Growth  | 

C O NT E NT S   i x
why should development strategies have a poverty focus?  | Improving 
Opportunities for the Poor  | Income Transfers and Safety Nets  | Global 
Inequality and the End of Poverty  | Summary 
 7 
Population 
217
A Brief History of World Population  | Th e Demographic Transition  | Th e 
Demographic Situation Today  | total fertility rates  | Th e Demographic 
Future  | population momentum  | Th e Causes of Population Growth  | 
Th omas Malthus, Population Pessimist  | Why Birth Rates Decline  | 
Population Growth and Economic Development  | Population and 
Accumulation  | population growth, age structure, and dependency 
ratios  | Population and Productivity  | Population and Market Failures  | 
Population Policy  | Family Planning  | Authoritarian Approaches  | 
missing girls, missing women  | Population Issues for the  Twenty- First 
Century  | Summary 
 8 
Education 
257
Trends and Patterns  | Stocks and Flows  | Boys versus Girls  | Schooling 
versus Education  | Education as an Investment  | Th e Rate of Return
 to Schooling  | Estimated Rates of Return  |  First- Generation Estimates  | 
estimating rates of return from wage equations  |  Second- Generation 
Estimates  | Puzzles  | returns to schooling and income opportunities  | 
Making Schooling More Productive  | Underinvestment  | Misallocation  | 
Improving Schools  | Reducing the Costs of Going to School  | mexico’s 
progresa  | Ineffi  cient Use of Resources  | It Is about More than the 
Money  | combating TEACHER absence  | Summary 
 9 
Health 
299
What Is Health?  | life expectancy  | Transitions in Global Health  | Th e 
Epidemiologic Transition  | Th e Determinants of Improved Health  | Health, 
Income, and Growth  | Income and Health  | how beneficent is the 
market? a look at the modern history of mortality  | Health and 
Productivity  | Health and Investment  | Th ree Critical Diseases  |
malaria, yellow fever, and the panama canal  | HIV/AIDS  |
hiv/aids, malaria, and tuberculosis: some basics  | Malaria  | making 
markets for vaccines  | Tuberculosis  | What Works? Some Successes 
in Global Health  | Preventing HIV/AIDS in Th ailand  | Controlling 
Tuberculosis in China  | Eradicating Smallpox  | Eliminating Polio in 
Latin America  | Preventing Deaths from Diarrheal Disease  | Lessons 
Learned  | Health Challenges  | Summary 

x   C O NTE NTS
PART THREE
Macroeconomic Policies for Development
 10 
Investment and Savings 
349
 Using Investment Productively:  Cost- Benefi t Analysis  | Present Value  |
Opportunity Costs  | Shadow Prices  | Welfare Weights  | Barriers to 
Productive Public and Private Investment  | Barriers to Doing Business  |
Foreign Direct Investment  | FDI Patterns and Products  | Benefi ts and 
Drawbacks of FDI  | FDI and Growth  | Policies Toward Foreign Direct 
Investment  | Savings  | Household Saving and Consumption  | Corporate 
Saving  | Government Saving  | Foreign Saving  | Summary 
 11 
Fiscal Policy 
391
Government Expenditures  | Categories of Government Expenditures  | reining 
in fiscal decentralization in brazil and china  | Government Revenue and 
Taxes  | tax rates and smuggling: colombia  | Taxes on International 
Trade  | Sales and Excise Taxes  | Personal and Corporate Income Taxes  | 
New Sources of Tax Revenues  | Changes in Tax Administration  | Fundamental 
Tax Reform  | tax administration in india and bolivia in the s  | 
indonesian tax reform  | Taxes and Income Distribution  | Personal 
Income Taxes  | Taxes on Luxury Consumption  | Corporate Income 
and Property Taxes: Th e Incidence Problem  | Economic Effi  ciency and the 
Budget  | Sources of Ineffi  ciency  | Neutrality and Effi  ciency: Lessons from 
Experience  | Summary 
 12 
Financial Development and Infl ation 
421
Th e Functions of a Financial System  | Money and the Money Supply  |
Financial Intermediation  | Transformation and Distribution of Risk  |
Stabilization  | Infl ation  | Infl ation Episodes  | hyperinflation 
in peru, –  | Monetary Policy and Price Stability  | Monetary 
Policy and  Exchange- Rate Regimes  | Sources of Infl ation  | Controlling 
Infl ation through Monetary Policy  | Reserve Requirements  | Credit 
Ceilings  |  Interest- Rate Regulation and Moral Suasion  | International 
Debt and Combating Recessions  | Financial Development  | Shallow 
Finance and Deep Finance  | Shallow Financial Strategy  | Deep Financial 
Strategy  | Informal Credit Markets and Micro Credit  | does micro credit 
reduce poverty?  | Summary 

C O NT E NT S   x i
 13 
Foreign Debt and Financial Crises 
455
Advantages and Disadvantages of Foreign Borrowing  | Debt 
Sustainability  | Debt Indicators  | From Distress to Default  | a short 
history of sovereign lending default  | Th e 1980s Debt Crisis  | Causes 
of the Crisis  | Impact on the Borrowers  | Escape from the Crisis, for 
Some Countries  | Th e Debt Crisis in  Low- Income Countries  | Debt 
Reduction in  Low- Income Countries  | Th e Heavily Indebted  Poor Country 
Initiative  | odious debt  | debt relief in uganda  | Emerging 
Market Financial Crises  | Domestic Economic Weaknesses  |  Short- Term 
Capital Flows  | Creditor Panic  | model of  self- fulfilling creditor 
panics  | Stopping Panics  | Lessons from the Crises  | Summary 
 14 
Foreign Aid 
499
Donors and Recipients  | What Is Foreign Aid?  | Who Gives Aid?  | the 
marshall plan  | the commitment to development index  | Who 
Receives Foreign Aid?  | Th e Motivations for Aid  | china’s foreign 
aid  | Aid, Growth, and Development  | View 1. Although Not Always 
Successful, on Average, Aid Has a Positive Impact on Economic Growth 
and Development  | controlling river blindness in  sub- saharan 
africa  | View 2. Aid Has Little or No Eff ect on Growth and Actually May 
Undermine Growth  | food aid and food production  | View 3. Aid 
Has a Conditional Relationship with Growth, Stimulating Growth Only Under 
Certain Circumstances, Such as in Countries with Good Policies or 
Institutions  | Donor Relationships with Recipient Countries  | Th e 
 Principal- Agent Problem  | Conditionality  | Improving Aid 
Eff ectiveness  | Summary 
 15 
Managing  Short- Run Crises in an Open Economy 
545
Equilibrium in a Small, Open Economy  | Internal and External Balance  | real 
versus nominal exchange rates  | Th e Phase Diagram  | Equilibrium and 
Disequilibrium  | pioneering stabilization: chile, –  | Stabilization 
Policies  | Applications of the Australian Model  |  Dutch Disease  |
recovering from mismanagement: ghana, –  | Debt Repayment 
Crisis  | Stabilization Package: Infl ation and a Defi cit  | the greek debt crisis 
of  –  | Drought, Hurricanes, and Earthquakes  | Summary  | 
Appendix to Chapter 15: National Income and the Balance of Payments 

xii   C O NTE NTS
PART FOUR
Agriculture, Trade, and Sustainability
 16 
Agriculture and Development 
583
Unique Characteristics of the Agricultural Sector  | Structural 
Transformation  |  Two- Sector Models of Development  | Th e Labor 
Surplus Model  | surplus labor in china  | Th e Neoclassical  Two- Sector 
Model  | debates over surplus labor  | Evolving Perspectives on the Role 
of Agriculture in Economic Growth and Poverty Alleviation  | Agriculture and 
Economic Growth  | the nutrition linkage to economic growth  |
Agriculture and Poverty Alleviation  | Agricultural Growth as a Pathway out of 
Poverty  | Summary  
 17 
 Agricultural Development: Technology, Policies, 
 and Institutions 
619
Characteristics of Traditional Agriculture and Agricultural Systems  | 
Agricultural Systems  | Diagnosing the Constraints to Agricultural Development  | 
Raising the Technical Ceiling  | Th e Green Revolution  | Recent Trends in 
Agricultural Productivity  | a model of induced technical change in 
agriculture  | Raising the Economic Ceiling  | Food Production 
Analysis  | What to Produce? Th e  Product–Product Decision  | How to Produce 
It? Th e  Factor–Factor Decision  | How Much to Produce? Th e  Factor–Product 
Decision  | fertilizer subsidies in malawi  | Market Access  | cell 
phones and agricultural development  | Institutions for Agricultural 
Development  | Land Reform  | Th e World Food Crisis of 2005–08  | 
Causes of the Crisis  | Consequences of the Crisis  | Summary 
 18 
Trade and Development 
665
Trade Trends and Patterns  | Who Trades?  | Comparative Advantage  | 
Th e Benefi ts of Trade  | Winners and Losers  | Trading Primary Products  | 
empirical evidence on  primary export- led growth  | Export Pessimism  | 
Declining Terms of Trade?  | Dutch Disease  | dutch disease: a geometric 
presentation  | nigeria: a bad case of dutch disease  | indonesia: 
finding a cure  | Th e Resource Trap  | Breaking the Resource Curse  | 
Summary 

C O NT E NT S   x i i i
 19 
Trade Policy 
709
Import Substitution  | Protective Tariff s  | Import Quotas  | effective 
rates of protection  | Trade Protection and Politics  | the  two- 
country model with a tariff  | Production Subsidies  |  Exchange- 
Rate Management  | Outcomes of Import Substitution  | Export 
Orientation  | Removing the Bias against Exports  | Favoring 
Exports  | Building Export Platforms  | is china’s  exchange- rate policy 
unfair?  | Trade Strategy and Industrial Policy  | Trade, Growth, and 
Poverty Alleviation  | Trade Reforms and Poverty Alleviation  | Key Issues 
on the Global Trade Agenda  | Increased Global Competition and the Rise of 
China (and India)  | Does Outward Orientation Create Sweatshops?  | labor 
activists and labor outcomes in indonesia  | Expanding Market 
Access  | Multilateral Trade Negotiations and the WTO  | Temporary 
Migration: Another Dimension of International Trade  | Summary  
 20 
Sustainable Development 
757
Will Economic Growth Save or Destroy the Environment?  | Concept and 
Measurement of Sustainable Development  | Saving for a Sustainable 
Future  | the malthusian effect of population growth on adjusted net 
savings in ghana  | Market Failures  | Externalities and the Commons  | 
Policy Solutions  | Property Rights  | Government Regulation  | Taxes, 
Subsidies, and Payments for Environmental Services  | taxing water pollution 
in colombia  | Marketable Permits  | Informal Regulation  | Policy 
Failures  | policy failures and deforestation in indonesia  | Poverty- 
Environment Linkages  | Global Climate Change  | Summary 
 
 
Index 
803


Preface
I
n 1983, when the fi rst edition of this textbook was published, 50 percent of the 
world’s population lived in nations the World Bank classifi ed as low income. By 
2010 the number had dropped to 12 percent. Much of that change is the result of 
rapid economic growth in China and India. Today, both are  middle- income econ-
omies. But economic growth and development has not been limited to these two 
Asian giants. “Africa Rising” was the cover story of a 2011 issue of Th e Economist, 
refl ecting more than a decade of rapid growth in a region Th e Economist 10 years ear-
lier referred to as “Th e Hopeless Continent.” Th roughout Africa, East and South Asia, 
Latin America, and elsewhere, dramatic improvements have been taking place in the 
education, health, and living standards of billions of people.
Th e study of the economics of development has had to keep pace with these his-
toric changes. We have tried to keep pace as well. In this as in previous editions, we 
have incorporated new ideas and new data and provide fresh insights from the expe-
riences of the nations that make up the developing world. While there is much that is 
new in this seventh edition, the distinguishing features of this text remain the same:
• It is based primarily on the  real- world experiences of developing countries. 
It explores broad trends and patterns and uses numerous  real- country 
examples and cases to illustrate major points, many of which are drawn 
from the authors’ own experiences.
• It draws heavily on the empirical work of economists who believe that 
attention to the data not only reveals what the development process entails 
but permits us to test our beliefs about how that process works.
• It relies on the theoretical tools of neoclassical economics to investigate 
and analyze these  real- world experiences in the belief that these tools 
contribute substantially to our understanding of economic development.
• It highlights the diversity of development experience and recognizes 
that the lessons of theory and history can be applied only within certain 
institutional and national contexts.
As in previous editions, the seventh edition of Economics of Development is intended 
to be both accessible and comprehensive. Th e discussion is accessible to those stu-
dents, whether undergraduates or those pursuing advanced degrees in international 
relations, public policy, and related fi elds, who have only an elementary background 
in economics. At the same time, the text provides a comprehensive introduction to all 
x v

xvi   P R E FA C E
students, including those with signifi cant training in economics, who are taking their 
fi rst course in development economics.
Major Changes for the Seventh Edition
Th e seventh edition of Economics of Development continues and extends the major 
revisions of the book initiated in previous editions. Th e substantial changes refl ect 
the contributions of three new  coauthors— Steven Radelet in the fi fth edition, David 
Lindauer in the sixth, and Steven Block in the seventh— working alongside origi-
nal coauthor Dwight Perkins. Th e seventh edition features fundamental revisions 
of many chapters. Th e revised chapters take full advantage of research on develop-
ment economics over the past decade. In addition, there are more and better tables, 
charts, and other exhibits chronicling the lessons and remaining controversies of the 
development fi eld. Th e chapter summaries that follow highlight the major changes 
in the seventh edition. Asterisks indicate chapters that are essentially or entirely new 
for this edition.
Chapter 1 (Patterns of Development) has been condensed. It begins with the three 
vignettes— on Malaysia, Ethiopia, and Ukraine— that were introduced in the previ-
ous edition and updated for this one. Th e chapter includes a new table on the classi-
fi cation of world economies and populations according to income status. Also added 
is a section on how the study of development economics diff ers from the study of 
economics as applied to developed nations.
Chapter 2 (Measuring Economic Growth and Development) refl ects important 
updates by various agencies and authors, including the 2005 International Compari-
son Program (ICP) estimates of purchasing power parity; Angus Maddison’s latest 
and last estimates of world economic growth; and the United Nations Development 
Programme’s (UNDP) 2010 revision of the human development index (HDI). Th e 
analysis of economic growth and happiness has been fully revised and expanded, 
reversing some of the conclusions fi rst reported in the sixth edition. A new box has 
been added on the determinants of  long- run economic growth suggested by Jared 
Diamond’s Guns, Germs, and Steel. Th ere is also a new box on the use of logarithms, 
essential to understanding the HDI and other development measures.
Chapter 3 (Economic Growth: Concepts and Patterns) has been reorganized and 
updated to include the latest data and country examples. Th is edition features a new 
box on the calculation of growth rates, future values, and doubling times. Previous 
material on the characteristics of production functions and on growth convergence 
has been moved to Chapter 4. Th e previous discussion of structural change has been 
entirely rewritten and relocated to Chapter 16, where it supports the discussion of 
economic dualism.

P R E FA C E   x v i i
Chapter 4 (Th eories of Economic Growth) has also been streamlined and consoli-
dated. Th is edition integrates into its presentation of growth theory the discussions 
of production functions and growth convergence previously found in Chapter 3. Th e 
previous discussion of  dual- sector growth models has been eliminated from the dis-
cussion of growth theory and relocated to Chapter 16, where its primary purpose is 
to illustrate sectoral interactions as a foundation for discussing the role of agriculture 
in development. Chapter 4 also provides newly updated data and illustrative fi gures.
*Chapter 5 (States and Markets) raises the central question, What makes economic 
development happen? For this edition, senior author, Dwight Perkins, takes a fresh 
look, tracing the evolution of thinking about development from Adam Smith, through 
notions of Th e Big Push advanced in the 1940s by economist Paul  Rosenstein- Rodan, 
to more recent debates over Structural Adjustment and the Washington Consensus.
Chapter 6 (Inequality and Poverty) updates the analysis of poverty by examining 
the revision of the global poverty line from $1 per day to $1.25 per day. Combined 
with recent measures of purchasing power parity (PPP), the latest estimates on levels
of both inequality and poverty are presented. A new section, “Living in Poverty,” has 
been added that includes insights from the work by economists Abhijit Banerjee, 
Esther Dufl o, and others on the economic lives of the poor. Th e use of conditional 
cash transfers also receives more attention.
Chapter 7 (Population) incorporates the United Nations 2010 Revision to its world 
population projections. Th e chapter now includes more discussion of the demo-
graphic dividend and a new section on population issues for the  twenty- fi rst century.
Chapter 8 (Education) benefi ts from recent revisions to the  Barro- Lee data set 
on school attainment and from recent results of the Organisation for Economic 
 Co- Operation and Development’s (OECD) Programme for International Student 
Assessment (PISA). Fuller use is made of econometric approaches, including natural 
experiments and randomized controlled trials (RCTs) in determining rates of return 
to schooling and the eff ectiveness of alternative interventions to improve learning 
outcomes. A new box on combating teacher absence has been added.
Chapter 9 (Health) now includes an extended discussion of the relationship be-
tween income and health. Th e Preston curve, showing the relationship between life 
expectancy and per capita income is presented and the debate over causality more 
fully developed. A box has been added on creating markets for vaccines for diseases 
that primarily aff ect populations in  low- income settings.
*Chapter 10 (Investment and Savings) draws on material from two chapters in the 
sixth edition. Th e chapter assumes students have had some background in the prin-
ciples of macroeconomics and focuses on topics central to developing nations. Th ese 
include barriers to both public and private investment and alternative sources of 

xviii   P R E FA C E
 savings to fi nance productive investments. Special attention is given to foreign direct 
investment and its role in promoting economic growth.
Chapter 11 (Fiscal Policy) continues to focus on the key components of government 
expenditures and revenues. Data have been updated and a box added on the chal-
lenges of fi scal decentralization in Brazil and China.
Chapter 12 (Financial Development and Infl ation) reorders some of the material 
on monetary policy and price stability, providing a more intuitive fl ow to the mate-
rial. Th e discussion of microcredit has been expanded and includes a new box based 
on an RCT in India.
Chapter 13 (Foreign Debt and Financial Crises) is updated to provide the most 
recent data on foreign debt and provides current examples of fi nancial crises (includ-
ing the 2010–11 Euro Zone crisis, though the focus remains on developing countries).
Chapter 14 (Foreign Aid) has been updated to refl ect recent trends in offi  cial devel-
opment assistance, which, in part, are the results of events in Afghanistan, Iraq, and 
Pakistan. New boxes have been added on the commitment to development index 
and on Chinese foreign aid.
Chapter 15 (Managing  Short- Run Crises in an Open Economy), formerly Chap-
ter 21, now concludes the section on macroeconomic policies for developing coun-
tries. Presentation of the Australian model of  short- run macroeconomic management 
has been clarifi ed and illustrated with updated examples. New boxes cover real versus 
nominal exchange rates and the Greek debt crisis of 2010–11 (with an application of 
the Australian model). Th is chapter also features a new appendix for this edition, pro-
viding a review of national income and balance of payments accounting.
*Chapter 16 (Agriculture and Development) is the fi rst of two entirely new chapters 
on agriculture. Th is chapter places agriculture in its broad developmental context, 
emphasizing the potential contributions of agriculture to both growth and poverty 
alleviation. Specifi c topics include structural transformation,  dual- sector growth 
models, agriculture and growth, and agriculture as a pathway out of poverty.
*Chapter 17 (Agricultural Development: Technology, Policies and Institutions) 
builds on the broad discussion of agriculture and development in the previous chap-
ter, concentrating on policies and institutions to promote agricultural development. 
Specifi c topics introduced in this chapter include a typology of agricultural systems 
common in developing countries, a broad framework for analyzing constraints to 
agricultural production growth, the role of technical change and the green revolu-
tion, the role of institutions and land reform in agricultural development, and a 
review of the global food price crisis of 2005–08.
*Chapter 18 (Trade and Development) presents an overview of trends and pat-
terns in world trade. It reviews the theory of comparative advantage, discussing both 

P R E FA C E   x i x
the benefi ts of trade and its distributional consequences. Special attention is paid to 
trade in primary products, including export pessimism and the terms of trade, Dutch 
disease and the real exchange rate, and the resource curse and responses to it.
*Chapter 19 (Trade Policy) builds on the broad discussion of trade and develop-
ment in the previous chapter. It reviews import substitution as a trade strategy and 
the consequences of trade protection. Th is is followed by discussion of export orien-
tation, including experience with export processing zones. Evidence is presented on 
trade, growth, and poverty alleviation. Th e chapter concludes with an examination 
of key issues on the global trade agenda, such as the impact of China and India on 
global trade competition, sweatshops and labor standards, the Doha Round of trade 
negotiations, and temporary labor migration as a strategy to alleviate world poverty.
*Chapter 20 (Sustainable Development) is essentially a new treatment of the sub-
ject, retaining from the previous edition only the discussion of market and policy 
failures. New topics addressed in this edition are the environmental Kuznets curve 
hypothesis, an expanded and more analytical treatment of the concept and mea-
surement of sustainable development, institutional perspectives on externalities 
(drawing on the work of Elinor Ostrom), payments for environmental services as a 
response to externalities, a substantially expanded treatment of  poverty- environment 
linkages, and a new section on the economics of climate change. New boxes in this 
edition cover the Malthusian eff ect of population growth on adjusted net savings in 
Ghana, taxation of water pollution in Colombia, and, policy failures and deforesta-
tion in Indonesia.
About the Authors
Of the four original authors of Economics of Development only Dwight Perkins 
remains as an active contributor to this edition. Michael Roemer’s death in 1996 took 
from the development fi eld one of its most thoughtful and productive writers and 
practitioners. Mike, in many ways, was the single most important contributor to the 
earlier editions, and his legacy endures in this edition. Malcolm Gillis, an expert in 
issues of public fi nance and economic development, played the central role in get-
ting this book started in the early 1980s. He later went on to a distinguished career as 
president of Rice University, from which he retired. Donald Snodgrass was respon-
sible for Part Th ree, “Human Resources,” for the fi rst fi ve editions. Both Malcolm Gil-
lis’s and Donald Snodgrass’s strong contributions are evident in the current edition 
as well. Th e new authors are privileged to be part of a text that, thanks to the scholar-
ship of the original authors, helped to defi ne the fi eld of development economics.
Dwight H. Perkins is the H. H. Burbank Professor of Political Economy Emeritus 
at Harvard University and former director of the Harvard Institute for International 
Development. Professor Perkins is a leading scholar on the economies of East and 
Southeast Asia. Professor Perkins’s legacy is contained not only in the many  chapters 

xx   P R E FA C E
he has contributed to Economics of Development and in his many scholarly books 
and articles but also in the thousands of students he has taught over his distin-
guished academic career (including all of his current coauthors!).
Steven Radelet joined Economics of Development for its fi fth edition. At the time he 
was a fellow at Harvard’s Institute for International Development and taught in both 
Harvard’s economics department and the Kennedy School of Government. He sub-
sequently was deputy assistant secretary of the U.S. Treasury for Africa, the Middle 
East, and South Asia; a Senior Fellow at the Center for Global Development; and 
Senior Advisor on Development for Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. He is an expert 
on foreign aid, developing country debt and fi nancial crises, and economic growth 
and has extensive experience in West Africa and Southeast Asia. He currently serves 
as Chief Economist for the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID). In 
that capacity he was unable to contribute to this edition but his prior work on the 
textbook signifi cantly informs this edition as well.
David L. Lindauer is the Stanford Calderwood Professor of Economics at Wellesley 
College, where he has taught since 1981. He has frequently served as a consultant 
to the World Bank and was a faculty associate of the Harvard Institute for Interna-
tional Development. Professor Lindauer’s area of expertise is in labor economics. His 
research and policy advising has included work on industrial relations, labor costs 
and export potential, minimum wages, poverty and unemployment, public sector 
pay and employment, and racial affi  rmative action. He has worked on labor mar-
ket issues in East and Southeast Asia,  Sub- Saharan Africa, and elsewhere. Professor 
Lindauer, an  award- winning teacher of economics, brings his considerable experi-
ence teaching undergraduates to this edition.
Steven A. Block is Professor of International Economics and head of the Interna-
tional Development Program at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts 
University. He joins Economics of Development beginning with this edition and has 
been teaching development economics at the Fletcher School since 1995. Professor 
Block also holds a faculty appointment at the Friedman School of Nutrition Science 
and Policy at Tufts University, and has been a visiting scholar at the Harvard Univer-
sity Center for International Development and at Harvard’s Weatherhead Center for 
International Aff airs. He has published numerous scholarly articles in the areas of 
agricultural development and political economy, and worked extensively on policy 
advisory teams across  Sub- Saharan Africa and in Southeast Asia.
Acknowledgments
Any textbook that makes it to a seventh edition accumulates many debts to colleagues 
who read chapters, provided feedback, or contributed in some way to the success and 
longevity of the work. We owe many thanks to many people. In these acknowledg-
ments, we wish to thank those individuals who contributed to this edition.

P R E FA C E   x x i
Dwight H. Perkins is grateful to the hundreds of colleagues and students from 
around the developing world and at Harvard and other universities in the United 
States and elsewhere who, over the past fi ve decades, have taught him what he 
knows about development economics and to his wife, Julie, who has joined him on 
many of his trips to developing countries.
David L. Lindauer thanks his research assistants, Yue Guan and Teju Vela-
yudhan. Th ey did a tremendous job creating the charts and fi gures in many of the 
chapters. Dana Lindauer, Pasinee Panitnantanakul, and Anisha Vachani provided 
additional assistance. Th anks are owed David Johnson and Joseph Stern for help in 
drafting several of the text Boxes. He also received excellent comments from Akila 
Weerapana (Wellesley College), Jere Behrman (Pennsylvania), Lant Pritchett (Har-
vard), Martin Ravallion (World Bank), and Paul Glewwe (Minnesota). He greatly 
appreciates the sabbatical leave provided by Wellesley College that provided the time 
needed to produce this edition and wishes to thank his family for all their support.
Steven A. Block thanks his research assistant, Bapu Vaitla, for his impeccable 
support and useful suggestions. He is particularly grateful to Peter Timmer (emeritus, 
Harvard University) and Jeff rey Vincent (Duke University) for their critical reading 
and constructive suggestions for Chapters 16, 17, and 20 of this edition. In addition, 
he is grateful to his family— Avi; Ruthie; and wife, Maria— for their love and patience.
All three of us wish to thank everyone at W. W. Norton and Company for their 
continued support. We are especially grateful for the continued guidance and eff orts 
of our editor, Jack Repcheck.
 
D.H.P. Cambridge
 
S.R. Washington, D.C.
 
D.L.L. Wellesley
 
S.A.B. Tufts


International Development 
Resources on the Internet
International Organizations
 
1. The World Bank (www.worldbank.org) hosts specific sites dedicated to 
country information (www.worldbank.org/html/extdr/regions.htm), data 
on a range of development indicators (www.worldbank.org/data), specific 
development themes (www.worldbank.org/html/extdr/thematic.htm), poverty 
reduction (www.worldbank.org/poverty), and governance and anticorruption 
(www.worldbank.org/wbi/governance).
 
2. The International Monetary Fund (www.imf.org) hosts individual country 
information (www.imf.org/external/country/index.htm) and an index of over 
100 economic, commodity, and development organizations (www.imf.org/np
/sec/decdo/contents.htm).
 
3. African Development Bank (www.afdb.org), Asian Development Bank (www
.adb.org), and  Inter- American Development Bank (www.iadb.org).
 
4. The United Nations development organizations, including the United 
Nations Development Programme (www.undp.org), the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (www.fao.org), the World Health Organization (www.who
.org), the United Nations Children’s Fund (www.unicef.org), the Joint United 
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (www.unaids.org), and the United Nations 
Millennium Project with information on the Millennium Development Goals 
(www.unmillenniumproject.org).
Independent Research Organizations 
 
5. The Center for Global Development (www.cgdev.org).
 
6. The Center for International Development at Harvard University (www.hks
.harvard.edu/centers/cid).
 
7. The Earth Institute at Columbia University (www.earthinstitute.columbia.edu).
 
8. The Overseas Development Institute (www.odi.org.uk).
 
9. The World Institute for Development Economics Research (www.wider.unu.edu).
 10. The World Resources Institute (www.wri.org).
x x i i i

xxiv   I NTE R N AT I O N A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  R E S O U R C E S  O N  T H E  I N T E R N E T
Information Gateways
 11. The Development Gateway (www.developmentgateway.org).
g
 12. Institute of Development Studies (www.ids.ac.uk).
 13. The International Development Research Centre (www.idrc.ca).
 14. Netaid.org (www.netaid.org).
g
 15. Oneworld.net (www.oneworldgroup.org).
g
 16. International Economics Network, Development Resources (www
.internationaleconomics.net/development.html)
Data Sources
In addition to the other sites listed, the following offer useful data.
 17. The Center for International Comparisons (Penn World Tables, www.pwt.econ
.upenn.edu).
 18. The Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (www.oecd.org/dac).
 19. The Living Standards Measurement Study of Household Surveys (www
.worldbank.org/LSMS).
 20. The Roubini Global Economics Monitor (www.rgemonitor.com).
 21. The World Factbook (www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook).
Foundations
 22. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (www.gatesfoundation.org).
g
 23. The Ford Foundation (www.fordfound.org).
g
 24. The Open Society Institute (www.soros.org).
g
 25. The Rockefeller Foundation (www.rockfound.org).
g
 26. The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation (www.hewlett.org).
g

PART ONE
Development 
and Growth


3
Patterns of 
Development
1
THREE VIGNETTES1
MALAYSIA
During the early 1980s, when she was 17 years old, Rachmina Abdullah did some-
thing no girl from her village had ever done before. She left her home in a beautiful 
but poor part of the state of Kedah in Malaysia, where people grew rice in the valleys 
and tapped rubber trees in the nearby hills, and went to work in an electronics plant 
in Penang, 75 miles away. Rachmina’s family was poor even by the modest standards 
of her village, and her parents welcomed the opportunity for their daughter to earn 
her own keep and possibly even send money back to help them feed and clothe 
the family, deal with recurrent emergencies, and raise their five younger children. 
With these benefits in mind, they set aside their reservations about their unmarried 
daughter’s unheard-of plan to go off by herself to work in the city.
1The three narratives that follow are fictional. The vignette on Malaysia is loosely based on Fatimah 
Daud, Minah Karan: The Truth about Malaysian Factory Girls (Kuala Lumpur: Berita Publishing, 1985), 
and Kamal Salih and Mei Ling Young, “Changing Conditions of Labour in the Semiconductor Industry in 
Malaysia,” Labour and Society 14 (1989), 59–80. The narratives on Ethiopia and Ukraine are based on dis-
cussions with experts who have lived and worked in these nations. The named individuals are constructs 
rather than actual people. Data used in all three vignettes are from World Development Indicators Online.

4  [CH. 1] PATTE R N S  O F  D E V E LO PM E N T
Rachmina got a job assembling integrated circuits in a factory owned by a Japa-
nese company. Every day, she patiently soldered hundreds of tiny wires onto minute 
silicon chips. It was tedious, repetitive work that had to be performed at high speed and 
with flawless accuracy. From a long day of hard work with few breaks, Rachmina could 
earn the equivalent of a few dollars. Because their wages were low, Rachmina and her 
colleagues welcomed opportunities to work overtime. Often they put in two or three 
extra hours a day, for up to seven days a week. They particularly liked working Sun-
days and holidays, when double wages were paid. Rachmina shared a small house in 
a squatter area with seven other factory workers. By living simply and inexpensively, 
most of the young women managed to send money back home each month and gener-
ally enjoyed the unfamiliar freedom of living apart from their families and villages.
Five years later, Rachmina, who had accumulated some savings, decided it was 
time to return to her village, where she soon married a local man and settled down. 
She later had two children—fewer than her friends who had stayed in the village and 
married earlier. Her savings helped provide for her family, and she was able to enroll 
her children in the local school.
Rachmina’s chance to work in an electronics factory came about because, starting 
in the 1970s, American and Japanese electronics manufacturers were moving into export 
processing zones (EPZs) established by the Malaysian government. The national unem-
ployment rate was high, and the government was particularly anxious to find more urban, 
nonagricultural jobs for the indigenous Malay population. In the mid-1970s, demand for 
electronic devices was growing by leaps and bounds, and international firms were look-
ing for overseas locations where they could carry out parts of their operations at lower 
cost. The first beneficiaries of this migration were the newly industrializing nations of 
East Asia: Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan. Malaysia, with its good infra-
structure, English-speaking workforce and stable political environment, also attracted 
foreign investors. Although the wages were lower than those paid in Japan and the United 
States, they were much higher than most Malays could earn through farm work, and peo-
ple lined up for the opportunity to secure these prized jobs.
Malaysia, which previously had been known mainly for the export of rubber, tin, 
and palm oil, became one of the world’s largest exporters of electronic components 
and other labor-intensive manufactured goods. Partly because of these exports, 
Malaysia emerged as one of the fastest growing economies in the world and a leading 
development success story. The income of the average Malay more than quadrupled 
in real terms between 1970 and 2010, infant mortality fell from 41 to 6 infants per 
thousand, and life expectancy rose from 61 to 75 years. Adult literacy jumped from 
58 to 92 percent and the ratio of girls to boys enrolled in school increased from 83 to 
103 percent. (In other words, if Rachmina had grandchildren, today her granddaugh-
ters would be slightly more likely to attend school than would her grandsons.)
The Malaysian economy changed as well. Agriculture accounted for about one 
third of national output in 1970; today it accounts for less than 10 percent. House-
holds in Kedah still grow rice, and young women still work in electronics assembly 

T H R E E  V I G N E T T E S   5
in Penang as they did in the 1970s. (If you own a Dell laptop, it very well may have 
been assembled in Penang.) But Penang must now look to the future. Low wage com-
petition from Vietnam and elsewhere in Southeast Asia is attracting the electronic 
assembly plants that once came to Malaysia. Penang is hoping to develop a more 
knowledge-based economy, which might include biotechnology, business-process 
outsourcing, and medical tourism.2 Rachmina’s grandchildren in all likelihood will 
live in a Malaysia far different from the one she knew.
ETHIOPIA
On another continent and at about the same time that Rachmina was on her way to 
begin working in Penang, Getachew was born in Ethiopia. Getachew’s family and 
many of his relatives lived in a rural area outside of Dese, a drought-affected area in 
Amhara region and a day’s bus ride from the capital city of Addis Ababa. The family 
lived in a thatched hut and had few possessions. They owned cooking utensils, some 
blankets and clothing, a radio, and a bicycle. Getachew’s sisters spent two hours a 
day fetching water from a small stream outside their village. The village did not have 
a paved road or electricity. In addition to growing tef, a cereal crop similar to millet, 
the family grew vegetables and relied on its own production for most of its consump-
tion needs. The family was especially proud of their livestock. Getachew’s father 
raised and traded oxen, which earned the family most of their meager cash income.
Getachew was the fifth of eight children, one of whom died at birth and another 
before her third birthday. Getachew received five years of schooling, but the years 
were not in succession. In some years, he needed to tend the family’s crops and live-
stock with his father and brothers. In other years, the family did not have enough 
money to pay for uniforms and other school fees and could afford to send only one 
or two of their children to school. Priority was given to Getachew’s older brothers. By 
the time he was 16, Getachew was able to read and write, although not well.
Getachew and his family have known hard times. His mother died shortly after the 
birth of her last child. This was due, in part, to her weakened state as a result of the 
drought and famine in 1984, compounded by multiple births and lack of emergency 
postpartum care. Despite worldwide attention to Ethiopia’s plight that year, relief came 
too late to help them. The area has been affected by drought and shortages of food 
since then, but none as severe. Political transition in 1991 brought a lot of uncertainty, 
even to the countryside. The village school remained closed that year, as the teacher 
returned to live in the capital. Prices for most commodities went up at the same time 
that Getachew’s father earned little for his oxen. In 1998, war broke out between Ethio-
pia and neighboring Eritrea. Getachew was staying with his brother in Addis at the time 
and escaped the draft, but several of his friends were conscripted to serve. One lost a 
2Homi Kharas, Albert Zeufack, and Hamdan Majeed, Cities, People & the Economy: A Study on 
Positioning Penang, Khazanah Nasional Berhad and the World Bank (Kuala Lumpur, 2010).

6  [CH. 1] PATTE R N S  O F  D E V E LO PM E N T
leg during the war and returned home but was no longer much help tending livestock. 
Another contracted HIV/AIDS and, without treatment, died soon after.
Getachew’s second oldest brother is a truck driver and occasionally provides 
the family with goods and cash. Getachew went with his brother to Addis Ababa and 
lived there for a time, finding only occasional casual day labor. Life was hard in the 
city, in some ways harder than in the countryside. Back home everyone lived simi-
larly. In Addis, many people had money to spend while Getachew did not. When 
his father fell ill from tuberculosis, Getachew went back to help out on the farm. He 
would like to get married but land has become increasingly scarce in his village, and 
it is unclear when he will be able to support a family of his own.
Getachew’s life has been much like his father’s and parallels that of most Ethio-
pians and many Africans. Per capita incomes in 2004 were at about the same levels 
as in 1981. In the intervening years, incomes at times increased and at other times 
declined, but overall, economic stagnation characterized the nation. Since 2004, how-
ever, economic growth has been faster and more consistent, averaging 6.6 percent per 
year. This is much faster than at any time over the past three decades. Despite the 
global recession of 2008–09, Ethiopia’s economy continues to grow rapidly, although 
it is hard to know if this will be sustained.
Looking at other indicators of living standards, infant mortality rates fell from an 
estimated 136 per thousand in 1970 to 67 per thousand in 2009, reflecting the poten-
tial for health outcomes to improve even when income does not. Life expectancy, at 
56 years, is 13 years more than in 1970 but still well below the levels in Malaysia and 
other more affluent economies. Adult literacy is less than one out of three, but this 
will improve in the future. Four out of every five of Ethiopia’s children of school age 
are now enrolled in primary school—double the level of a decade ago. The economy 
is changing too, albeit slowly. In 1970, 61 percent of national output was derived 
from agriculture; today this figure is 51 percent. Growing crops and tending live-
stock remain the main economic activities for Getachew and three quarters of all 
Ethiopians.
With more than 80 million people, Ethiopia is one of the most populous poor 
nations in the world. But it is also one of Africa’s emerging economies. Exports of pri-
mary products (including coffee), remittances from Ethiopians working abroad, and 
foreign direct investment are all fueling the nation’s recent growth. Underlying these 
trends are better economic policies and management; the spread of new technolo-
gies, including cell phones; and increasing economic relations with China, India, and 
the Middle East.
UKRAINE
Unlike Getachew or Rachmina, Viktor and Yulia are relatively well educated. Both 
were born in L’viv in western Ukraine, about 300 miles from the capital, Kyiv. They 
graduated from secondary school in 1980 and went on to study for several more years 

T H R E E  V I G N E T T E S   7
at the local polytechnic institute, which is where they met. Viktor studied engineer-
ing, and Yulia architectural drawing. After finishing their studies, they married, and 
Viktor began work at a local glass factory. Yulia was hired by a municipal agency. As 
was common during the Soviet era, the couple moved into the one-bedroom apart-
ment where Yulia’s parents lived. Viktor and Yulia owned a refrigerator and other 
kitchen appliances, a television, furniture, some musical instruments, many books, 
and a telephone. They went on vacations, often going to a state-subsidized “sanato-
rium” in the Carpathian Mountains in Ukraine’s southwest. Their daughter, Tetiana, 
was born in 1986, and Yulia was able to take a paid maternity leave.
Viktor’s and Yulia’s lifestyle in the 1980s was certainly modest by American or 
western European standards. They enjoyed few luxuries but most of their everyday 
needs were met. Often this required standing in long lines at government stores for 
staples such as bread, cooking oil, milk, and sugar. They also had their own garden 
plot where they grew flowers, fruit, and vegetables. Occasionally they purchased Pol-
ish goods in the gray market (technically illegal but not enforced). Healthcare and 
daycare were publicly provided.
Like many other ethnic Ukrainians in L’viv, Viktor, Yulia, and Yulia’s parents 
longed for national independence. They spoke and maintained their native language 
even though the official language of the Soviet Union was Russian. Beyond their 
nationalist leanings, they thought their lives would be better in a less-centralized 
economy but were unaware of the severe consequences the breakup of the Soviet 
Union would entail.
Ukraine became independent in December 1991, with 90 percent of voters in sup-
port of a referendum on independence. Street celebrations and emotional speeches 
about freedom marked the event. But independence also had negative consequences. 
Trade with Russia collapsed and, with it, so did orders at the glass factory where Viktor 
was employed. Viktor was paid less and less often. A common refrain heard throughout 
the former Soviet Union was “they pretend to pay us and we pretend to work.” Ukraine 
relied on energy supplies from Russia, but without foreign exchange to pay for them, 
Russian fuel exports dwindled, and many Ukrainians had to endure cold winters with-
out much heat in their homes or offices. Mismanagement of the domestic economy 
led to hyperinflation in 1993–94, with prices rising almost 5,000 percent. The hyperin-
flation destroyed the purchasing power of pensioners, like Yulia’s aging parents, and 
others living on fixed incomes. The healthcare system fell apart. Medicine, at times, 
had to be obtained on the black market, and one could never be sure of its efficacy. 
Life became harsher, with more anxiety, stress, and uncertainty about the future. Life 
expectancy for Ukrainian men was 66 years in 1989 but fell to 62 years by 1995. In 2009, 
it was still lower than two decades earlier, at 64 years.
Ukrainians had hoped that after independence foreign investment would flow into 
their country. It did not. Foreigners looked at Ukraine’s situation and found existing 
technology backward, products of poor quality, and corruption rife. Instead of foreign 
purchase of factories, company officials often stripped factories of whatever assets they 

8  [CH. 1] PATTE R N S  O F  D E V E LO PM E N T
had and kept the proceeds themselves. Per capita income in 1998 was only 40 percent 
of its pretransition peak in 1989. All of this was happening in a society in which adult 
literacy was universal and where the nation’s boys and girls were all well educated.
Viktor was one of many Ukrainian men who had a difficult time with the tran-
sition. He could not adjust to changing circumstances and never found a new job. 
He spent a lot of time at home, doing some carpentry and other odd jobs now and 
then. His health was poor as a result of smoking too much and, Yulia believes, the 
environmental hazards of the glass factory. Many of Viktor’s friends from the factory 
have similar health problems; a few have died prematurely. Yulia is holding the fam-
ily together. She has reinvented herself. She still is employed at the municipal agency, 
although her wages are not always paid. She spends much of her time at work draw-
ing plans for some of the newly rich Ukrainians who are building summer villas and 
renovating apartments. She prefers not to discuss where the money to pay for these 
villas, and for her services, is coming from.
Ukraine’s economy rebounded during the 2000s, and Viktor and Yulia were start-
ing to feel more optimistic about the prospects for their daughter. By 2008 income 
per capita had risen to three quarters of its level in 1989. But the global recession hit 
Ukraine hard, in part because of a sharp decrease in demand for steel, one of the 
nation’s major exports. A weak domestic banking sector also proved vulnerable to the 
world financial crisis. The economy shrank by 15 percent in 2009. (By way of compar-
ison, during the Great Recession the U.S. economy contracted by only 2.5 percent.) 
Although the economy improved again in 2010, the nation is plagued by political 
turmoil and poor governance. Problems of corruption, cronyism, and unresponsive 
public institutions remain unresolved.
DEVELOPMENT AND GLOBALIZATION
These three development vignettes, about Malaysia, Ethiopia, and Ukraine, are 
meant to capture the range of experiences of individual nations over the past three 
to four decades. Some nations, including Malaysia, have experienced historically 
unprecedented rates of economic growth, which have dramatically changed the 
lives of their populations. In other parts of the world, including Ethiopia and much 
of sub-Saharan Africa, economic growth, at least until fairly recently, has been mini-
mal, and standards of living have changed far less from one generation to the next. 
A third group of nations experienced a fundamental transition from one economic 
system to another. In many nations, including Ukraine, this resulted in an abrupt and 
steep decline in living standards. Recovery occurred in some but not all areas during 
the 2000s; the global financial crisis in 2008–09 hit some nations harder than others. 
Understanding the causes and consequences of these different patterns of economic 
development is the central goal of this textbook.
Economic growth, stagnation, and transition have had a profound impact on the 
lives of Rachmina, Getachew, and Viktor and Yulia, respectively, and on the more 

T H R E E  V I G N E T T E S   9
than 5.6 billion people of the developing countries these individuals are meant to 
personify. As different as the outcomes have been across nations, all countries have 
been affected by dramatic changes both within their borders and outside of them.
• Political systems have undergone profound changes, especially since 
the end of the cold war. Many low-income countries have adopted more 
democratic political systems since the early 1990s. The relationship 
between these political changes and the process of economic development 
and poverty reduction remains a matter of considerable debate.
• Substantial demographic shifts have led to a fall in population growth rates 
in many countries, with a decline in the number of dependent children 
and a corresponding growth in the share of workers in the population. 
Looking forward, many low-income countries will soon see large segments 
of the population reaching retirement age, with important implications for 
savings, tax revenues, pension systems, and social programs.
• The spread of endemic disease, including the HIV/AIDS pandemic, 
threatens development progress in many countries. In more than half a 
dozen African countries, more than a quarter of the adult population is 
HIV-positive. HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, and other diseases bring a 
heavy human toll and substantial economic costs.
• Global trade has grown rapidly in line with sharply falling transportation 
and communication costs, giving rise to far more sophisticated global 
production networks. Instead of products being made start to finish in 
one location, firms in one country specialize in one part of the production 
process, while firms in another country play a different role. There has been 
a dramatic shift away from producing goods for the local market under 
government protection toward greater integration with global markets.3
• Capital moves much more quickly across borders than it did several 
decades ago. More sophisticated financial instruments and a greater 
emphasis on private capital have opened opportunities for low-income 
countries to access foreign capital for local investment. In some countries 
rapid financial liberalization resulted in deep financial crises when local 
financial institutions were weak and foreign capital was quickly withdrawn. 
On the other hand, the financial crisis of 2008–09 that originated in the 
United States and other advanced economies had far less of an impact on 
many developing economies than was expected.
3Malaysia has been most obviously helped by this process, and, at least in the short run, Ukraine has been 
hurt. Even rural Ethiopians who engage in subsistence agriculture are not insulated from global economic 
events. The Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s provides an example. The crisis resulted in a sharp decline 
in global demand for shoes, handbags, and other goods made from leather. This in turn lowered the demand 
and price for animal hides, a traditional Ethiopian export, and reduced the cash income of rural Ethiopians 
who might have had no idea why the prices they received for their animal skins had fallen.

10   [CH. 1] PATT E R N S  O F  D E V E LO PM E N T
• Information and ideas spread much faster around the globe than in earlier 
times. Cell phones, the Internet, and other communications technology 
have created new opportunities for low-income countries. Farmers can get 
pricing information that previously was unavailable, and family members 
can send money without the need of traditional banks. The new technology 
has created jobs that provide services via satellite and through the Internet, 
such as accounting, data entry, and telephone help lines.
Many forces are at work behind these changes. One of the most important is the 
process of globalization. Globalization is a term used by different people to mean 
many different things. Columbia University economist Jagdish Bhagwati defines eco-
nomic globalization as the integration of national economies into the international 
economy through trade in goods and services, direct foreign investment, short-term 
capital flows, international movements of people, and flows of technology. Globaliza-
tion has important noneconomic aspects as well, including integration of cultures, 
communications, and politics. It is not a new phenomenon: The early voyages of Fer-
dinand Magellan, Christopher Columbus, Zheng He, Marco Polo, and others opened 
an early epoch of globalization, and the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries 
saw increased global integration until the process abruptly ended with the onset of 
World War I. But the current era has included more parts of the world and affected far 
more people than earlier episodes.
These broad global trends and the individual stories of Rachmina, Getachew, 
Viktor and Yulia raise many issues central to the process of economic development 
addressed in this book. How do governments promote investment, industrializa-
tion, and exports? How do countries educate their citizens and protect their health, 
enabling them to become productive workers? Who benefits from foreign investment 
and integration with global trading networks, and who loses? How does the shift from 
agriculture to manufacturing affect the lives of the majority of people in developing 
countries who still are rural and poor? How will climate change affect the lives of 
those who already face extreme poverty? This book explores the economics of these 
and other issues in an attempt to understand why some countries develop rapidly, 
whereas others seem not to develop at all. Remember that within each nation are 
people like Rachmina, Getachew, Viktor and Yulia, whose lives are deeply affected by 
the progress their nations make along the path toward economic development.
RICH AND POOR COUNTRIES
The countries with which this book is concerned have been labeled with many differ-
ent terms. A term in vogue during the 1980s, especially in international forums, was 
the third world. Perhaps the best way to define it is by elimination. Take away the 
RICH AND POOR COUNTRIES

R I C H A N D P O O R C O U NT R I E S   11
industrialized economies of western Europe, North America, and the Pacific (the first 
world, although it was rarely called that) and the industrialized, formerly centrally 
planned economies of eastern Europe (the second world), and the remaining coun-
tries constitute the third world. This terminology is used much less frequently today. 
The geographic configuration of the third world has led to a parallel distinction of 
North (first and second worlds) versus South, which still has some currency.
The more popular classifications used today implicitly put all countries on a 
continuum based on their degree of development. Therefore, we speak of the 
distinctions between developed and underdeveloped countries, more and less 
developed ones, or—to recognize continuing change—developed countries and 
developing countries. The degree of optimism implicit in the words developing 
countries and the handy acronym LDCs (less-developed countries), make these 
widely used terms, although they suffer from the problem that developed implies 
the process is fully complete for wealthier countries. The United Nations employs 
a classification scheme that refers to the poorest nations as the least-developed 
countries. Some Asian, eastern European, and Latin American economies, whose 
industrial output is growing rapidly, are sometimes referred to as emerging econ-
omies. Richer countries are frequently called industrialized countries, in recog-
nition of the close association between development and industrialization. The 
highest-income countries are sometimes called postindustrial countries or service-
based economies because services (finance, research and development, medical 
services, etc.), not manufacturing, account for the largest and most rapidly growing 
share of their economies.
The rich–poor dichotomy, based simply on income levels, has been refined by 
the World Bank4 to yield a four-part classification:
• Low-income economies, with average incomes less than $1,005 per capita 
in 2010, converted into dollars at the current exchange rate.
• Lower-middle-income economies, with incomes between $1,006 and 
$3,975.
• Upper-middle-income economies, with incomes between $3,976 and 
$12,275.
• High-income economies, with incomes over $12,275.
The World Bank’s classification system dates back to the 1970s. The Bank 
wanted poorer countries to receive better lending terms. To do so required some 
way to distinguish economic capacity for repaying loans. Gross national product 
4The World Bank, formally the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), bor-
rows funds on private capital markets in developed countries and lends to developing countries; through 
its affiliate the International Development Association (IDA), it receives contributions from the govern-
ments of developed countries and lends to low-income countries at very low interest rates with long 
repayment periods. The Bank, as it often is called, is perhaps the world’s most important and influential 
development agency. Its role is explored in more detail in the discussion of foreign aid in Chapter 14.

12   [CH. 1] PATT E R N S  O F  D E V E LO PM E N T
(GNP) per capita, also referred to as GNI (gross national income) per capita, was 
adopted as such a measure. The actual cutoffs used to distinguish between low-, 
middle-, and high-income economies were based on natural gaps among coun-
tries. The threshold income levels are updated annually to account for interna-
tional price inflation.5
Table 1–1 divides the world according to the Bank’s classification scheme. It may 
surprise you that the largest number of countries, 70, falls into the high-income cat-
egory. This is because in addition to the well-known rich nations such as France, 
Japan, and the United States, there are a large number of small rich nations, includ-
ing Aruba, Brunei, Isle of Man, Liechtenstein, and Qatar. Despite the number, the 
high-income economies represent only 16 percent of the world’s population. The 
middle-income economies represent 72 percent. China and India alone account for 
almost half of the population of the middle-income economies. The 35 low-income 
economies, the poorest nations in the world, represent 12 percent of humanity. These 
economies can be found mostly in sub-Saharan Africa. Haiti is the only nation in the 
Western Hemisphere that is still a low-income country. Other low-income nations 
are located throughout Asia, with Bangladesh being the most populous of these. As 
a group, the low-income nations in 2010 averaged just over $1,200 GNI per capita, 
measured in terms of purchasing power parity (PPP). PPP is a way of accounting 
for the difference in prices between nations and gives a more accurate comparison 
of incomes among countries. (PPP is discussed at greater length in Chapter 2.) Average 
GNI per capita in low-income nations in 2010 was a mere 3.4 percent of the aver-
age GNI per capita of high-income nations, $37,183. We will have more to say about 
global income inequality in Chapter 6.
Table 1–1 provides a snapshot of the world in 2010. It tells us that one out of every 
two people in the world live in low- or lower-middle-income countries where the 
average standard of living is well below that in the upper-middle-income and high-
income economies. But it does not tell us much about how things have changed over 
time. In 1983, when this textbook was first published, 16 percent of the world’s popu-
lation lived in high-income countries, the same percentage as today. But 50 percent 
of the world’s population in 1983 lived in low-income countries, compared to only 
12 percent today. This is a dramatic change, the result of rapid economic growth in 
China, India, and many other previously very poor nations.6
5The inflation rate used today is an average of inflation in the Euro Zone, Japan, the United Kingdom, 
and the United States.
6According to World Bank estimates, India graduated from low-income to lower-middle-income status 
in 2009. China became a lower-middle-income economy in the late 1990s and graduated into the upper-
middle-income group in 2010. Because of systematic undervaluation of its currency, China actually gradu-
ated from one income category to the next earlier than reported by the World Bank. When China officially 
became an upper-middle-income economy in 2010, the average GNI per capita of both the lower and the 
upper-middle-income groups fell. Do you see why?

G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT   13
GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
While the labels used to distinguish one set of countries from another can vary, one 
must be more careful with the terms used to describe the development process itself. 
The terms economic growth and economic development are sometimes used 
interchangeably, but they are fundamentally different. Economic growth refers to 
a rise in national or per capita income. If the production of goods and services in a 
country rises, by whatever means, and along with it average income increases, the 
country has achieved economic growth. Economic growth explains why the percent-
age of the world’s population living in low-income countries, defined in terms of GNI 
per capita, has fallen so rapidly over the past three decades. Economic development
GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
TABLE 1–1 Classification of World Economies, 2010
  
GNI PER 
 
POPULATION IN 
AVERAGE GNI 
COUNTRY 
CAPITA* 
COUNTRIES† 
MILLIONS 
PER CAPITA‡ 
REGIONAL
CLASSIFICATION 
(US$) 
(NO.) 
(% OF WORLD TOTAL) 
(US$, PPP) 
EXAMPLES§
Low-income 
≤ $1,005 
35 
817 (12%) 
$1,247 
Ethiopia, 
 
 
 
 
 
Bangladesh,
 
 
 
 
 
Cambodia,
 
 
 
 
 
Haiti, Tajikistan
Lower-middle- 
$1,006–3,975 
57 
2,466 (36%) 
$3,701 
Senegal,
 income 
 
 
 
 
Sri Lanka, 
 
 
 
 
 
Philippines,
 
 
 
 
 
Ecuador,
 
 
 
 
 
Jordan,
 
 
 
 
 
Ukraine
Upper-middle- $3,976–12,275 
54 
2,449 (36%) 
$9,904 
Gabon, 
 income 
 
 
 
 
Malaysia, 
 
 
 
 
 
Brazil,
 
 
 
 
 
Iran, Romania
High-income 
>$12,275 
70 
1,123 (16%) 
$37,183 
Australia,
 
 
 
 
 
France,
 
 
 
 
 
Japan, Norway,
 
 
 
 
 
Saudi Arabia,
 
 
 
 
 
Taiwan, 
 
 
 
 
 
United States
World** 
$9,097 
216 
6,855 (100%) 
$11,058 
*Gross national income (GNI) per capita expressed in terms of current market exchange rates.
†Countries with populations of 30,000 or more people are included.
‡Average GNI per capita by income group in terms of current purchasing power parity (PPP).
§For the low- and middle-income groups, the examples are listed by World Bank geographical regions in 
the following order: Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, East Asia and Pacific, Latin America and the Carib-
bean, Middle East and North Africa, and Europe and Central Asia.
**World GNI per capita values are based on the population weighted average of all 216 countries.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

14   [CH. 1] PATT E R N S  O F  D E V E LO PM E N T
implies more—particularly, improvements in health, education, and other aspects of 
human welfare. Countries that increase their income but do not also raise life expec-
tancy, increase schooling, and expand individual opportunities are missing out on 
some important aspects of development. The extent to which economic growth sup-
ports these broader criteria for development is related to income distribution within 
countries. The average income figures cited earlier tell us nothing about how widely 
(or narrowly) the benefits of growth are shared within countries. If all of the increased 
income is concentrated in the hands of a few or spent on monuments or a military 
apparatus, there has been very little development in the sense that we mean.
Development is also usually accompanied by significant shifts in the structure of 
the economy, as more and more people typically shift away from rural agricultural pro-
duction to urban-based and higher-paying employment, usually in manufacturing or 
services. Economic growth without structural change is often an indicator of the new 
income being concentrated in the hands of a few people. Situations of growth without 
development are the exceptions rather than the rule, but they do happen. Take the case 
of Equatorial Guinea, a small nation of fewer than 700,000 people on the west coast of 
Africa. The discovery and development of vast oil deposits off the nation’s coast raised 
its GNI per capita income from an estimated US$330 in 1990 to US$12,420 in 2009. 
During the 2000s, Equatorial Guinea was the fastest-growing economy in the world, 
averaging growth rates of 25 percent per year, far greater than China, India, or any other 
successful economy. With growth rates of this magnitude, Equatorial Guinea moved 
from being a low- to a high-income economy in about a decade.
Does this also mean that Equatorial Guinea became a developed economy? By 2009, 
Equatorial Guinea had a per capita income comparable to Hungary’s, but this is where 
the similarity between the two nations ends. Life expectancy in Equatorial Guinea stands 
at 50 years. In Hungary it is 74 years. About 90 percent of school-aged Hungarian children 
are enrolled in primary school; for Equatorial Guinea it is closer to 50 percent. Despite 
Equatorial Guinea’s sudden high level of per capita income there has been little transfor-
mation in the low levels of education and poor health care of most Equatorial Guineans. 
Nor has there been much change in their economic activity. Rapid economic growth has 
not brought economic development to most of the population of Equatorial Guinea. But 
again, this case is the exception rather than the rule. In most cases, increases in per capita 
incomes and economic development have moved together.
Modern economic growth, the term used by Nobel laureate Simon Kuznets, 
refers to the current economic epoch as contrasted with, say, the epoch of merchant 
capitalism or the epoch of feudalism. The epoch of modern economic growth still is 
evolving, so all its features are not yet clear, but the key element has been the applica-
tion of science to problems of economic production, which in turn has led to indus-
trialization, urbanization, and even explosive growth in population. Finally, it should 
always be kept in mind that, although economic development and modern economic 
growth involve much more than a rise in per capita income or product, no sustained 
development can occur without economic growth.

G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT   15
DIVERSITY IN DEVELOPMENT ACHIEVEMENTS
A large number of less-developed countries have experienced growth in income over 
the past four decades and many have enjoyed substantial growth. The most rapidly 
growing economies have been in Asia and include China, India, Indonesia, Korea, 
Malaysia, and Thailand. But several non-Asian countries also are among the fast 
growers, such as Botswana, Chile, Estonia, and Mauritius. Since 1970, Botswana, a 
landlocked country in southern Africa, has been one of the fastest-growing econo-
mies in the world and one that has used its increased income to improve the lives 
of its citizens. Botswana’s experience challenges the stereotype that all African coun-
tries have been stuck with little growth and development. At the same time, several 
Asian countries have grown slowly or not at all, including Myanmar (Burma), North 
Korea, and Papua New Guinea.
There are many examples of countries that have had an income growth 
exceeding 2 percent a year over the past four decades. At 2 percent annual 
growth, average income doubles in 35 years; at 4 percent, it doubles in 18 years. 
In most of these countries, manufacturing grew more rapidly than the gross 
domestic product and thus moved these economies through the inevitable struc-
tural change that reduces the share of income produced and labor employed in 
agriculture. Many other countries experienced slower (albeit positive) growth 
and development, with incomes growing 1 or 2 percent per year. In still others, 
incomes stagnated or declined. Most of the countries in this latter group are in 
Africa, although income also fell elsewhere, including in many of the transition 
economies of eastern Europe and Central Asia.
Perhaps the most remarkable changes in low-income countries in recent decades 
have been the virtually universal improvement in health conditions and the availability 
of schooling. From 1970 to 2009, the infant mortality rate in today’s low-income nations 
fell dramatically from 147 to 76 per thousand births. This means that within this group 
of nations an additional 71 children out of every 1,000 lived to see their first birthday. 
For today’s middle-income nations, which in 1970 included many countries that were 
still low-income, the results are similarly dramatic. Primary school enrollment became 
nearly universal in middle-income economies and rose substantially in most of the 
low-income countries. With few exceptions, more than three-quarters of eligible chil-
dren attend primary school in poor countries. Despite this good news, more than 1 bil-
lion people in the developing world continue to live in extreme poverty.
The study of economic development is not mainly a review of what has and has 
not been accomplished in the past. It is a field concerned most of all with the future, 
particularly the future of the least-advantaged people in the world. To comprehend 
the future, one must first try to understand how we got to the point where we are 
now. But the future will not be just a replay or a projection of trends of the past, as 
new forces that will shape that future also are at work. Some of these forces can be 
seen clearly today, whereas others are only dimly perceived, if they are seen at all.

16   [CH. 1] PATT E R N S  O F  D E V E LO PM E N T
Any list of changes that will make the future of economic development differ-
ent from the past should probably start with the information revolution. Greatly 
enhanced communication around the world as represented by the Internet has 
sped up the flow of ideas across oceans and borders to an unprecedented degree. 
Lower transport costs, together with better information, contribute to global produc-
tion networks and the expansion of global trade and investment. The rapid flow of 
information is also having an impact on politics by making it harder for authoritar-
ian regimes to control what their people are allowed to know. Partly for this reason, 
democratic regimes are becoming more the norm than the exception in developing 
countries, and there is reason to expect this trend to continue.
Not all the foreseeable trends of the future are positive. Despite the benefits of 
advanced technology and the information revolution, some groups in society, nota-
bly the better educated, may capture most of the gains while other large groups are 
left behind. The experience with HIV/AIDS must keep us vigilant for whatever the 
next new infectious disease might be. Natural disaster—droughts, earthquakes, hur-
ricanes, and tsunamis—hit rich and poor nations alike, but the effects are usually far 
more severe the poorer the country. Environmental degradation is much more seri-
ous today than it was a century ago, when Europe and North America were in the 
early stages of economic growth. Global warming, as a result, is a problem likely to 
play an important role in our future. The one positive change in the environmental 
sphere is that people around the world are becoming aware of the danger at a much 
faster pace than in the past, though international cooperation in limiting climate 
change remains a challenge.
We probably are not even aware of many of the forces that will shape the future 
economic development of nations. No one at the end of the nineteenth century had 
heard of nuclear energy, DNA, or integrated circuits. No one in the 1970s had heard of 
cell phones, laptop computers, or antiretroviral (ARV) drugs used to treat HIV/AIDS. 
Given the pace of change in the current world of the new millennium, similar and 
possibly greater discoveries will profoundly influence how economies develop. That 
said, we cannot rely on future discoveries to solve the problems of economic devel-
opment and poverty among nations. We must try to understand how the nations of 
the world got to where they are today so that we can do a better job of raising living 
standards for all in the future.
APPROACHES TO DEVELOPMENT
This book is not for readers looking for a simple explanation of why some countries 
are still poor or how poverty can be overcome. Library shelves are full of studies 
explaining how development will occur if only a country will increase the amount 
it saves and invests or intensify its efforts to export, among other prescriptions. 
APPROACHES TO DEVELOPMENT

A P P R O A C H E S  TO D E V E L O P M E NT   17
For two decades in the mid-twentieth century, industrialization through import 
 substitution—the replacement of imports with home-produced goods—was con-
sidered by many to be the shortest path to development. In the 1970s, labor-intensive 
techniques, income redistribution, and provision of basic human needs to the poor 
gained popularity as keys to development. More recently, economists have coun-
seled governments to avoid high protective barriers and to depend substantially on 
markets to set prices and allocate resources. A different theme for some analysts 
is that development will be possible only with a massive shift of resources, in the 
form of foreign aid and investment, from the richest countries to the poorest. Oth-
ers call for debt forgiveness for poor nations that have found it difficult to repay 
earlier loans.
No single factor is responsible for poverty, and no single policy or strategy can 
set in motion the complex process of economic development. Each of the various 
explanations and solutions to the development problem makes sense if placed in the 
proper context and makes no sense at all outside that set of circumstances. Import 
substitution has carried some countries toward economic development, but export 
promotion has helped others when import substitution bogged down. Prices badly 
distorted from their free-market values can stifle initiative and hence growth, but 
removing those distortions leads to development only when other conditions are 
met as well. Finally, where leaders backed by interests hostile to development rule 
countries, those leaders and their constituents must be removed from power before 
growth can occur. Fortunately, the majority of developing countries have govern-
ments that want to promote development.
This book is not neutral toward all issues of development. Where controversy 
exists we shall point it out. Indeed, the authors of this book differ among themselves 
over some questions of development policy. But we share a common point of view on 
certain basic points.
This text extensively uses the theoretical tools of mainstream economics in the 
belief that these tools contribute substantially to our understanding of development 
problems and their solution. The text does not rely solely or even primarily on the-
ory, however. For five decades and more, development economists and economic 
historians have been building up an empirical record against which these theories 
can be tested, and this book draws heavily on many of these empirical studies. We try 
to give real-country examples for the major points made in this book. In part, these 
examples come from the individual country and cross-country comparative stud-
ies of others, but they also are drawn extensively from our own personal experiences 
working on development issues around the world. The several authors who contrib-
uted to this textbook, both the current and past editions, have been fortunate enough 
to study and work over long periods of time in Bolivia, Chile, China, the Gambia, 
Ghana, Indonesia, Kenya, Korea, Malaysia, Nepal, Peru, Samoa, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, 
Vietnam, and Zambia. At one time or another, at least one nation from this group has 
exemplified virtually all the approaches to development now extant.

18   [CH. 1] PATT E R N S  O F  D E V E LO PM E N T
THE STUDY OF DEVELOPMENT ECONOMICS
If you are like most students taking a course in development economics this will not 
be your first course in economics. Most likely, you have taken courses in principles of 
microeconomics and macroeconomics. Some of you may have also studied interme-
diate economic theory, statistics, econometrics, and other economic subfields. Your 
study of these subjects will prove extremely useful in your examination of develop-
ment economics. In your introductory microeconomics class you learned the impor-
tance of incentives and how markets tend to clear when quantity demanded equals 
quantity supplied. In macroeconomics you learned how expanding the money sup-
ply can lead to inflation. These insights are as applicable to poor nations as they are 
to rich ones. But there also are important differences between your earlier study of 
economics and the study of development. Context matters.
If you took your micro principles courses in a college or university in the United 
States or other high-income country, the examples you were given and the prob-
lems you studied reflected those of a rich nation. Rent control is a common exam-
ple included in principles textbooks to explain price ceilings and how they can 
have unintended effects, including housing shortages and black market prices. In a 
developing country, price ceilings will have the same impact but are unlikely to be 
used to control apartment prices. A better example might be how governments have 
attempted to use price ceilings to lower urban food prices for urban consumers (usu-
ally at the expense of farmers, who are often much poorer than urban consumers). 
Rich nations are more prone to employ price floors to raise food prices and support 
farm incomes.
When discussing taxes, authors of principles textbooks in the United States will 
focus on how marginal tax rates can affect the supply of labor—the higher the tax, the 
less likely workers will want to work. In poor nations, the presence of such taxes is 
most likely to encourage growth in the informal sector in which people are employed, 
although those workers evade paying taxes on their earnings. This happens in rich 
nations too but is a much less common response. In low-income nations, the lack of 
secure property rights to land helps explain squatter settlements and urban slums. 
This is not much of a problem in rich nations and is less likely to be discussed.
In learning macroeconomics, you may have studied how an expansion in the 
money supply may cause a nation’s exchange rate to depreciate. You were less likely 
to have learned how a country can fix its exchange rate intentionally to undervalue 
its currency. Such practices are far more common in developing nations (includ-
ing China) than in developed ones. You might have read about the importance of 
the independence of the Federal Reserve System in the United States, which helps 
insulate decisions about monetary policy from domestic politics. But in developing 
nations, the lack of independence of central banks is far more likely.
The study of macroeconomics in high-income economies tends to focus on eco-
nomic stabilization—that is, on how monetary and fiscal policy can be used to keep 

O R G A N I Z AT I O N   19
unemployment down and inflation low. Economic growth is less of a focus, in part 
because of the success high-income economies have had in growing their econo-
mies. To the extent you studied economic growth, much of the focus was on tech-
nological change as a determinant of growth. In the development setting, economic 
growth and structural change are central issues in the field. Growth rates depend 
not only on the technological frontier but also on the ability to mobilize savings and 
engage in productive investment. These issues will capture much of our attention in 
the chapters that follow.
A final difference between the study of economics in a developed versus a devel-
oping nation context is the role of institutions. Economic theory tends to take institu-
tions (the rules of the game that govern the functioning of markets, banking systems, 
enforcement of property rights, and so on) as a given. But development is concerned 
with how one creates and strengthens institutions that facilitate development in the 
first place. How, for example, does a country acquire a government interested in and 
capable of promoting economic growth? Can efficiently functioning markets be cre-
ated in countries that currently lack them, or should the state take over the functions 
normally left to the market elsewhere? Is a fully developed financial system a precon-
dition for growth, or can a country do without at least some parts of such a system? 
Is land reform necessary for development and, if so, what kind of land reform? What 
legal systems are needed to support market-based growth? These institutional issues 
and many others like them are at the heart of the development process and will reap-
pear in different guises throughout this book.
The economics you have studied before is an important foundation for the study 
of development economics. Be prepared to build on it.
ORGANIZATION
This book is divided into four parts. Part 1 examines the main factors, both those sug-
gested by economic theory and those supported by empirical investigations, that 
contribute to differing rates of economic growth. This discussion involves the delib-
erate choices by governments, including the debate over how economic develop-
ment should be guided or managed.
Part 2 goes beyond issues of economic growth and focuses directly on inequality 
and poverty. Because economic development first and foremost is a process involv-
ing people, who are both the prime movers of development and its beneficiaries, 
Part 2 deals with how human resources are transformed in the process of economic 
development and how that transformation contributes to the development process 
itself. Individual chapters are devoted to population, education, and health.
The other major physical input in the growth process is capital. Part 3 is con-
cerned with how capital is mobilized and allocated for development purposes. From 
ORGANIZATION

20   [CH. 1] PATT E R N S  O F  D E V E LO PM E N T
where, for example, do savings come and how are they transformed into investment? 
How does government mobilize the resources to finance development? What kind of 
financial system is consistent with rapid capital accumulation? Will inflation enhance 
or hinder the process, and what roles will foreign aid and investment play?
Especially in the early stages of development, countries depend heavily on agri-
culture and on the export of food, fuel, and raw materials. Part 4 discusses strategies 
to enhance the productivity of such primary industries as a first, and often a continu-
ing, task in stimulating economic development. Part 4 also explores trade in primary 
products, in manufactured goods and increasingly in services, too. In a more globalized 
world economy, trade plays a larger role in low- and middle-income nations than ever 
before. Part 4 concludes with the all-important question of environmental sustainabil-
ity and the challenges developing nations confront in the face of climate change.
SUMMARY
• The last 40 years have seen a wide diversity of development experiences 
around the world. Some countries, including some very large ones 
like China, India, and Indonesia, have experienced rapid growth and 
development. Others, particularly many African countries and some in 
eastern Europe, have experienced stagnation or even a decline in incomes. 
Understanding the differences in these experiences and the lessons for the 
future is the core purpose of this book.
• Many different terms are used to differentiate poor from rich countries, 
but this text mainly uses the terms developing and low- and middle-income 
economies to refer to those nations with incomes substantially lower than 
the developed and high-income nations.
• Only 12 percent of the world’s population today lives in low-income 
economies, nations with a GNI per capita falling below US$1,005 (in 2010). 
Twenty-five years ago, half of the world’s population lived in low-income 
nations. Economic growth in China, India, and many other previously poor 
nations accounts for this historic change. Of course, many very poor people 
still live in these economies, but their numbers have fallen significantly.
• Economic growth refers to an increase in per capita incomes, whereas 
economic development involves, in addition, improvements in health and 
education and major structural changes, such as industrialization and 
urbanization. Some countries may have economic growth, usually because 
of the discovery of great mineral wealth, but not development because they 
retain many of the structural features of a traditional society.
• No single factor is responsible for poverty, and no single policy or strategy 
can set in motion the complex process of economic development. We can 
SUMMARY

S U M M A R Y   21
learn much from the past experience of other nations, especially those that 
have achieved rapid growth and experienced economic development in 
recent decades.
• We must also be aware that new forces, from new diseases to new 
technologies, will influence the path and opportunities facing today’s 
developing nations. Changes in the global climate, including the planet’s 
physical climate as well as its economic and political climate, will also 
impact the course nations follow.
• The economics of development bears a lot in common with the economics 
you may have studied in other courses. But it is also different. Context 
matters. A focus on long-term economic growth and structural change in 
the economy and on the role of institutions commands the attention of 
development economists.


23
A 
native American saying recommends, “One should not go hunting a bear 
unless one knows what a bear looks like.” This is sound advice for bear 
 hunters; it also has meaning for our inquiry. Understanding how to achieve 
economic development requires some agreement on what we want to achieve.
The previous chapter drew a distinction between economic growth and economic 
development. Economic growth refers to a rise in real national income per capita—
that is, a rise in the inflation-adjusted, per person, value of goods and services pro-
duced by an economy. This is a relatively objective measure of economic capacity. It 
is widely recognized and can be computed with varying degrees of accuracy for most 
economies. There is far less of a consensus on how to define economic development. 
Most people would include in their definition increases in the material well-being of 
individuals as well as improvements in basic health and education. Others might add 
changes in the structure of production (away from agriculture toward manufactur-
ing and services), improvement in the environment, greater economic equality, or an 
increase in political freedom. Economic development is a normative concept, one not 
readily captured by any single measure or index.
To understand the magnitude of the global challenge of development, it is essen-
tial to be able to track what has happened to an economy over time and make com-
parisons between countries. If we want to understand why some nations experienced 
more rapid growth and development than others, we need measures of economic 
performance that are relatively accurate and comparable. Poor countries are envi-
ronments in which information is scarce and data can be of questionable quality, 
so we have to assure ourselves that our indicators, though imperfect, are sufficiently 
Measuring 
Economic Growth 
and Development
2

24   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
robust to help us understand the outcomes we observe. The study of economic devel-
opment requires us to combine our insights on how economies work with an appeal 
to the evidence to check if our insights are consistent with experience. Measurement 
is central to this process and will be an issue we return to throughout this book.
To get started, this chapter introduces measures of national income and consid-
ers the problem of making cross-country comparisons when national incomes are 
expressed in different currencies. Equipped with a means of making comparisons 
of national income levels, we examine the record both over time and across coun-
tries. These data highlight the enormous differences in economic growth that have 
characterized different regions of the world over the past 500 years as well as over the 
more recent past. Much of the rest of this book is devoted to understanding what has 
caused these differences.
Economic growth may be central to achieving economic development, but there 
is much more to economic development than growth alone. Not only the level of per 
capita income but how that income is produced, spent, and distributed within and 
between countries determines development outcomes. There is much debate about 
how to define and measure economic development. We introduce two widely cited 
indicators of economic development, the human development index and the millen-
nium development goals, and consider their strengths and weaknesses. The infor-
mation presented in this chapter may not make you a better bear hunter but it will 
inform the rest of your study of development economics.
MEASURING ECONOMIC GROWTH
At the core of studies of economic growth are changes in national income. Two basic 
measures of national income are commonly employed. Gross national product 
(GNP) is the sum of the value of finished goods and services produced by a society 
during a given year. GNP excludes intermediate goods (goods used up in the produc-
tion of other goods, such as the steel used in an automobile or the chips that go into 
a computer). GNP counts output produced by citizens of the country, including the 
value of goods and services produced by citizens who live outside its borders. GNP is 
one of the most common terms used in national income accounting. The World Bank 
and other multilateral institutions often refer to this same concept as gross national 
income (GNI). Gross domestic product (GDP) is similar to GNP, except that it 
counts all output produced within the borders of a country, including output pro-
duced by resident foreigners, but excludes the value of production by citizens living 
abroad. GNP or GDP divided by total population provides a measure of per capita 
income. Economic growth refers to changes in per capita income over time.
The distinction between GNP and GDP can be illustrated using examples from 
two very different economies, Angola and Bangladesh. More than three-quarters of 

M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H   25
Angola’s national income is derived from oil. Multinational companies drill for most 
of the oil and repatriate their profits. These profits count as part of Angola’s GDP but 
not its GNP. In 2009, Angola’s GDP was 12 percent higher than its GNP. By contrast, 
Bangladesh has few natural resources and little foreign investment. Large numbers of 
Bangladeshis work abroad, especially in the Persian Gulf: men often as construction 
workers and Bangladeshi women as domestics. The value of the output produced by 
these Bangladeshi workers counts as part of Bangladesh’s GNP (since these work-
ers are Bangladeshi nationals) but not as part of its GDP (because the work is per-
formed outside of the country). In 2009, Bangladesh’s GNP was 9 percent higher than 
its GDP. In most countries the differences between GNP and GDP are much smaller. 
In part because it is easier to track economic activity within a nation’s borders, GDP 
has become the more widely used measure of national income by the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), UN Development Programme, World Bank, and other multi-
lateral agencies as well as by researchers engaged in analyzing cross-country data 
and trends. We follow this convention and refer primarily to GDP and GDP per capita 
as measures of national income from here on. Unless otherwise indicated, when dis-
cussing trends over time, we refer to real GDP and real GDP per capita—that is, per 
capita gross domestic product adjusted for domestic price inflation.1
The contribution of a sector or component of GDP, such as manufacturing or 
 agriculture, is measured by the value added by that sector. Value added refers to the 
incremental gain to the price of a product at a particular stage of production. There-
fore, the value added of the cotton textile industry is the value of the textiles when 
they leave the factory minus the value of raw cotton and other materials used in their 
production. At the same time, the value added is equal to the payments made to the 
factors of production in the textile industry: wages paid to labor plus profits, inter-
est, depreciation of capital, and rent for buildings and land. Because the total value 
added at all stages of production equals total output, GDP is a measure of both total 
income and total output.
MEASURING GDP: WHAT IS LEFT OUT?
One way to calculate GDP is to add up the value of all the goods and services pro-
duced within a country and then sold on the market. The focus on goods and services 
sold in the market creates a measurement problem because many valuable contribu-
tions to society are excluded. When a farm household pays someone else to dig an 
irrigation ditch or repair a roof, such economic activity is included in GDP because 
these activities are purchased “in the market.” However, when unpaid members of 
1Real GDP is computed by deflating nominal GDP (GDP measured in current prices) by a price index. 
National statistical offices often calculate a variety of price indices, including the consumer price index 
(CPI), the GDP deflator, and others. What these indices share in common is an attempt to isolate any gen-
eral increase (or decrease) in the price level for all goods.

26   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
the household perform these same tasks, they tend not to enter GDP. The scale of this 
problem tends to be larger in low-income countries and is evident in a poor nation 
like Cambodia, where about one-third of the labor force is classified as unpaid fam-
ily workers, most of whom are engaged on family farms, producing food and other 
goods and services for their own consumption.
In most developing countries, a large number of activities do not enter the market. 
Much of what is produced by the agricultural sector is consumed by the farm house-
hold and never exchanged in the marketplace. To not include this production would 
seriously underestimate a nation’s GDP. The usual practice is to include estimates 
from sample surveys of farm output consumed by the producer, which are then val-
ued at the prices of marketed farm produce. This is done, for example, in Moldova and 
even includes the output of household garden plots. In India, estimates are made for 
the construction of traditional homes made out of mud, straw, and other local materi-
als. Even illegal activity may be included, as in Afghanistan where estimates of poppy 
production, a banned crop, are part of the nation’s GDP. Despite these adjustments, 
not all household production is accounted for. As economies grow, more output is 
transacted in the marketplace and gets included in GDP. The resulting estimates of 
GDP may overestimate the growth in economic activity because some of what is now 
captured is merely a transfer of production from within the household to the market.
An additional measurement problem for GDP arises from the need to compare 
apples with oranges in calculating the value of national output. A typical economy 
might produce thousands of different goods and services. Adding up the total value 
of goods and services that are traded in markets requires using their market prices. 
But accurate price information may not be available or may not be representative of 
market prices at the national level. Government agencies in poor countries may lack 
the means to conduct thorough market surveys of prices or may rely too heavily on 
information from major urban centers (where prices may be easier to track but are 
unrepresentative of markets around the country).
Another criticism of GDP is that it may be a measure of the goods and services 
produced by an economy, but does not account for the “bads” society produces. If 
a steel mill pollutes a river or the air, the value of the steel produced is included in 
GDP but the cost of pollution is not deducted. Should crime, congestion, and other 
social bads be deducted from estimates of GDP? Gross domestic product also does 
not account for the depreciation of goods (for example, when machinery or trucks 
wear out) or depletion of natural resources (when forests are cut, fisheries depleted, 
or mines exhausted). Proposals for making adjustments to GDP to account for these 
factors have been raised, but none has been widely adopted yet.2 Although there are 
2In 2008, President Nicolas Sarkozy of France established the international Commission on the Mea-
surement of Economic Performance and Social Progress that included discussion of GDP as a useful mea-
sure. The commission, chaired by Joseph Stiglitz, a Nobel laureate in economics, raised many concerns 
about GDP as a measure of economic production and as a measure of the quality of life and of sustainabil-
ity. More information is available at www.stiglitz-sen-fitoussi.fr/documents/rapport_anglais.pdf.

M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H   27
obvious flaws in GDP as a measure of national income, there are also many benefits. 
Having a widely agreed on approach to measuring national income facilitates com-
parisons of nations’ economic activity both over time and relative to other countries. 
Both types of comparisons are essential to understanding the process of economic 
development.
EXCHANGE-RATE CONVERSION PROBLEMS
Another measurement issue we need to consider is how to compare levels of GDP per 
capita across countries. The problem arises because each nation measures national 
income in its own currency: dinar in Tunisia, guarani in Paraguay, leu in Moldova, 
and so on. Economic growth rates can be computed in a nation’s own currency, but if 
we want to understand better what is required to transform a nation from low to high 
income, it is useful to compare nations at different income levels. To do so requires 
converting GDP per capita into a common currency. The shortcut to accomplish-
ing this goal is to use the market exchange rate between one currency, usually U.S. 
dollars, and each national currency. For example, to convert India’s GDP per capita 
(2009) of about 57,000 rupees into U.S. dollars, use the appropriate exchange rate 
between the two currencies (about 49 rupees per US$1 in 2009), which in this case 
yields an estimate of about US$1,160.
A common reaction to this low figure by anyone who has lived in or visited India 
(or for that matter any developing nation) is that one U.S. dollar goes much further in 
India than it does in the United States. A basic woman’s haircut in a less-affluent part 
of Mumbai, for example, might cost 200 rupees (US$4 at the official exchange rate), 
whereas a basic haircut in Boston might run US$40. If one can buy more for $1 in 
India than one can in the United States—in this example, 10 haircuts in Mumbai for 
the price of 1 in Boston—then India’s true level of per capita income must be higher 
than the one given by converting currency using the official exchange rate.
There is considerable merit to this argument. One problem with converting 
per capita income levels from one currency to another is that exchange rates, par-
ticularly those of developing countries, can be distorted. Trade restrictions or direct 
government intervention in setting the exchange rate make it possible for an official 
exchange rate to be substantially different from a rate determined by a competitive 
market for foreign exchange.
But even the widespread existence of competitively determined market 
exchange rates would not eliminate the problem. The huge price difference in hair-
cuts between Boston and Mumbai is not the result of trade restrictions or a man-
aged Indian exchange rate. Instead, a significant part of national income is made 
up of what are called nontraded goods and services—that is, goods that do not 
and often cannot enter into international trade. Haircuts are one example.  Internal 
transportation, whether by bus, taxi, or train, cannot be traded, although many 
transport inputs, such automobiles and rail cars, can be imported. Wholesale 

28   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
and retail trade and elementary school education also are nontraded services. 
Land, homes, and office buildings are other obvious examples of goods that are 
not exchanged across national borders. Generally speaking, whereas the prices of 
traded goods tend to be similar across countries (because, in the absence of tar-
iffs and other trade barriers, international trade could exploit any price differences), 
the prices of nontraded goods can differ widely from one country to the next. This is 
because the markets for nontraded goods are spatially separated and the underly-
ing supply and demand curves can intersect in different places, yielding different 
prices.
Exchange rates are determined largely by the flow of traded goods and interna-
tional capital and generally do not reflect the relative prices of nontraded goods. As 
a result, GDP converted to U.S. dollars by market exchange rates gives misleading 
comparisons of income levels if the ratio of prices of nontraded goods to prices of 
traded goods is different in the countries being compared. The way around this prob-
lem is to pick a set of prices for all goods and service prevailing in one country and to 
use that set of prices to value the goods and services of all countries being compared. 
In effect, one is calculating a purchasing power parity (PPP) exchange rate. Thus a 
cement block, a computer chip, or a haircut is assigned the same value whether it is 
produced in New Delhi or New York.
The essence of the procedure can be illustrated by the numerical exercise pre-
sented in Table 2–1. The two economies in the table are called the United States and 
India for illustrative purposes, and each economy produces one traded commodity 
(steel) and one nontraded service (retail sales). Each economy produces a different 
amount of each good. GDP, expressed in local currencies, is equal to the total value of 
production of steel plus retail sales. A ton of rolled steel sells for about $1,000 in the 
United States and Rs 50,000 in India. The value of the services of retail sales person-
nel is estimated in the most commonly used way, which is to assume the value of 
the service is equal to the wages of the worker providing the service. (For the United 
States we assume earnings of $10 per hour, working 40 hours per week for 50 weeks, 
for annual earnings of $20,000. In India, we assume annual earnings of Rs 60,000.) 
Wages are likely to differ widely across countries and to be determined almost 
exclusively by domestic labor supply and labor demand conditions. This is because 
workers cannot easily migrate from one country to another to take advantage of any 
differences in wages (partly because of immigration rules and partly because the cost 
of moving to a new country can be high, both financially and psychically). From the 
data in Table 2–1 we determine that GDP in the United States equals $240 billion and 
in India, Rs 1,490 billion.
One way of comparing the GDP levels in the two economies is to convert 
them into a single currency, say, the U.S. dollar. In this simple world of two goods 
and two nations, the exchange rate is determined solely by trade in steel. If steel 
is freely traded between the two countries, then the exchange rate settles where 
the price per ton of steel in the two countries is equal—that is, at the point at 
which the U.S. price of $1,000 per ton equals India’s price of Rs 50,000 per ton or 

M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H   29
where US$1 = Rs 50.3 Using this market-determined exchange rate, India’s GDP of 
Rs 1,490 billion equals US$29.8 billion, or about 12 percent of U.S. GDP in this 
hypothetical example.
The problem with this comparison is that, although Rs 50 and US$1 purchase 
the same amount of steel in both countries, they purchase different amounts of the 
nontraded good. To compare the GDP levels of the two nations taking into account 
this difference in the purchasing power of the respective currencies, we cannot rely 
on market exchange rates. An alternative approach is to use a common set of prices 
applied to the output of both countries. We can calculate Indian GDP in U.S. dollars 
by applying U.S. prices for each product or service to India’s quantities. (We could 
also compute U.S. GDP in terms of India’s prices but the convention is to express 
PPP estimates in terms of U.S. dollars.) This PPP calculation results in India’s steel 
production valued at US$25 billion and retail sales valued at US$80 billion, for an 
estimated India GDP of US$105 billion. In this example, the PPP calculation of 
3At any other exchange rate, there would be profitable opportunities to buy more steel from one of the 
two countries, causing changes in the market for foreign exchange until the two steel prices were equiva-
lent and the exchange rate settled at US$1 = Rs 50. This is sometimes referred to as the law of one price,
reflecting how opportunities for arbitrage in traded goods lead to price convergence in these goods.
TABLE 2–1  Market Exchange Rate Versus Purchasing Power Parity Methods of 
     Converting GDP
UNITED STATES
INDIA
QUANTITY
PRICE
(US$)
VALUE OF 
OUTPUT 
(BILLION US$)
QUANTITY
PRICE 
(RUPEES)
VALUE OF OUTPUT 
(BILLION RUPEES)
Steel (million 
 tons)
200
1,000 
per ton
200
25
50,000 per 
ton
1,250
Retail sales 
 personnel 
 (millions)
  2
20,000 per 
person per 
year
 40
 4
60,000 per 
person per 
year
  240
Total GDP 
 (local currency,
 billions)
240
1,490
Market exchange rate based on steel prices = Rs 50,000/$1,000 or Rs 50 = US$1.
1. India’s gross domestic product (GDP) in U.S. dollars calculated by using the official exchange rate: Rs 1,490 
billion/Rs 50 = US$29.8 billion.
2. India’s GDP in U.S. dollars calculated by using U.S. prices for each individual product or service and applying 
that price to India’s quantities (that is, using purchasing power parity [PPP]):
Steel: 25 million tons  $1,000/ton = $25 billion
Retail sales personnel: 4 million people  $20,000/person = $80 billion
GDP: $25 billion + $80 billion = $105 billion
3. Ratio of PPP calculation of India’s GDP to official exchange rate calculation: $105 billion/$29.8 billion = 3.5

30   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
India’s GDP is more than three times as large as the calculation that relied on mar-
ket exchange rates. In terms of PPP, India’s GDP is over 40 percent of the U.S. GDP.
Table 2–1 presents a hypothetical PPP conversion for two countries using two 
goods. The task becomes significantly more complicated in a world of tens of thou-
sands of goods and more than 200 nations. The International Comparison Program 
(ICP), which began in 1968 under the auspices of the United Nations and is now 
overseen by the World Bank, tackles this difficult task by deriving a set of interna-
tional prices in a common currency. Detailed price data on a basket of hundreds 
of specific goods have been collected periodically for an ever-increasing number of 
nations. International prices are then derived by aggregating the price data from the 
individual countries and are used to determine the value of national output at these 
standardized international prices. The most recent round of international price com-
parisons released by the ICP was based on 2005 data and represented a significant 
quality improvement over the previous round of price data from 1993. Key elements 
of this improvement were coverage of a larger number of countries (146 countries in 
2005 as compared to only 118 in 1993) and more careful comparison of specific goods 
and services across countries. (The next update of the ICP will be based on 2011 data, 
to be released in 2013.) Estimates of national income in terms of PPP are reported in 
the publications of the IMF, UN Development Programme (UNDP), World Bank, and 
other multilateral agencies. Researchers have made extensive use of these data.4
The ratio of GDP per capita based on international prices relative to GDP using 
official exchange rates ranged in 2009 from about 0.7 in Norway to 3.3 in the Gambia 
(Table 2–2). For high-income countries, like Germany, Japan, and the United King-
dom, the ratio is close to 1.0. This means market exchange rate conversion is a close 
approximation of what is obtained when converting German, Japanese, or UK GDP 
into international price dollars using the PPP method. This is to be expected because 
at similar levels of income the prices of nontraded goods tend to be similar as well. 
For low- and middle-income economies the ratio is greater than 1, consistent with 
the finding that the degree to which the official exchange rate conversion method 
understates GNP is related, generally, to the average income of the country. For 
China the ratio is 1.8, for Bolivia 2.5, for Vietnam and Ethiopia 2.7, and for India 2.8.
With differences of this magnitude, comparisons of per capita income levels 
using market exchange rate conversions can be misleading. Market exchange rates 
suggest that per capita incomes in the United States were about 40 times those in 
India in 2009. PPP calculations narrow the multiple to about 14 times—still a huge 
gap but maybe a more reasonable indicator of relative income levels. Another way 
of appreciating the difference between making comparisons of GDP using market 
exchange rates versus PPP is to think about world GDP as a whole. When world GDP 
4If you read The Economist you may be familiar with another measure of PPP, the Big Mac index, which 
was introduced, lightheartedly, in 1986 and has been reported on annually ever since. The common basket 
of goods is a cheese hamburger with lettuce, onions, and pickles on a sesame bun. For a discussion of the 
Big Mac index as a measure of PPP, see M. Pakko and P. Pollard, “Burger Survey Provides Taste for Interna-
tional Economics,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, The Regional Economist (January 2004), 12–13.

M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H   31
is calculated by converting each nation’s GDP into a common currency using mar-
ket exchange rates, the low- and middle-income economies account for 29 percent 
of world output. When the calculation is based on PPP, the low- and middle-income 
economies account for 44 percent of world output.
PPP allows for more valid comparisons of real income levels across economies. 
But PPP has its limits too. Trade and capital flows are transacted at market exchange 
rates and should be converted at those rates. The ICP provides a consistent set of PPP 
estimates of national income, but these are only estimates and critics have pointed 
out flaws in data collection and methodology.5 PPP conversions cannot correct for 
5Angus Deaton provides a useful introduction to the ICP in “Reshaping the World: The 2005 Round 
of the International Comparison Program,” in Prasada Rao and Fred Vogel, eds., Measuring the Size of 
the World Economy: The Framework, Methodology, and Results from the International Comparison Pro-
gram (Washington, DC, World Bank, in press). Problems associated with constructing PPP estimates are 
discussed in Angus Deaton and Alan Heston, “Understanding PPPs and PPP-Based National Accounts,” 
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2, no. 4 (2010), 36–45.
TABLE 2–2  Comparing GDP per Capita Using Market Exchange Rates and PPP 
      in 2009 (US$)
COUNTRY
GDP AT MARKET 
EXCHANGE RATES
GDP AT PPP
RATIO OF PPP CALCULATION TO 
MARKET EXCHANGE RATE CALCULATION
Norway
79,089
56,214
0.7
Japan
39,738
32,417
0.8
Germany
40,670
36,378
0.9
United Kingdom
35,165
35,155
1.0
United States*
45,989
45,989
1.0
Hungary
12,868
20,312
1.6
Lebanon
8,175
13,070
1.6
China
3,744
6,828
1.8
Botswana
6,064
13,384
2.2
Bolivia
1,751
4,419
2.5
Vietnam
1,113
2,953
2.7
Ethiopia
344
934
2.7
India
1,192
3,296
2.8
The Gambia
430
1,415
3.3
*Gross domestic product (GDP) per capita in the United States is unchanged when measured in terms 
of purchasing power parity (PPP). This must be the case because the United States is used as the refer-
ence country by the International Comparison Program (ICP). As with any index number, the price index 
at the heart of the ICP must be compared relative to some base, and by convention, U.S. prices were 
selected.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

32   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
underlying problems in the measurement of GDP in a nation’s own currency. Varia-
tions in the quality of goods cloud cross-country comparisons. In addition, the spe-
cific price index constructed by the International Comparison Project gives more 
weight to the goods consumed in rich nations and tends to bias upward the GDP of 
poorer nations that consume a different basket of goods. This index number problem 
occurs whenever one studies the aggregate performance of an economy over time 
or compares the performance of different economies. But, despite these problems, 
much can be learned from the data at hand, and PPP estimates of GDP per capita are 
central to the study of economic growth and development.
 ECONOMIC GROWTH AROUND THE WORLD: 
A BRIEF OVERVIEW
We now turn from exploring the measurement of GDP to examining the actual per-
formance of countries around the world in terms of the rate of growth of GDP per 
capita.6 We begin by looking at the findings of economic historian Angus Maddison, 
who estimated income levels and corresponding rates of economic growth for the 
world economy as far back as the year 1 b.c.e. Such an exercise requires a lot of con-
jecture, especially the further back in time one goes. To perform the analysis, Maddi-
son compiled estimates of population, GDP, and a price index for determining PPP.7
According to Maddison’s calculations, average world income in 1000 was virtu-
ally the same as it had been 1,000 years earlier. In other words, growth in per capita 
income between 1 b.c.e. and 1000 was effectively zero. The next 820 years (from 1000 
to 1820) were barely any better, with world income per capita growing, on average, by 
just 0.05 percent per year. (Note: This is not a growth rate of 5 percent; it is a growth 
rate of 0.05 percent.) During those 820 years, world GDP grew by only slightly more 
than the growth in world population. After eight centuries, world per capita income 
had increased by only 50 percent. To place this in some perspective, China today is 
one of the world’s fastest-growing economies. With more than 1 billion people (about 
four times the entire world’s population in 1000), economic growth in China aver-
aged about 9.5 percent over the past decade, raising Chinese per capita incomes by 
50 percent, not in 820 years but in just under 5 years!
6In this section we derive the growth rate of real GDP per capita in PPP using the formula for annual 
compound growth, Yt = Y0(1 + r)t, where Y refers to real GDP per capita in PPP; t, the number of years 
under consideration; r, the rate of growth of real GDP per capita; and Y0 refers to real GDP per capita in 
the base year and Yt in the final year. Alternative ways of estimating growth rates are discussed in Box 3–2.
7Angus Maddison died in 2010. His work is being maintained by his colleagues. The data reported here 
are from Maddison’s original web page titled “Statistics on World Population, GDP and Per Capita GDP, 
1–2008 AD.” Links are available at www.ggdc.net/MADDISON/oriindex.htm, accessed February 2012.

E C O N O M I C G R O W TH A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D :  A  B R I E F  O V E R V I E W    33
Maddison’s estimates indicate considerable uniformity in per capita incomes 
throughout the first millennium. The little bit of economic growth that did take place 
over the next 800 years was centered in western Europe and in what Maddison calls 
the western “offshoots” (Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States). 
By 1820, these regions already had a decided advantage over the rest of the world. 
For example, whereas China and India may have been slightly ahead of the western 
European countries in 1000, average per capita incomes in western Europe and in 
their offshoots were already double those of China and India by 1820. Box 2–1 offers 
one explanation for some of the early and divergent trends and their consequences 
for the world we live in today.
Maddison’s research suggests that rapid economic growth as we know it really 
began around 1820. He estimates that over the subsequent 190 years, the aver-
age growth in world income increased to 1.3 percent per year. Note that the differ-
ence between annual growth of 0.05 percent and 1.3 percent is huge. With the world 
 economy growing at 0.05 percent per year, it would take more than 1,400 years for aver-
age income to double. With annual growth of 1.3 percent, average income doubles in 
just 55 years. The world had changed from no growth at all during the first millennium, 
to slow growth for most of the second millennium, to a situation in which, in the past 
two centuries, average real income began to double in less than every three generations.
Maddison’s estimates of average income levels for the world’s major regions 
since 1820 are shown in Figure 2–1.8 Several features of these data are notable. First, 
economic growth rates clearly accelerated around the world since the early 1800s 
and especially after 1880. Second, and perhaps most striking, the richest countries 
recorded the fastest growth rates and the poorest countries recorded the slowest 
growth rates, at least until 1950. Per capita income in the Western offshoots grew by 
about 1.6 percent per year between 1820 and 1950, while in Asia it grew by only 0.16 
percent. As a result, the ratio of the average incomes in the richest regions to those in 
the poorest regions grew from about 2:1 in 1820 to about 13:1 in 1950.
Between 1950 and 2008, the patterns of economic growth changed, at least in 
several regions. The gap between the Western offshoots and western Europe, which 
had been widening through 1950, narrowed significantly. The poorest region in 1950 
(Asia) recorded the fastest subsequent growth rate (3.6 percent), thereby beginning 
to close the income gap with the richer regions of the world. By contrast, Latin Amer-
ica’s growth stagnated during the 1980s and 1990s, and eastern Europe’s collapsed 
after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989. Both regions resumed economic growth dur-
ing the 2000s.
8Note that the y-axis in Figure 2–1 expresses GDP per capita in PPP using Geary-Khamis (GK) dollars, 
another PPP index. Figure 2–1 also expresses per capita income in logarithms. We will have more to say 
about the use of log scales later in this chapter. For now, it will be useful to know that when using a log 
scale, the slopes of the lines for each region are estimates of the growth rate of GDP per capita.

34   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
BOX 2–1 JARED DIAMOND: GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Most of this textbook is devoted to understanding why over the past 50 years 
some countries have experienced rapid economic growth and development 
while others have not. Jared Diamond, a physiologist, geographer, and Pulitzer 
Prize–winning author, poses a related but different question. The world as we 
know it is the result of the historical dominance of Eurasians, especially people 
of Europe and East Asia. Why, Diamond asks, did history turn out this way? Why 
did things not work in reverse with Native Americans, Africans, and Aboriginal 
Australians conquering Europeans? We know that Hernán Cortés, the conquis-
tador, overthrew the Aztec Empire and began Spanish colonization of the Ameri-
cas. But Diamond wants to understand why the opposite did not happen. Why 
didn’t Emperor Montezuma cross the Atlantic and conquer Europe? World history
would have turned out differently had he done so.
For Diamond, much of the history of the last two centuries is the result of
what happened in the previous 10,000 years. It was the advantages Europe and
Asia had over other continents by 1500 that determined much of what followed. 
Diamond is interested in the early divergence of regional incomes. He identifies
the “proximate causes” of Eurasian dominance over other regions: guns, germs, 
and steel. Eurasians had guns and steel for swords, which gave them their mili-
tary advantage; they carried diseases, such as measles and smallpox, which
decimated other populations; and they had political structures that could finance 
seaworthy ships and organize expeditions that led to the conquest of other lands.
But these are only proximate causes. Diamond digs deeper asking why
Eurasians had these advantages more than 500 years ago. Diamond’s explana-
tion is geography. Eurasia has a land mass that has an east–west axis whereas 
Africa and the Americas have a north–south orientation. An east–west axis per-
mitted the more rapid spread of both domesticated animals (cattle, chickens,
horses) and edible grains, which in turn permitted more rapid development of
settled farming communities. In time, these communities became productive 
enough to support craftsmen and others who developed the technologies that
led to the guns, ships, and steel necessary for foreign adventures and conquest.
If a continent has a north–south axis, plant and animal varieties cannot spread as
rapidly because they need to adapt to different climates as they move from one
area to the next, thus significantly limiting the opportunity for economic growth.
Domesticated agriculture also lies behind the germs that decimated indige-
nous populations in the Americas and elsewhere. Many infectious diseases result 
from microbes crossing over from animal populations to humans. Eurasians
acquired these diseases and built up their immunity to them as a consequence

E C O N O M I C G R O W TH A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D :  A  B R I E F  O V E R V I E W    35
of developing settled agriculture early. As more densely populated communities
came in close contact with their farm animals, diseases spread as did immunity
to them. Eurasia also happened to have more animal species suitable for domes-
tication than other continents. As Diamond writes, “Just think what the course
of world history might have been if Africa’s rhinos and hippos had lent them-
selves to domestication! If that had been possible, African cavalry mounted on
rhinos and hippos would have made mincemeat of European cavalry mounted on
horses.”
Sources: Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies (New York,
s
W. W. Norton, 1998). A summary is contained in a 1997 talk by Jared Diamond, “Why Did Human
History Unfold Differently on Different Continents for the Last 13,000 Years?” April 22, 1997, trans-
cript available at http://edge.org/conversation/why-did-human-history-unfold-differently-on-different-
continents-for-the-last-13000-years, accessed February 2012.
Western
Offshoots
Western
Europe
Eastern Europe
20,000
10,000
5,000
2,000
1,000
500
1820
1840
1860
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
Year
GDP per capita (PPP, 1990 GK$, log scale)
Asia
Africa
Latin America
FIGURE 2–1 Levels of GDP per Capita by Region: 1820–2008
Notes: Western offshoots include Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States. GDP, gross 
domestic product; GK$, Geary-Khamis dollars; PPP, purchasing power parity.
Source: Angus Maddison, “Statistics on World Population, GDP, and Per Capita GDP, 1–2008 AD,” 
www.ggdc.net/MADDISON/Historical_Statistics/vertical-file_02-2010.xls.

36   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
In Africa, as elsewhere, average growth rates accelerated after 1820 and did so 
again after 1950, in the period associated with the end of the colonial era. But as in 
Latin America, economic growth in Africa faded after 1980, continued to stagnate 
in the 1990s, and rebounded only recently. As a result, the income gap between 
the world’s richest regions (the Western offshoots) and the poorest in 2000 (Africa) 
reached 19:1. According to Maddison’s work, this is the largest gap in income 
between rich and poor regions the world has ever known.9 Because of resurgence in 
economic growth in Africa during the 2000s, this gap has narrowed but still remains 
huge by historical standards.
Maddison’s broad sweep of world economic history indicates how differential 
rates of economic growth, especially over the past two centuries, have produced the 
divergence in income levels that characterizes the world’s economy today.
ECONOMIC GROWTH, 1970–2010
Table 2–3 takes a closer look at the pattern of growth rates over the past four decades. 
The selection of decades as the unit of observation is somewhat arbitrary. The 
1970s often are associated with two oil price shocks and other significant changes 
in  commodity prices; the 1980s, with the first wave of international debt crises; 
the 1990s, with the major transition toward market economies, especially in east-
ern Europe and the republics of the former Soviet Union; and the 2000s, with the 
global consequences of the attacks of September 11, 2001, and of the financial cri-
sis of 2008– 09. The regional divisions in Table 2–3 differ from those in Maddison and 
conform to conventions used by the World Bank, a major source of data on eco-
nomic development. Most of the regional definitions are self-explanatory; however, 
all high-income economies are combined in one category regardless of geographic 
location. Therefore, East Asia does not include Japan, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, 
and a few small and affluent island economies. Similarly, Europe and Central Asia 
refers  primarily to eastern Europe and Central Asia and excludes all (mostly western) 
 European economies classified as high-income.
The growth rates in GDP per capita reported in Table 2–3 highlight major differ-
ences in economic growth both between regions and over time.10 The 1970s were a 
decade in which all regions experienced positive growth. The 1980s often are referred 
to as “the lost decade” in Latin America because of the sharp downturn in regional 
9Using a somewhat different methodology from that employed by Maddison, Lant Pritchett reached 
similar conclusions in “Divergence, Big Time,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11, no. 3 (1997), 3–17.
10The growth rates in Table 2–3 are based on constant US$. Although large differences in the level of 
GDP per capita are observed depending on whether PPP or market exchange rates are used, this is not the 
case when comparing growth rates of national income. The growth rates reported in the table are the dif-
ferences between World Bank estimates of GDP growth and population growth by region and by decade.

E C O N O M I C G R O W TH A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D :  A  B R I E F  O V E R V I E W    37
growth, from +3.0 percent in the 1970s to –0.3 percent in the following 10 years.  Negative 
growth and falling per capita income also were features of the Middle East and North 
Africa region and sub-Saharan Africa in the 1980s. Growth in sub-Saharan Africa also 
remained negative, but by a smaller amount, throughout the 1990s. The economies of 
Europe and Central Asia collapsed in the 1990s after the transition from a planned to a 
market-based economic system. But the region rebounded during the 2000s, in some 
cases because of large improvements in commodity prices, especially oil, and in other 
cases because of the integration of these countries with the global economy. The poor 
performance of some regions during the 1980s and 1990s stands in sharp contrast to the 
accelerating growth rates—and the associated improvements in living standards—in 
both East and South Asia. The term economic miracle has been used to describe the his-
torically unprecedented rates of growth achieved by some nations in these two regions.
The growth rates in Table 2–3 also reveal that the 2000s were the best decade since 
the 1970s for the low- and middle-income nations as a group. The political and eco-
nomic events that rocked the high-income economies, especially the United States 
and the European Union, did not have the same impact elsewhere. Such resiliency on 
the part of low- and middle-income nations was not expected based on the experi-
ence of the 1980s and 1990s. Sub-Saharan Africa’s improved growth performance is 
especially noteworthy. Some of it is due to much higher commodity prices. Emerg-
ing economies in the region are also benefiting from improved economic policies and 
management, more democratic and accountable governments, new technologies, 
and a new generation of development-oriented African leaders and entrepreneurs.11
11Steven Radelet, Emerging Africa: How 17 Countries Are Leading the Way (Washington, DC, Center for 
Global Development, 2010).
TABLE 2–3 Rate of GDP per Capita Growth (Percent/Year)
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000s
East Asia and Pacific
5.0
 6.4
 6.1
8.6
Europe and Central Asia
4.4
 1.5
–2.9
5.7
Latin America and Caribbean
3.0
–0.3
 1.7
2.5
Middle East and North Africa
3.0
–1.1
 0.8
2.9
South Asia
1.2
 3.5
 3.8
5.7
Sub-Saharan Africa
1.1
–1.2
–0.2
2.6
High income
2.4
 2.5
 1.8
1.3
Sources: World Bank, World Development Report 1995 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995). 
World Bank, World Development Report 2000/2001 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001). World 
Bank, World Development Report 2011 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011).

38   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
There are a few more points to take away from the growth rates presented in 
Table 2–3. First, remember that even small differences in growth rates imply huge dif-
ferences in the potential for economic development. In the 1970s, economic growth 
in South Asia was 1.2 per year. At this rate, GDP per capita in the region expanded 
by a mere 12.5 percent in a decade. In the 1980s, South Asia achieved a growth rate 
a few percentage points higher, 3.5 percent, and ended the decade with a 41 percent 
increase in GDP per capita. In the 2000s, growth rates again grew by a few more per-
centage points, reaching 5.7 percent. That decade ended with per capita incomes 
75 percent higher than they began. Second, the regional averages in Table 2–3 are 
weighted averages, where the weights are the population size of each nation in the 
region. Such averages are heavily influenced by the experience of the most populous 
country in the region, especially China in East Asia and India in South Asia, and dis-
guise the wide range in individual country performance. For example, in East Asia, 
the Philippines’ annual growth rate from 1979 to 2009 was only 0.7 percent, a fraction 
of its region’s performance; Botswana grew at 4.4 percent per annum over these three 
decades, far exceeding not only the sub-Saharan Africa average but the performance 
of most nations worldwide.
The successful growth performance in Asia and a few countries in other regions 
relative to the high-income economies illustrates an observation by economic his-
torian Alexander Gerschenkron. When Gerschenkron refers to “the advantages of 
backwardness,” he is not suggesting that it is good to be poor. Instead, he means 
that being relatively poorer might allow low-income countries to grow more quickly. 
For the first nations to experience modern economic growth, in western Europe and 
its offshoots, growth rates were constrained by the rate of technological progress. 
That same constraint operates today. Growth rates in the high-income economies 
reported in Table 2–3 range from 1.3 to 2.5 percent, far lower than the growth rates 
of the successful regions in the developing world. Poor countries can borrow and 
adapt existing technology and have the potential to grow faster and to catch up to 
the more advanced economies. Over the past three decades, this is what enabled 
growth rates in Asia to exceed the average growth rate of the high-income nations. 
For development economists, the challenge is to understand why some countries 
have been able to realize the advantages of backwardness whereas others have fallen 
further behind.
 WHAT DO WE MEAN BY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT?
As indicated in Chapter 1, economic growth is a necessary but not sufficient condi-
tion for improving the living standards of large numbers of people in countries with 
low levels of GDP per capita. It is necessary because, if there is no growth, individuals 
can become better off only through transfers of income and assets from others. In a 

W H AT  D O  W E  M E A N  BY  E C O N O M I C  D E V E LO P M E N T?  39
poor country, even if a small segment of the population is very rich, the potential for 
this kind of redistribution is severely limited. Economic growth, by contrast, has the 
potential for all people to become much better off without anyone becoming worse 
off. Economic growth has led to widespread improvements in living standards in 
Botswana, Chile, Estonia, Korea, and many other countries.
Economic growth, however, is not a sufficient condition for improving mass 
 living standards for several reasons. First, governments promote economic growth 
not just to improve the welfare of their citizens but also, and sometimes primarily, 
to augment the power and glory of the state and its rulers. Governments in develop-
ing nations may use national income to expand their militaries or construct elabo-
rate capital city complexes in deserts and jungles. Political leaders may be corrupt 
and expropriate income for personal gain, whether for conspicuous consumption at 
home or the accumulation of wealth in overseas bank accounts and property. When 
gains from growth are channeled in such ways, they often provide little benefit to 
the country’s citizens. Second, resources may be heavily invested in further growth, 
with significant consumption gains deferred to a later date. In extreme cases, such 
as the Soviet collectivization drive of the 1930s, consumption can decline dramati-
cally over long periods. When the Soviet Union fell in 1991, its consumers were still 
waiting for the era of mass consumption to arrive. Normally, the power to suppress 
consumption to this extent in the name of economic growth is available only to 
totalitarian governments. Third, income and consumption may increase, but those 
who already are relatively well off may get all or most of the benefits. The rich get 
richer, the old saw says, and the poor get poorer. (In another version, the poor get 
children.) This is what poor people often think is happening. Sometimes, they are 
right.
If economic growth does not guarantee improvement in living standards, then GDP 
per capita may not be a meaningful measure of economic development. In addition to 
problems associated with how income is spent and distributed, any definition of eco-
nomic development must include more than income levels. Income, after all, is only a 
means to an end, not an end itself. More than 2,000 years ago, Aristotle wrote, “The life 
of money-making is one undertaken under compulsion and wealth is evidently not the 
good we are seeking, for it is merely useful for the sake of something else.”
If economic growth and economic development are not the same thing, how 
should we define economic development? Amartya Sen, economist, philosopher, and 
Nobel laureate, argues that the goal of development is to expand the capabilities of 
people to live the lives they choose to lead. Income is one factor in determining such 
capabilities and outcomes, but it is not the only one. To be capable of leading a life of 
one’s own choice requires what Sen calls “elementary functionings,” such as escap-
ing high morbidity and mortality, being adequately nourished, and having at least 
a basic education. Also required are more complex functionings, such as achieving 
self-respect and being able to take part in the life of the community. Income is but 
one of the many factors that enhance such individual capabilities.

40   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
In his 1998 Nobel address, Sen identified four broad factors, beyond mere pov-
erty, that affect how well income can be converted into “the capability to live a mini-
mally acceptable life”:
• Personal heterogeneities: including age, proneness to illness, and extent of 
disabilities.
• Environmental diversities: shelter, clothing, and fuel, for example, required 
by climatic conditions.
• Variations in social climate: such as the impact of crime, civil unrest, and 
violence.
• Differences in relative deprivation: for example, the extent to which being 
impoverished reduces one’s capability to take part in the life of the greater 
community.
According to Sen, economic development requires alleviating the sources of 
“capability deprivation” that prevent people from having the freedom to live the lives 
they desire.
Sen’s seminal contributions played a key role in the formulation of the human 
development approach to economic development. This approach is also associ-
ated with the UNDP and the work of Pakistani economist Mahbub ul Haq. Part of 
the motivation of Haq and Sen was a concern over the focus by other development 
economists on economic growth. Like Aristotle, they wanted to explore how “money-
making” was “useful for the sake of something else.” They wanted to see the focus 
shift from the production of commodities to a focus on human lives, including the 
enhancement of individual capabilities and the enlargement of people’s choices.
MEASURING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
The UNDP published its first human development report in 1990 with “the single 
goal of putting people back at the center of the development process.” Although the 
terminology is different, human development and economic development are the 
same idea. The distinction is intended to expand the perception of development as 
encompassing more than increases in per capita income (Box 2–2).
The UNDP attempted to quantify what it saw as the essential determinants of 
human development: to live a long and healthy life, acquire knowledge, and have 
access to the resources needed for a decent standard of living. For each of these ele-
ments, a specific measure was constructed and aggregated into an index, the Human 
Development Index (HDI). Every year since 1990, the UNDP has calculated the value 
of the HDI for as many of the world’s nations as the data permit and assessed the rela-
tive progress of nations in improving human development. Because the HDI com-
bines outcomes with different units of measurement—years of life expectancy, years 
of schooling, and dollars of income—each outcome must be converted into an index 
number to permit aggregation into a composite measure. In response to criticisms of 

W H AT  D O  W E  M E A N  BY  E C O N O M I C  D E V E LO P M E N T?  41
the index, the HDI has evolved over time, including different variables and changing 
how the index is computed. In the Human Development Report 2010, the 20th anni-
versary of the HDI, significant changes were made to the variables used, the construc-
tion of the indices for each dimension, and the method of aggregation.
As a proxy for living a long and healthy life, the HDI employs a nation’s life 
expectancy at birth and compares progress on this measure relative to other nations. 
The goalposts for assessing life expectancy are a minimum value of 20 years and a 
maximum of 83.2. Twenty years represents the minimum life expectancy that per-
mits a society to sustain itself. Anything less than 20 years would be below the prime 
reproductive age range and a society would eventually die out. Historical evidence 
bears this out. The maximum value of 83.2 years is what Japan achieved in 2010, the 
highest level recorded in any nation over the 20 years the HDI has been calculated. 
A country’s score on this dimension is a measure of its populations’ life expectancy 
compared to the maximum and minimum scores. For example, in 2010, El Salvador 
BOX 2–2 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT DEFINED
Human development is a process of enlarging people’s choices. In principle,
these choices can be infinite and change over time. But at all levels of develop-
ment, the three essential ones are for people to lead a long and healthy life, to
acquire knowledge, and to have access to resources needed for a decent stan-
dard of living. If these essential choices are not available, many other opportuni-
ties remain inaccessible.
But human development does not end there. Additional choices, highly valued
by many people, range from political, economic, and social freedom to opportuni-
ties for being creative and productive, and enjoying personal self-respect and
guaranteed human rights.
Human development has two sides: the formation of human capabilities—such
as improved health, knowledge, and skills—and the use people make of their
acquired capabilities—for leisure, productive purposes, or being active in cultural,
social, and political affairs. If the scales of human development do not finely bal-
ance the two sides, considerable human frustration may result.
According to this concept of human development, income is clearly only one
option that people would like to have, albeit an important one. But it is not the
sum total of their lives. Development must, therefore, be more than just the
expansion of income and wealth. Its focus must be people.
Source: United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report 1990 (Oxford:
0
Oxford University Press, 1990), p. 10.

42   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
had life expectancy at birth of 72 years. El Salvador’s HDI life expectancy index is 
calculated as (72 – 20) ÷ (83.2 – 20) = 0.82; in other words, El Salvador has attained 
82 percent of the potential range in life expectancy.
As a proxy for acquiring knowledge, the HDI includes two variables. One is the 
mean years of schooling achieved by the adult population, those 25 years and older. 
The second variable is expected years of schooling for children of school-going ages. 
It is based on enrollment data. The goalposts of the adult schooling variable are 0 and 
13.2, the observed maximum from the United States. For expected years of school-
ing, the goalposts are 0 and 20.6, the maximum referring to Australia. El Salvador’s 
mean years of schooling among adults is 7.7 years (58 percent of the way in between 
the two goalposts); for expected years of schooling it is 12.1 years (59 percent). These 
values are then aggregated to form one composite index for education.
Access to resources is measured by transforming GNI per capita (PPP in US$).12 
The goalposts are $163 and $108,211; the minimum is the value attained in Zimba-
bwe in 2008, and the maximum is from the United Arab Emirates in 1980. The rela-
tive standing of a nation’s GNI per capita is determined by taking the logarithms 
of all dollar values. The transformation into logarithms decreases the significance 
of income gains as income increases. This reflects the conclusions made by all the 
human development reports that there are diminishing returns to income as a means 
of securing a decent standard of living (or, alternatively, that the marginal utility of an 
extra dollar of income falls as income rises). El Salvador, with an estimated 2010 GNI 
per capita of $6,498, falls 57 percent between the logarithm-adjusted income goal-
posts (Box 2–3).
All three dimensions of the HDI are expressed in terms of a percentage, solving 
the problem of different units of measurement. The next challenge is how to aggregate 
the three dimensions. Up until 2010, this was done by giving the index of each dimen-
sion an equal weight of one third and computing the arithmetic mean of the three. In 
2010, the three dimensions still have equal weight but now a geometric mean of the 
three percentages is computed.13 The UNDP explains the reason for this change. Using 
an arithmetic mean implied “perfect substitutability” among the three components of 
HDI. If a nation lost, say, 10 percent on its schooling measure this could be compen-
sated by a 10 percent improvement in income and the HDI would remain unchanged. 
The geometric mean does not have this property. Low achievement in one dimension 
is no longer linearly compensated by high achievement in another dimension. The 
level of each index matters, creating a situation of imperfect substitutability across 
12Before 2010, the HDI was based on GDP values. The change to GNI was made to include remittances 
and foreign assistance income and to exclude income generated within a country but repatriated abroad. 
All three can be significant, especially for low-income countries. This recalls our earlier discussion of the 
differences between GDP and GNP/GNI.
13The calculation requires taking the cube root of the product of the three indices on life expectancy, 
schooling, and income.

W H AT  D O  W E  M E A N  BY  E C O N O M I C  D E V E LO P M E N T?  43
BOX 2–3 WHY USE LOGARITHMS?
Logarithms have been used several times in this chapter and will be referred to 
throughout this text. It is worth reviewing some of their properties. It is easiest to
understand logarithms if you remember that the answer to any question involving 
a logarithm is an exponent. If we want to know the logarithm of 100 in base 10, 
the answer would be 2, because 10 raised to the second power is 100. In math-
ematical notation,
log 10 (100) = 2 because 10 
0
2 = 100
The base of the logarithm merely determines what number will be raised to a 
given power to arrive at the value whose logarithm we are seeking. If our base 
were 2 instead of 10, then the logarithm of 16 would be 4, because 2 raised to
the fourth power is 16:
log 2 (16) = 4 because 2 
2
4 = 16
The HDI uses the logarithm of income per capita rather than the level of income 
per capita in determining the importance of incomes in a country’s human devel-
opment. To see the implications, we build off our example. Assume that two
nations have incomes of 10 and 100, respectively. Using these values implies
a 10-fold importance to the higher income because 100 is 10 times as large
as 10. What if we use logarithms instead? If we use base 10 logarithms, we can
easily see how the relative importance of the higher income is reduced. As we 
already determined, the logarithm of 100 in base 10 is 2. What is the logarithm 
of 10 in base 10? It is 1, because 10 raised to the first power is 10. Using loga-
rithms in this case reduced the relative importance of the higher income from a 
factor of 10 to a factor of only 2.
This reduced relative importance becomes more pronounced as the spread
e
between incomes grows. If the two incomes were 10 and 1,000, using base 10
logarithms reduces the relative importance of the higher income from a factor of
100 to a factor of only 3! Logarithms are consistent with the UNDP’s position 
that income exhibits diminishing returns in achieving human development.
Economists, including the authors of the HDI, often use the mathematical
constant e as the base for their logarithms; these are called natural logarithms.
Base e is closely related to the concept of continuous compounding and is a
useful tool when examining economic variables that grow over time. Box 3–2
discusses this further.
One more property of logarithms is worth noting. If we track a variable in
logs rather than in levels, differences in the log values imply equal percentage
changes. For example, using logarithms in base 2,

44   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
log2 (2) = 1 as 2
2
1 = 2
log2 (4) = 2 as 2
2
2 = 4
log2 (8) = 3 as 2
2
3 = 8
log2 (16) = 4 as 2
2
4 = 16
As we move from the log values 1 to 2 to 3 to 4, the absolute change of the 
underlying value increases by 2 then 4 then 8, but the percentage change always 
remains the same at 100 percent.
This property of logarithms can be observed by considering the logarithmic
scales used in Figures 2–1 and 2–2. In Figure 2–2, notice that the distance 
between $500 and $1,000 on the horizontal axis is the same as the distance
between $20,000 and $40,000. We know that the absolute change is different
along those two intervals (clearly $500 is smaller than $20,000), but both inter-
vals represent a doubling (a 100 percent increase) of the variable. GNI per cap-
ita expressed in logarithms must behave this way.
the HDI’s three dimensions. The UNDP argues that a geometric mean better reflects 
intrinsic differences across the indices than did the arithmetic mean.
Once the geometric mean is applied, El Salvador had a 2010 HDI of 0.659, placing 
it in the medium human development range, ranked 90th out of the 169 nations for 
which an HDI was computed. El Salvador’s HDI improved from an estimated value of 
0.456 in 1980, to 0.562 in 1995, to its most recent value of 0.659 in 2010. These trends 
suggest significant progress in El Salvador’s human development over the past 30 years.
WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM THE HUMAN
DEVELOPMENT INDEX?
The basic concept behind human development is one with which many people would 
agree. But when we move from concept to measurement, problems arise. Many criticisms 
have been leveled against the HDI since it was first introduced. Some are concerned with 
limiting the index to only three dimensions of human development. In response, the 
human development reports now compute additional indices focusing on human pov-
erty and gender-related development. An inequality-adjusted HDI was added in 2010.
Some commentators criticize the HDI for assuming diminishing returns only 
to income but not to either life expectancy or schooling. If the marginal utility of 
income declines with the more income one has, can the same be said for an extra 
year of life or schooling? Specific criticisms also have been raised about the introduc-
tion of a geometric mean to aggregate the three dimensions. Geometric means are 

W H AT  D O  W E  M E A N  BY  E C O N O M I C  D E V E LO P M E N T?  45
sensitive to low values; in the extreme, if one index equaled zero then the HDI would 
equal zero too. The same principle applies if one index is close to zero. As econo-
mist William Easterly put it, “The new HDI has a ‘you’re only as strong as your weak-
est link’ property, and in practice the weakest link turns out to be very low income.”14 
This is due to both the construction of the HDI and to the greater convergence across 
nations in life expectancy and schooling than in income. The implication for nations 
with the lowest HDI, including Zimbabwe, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
and Niger seems to be focus on economic growth rather than health or education. 
This seems the opposite of the message behind the entire human development 
approach. It may be the right message for these nations but it is also an unintended 
artifact of how the HDI is now constructed.15
Beyond these criticisms lies the central question of how much of an improvement 
the HDI is over national income per capita as an index of economic or human devel-
opment. Figure 2–2 presents a comparison of HDI values and levels of GNI per capita. 
The scatter diagram of values for individual countries indicates, as might be predicted, 
that rising incomes raise the HDI. This is expected because incomes are a component 
of the HDI, and health and schooling also rise with incomes. According to the trend 
line, income alone explains 90 percent of the variation in the HDI. But the scatter dia-
gram also indicates variance around this trend. Angola and Georgia have similar levels 
of per capita GNI (around US$4,900, PPP) but Angola has much lower life expectancy 
than does Georgia (48 versus 72 years). There is also an almost eight-year gap in school-
ing between the two nations. Despite identical per capita incomes, there is low human 
development in Angola, with an HDI of 0.403, and high human development in  Georgia, 
with an HDI of 0.698. If one compares Mozambique and Togo the story is  similar. Both 
have per capita incomes of close to $850, but life expectancy and schooling are much 
higher in Togo, raising its HDI value. In terms of HDI values, Angola and Mozambique 
lay well below the trend line in Figure 2–2, Georgia and Togo lay well above it.
We can conclude that alternative measures of economic development are sig-
nificantly but not perfectly correlated with levels of income. This suggests that with 
economic growth, increasing levels of income can predict a lot about economic 
development. But the data also suggest that improved health and education depend 
on factors other than income. We elaborate on this point in the discussion of income 
and health in Chapter 9.
From an advocacy perspective, the HDI has been useful in calling attention 
to development issues. It is widely reported in the media and gets the attention of 
14William Easterly, “The First Law of Development Stats: Whatever Our Bizarre Methodology, We 
Make Africa Look Worse,” AIDWATCH (blog), December 2, 2010. http://aidwatchers.com/2010/12/
the-first-law-of-development-stats-whatever-our-bizarre-methodology-we-make-africa-look-worse/.
15Allen Kelley, “The Human Development Index: ‘Handle with Care,’” Population and Development 
Review 17, no. 2 (June 1991), 315–24 provides an early critique of the original HDI. Concerns about the 
2010 version are discussed in Martin Ravallion, “Troubling Tradeoffs in the Human Development Index,” 
Policy Research Working Paper 5484, World Bank, November 2010.

46   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
political leaders. But the construction of the HDI is far from transparent and the 
aggregation of different dimensions of human development may not be better than 
a dashboard of several indicators. How much additional insight the HDI offers as a 
means of measuring economic development remains open to debate.
MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS
Defining economic development is inherently difficult. As with any normative con-
cept, people have different opinions as to what should be included in the definition 
and on what weight to give to different goals. But even without a commonly agreed-
on definition, policy makers need specific targets. One such set of targets is known as 
the millennium development goals (MDGs).
In September 2000, 189 nations adopted the “United Nations Millennium Decla-
ration,” a broad-reaching document that states a commitment “to making the right to 
development a reality for everyone and to freeing the entire human race from want.”16 
The declaration specifies a set of eight goals consistent with this commitment:
16UN General Assembly, “United Nations Millennium Declaration,” section III, paragraph 11, Septem-
ber 18, 2000.
Kuwait
Angola
= 0.13  − 0.52
2 = 0.90
Georgia
El Salvador
Mozambique
Togo
Norway
GNI per capita (PPP US$, log scale)
HDI value
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
$5,000
$20,000 $40,000
$1,000
$500
y
x
R
FIGURE 2–2 HDI Versus GNI per Capita by Country (2010)
Source: UN Development Programme, Human Development Report 2010 (New York: 
UN Development Programme, 2010), http://hdr.undp.org/en/media/HDR_2010_EN_
Contents_reprint.pdf.

W H AT  D O  W E  M E A N  BY  E C O N O M I C  D E V E LO P M E N T?  47
BOX 2–4 TARGETS OF THE MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS
Target 1A. 
 Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose 
income is less than one dollar a day.
Target 1B. 
 Achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all, 
including women and young people.
Target 1C. 
 Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people who suf-
fer from hunger.
Target 2A. 
 Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will 
be able to complete a full course of primary schooling.
Target 3A. 
 Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education, pref-
erably by 2005, and to all levels of education no later than 2025.
Target 4A. 
 Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-five 
mortality rate.
Target 5A.
Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal 
mortality ratio.
Target 5B.
Achieve, by 2015, universal access to reproductive health.
Target 6A.
Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the spread of HIV/
AIDS.
Target 6B.
Achieve, by 2010, universal access to treatment for HIV/AIDS for
all those who need it.
Target 6C.
Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the incidence of malaria 
and other major diseases.
• Goal 1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger.
• Goal 2. Achieve universal primary education.
• Goal 3. Promote gender equality and empower women.
• Goal 4. Reduce child mortality.
• Goal 5. Improve maternal health.
• Goal 6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases.
• Goal 7. Ensure environmental sustainability.
• Goal 8. Develop a global partnership for development.
To more fully define these goals, a panel of experts developed a comprehen-
sive set of targets and indicators for each of the MDGs. The eight MDGs contain 21 
targets, which correspond to 60 indicators (Box 2–4). This combination of multiple 
goals, targets, and indicators is an articulation of what most of the world’s govern-
ments believe should be achieved to make “development a reality for everyone.” The 

48   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
Target 7A. 
 Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country pol-
icies and programs and reverse the loss of environmental resources.
Target 7B. 
 Reduce biodiversity loss, achieving, by 2010, a significant reduction 
in the rate of loss.
Target 7C. 
 Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access 
to safe drinking water and basic sanitation.
Target 7D. 
 By 2020, to have achieved a significant improvement in the lives of 
at least 100 million slum dwellers.
Target 8A. 
 Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, nondiscriminatory 
trading and financial system.
Target 8B. 
Address the special needs of the least developed countries.
Target 8C. 
 Address the special needs of landlocked countries and small island
developing states.
Target 8D. 
 Deal comprehensively with the debt problems of developing coun-
tries through national and international measures in order to make
debt sustainable in the long run.
Target 8E. 
 In cooperation with pharmaceutical companies, provide access to 
affordable essential drugs in developing countries.
Target 8F. 
 In cooperation with the private sector, make available the benefits 
of new technologies, especially information and communications.
Source: United Nations Statistics Division, “Official List of MDG Indicators,” January 2008, avail-
able at http://unstats.un.org/unsd/mdg/Host.aspx?Content=Indicators/OfficialList.htm, accessed 
February 2012.
millennium declaration even suggests ways in which this development agenda might 
be financed. For example, Target 8B, which focuses on the least developed countries, 
makes recommendations for debt relief and for more official development assistance 
from the rich nations. But none of these recommendations is binding.
The MDGs were drawn up in 2000 and their due dates are soon approaching. It 
is possible to assess progress thus far. Poverty reduction at the global level, for which
the poverty indicator is living on less than US$1.25 (PPP) per day, is on track to meet 
or exceed the global target by 2015 (although the target will not be met in every coun-
try or region). Access to clean drinking water is proceeding well and should exceed
the original target. More disappointing are trends in under-five mortality. In 1990, the 
developing regions experienced child mortality in the neighborhood of 100 deaths 
per 1,000 children. This fell to 66 per 1,000 by 2009. To reach the target of a two-thirds
reduction in child mortality by 2015 will take, according to the United Nations, “sub-
stantial and accelerated action,” especially in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia 
where child mortality rates remain high. Target 6B, universal treatment for HIV/
AIDS, has met with some success. But because only 35 to 40 percent of those who 

W H AT  D O  W E  M E A N  BY  E C O N O M I C  D E V E LO P M E N T?  49
Sub-Saharan Africa
Southern Asia
Southern Asia (excluding India)
Caribbean
Caucasus & Central Asia
South-Eastern Asia
Eastern Asia
Latin America
Western Asia
Northern Africa
Developing regions
1990
2005
0
20
40
60
80
2015 target
58
51
49
39
45
27
45
31
29
26
6
19
39
19
60
16
11
7
6
2
3
5
FIGURE 2–3 Proportion of People Living on Less Than $1.25 a 
Day, 1990 and 2005 (Percentage)
Source: Figure from the Millennium Development Goals Report, 2011. The 
World Bank. Reprinted by permission of United Nations Publications.
needed antiretroviral treatment received it in 2009, universal coverage will not be 
achieved by the target date. Universal treatment by 2010 was an ambitious and prob-
ably unrealistic goal.
Evaluating progress toward achieving the MDGs requires caution, especially 
regarding the level of aggregation across countries. Relative success and failure at 
meeting the MDGs varies not only among specific targets but also by region. Some 
of the explanation for differential performance is based on disparities in the rate of 
economic growth between countries. Success at cutting global poverty in half owes 

50   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
a lot to China’s performance alone. China reduced extreme poverty from 60 percent 
of its population in 1990 to only 16 percent by 2005. Yet Figure 2–3 illustrates that this 
global result does not describe progress in specific regions. Based on data for 2005, 
the most recent data available, Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia appear far from 
being on track to halve poverty by 2015.
Rapid economic growth is widely seen as responsible for China’s success at pov-
erty alleviation and, by implication, much of global achievements. But some of the 
difficulty in achieving other MDGs is due to factors beyond economic growth. Bet-
ter use and distribution of income and specific strategies aimed at some of the tar-
gets (such as reducing infant mortality through disease control), combined with 
economic growth, are essential to achieving the United Nations’ goal of “freeing the 
entire human race from want.” By setting targets, the MDGs have focused the atten-
tion of governments in poor nations and of donors in rich ones to achieve specific 
outcomes that promote economic development.
The MDGs have been challenged on the basis of including too much and set-
ting targets that may be either too high or too low based on historical experience.17 
The MDGs also fail to address the fundamental economic problem of trade-offs and 
priorities. If one cannot fulfill all 21 targets simultaneously, which takes precedence: 
maternal mortality or access to safe drinking water, reducing hunger or promoting 
environmental sustainability? This is less of a problem for defining development: 
Economic development involves all these goals. But it is a practical problem for those 
charged with realizing such an ambitious development agenda.18
IS ECONOMIC GROWTH DESIRABLE?
After discussing the MDGs, which convey the absolute and relative deprivation of 
so many people around the world, and recognizing the positive correlation between 
economic growth and human development, it may seem odd to end this chapter by 
asking, Is economic growth desirable? The answer would seem to be an obvious and 
emphatic yes! But there are other perspectives. Some decry the spread of material-
ism, the Westernization of world cultures, and the destruction of traditional socie ties 
that seem to accompany economic growth. Others are troubled by environmental 
degradation, whether species loss or global warming, that has accompanied rising 
per capita incomes. Still others in the high-income world may wonder if we should be 
so quick to encourage people to follow the path we have taken: seemingly  insatiable 
17Michael Clemens, Charles Kenny, and Todd Moss, “The Trouble with the MDGs: Confronting Expecta-
tions of Aid and Development Success,” World Development 35, no. 5 (2007), 735–51; and William Easterly, 
“How the Millennium Development Goals Are Unfair to Africa,” World Development 37, no. 1 (2009), 26–35.
18A strategy for achieving the MDGs is laid out in a report by the UN Millennium Project, Investing 
in Development: A Practical Plan to Achieve the UN Millennium Development Goals (New York: United 
Nations Development Programme, 2005).

I S  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H  D E S I R A B L E ?   51
consumerism, the withering of extended and nuclear families, high levels of stress, 
and all the other ills associated with modern life.
Richard Easterlin, an economic historian, once observed that, although per capita 
incomes in the United States had risen dramatically over the preceding half century, 
people did not seem to be any happier. He based this conclusion, which came to be 
known as the Easterlin paradox, on survey data taken over time in which people were 
asked how happy they were with their lives. Easterlin found similar results when look-
ing across a small number of high-income nations. The Easterlin paradox and, more 
generally, the analysis of subjective well-being, often referred to as the study of hap-
piness, have received a great deal of attention over the past decade by economists and 
other social scientists. This research has been enabled by newly conducted surveys of 
happiness and life satisfaction covering countries at all income levels. The motivation 
behind this research has included many of the concerns raised throughout this chap-
ter about whether GDP or GNI per capita is a useful measure of economic well-being.
How can happiness be measured? One set of surveys asks individuals, “Taking 
all things together, would you say you are: very happy, quite happy, not very happy, 
or not at all happy?” Responses are coded from 1 to 4, with 4 signifying “very happy.” 
Easterlin’s work was based on questions like this. Another set of surveys directed at 
life satisfaction asks a related but different question:
Please imagine a ladder with steps numbered from 0 at the bottom to 10 at the 
top. Suppose we say that the top of the ladder represents the best possible life for 
you, and the bottom of the ladder represents the worst possible life for you. On 
which step of the ladder would you say you personally feel you stand at this time, 
assuming that the higher the step the better you feel about your life, and the lower 
the step the worse you feel about it? Which step comes closest to the way you feel?
Surveys that ask both of these questions find that responses are well but not perfectly 
correlated. Happiness and life satisfaction are not identical.
Based on data from the life satisfaction question, which include a relatively large 
sample of countries, the plots in Figure 2–4a show the life satisfaction score against GDP 
per capita (US$, PPP). In Panel b, GDP per capita (US$, PPP) is entered in log values. Both 
graphs tend to reject the Easterlin paradox. Life satisfaction rises with per capita income. 
One reason Easterlin did not observe this relationship is the small sample of rich nations 
he had to work with. The graph using log values suggests that, in relative terms, life satis-
faction increases with percentage changes in per capita incomes across the entire range 
of observed incomes. Although economic growth and happiness are correlated, within 
income categories (low, middle, and high) there appears to be much less of a trend than 
between them. Among any given income category the Easterlin paradox may hold.19
19Angus Deaton, “Income, Health, and Well-Being around the World: Evidence from the Gallup World 
Poll,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, no. 2 (Spring 2008), 53-72; Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers, 
“Economic Growth and Subjective Well-Being: Reassessing the Easterlin Paradox,” Brookings Papers on 
Economic Activity 39, no. 1 (Spring 2008), 1–102.

52   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
ECA
Rest of world
$50,000
$40,000
$30,000
$20,000
$10,000
$0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
GDP per capita (US$, PPP)
Mean level of life satisfaction
ECA
Rest of world
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
$500
$1,000
$5,000 $10,000 $20,000 $40,000
Log GDP per capita (US$, PPP)
Mean level of life satisfaction
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2–4 Life Satisfaction as a Measure of Well-Being 
(2008)
Life satisfaction measures the mean level of life satisfaction of a 
random group of people who were asked the following question: 
“Please imagine a ladder with steps numbered from zero at 
the bottom to ten at the top. Suppose we say that the top of the 
ladder represents the best possible life for you, and the bottom 
of the ladder represents the worst possible life for you. On which 
step of the ladder would you say you personally feel you stand 
at this time, assuming that the higher the step the better you feel 
about your life, and the lower the step the worse you feel about 
it? Which step comes closest to the way you feel?”
Source: Gallup World Poll.

S U M M A R Y   53
There is also variance around the trend line because more than income levels 
determine life satisfaction. Costa Rica and the United States both have mean levels of 
life satisfaction of around 7.2, but Costa Rica has only one-quarter the income of the 
United States; Korea is more than three times richer than Thailand, but both share sim-
ilar levels of life satisfaction (around 6.1). For reasons other than income, Costa Ricans 
and Thais are more satisfied than are Americans and Koreans. One group of nations 
stands out in terms of lower life satisfaction than expected based on income alone. 
Countries in Europe and Central Asia almost always lie below the trend line. After 
accounting for income level, mean life satisfaction is systematically lower for these 
nations than it is in other regions. Much of this can be explained by the wrenching 
effects of the transition from planned to market economies. People who benefited from 
the former system, including those who had decent jobs or relied on pensions, were 
made worse off. Public goods deteriorated, inequality rose, and growth rates turned 
negative. All contributed to declining measures of average life satisfaction. There is 
some evidence that with the resumption of growth in many of these economies during 
the 2000s, levels of happiness are rising and falling more in line with other regions.20
Recent research suggests that happiness and income levels are correlated, imply-
ing that economic growth improves happiness. But even in those situations in which 
the relationship is less certain, a case for economic growth still can be made. More than 
half a century ago, W. Arthur Lewis, one of the pioneers of the field of development 
economics and a Nobel laureate, provided one. Lewis was writing before there was 
survey evidence on happiness and at a time when the distinction between the terms 
economic growth and economic development were not as nuanced as they are today. 
The concluding chapter of his 1955 book, The Theory of Economic Growth, is titled, “Is 
Economic Growth Desirable?” Lewis’s answer: “The case for economic growth is that it 
gives man greater control over his environment, and thereby increases his freedom.”21
SUMMARY
• Understanding the process of economic development requires methods of 
measuring economic performance across countries and over time. Gross 
domestic product (GDP) per capita is a measure of the aggregate value of 
national output and, despite a number of limitations, is the most common 
standard for measuring economic growth.
• For cross-country comparisons, GDP per capita is best measured in 
terms of purchasing power parity (PPP). PPP estimates are superior to 
20Sergei Guriev and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, “(Un)Happiness in Transition,” Journal of Economic Per-
spectives 23, no. 2 (Spring 2009), 143–68.
21W. Arthur Lewis, The Theory of Economic Growth (Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin, 1955), p. 420–21.

54   [CH. 2] M E A S U R I N G  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  A N D  D E V E L O P M E NT
comparisons based solely on market exchange rates. Market exchange rates 
tend to underestimate the GDP levels of poorer nations. This is because 
market exchange rates are based on traded goods and capital flows and fail 
to account for the much lower prices of nontraded goods in poor nations. 
The PPP estimates obtained from the UN International Comparison 
Program correct this problem by expressing every nation’s GDP per capita 
in terms of a common set of international prices.
• Angus Maddison provides a broad overview of economic growth over the 
past 2,000 years. For most of this period and in most regions, growth in 
output was just about sufficient to match growth in population, resulting in 
more or less stagnant per capita incomes. According to Maddison, modern 
economic growth began only around 1820, with the escalation of growth 
rates in western Europe and its offshoots. These regions had achieved 
higher per capita income levels by 1500 but accelerated these differences, 
especially, over the last 190 years. Rapid growth rates began to characterize 
other regions, especially in Asia, only in the decades after 1950. As a result 
of these divergent patterns of economic growth, there is much greater 
disparity in world incomes today than in the past.
• Unlike economic growth, which is a relatively objective measure of 
economic capacity, economic development is a normative concept. Various 
scholars and organizations offer specific indicators or goals for achieving 
development. Prominent among these is the human development index 
(HDI), a composite measure reflecting the goals of leading a long life, 
acquiring knowledge, and achieving material well-being. The millennium 
development goals (MDGs) rely on a multiplicity of goals and targets for 
advancing human well-being within the decade.
• Analysis of the HDI and the MDGs reveals the centrality of economic 
growth to achieving both. HDI ranks are well correlated with per capita 
income levels, and differential performance in achieving specific MDGs 
often is tied to differential growth performance. But economic growth is not 
a panacea. Achieving economic development also involves questions of 
distribution and strategies to reach specific development targets.
• Citizens of rich nations can engage in a debate over whether further 
economic growth will advance their well-being, but this is not a 
meaningful debate for poor nations. Even if rising per capita incomes are 
not perfectly correlated with perceptions of happiness, economic growth 
and development are essential for poor nations as a means of increasing 
choices and advancing human capabilities and freedoms.

55
W
hy are some countries rich and others poor? Why do some economies 
grow quickly with their citizens enjoying rapid increases in their average 
incomes, while others grow slowly or not at all? How did some East Asian 
countries advance from poverty to relative prosperity in just 30 years, 
while many African countries remain mired in deep poverty, with few signs of sus-
tained growth and development? These are some of the most important questions 
in the study of economics and indeed touch on some of the deepest problems facing 
human society.
As we saw in the last chapter, rapid economic growth and wide divergences 
of economic performance across countries are fairly recent phenomena in world 
 history. Up until about 500 years ago—a relatively short period of time in human 
history—most people lived in conditions that we now would consider abject pov-
erty. Housing was poor, food supplies were highly variable and dependent on the 
weather, nutrition was inadequate, disease was common, healthcare was rudimen-
tary, and life spans rarely exceeded 40 years. Even as recently as 125 years ago, the 
vast majority of people living in the world’s most modern cities, including New York, 
London, and Paris, lived in extremely difficult conditions on very meager incomes. 
One decade into the twenty-first century, however, income levels around the world 
generally are both much higher and far more diverse. A significant minority of the 
world’s population has recorded relatively rapid and sustained income growth dur-
ing the last several decades and now enjoys much longer and healthier lives, higher 
levels of education, and much-improved standards of living. Other countries have 
achieved important but more modest gains and now are middle-income countries. 
Economic Growth: 
Concepts and Patterns
3

56   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
The  majority of the world’s population, however, continues to live in poverty, in most 
cases better off than their ancestors but living at levels of income and welfare far 
below those of the world’s richest countries.
Economic growth and economic development are not synonymous, as we dis-
covered in Chapter 2. Yet economic growth is at the heart of the development pro-
cess, and sustained development and poverty reduction cannot occur in the absence 
of economic growth. This chapter and the next explore in some detail the puzzles of 
economic growth and divergent levels of income across countries. Our objectives are 
to better understand the processes by which economies grow and develop and the 
characteristics that distinguish rapidly growing economies from those with slower 
growth. This chapter explores the basic empirical data on economic growth, the con-
cepts underlying the leading ideas of what causes growth, and some of the patterns 
of changing economic structure that typically accompany growth. Chapter 4 expands 
the analysis by introducing some formal models of economic growth. Later chapters 
explore other dimensions of development introduced earlier, including the distribu-
tion of income, poverty, and improvements in health and education.
 DIVERGENT PATTERNS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH 
SINCE 1960
As we begin to explore differences in growth rates, consider Thailand and Zambia. 
In 1960, the annual income of the average Zambian was almost twice as high as 
that of the average Thai, around $1,800 in Zambia and $960 in Thailand in constant 
2005 purchasing power parity (PPP) dollars. Since that time, Thailand achieved very 
rapid economic growth of around 4.3 percent per person per year, so that the aver-
age income in Thailand is now around $7,800. In 2009, the income of the average 
Thai was over eight times higher in real terms than that of his or her grandparents 
50 years ago. As a result, Thais can consume much more (and much higher-quality) 
food, housing, clothing, healthcare, education, and consumer goods. Thais are bet-
ter off in other ways as well: life expectancy increased from 54 to 69 years, infant 
mortality dropped from 103 to 12 per thousand (meaning that an additional 91 chil-
dren per thousand infants lived beyond their first birthday), and the percentage of 
adults that were literate grew from 80 (in 1970) to 94 percent. In Zambia, by con-
trast, average income actually fell slightly to $1,765, about 2 percent lower than in 
1960. Life expectancy remained at around 45 years, pulled down to a large extent 
because of the dramatic spread of the HIV/AIDS pandemic in the 1990s. Infant mor-
tality rates improved (from 126 to 86 per thousand), as did literacy rates (from 48 
to 71 percent), but overall Zambians are arguably worse off than their parents and 
grandparents.
The different growth records of Thailand and Zambia are mirrored by the experi-
ences of many other developing countries, as shown in Table 3–1. Madagascar joins 

TABLE 3–1 Economic Growth across Countries, 1960–2009
COUNTRY
GDP PER CAPITA 
(2005 PPP)
RATIO OF 
2009 TO 
1960 GDP/
CAPITA
AVERAGE 
ANNUAL 
GROWTH 
RATE (%)
INCOME AS A 
SHARE OF U.S. 
INCOME*
1960
2009
1960
2009
Negative growth
Madagascar
842
753
0.89
-0.23
0.07
0.02
Zambia
1,803
1,765
0.98
-0.04
0.14
0.04
Slow growth
Senegal
1,421
1,492
1.05
0.01
0.11
0.04
Kenya
1,020
1,206
1.18
0.34
0.08
0.03
Rwanda
860
1,031
1.2
0.37
0.07
0.03
Nigeria
1,528
2,034
1.33
0.58
0.12
0.05
Venezuela
6,663
9,115
1.37
0.64
0.52
0.22
Chad
819
1,277
1.56
0.91
0.06
0.03
Jamaica
5,609
8,795
1.57
0.92
0.44
0.21
El Salvador
3,397
6,338
1.87
1.28
0.26
0.15
Argentina
6,244
11,961
1.92
1.33
0.49
0.29
Peru
3,759
7,280
1.94
1.36
0.29
0.18
South Africa
3,850
7,589
1.97
1.4
0.3
0.18
Ghana
603
1,239
2.05
1.48
0.05
0.03
Philippines
1,314
2,838
2.16
1.58
0.1
0.07
Moderate growth
Turkey
3,243
9,909
3.06
2.31
0.25
0.24
Papua New Guinea
887
2,746
3.1
2.34
0.07
0.07
Brazil
2,581
8,160
3.16
2.38
0.2
0.2
Chile
3,780
11,999
3.17
2.39
0.29
0.29
Pakistan
728
2,353
3.23
2.43
0.06
0.06
Lesotho
401
1,311
3.27
2.45
0.03
0.03
Dominican Republic
2,355
9,911
4.21
3.06
0.18
0.24
Mauritius
2,208
9,484
4.29
3.01
0.17
0.23
Rapid growth
India
711
3,239
4.55
3.14
0.06
0.08
Egypt
1,036
4,956
4.78
3.24
0.08
0.12
Sri Lanka
765
4,035
5.27
3.45
0.06
0.1
Indonesia
693
4,075
5.88
3.69
0.05
0.1
Malaysia
1,470
11,296
7.68
4.25
0.11
0.27
Thailand
961
7,794
8.11
4.36
0.07
0.19
Singapore
4,300
47,373
11.02
5.02
0.33
1.15
South Korea
1,782
25,034
14.05
5.54
0.14
0.61
Botswana
578
8,872
15.35
5.73
0.05
0.22
China
403
7,634
18.94
6.18
0.03
0.19
Industrialized countries
United Kingdom
12,841
33,383
2.6
1.97
1
0.81
United States
15,438
41,099
2.66
2.02
1.2
1
Canada
12,988
36,209
2.79
2.11
1.01
0.88
France
10,101
30,822
3.05
2.31
0.79
0.75
Japan
5,850
30,008
5.13
3.4
0.46
0.73
*Growth rates are trend-growth calculated by ordinary least squares regressions and do not necessarily match 
endpoint-to-endpoint growth rates. Growth rates are listed in order of magnitude, but the ordering of magnitudes 
in the third and fourth columns sometimes differ.
PPP, purchasing power parity; GDP, gross domestic product.
Source: Penn World Tables 7.0, http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/php_site/pwt_index.php, accessed May 2011.

58   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
Zambia in the unfortunate experience of shrinking incomes. Because incomes were 
very low to begin with in many of these countries, negative growth has been a major 
tragedy. A second group of countries attained positive growth but at relatively slow 
rates. Average incomes in these countries increased but not by as much as in many 
other countries around the world. In Venezuela, for example, per capita growth 
averaged about 0.6 percent per year since 1960, enough for incomes to increase by 
around 37 percent, but less than what many Venezuelans may have hoped for.
A third group of countries has been more successful and has achieved moder-
ate growth, shown in the table as per capita growth between 2 and 3 percent per 
year. By world historical standards (calculated by Angus Maddison and shown 
in  Figure 2–1), these growth rates are relatively high and allow for solid increases 
in  average income. For example, Egypt recorded a growth of 3.2 percent a year, 
enough for average income to double every 22 years and nearly quintuple between 
1960 and 2009, a significant achievement. India, home to over 1 billion people, saw 
similar growth.
A fourth group of countries has done even better, recording rapid growth of more 
than 3 percent per capita per year. A few have achieved extraordinary growth exceed-
ing 5 percent, including Singapore, South Korea, Botswana, and China. These are 
some of the fastest growth rates ever recorded over a 50-year period in the history of 
the world, and they have led to enormous changes. In South Korea, income expanded 
by a mind-boggling factor of 14, while in Botswana (Box 3–1), average income is more 
than 15 times what it was 50 years ago. (Unfortunately, Botswana’s great success is 
now threatened by the HIV/AIDS pandemic, as we discuss later in the book.) China, 
where growth has averaged 6 percent per year (with almost all of it coming after 1980, 
meaning the growth rate since then has been much faster), has undergone perhaps 
the most remarkable transformation of all: For one-fifth of the world’s population, 
including a huge number of people living in or near poverty, average incomes have 
increased by a factor of nearly 19 between 1960 and 2009. China’s rapid growth is one 
of the most important events of the last century, and its continued growth will have 
profound implications for this century, as well.
There are some clear regional differences in growth rates, as the data in Table 3–1 
suggest and as we saw in Table 2–3. Most of the rapidly growing countries are in East 
Asia, while most of the slowly growing countries are in Africa. But beware of taking 
these general statements too far because there are important exceptions. In East 
Asia, Myanmar (Burma) and Laos both recorded slow growth, and the Philippines’ 
performance has been modest at best. In Africa, Botswana and Mauritius are among 
the fastest-growing countries in the world, and tiny Lesotho and Swaziland have also 
achieved steady growth.
Remember, apparently small differences in growth rates can make a huge dif-
ference over time. The difference between 1 percent growth and 2 percent growth 
is huge: It is not a 1 percent difference but a 100 percent difference. With growth of 
1 percent per year, average income increases by about 65 percent over 50 years, and 

D I V E R G E N T  PAT T E R N S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H  S I N C E  19 6 0    59
BOX 3–1 BOTSWANA’S REMARKABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTa
Whereas most of sub-Saharan Africa has achieved little or no economic growth
in per capita income on average over the past 50 years, Botswana stands out as
a clear exception. Indeed, during the 20-year period between 1970 and 1990,
Botswana was the fastest-growing economy in the world, with growth averag-
ing an astonishing 7.9 percent per year, easily outpacing the more widely noted
rapid growth in Singapore (6.3 percent), Korea (6.9 percent), and other coun-
tries around the world. Table 3–1 shows that over the longer period from 1960
to 2009, Botswana’s growth rate was second only to China’s. Over the 50-year
period, average real income increased by a factor of more than 15 in just over
two generations. A wide array of other development indicators improved dramati-
cally as well. Life expectancy increased from 46 to 61 years in 1987 (before
plunging again because of the HIV/AIDS pandemic), infant mortality fell from
118 to 43 per thousand by 2009, and literacy rates jumped from 46 percent (in
1970) to 83 percent by 2008.
Botswana did not seem to have strong prospects when it achieved indepen-
dence from Great Britain in 1965. At that point, there were only 12 kilometers
of paved roads in the entire country. Only 22 Batswana had graduated from
university, and only 100 had graduated from secondary school. The country is
landlocked, and more than 80 percent of the country is in the Kalahari Desert,
leaving only a small amount of arable land. Yet, despite the long odds, Botswana
prospered. What was behind this remarkable transformation?
Diamonds are part of the story, because Botswana sits atop some of the
world’s richest diamond deposits, and mining now accounts for about 40 percent
of the country’s output. But the answer is not that simple: Many other develop-
ing countries have rich natural resources, and in many cases, these have created
more problems than benefits (see Chapter 17). More broadly, most observers
point to Botswana’s strong policies and institutions as key determinants of its
development success.
Botswana clearly managed its resources much more prudently than other
countries. Most of the receipts were invested productively: Botswana has built
an impressive infrastructure, with paved roads connecting much of the country,
aThis account draws heavily from Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson, “An 
African Success Story,” in Dani Rodrik, ed., In Search of Prosperity: Analytic Narratives on Eco-
nomic Growth (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003); and Clark Leith, “Why Botswana 
Prospered,” paper presented at the 34th Annual Meeting of the Canadian Economics Asso-
ciation, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada, June 2000, available at www.ssc.uwo
.ca/ economics/faculty/Leith/Botswana.pdf, accessed February 2012.

60   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
a reasonably reliable electricity generation and distribution system, a substantial 
stock of housing, and many schools and clinics. Some of the diamond receipts
were saved as reserves to help manage macroeconomic fluctuations. Corruption
has been much less of a problem than in other countries. Overall macroeconomic
policies were strong; inflation was relatively low, for the most part; and supporting 
fiscal, monetary, and exchange-rate policies were in place. Trade policies were 
relatively open, with the external tariff set through Botswana’s membership in
the Southern Africa Customs Union. The public sector has remained small, with a 
civil service based on merit rather than patronage and relatively few state-owned 
companies. Property rights and other legal protections have been generally well 
respected. Strong economic management, in turn, may have been due partly to 
the fact that Botswana is a democracy, and one of the few countries in Africa 
that has been so since independence.
However, not everything in Botswana is positive. Income inequality is high and
has not declined over time. Unemployment remains high, particularly for migrants
coming from rural to urban areas. Although democratic traditions are solid, with
fair elections and a vibrant free press, one party has dominated politics since 
independence. The biggest concern, however, is HIV/AIDS. According to the 
World Health Organization, Botswana has the second- highest prevalence of 
HIV in the world; around 24 percent of the adult population is HIV-positive. The
scourge of HIV/AIDS threatens to turn back much of the progress Botswana
has realized in recent decades. With all that Botswana has achieved, its greatest 
challenges may lie ahead in fighting the disease and ensuring continued growth
and development.
incomes double in about 70 years. With 2 percent growth, average income increases 
by 270 percent over 50 years, and it takes only 35 years for income to double. (Box 3–2 
demonstrates the methods behind these calculations.)
 FACTOR ACCUMULATION, PRODUCTIVITY, 
AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
Economists have been trying to understand the determinants of economic growth 
and the characteristics that distinguish fast-growing from slower-growing countries 
at least since Adam Smith wrote An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth 
of Nations, published in 1776. More than 200 years later, our knowledge about the 
growth process has expanded but is far from complete. A broad range of factors could 

FA CTO R A C C U M U L ATI O N, P R O D U CT I V I T Y,  A N D  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H   61
BOX 3–2 CALCULATING FUTURE VALUES, GROWTH RATES, 
AND DOUBLING TIMES
The illustrative growth calculations presented in the text are based on simple, yet 
quite useful mathematical techniques. Let us take a look at how to perform the 
calculations required to answer three basic questions.
QUESTION 1
If a country’s current level of income per capita is X0 and that country’s income 
per capita grows for t years at rate r, what will its income per capita be at the end 
of that period (Xt )?
To answer this question, we will use the basic formula for compound growth 
over discrete periods (such as years),
Xt = X0 * (1+ r)t
For example, we see from Table 3–1 that Senegal’s income per capita in 2009 
was $1,492, and its historical growth rate was 1.05 percent per year (which we 
will round down to 1 percent per year to simplify this calculation). Suppose we 
want to project Senegal’s per capita income 10 years into the future (in 2019), 
assuming that its income continues to grow at 1 percent per year. Plugging in 
$1,492 for X0, 0.01 for r, and 10 for t :
$1,492 * 1.0110 = $1,648
The key here is to recognize that this future value is not simply 1 percent times 
10 years (or 10 percent) greater than the initial value. Compound growth cal-
culations take into account that after one year of 1 percent growth (starting 
at $1,492), Senegal’s income is $1,507; the second year’s growth of 1 per-
cent thus starts from this new base. That is, for the first year, we’d calculate 
$1,492 * 1.01 = $1,507; for the second year we’d calculate ($1,492 *
1.01) * 1.01, or $1,492 * 1.012 = $1,522, and so on.
QUESTION 2
If, instead, we know a country’s initial level of per capita income (X0) and its level 
of per capita income t years hence (Xt ), what was its annually compounded aver-
age rate of growth?
To solve for the growth rate we begin with the basic compound growth for-
mula from Question 1. With a bit of algebraic manipulation, we can solve that 
equation for r, resulting in the following formula:
a
Xt
X0
b
1
t - 1 = r

62   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
If we knew that Senegal’s per capita income in 2009 was $1,492 and that it 
would be $1,648 10 years later, we could calculate its average compound 
growth rate as:
a $1,648
$1,492b
1
10 - 1 = 0.01 or 1 percent
Calculating growth rates using these endpoint data is potentially misleading if 
either the start or end year observation is unusually high or low relative to the 
underlying trend (that is, if there was a shock of some sort in either the start 
or end year, making it unrepresentative of the trend). It is possible to avoid this 
problem by using regression analysis to estimate the growth rate. This approach 
uses all of the observations in a given time series, rather than relying entirely on 
the first and last observations.
To estimate average growth rates by least-squares regression, we begin by 
transforming the basic formula for discrete periods of compound growth into a 
linear function by taking the natural logarithm of both sides of the formula:
In Xt = In X0 + In(1+ r) * t
We can estimate this equation as the least-squares regression ln Xt = a + bt, 
where a = ln X0, b = ln(1 + r), and t is time. That is, we regress the natural 
log of the series against a linear time trend. To recover the direct estimate of the 
compound growth rate t, we calculate r = eb - 1.
QUESTION 3
If income (or, for that matter, population) were to grow at rate r, how long would it 
take to double?
To calculate doubling times (commonly used for illustrative purposes), we 
resort to the rule of 70. The rule of 70 is based on a slightly different concept of 
compounding from the one used for the other questions. In the previous exam-
ples, we compounded once each year. The rule of 70 is based on continuous 
compounding, in which the base is increased at each instant. The basic equation 
for continuous compounding uses the exponential function (e),
Xt = X0 * ert
In general, continuous compounding using this formula is more appropriate when 
calculating growth rates for populations, which growth continuously. (When the 
available data for a series consist of annual observations, such as is common 
for countries’ gross domestic product [GDP], then it may be more appropriate to 
apply annual compounding for those discrete periods, as described earlier.) We 

FA CTO R A C C U M U L ATI O N, P R O D U CT I V I T Y,  A N D  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H   63
can use this formula to calculate the time it takes for income (or population) to 
double by setting Xt = 2 and X0 = 1,
2 = 1 * ert
If we transform this equation by taking natural logarithms of both sides, we have
In 2 = In 1 + (r * t  )
Conveniently, ln 1 = 0 so that term drops out. This calculation is called the Rule 
of 70 because ln 2  0.70. So if we know r, we can solve for the doubling time:
doubling time (t) = 0.70
r
If Senegal’s economy grows at 1 percent per year, its level doubles every 
(0.70>0.01) = 70 years. If, instead, Senegal’s economy grows at 2 percent per 
year, it would double in size every (0.70>0.02) = 35 years.
plausibly be important to growth, including the amount and type of investment, edu-
cation and healthcare systems, natural resources and geographical endowments, 
the quality of government institutions, and the choice of public policy. All these play 
some role, as we see later in the chapter, but some are more central to the process of 
growth than others.
At the core of most theories of economic growth is a relationship between the 
basic factors of production—capital and labor—and total economic production. 
Some countries also are endowed with specific natural resources assets, such as 
petroleum deposits, gold, rubber, land, rich agricultural soil, forests, lakes, and 
oceans. These assets are often included as parts of a broad definition of the capital 
stock, but sometimes are treated separately. For simplicity, we focus our analysis 
on capital and labor. Depending on the products being produced, different com-
binations of these inputs are required. Growing rice requires significant amounts 
of labor (at least around planting and harvesting time), but not much machinery 
other than a plow. Garment production also requires lots of unskilled labor, but 
needs many sewing machines as well as decent infrastructure to get goods to over-
seas markets. A steel or chemical factory requires substantial amounts of machin-
ery and other capital, including a reliable source of energy, and (relatively) less 
labor.
A country’s total output—and thus its total income—is determined by how 
much capital and labor it has available and how productively it uses those assets. In 
turn, increasing the amount of production—that is, economic growth—depends on 

64   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
increasing the amount of capital and labor available and increasing the productivity 
of those assets. In other words, economic growth depends on two basic processes:
• Factor accumulation, defined as increasing the size of the capital 
stock or the labor force. Producing more goods and services requires 
more machines, factories, buildings, roads, ports, electricity generators, 
computers, and tools along with more and better educated workers to put 
this capital equipment to work.
• Productivity growth, defined as increasing the amount of output produced 
by each machine or worker. Productivity can be increased in two broad 
ways. The first is to improve the efficiency with which current factors are 
being used. A small furniture maker might initially have each worker make 
a chair from start to finish. By reorganizing the workers so each specializes 
in one task (for example, cutting, assembling, finishing), total production 
might be increased. The second is technological change, through which 
new ideas, new machines, or new ways of organizing production can 
increase growth. Countries that can either invent new technologies or 
quickly adopt technologies invented elsewhere (a more relevant path for 
most developing countries) can achieve more rapid economic growth than 
other countries. Productivity growth often entails shifting resources from 
producing one good to another. The process of economic growth in low-
income countries almost always corresponds to major structural shifts in 
the composition of output, generally from agriculture to industry, as we 
discuss in Chapter 15.
Understanding that factor accumulation and productivity gains are at the heart 
of the growth process is important but takes us only so far. To gain a deeper under-
standing of growth, we must understand what drives factor accumulation and pro-
ductivity growth themselves. We begin with saving and investment.
SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND CAPITAL ACCUMULATION
Perhaps the most influential model of economic growth was developed by MIT 
economist Robert Solow in 1956.1 At the heart of the Solow growth model (which 
we explore in depth in Chapter 4) and many other influential growth models is the 
process of capital accumulation. As mentioned previously, classical and neoclassi-
cal growth models typically give much less attention to the process of expanding the 
1Robert Solow, “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
70 (February 1956), 65–94, and “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,” Review of 
 Economics and Statistics 39 (August 1957), 312–20.

S A V I N G ,  I N V E S T M E NT,  A N D  C A P ITA L  A C C U M U L AT I O N   65
labor force (because labor is not seen as a binding constraint on growth), which usu-
ally is assumed to grow in line with the population. The key ideas in these kinds of 
models are relatively straightforward:
• New investment increases the capital stock. Investment in new factories 
or machines directly increases the capital stock, which facilitates greater 
production. For the capital stock to grow, the value of new investment must 
be greater than the amount of depreciation of existing capital. Factories and 
machines deteriorate over time, and a certain amount of new investment 
is needed simply to keep pace and maintain the current size of the capital 
stock. Investment greater than the amount of depreciation directly adds 
to the capital stock. Investment must be greater than depreciation and the 
growth of the labor force for there to be an increase in capital per worker.
• Investment is financed by saving. We know from standard national accounts 
identities that investment equals saving.2 Thus the models postulate that the 
key to increasing investment (and the capital stock) is to increase saving.
• Saving comes from current income. Households save whatever income they 
do not consume. Corporations save in the form of retained earnings after 
distribution of dividends to stockholders. Governments either add to saving 
to the extent that they receive tax payments in excess of government current 
(noninvestment) spending (that is, a budget surplus, excluding investment 
spending) or detract from saving if they spend more than tax receipts (a 
budget deficit, excluding investment spending). We discuss these concepts in 
more depth in Chapters 10 and 11. Gross domestic saving, which combines 
all three sources of saving, provides the resources to finance investment.3
A key decision facing households, corporations, and governments is how much 
income to consume and how much to save. Individuals do not care about the level 
of capital or even the level of output, but they do care about the amount of goods 
and services they consume. However, there is a clear trade-off: The more that is con-
sumed now, the less that is available for saving and therefore for investment, growth, 
and increased future consumption. On the one hand, people prefer to consume 
sooner rather than later. Given a choice between better housing now or in five years, 
everyone would choose now. On the other hand, people also recognize that consuming 
all income now is shortsighted. At a minimum, enough needs to be saved to compen-
sate for depreciation of existing assets: to fix the roof on the house when it leaks, repair 
2On the production side of the national accounts (for a closed economy with no trade), everything that 
is produced (total output, usually designated as Y) must be used for either consumption (C) or invest-
ment (I). On the income side, total income (also designated as Y because the value of total output must 
equal total income) is either used to purchase consumption goods (C) or saved (S). Putting these two iden-
tities together (because Y and C appear in both), saving must be equal to investment.
3In an open economy with trade and international capital flows, foreign saving (for example, borrowing 
from an overseas bank) can add to the total pool of available saving.

66   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
the motorbike, or replace a worn-out hoe. Additional saving can provide the basis for 
even higher income in the future. Deferring current consumption can lead to greater 
consumption later. For example, a farmer who wants to buy a water buffalo may have 
to reduce his or her consumption for several years to save enough to eventually make 
the purchase. The farmer’s reward comes later, when (ideally) the water buffalo 
increases farm production and income by far more than the amount saved, allowing 
for even larger consumption in the future.
As the last sentence hints, although generating saving and investment is nec-
essary for growth, it is not sufficient. The investments actually have to pay off with 
higher income in the future, and not all investments do so. The farmer who buys 
the water buffalo will not earn the reward if the field is too rocky to plow or the land 
does not have enough nutrients to support the crop. If the government forces down 
the price of the crop (for example, to try to keep food prices low for urban consum-
ers), the farmer’s income will fall and the investment will be much less profitable. If 
property rights are not secure, the farmer could lose the water buffalo or the land. 
Changes in world market prices (well out of the farmer’s control) could also affect 
income. These issues highlight a key point: Sustaining economic growth requires both 
generating new investment and ensuring that the investment is productive. This idea is 
a recurrent theme in the next two chapters and throughout this book.
SOURCES OF GROWTH ANALYSIS
So far, we have identified factor accumulation and productivity gains as the two core 
determinants of growth. But how important are each of these in explaining growth? Rob-
ert Solow pioneered early efforts to quantify the contribution of each of the proximate 
causes of increased output—capital accumulation, labor accumulation, and produc-
tivity gains—to economic growth. This approach is more of an accounting framework 
based on actual data than an economic model. It seeks to answer the following ques-
tion: What proportions of recorded economic growth can we attribute to growth in the 
capital stock, growth of the labor force, and changes in overall productivity?4
One way to explore how factor accumulation and productivity growth affect 
output and economic growth is by examining a production function, which char-
acterizes how inputs (capital and labor) are combined to produce various levels of 
output. Figure 3–1 shows an example of a common production function. The hori-
zontal axis shows one measure of factor inputs (the amount of capital per worker), 
4Solow, “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.” A year before Solow’s paper, 
Moses Abramovitz found similar estimates of the contribution of productivity gains to U.S. growth between 
1870 and 1953 using a less formal methodology. See his “Resource and Output Trends in the United States 
since 1870,” American Economic Review 46, no. 2 (May 1956), 5–23.

S O U R C E S  O F  G R O W T H  A N A LY S I S   67
and the vertical axis shows the amount of output per worker (in this example, pairs 
of running shoes). Combining capital and labor into the single “capital per worker” 
term is a convenient way to simplify the analysis, but it also reflects the dominant 
role that capital has played in thinking on economic growth over the years. In most 
models, insufficient capital is seen as the binding constraint on growth. Labor is 
 usually assumed to be in plentiful supply, based on the observation of unemployed 
or underemployed workers. Thus, in this formulation, increasing the amount of capi-
tal available for each worker is seen as key to growth.
Factor accumulation is shown in Figure 3–1a as a movement to the right along 
the x-axis. As the economy accumulates more capital for each of its workers, out-
put expands, shown by the upward slope of the production function. Note that this 
particular production function begins to flatten out as capital per worker expands, 
a characteristic that we explore more fully later. In this case, as the value of capital 
$10
c
a
3,000
2,500
Capital per worker (thousands)
(b)
Output per worker
(pairs of running shoes)
$10
$15
b
a
2,800
2,500
Capital per worker (thousands)
(a)
Output per worker
(pairs of running shoes)
FIGURE 3–1 Basic Sources of Economic Growth
(a) Factor accumulation. As capital per worker expands, output per worker increases. 
(b) Productivity gains. As the factors of production are used more efficiently or the economy 
acquires new technology, the same level of capital per worker can produce more output.

68   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
per worker increases from $10,000 to $15,000, output per worker grows from 2,500 to 
2,800 pairs of shoes. The movement from point a to point b on the production func-
tion is the process of economic growth. Of course, growth of this magnitude (12 per-
cent) does not happen instantaneously. It might take two years or so, in which case 
the annual rate of growth would be a brisk 5.8 percent.
Figure 3–1b shows the relationship between productivity change and economic 
growth. As factors of production are used more efficiently or as new technology 
is adopted, the production function shifts upward. With this productivity gain, any 
amount of capital per worker produces more output than it did before. The produc-
tion function shifts upward so that $10,000 worth of capital per worker can now pro-
duce 3,000 pairs of running shoes, whereas it originally produced 2,500 pairs. This 
expansion of output of 20 percent might take four years, in which case the annual 
rate of growth would be 4.7 percent. In this case, the movement along the path from 
point a to point c depicts the process of economic growth through productivity gains.
Solow’s procedure for measuring these relationships usually is referred to as 
growth accounting or sources of growth analysis. He starts with a standard produc-
tion function relating the contribution of labor and capital to aggregate production, 
then adds a term to capture total factor productivity (TFP). TFP is meant to mea-
sure the contribution to production of efficiency, technology, and other influences 
on productivity. This production function is then converted into a form that makes 
it possible to measure the contribution of changes in each term—expansion of the 
labor force, additions to the capital stock, and growth in TFP—to overall growth. The 
resulting equation is
 
gY = (WK * gK) + (WL * gL) + a 
[3–1]
where gY stands for the growth of total income, or gross domestic product (GDP); 
gK and gL are the growth rates of the capital stock (K) and the labor force (L), respec-
tively; and WL and WK represent the shares in total income of wages and returns on 
capital, respectively. For example, if 60 percent of all income comes from wages and 
the remaining 40 percent comes from returns on capital (for example, interest pay-
ments and rent), then WL = 0.60 and WK = 0.40. These two shares must add up to 
100 percent because all income must be allocated to either workers or the owners 
of capital. The final term, a, is the rate of change in TFP. The equation should make 
intuitive sense: It shows us how the growth in output depends on the growth in inputs 
(K and L) and the growth in the productivity of those inputs (a).
It is important to see the relationship between equation 3–1 and Figure 3–1. 
Equation 3–1 simply summarizes the two effects illustrated in Figure 3–1. Figure 3–1a 
shows the effect of factor accumulation on output, while Figure 3–1b illustrates pro-
ductivity growth as a vertical shift of the production function (for example, getting 
more output per unit of input). Equation 3–1 combines these two dimensions of 
growth in a way that allows us to distinguish between them. The first two terms on 
the right-hand side of the equation, (WK * gK) + (WL * gL), describe movements 

S O U R C E S  O F  G R O W T H  A N A LY S I S   69
along the production function (that is, using more inputs to increase output). TFP 
growth (indicated by a in equation 3–1) measures the upward shift in the production 
function in Figure 3–1b.
The basic procedure is to substitute actual data for all the variables in equa-
tion 3-1 except a, which cannot be measured directly, then calculate a as the residual. 
This is the famous Solow residual. In this way, the contribution of each of these vari-
ables to growth can be measured and identified. A straightforward numerical exam-
ple illustrates the way in which this equation is used. From the statistical records of 
a developing country, we find the following values for the variables in the equation:
 gY = 0.05 (GDP growth rate of 5 percent a year).
 gK = 0.07 (capital stock growth of 7 percent a year).
 gL = 0.02 (labor force growth of 2 percent a year).
 WL = 0.6 (the share of labor in national income is 60 percent).
 WK = 0.4 (the share of capital is 40 percent).
By substituting these figures into equation 3–1, we get
0.05 = (0.4 * 0.07) + (0.6 * 0.02) + a
Solving for a, we find that a = 0.01, meaning that TFP growth is 1 percent per year. 
These figures tell us the degree to which capital accumulation, labor accumula-
tion, and TFP growth each contribute to the overall rate of output growth of 5 per-
cent. TFP growth of 1 percent counts for one fifth (20 percent) of total growth. The 
growth in the capital stock accounts for slightly more than half (56 percent) the total 
growth: (0.4 * 0.07)>0.05. Finally, growth in the labor force accounts for the remain-
ing 24 percent of total growth: (0.02 * 0.6)>0.05. In this particular example, capital 
accumulation is the main driver of growth, with labor accumulation and TFP growth 
each contributing similar amounts.
This type of accounting analysis has been used widely in many countries to 
examine the sources of growth, with particular attention paid to calculating TFP 
growth. Before examining some of these results, however, it is important to recognize 
the limits of this kind of study, arising from the fact that we can estimate productivity 
growth only as the residual output growth unexplained by having used more inputs. 
There are at least two kinds of problems:
• First, a represents a combination of influences that this analysis cannot 
entirely disentangle. Should improvements in a be attributed to efficiency 
gains stemming from improved trade policies, reduced corruption, or 
streamlined bureaucratic procedures? Or are they due to the introduction 
of faster computers, new seed varieties for agricultural crops, or other 
technologies? The limited growth accounting framework cannot 
definitively answer these questions without adding many more variables 
for which data do not exist (although that has not stopped analysts from 
assigning their own favorite explanation to the results).

70   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
• Second, a invariably is measured inaccurately because it is the residual in 
the equation. All economic data are measured with some inevitable errors, 
including all the data used in equation 3–1. As a result, in addition to TFP, a 
captures the net effect of all the errors and omissions in the other data.
What is labeled TFP actually, in practice, is a combination of errors in the data, 
omission of other factors that should be included in the growth equation, and effi-
ciency gains and changes in technology. As a result, there is a danger in trying to read 
too much into these data when analysts interpret them as strictly efficiency gains or 
the effects of new technology. Rather than truly being TFP growth, a simply is the 
part of measured growth that cannot be explained by data on the traditional factors 
of production. For this reason, economist Moses Abramovitz famously referred to the 
residual a as a “measure of our ignorance” about the growth process.5
Sources of growth analyses have been carried out for many countries. Solow’s 
initial study on the United States attributed a surprisingly large share of growth to the 
residual and a correspondingly small share to changes in the capital stock: 88 percent 
to TFP growth and only 12 percent to increases in capital per worker. Subsequent 
work by Abramovitz, Edward Denison, Zvi Griliches, Dale Jorgenson, and others 
attempted to measure, in a more precise way, the contribution of various inputs to 
the growth process. They divided labor into different skill categories, based on the 
amounts of formal education workers had received. A worker having a high school 
education and earning $50,000 a year is treated as the equivalent of two people hav-
ing only primary school education and earning $25,000 a year each. Similar proce-
dures are used to measure the increase in productivity that occurs when workers shift 
from low-productivity occupations in rural areas to higher-productivity occupations 
in urban areas. Other methods are used to measure improvements in the quality of 
capital and increasing economies of scale.
Many of these more detailed analyses of the U.S. economy found results simi-
lar to Solow’s initial work: The bulk of the growth process could be attributed to the 
residual, with relatively small amounts apportioned to various categories of labor, 
capital, and other inputs. Over the years, many more studies have been completed 
for the industrialized countries. Increases in the capital stock frequently account for 
less than half the increase in output, particularly in rapidly growing countries. These 
results came as a bit of a surprise for most economists because most basic models 
put capital formation at the heart of the growth process.
Similar studies have now been carried out for a wide range of developing coun-
tries. Data problems and price distortions tend to be more severe for developing 
countries than for the industrialized countries, making the results even harder to 
interpret. Few developing countries, for example, have reliable measures for differ-
ences in the quality of alternative capital input and labor skill categories.
5Abramovitz, “Resource and Output Trends in the United States since 1870.”

S O U R C E S  O F  G R O W T H  A N A LY S I S   71
Generally speaking, sources of growth analyses in developing countries  attribute 
a larger role to capital formation than in the industrialized country studies. This is 
consistent with the idea that developing countries have lower levels of capital per 
worker than the industrialized countries and can catch up (or converge incomes) 
through the investment process. Much of the capital equipment imported by 
developing countries (counted as investment) embodies advances in technology. 
Therefore, the mobilization of capital remains a major concern of policy makers in 
developing countries.
Economists Barry Bosworth and Susan Collins explored the relative contribu-
tions of physical capital, human capital (in the form of education), and TFP to eco-
nomic growth in a large number of countries around the world between 1970 and 
2000. Some of their results are shown in Table 3–2.6 As with other studies, they found 
a fairly consistent pattern that capital accumulation was the main contributor to 
growth for developing countries, whereas for industrialized countries, the main con-
tributions were more evenly split between capital accumulation and TFP growth. In 
East Asia, capital accumulation accounted for about two-thirds of total growth, with 
TFP growth accounting for a smaller share. In comparing TFP growth across coun-
tries, the rapidly growing East Asian economies generally (but not always) recorded 
faster TFP growth than did developing countries from other regions of the world. TFP 
growth in East Asia was generally faster than that of the industrialized countries dur-
ing the 1970s and 1980s and about the same during the 1990s.
Average TFP growth was negative in all three decades in Africa, during the 1980s 
in Latin America, during the 1970s in South Asia, and during the 1970s and 1990s in 
the Middle East! What does this mean? Inputs actually became less productive over 
time. This might be the result of capital and labor lying idle, as often happens during 
wars, political unrest, or recessions. During Latin America’s deep recession, induced 
by the debt crisis of the 1980s, growth was negative while new investment was essen-
tially zero, implying less productive use of existing capital. Negative TFP growth also 
might reflect the accumulation of increasingly unproductive assets, like presiden-
tial palaces or so-called white elephant projects. For example, Ethiopia built one of 
the largest tanneries in the world, but it usually operates at a fraction of its capacity, 
and Nigeria’s Ajaokuta Steel factory cost nearly $5 billion in construction costs over 
25 years and has yet to produce any steel.
In a more recent study, Bosworth and Collins provide a detailed  comparative 
analysis of the sources of growth in the world’s two most populous countries— 
India and China.7 Since 1980, GDP per capita has more than doubled in India and 
increased more than sevenfold in China. While China’s growth has been driven by its 
6Susan M. Collins and Barry Bosworth, “The Empirics of Growth: An Update,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
nomic Activity 2 (2003), 113–79.
7Barry Bosworth and Susan M. Collins, “Accounting for Growth: Comparing India and China,” Journal 
of Economic Perspectives, 22, no. 1 (Winter 2008), 45–66.

72   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
TABLE 3–2  Sources of Growth in East Asia and Other Regions, 1960–2000 
    (Average Annual Growth Rate, Percent)
CONTRIBUTION BY COMPONENT
GROWTH OF 
OUTPUT PER WORKER
PHYSICAL CAPITAL 
PER WORKER
EDUCATION 
PER WORKER
TOTAL FACTOR 
PRODUCTIVITY
Brazil
1970s
4.86
2.02
0.12
2.72
1980s
-1.63
0.16
0.68
-2.47
1990s
0.71
0.07
0.38
0.25
Ecuador
1970s
5.96
1.05
0.89
4.03
1980s
-1.42
-0.28
0.16
-1.30
1990s
-1.40
-0.46
0.31
-1.24
Egypt
1970s
4.39
2.33
0.54
1.52
1980s
2.91
1.98
0.89
0.03
1990s
1.46
-0.12
0.64
0.94
Ethiopia
1970s
0.55
0.22
0.13
0.20
1980s
-1.74
1.11
0.27
-3.12
1990s
1.84
0.81
0.29
0.74
Ghana
1970s
-2.01
-0.24
0.24
-2.00
1980s
-1.14
-1.23
0.15
-0.07
1990s
1.62
0.80
0.16
0.65
India
1970s
0.70
0.61
0.36
-0.27
1980s
3.91
1.06
0.36
2.48
1990s
3.13
1.35
0.49
1.29
Singapore
1970s
4.41
3.53
0.11
0.78
1980s
3.79
2.01
0.39
1.38
1990s
5.08
1.96
0.91
2.22
Taiwan
1970s
5.93
3.69
1.11
1.14
1980s
5.36
2.19
0.24
2.94
1990s
4.84
2.66
0.41
1.77
United States
1970s
0.83
0.11
0.71
0.01
1980s
1.82
0.55
0.12
1.15
1990s
1.84
0.74
0.11
0.98
Africa
1970s
1.03
1.28
0.08
-0.32
1980s
-1.06
-0.07
0.42
-1.41
1990s
-0.16
-0.09
0.40
-0.48
East Asia
1970s
4.27
2.74
0.67
0.86
1980s
4.36
2.45
0.66
1.25
1990s
3.36
2.35
0.50
0.52

S O U R C E S  O F  G R O W T H  A N A LY S I S   73
industrial sector, India’s less traditional growth pattern has been driven by its service 
sector. Comparing these two economies in the aggregate for the years 1978–2004, 
Bosworth and Collins estimate that TFP growth accounted for just under half of the 
growth in output per worker in both countries. Yet, the absolute rate of TFP growth in 
China over that period was 3.6 percent per year compared with 1.6 percent per year 
in India. The contribution of TFP to growth in output per worker in India and China, 
they find, differs sharply from the broader pattern in East Asia (excluding China), 
where average TFP growth was slower (0.9 percent per year) and accounted for less 
than 25 percent of growth in output per worker.
The aggregate figures for the contribution of TFP to output growth in Sub- 
Saharan Africa presented in Table 3–2 are bleak. Yet, a more recent and more detailed 
analysis of that region by economist Steven Radelet demonstrates that for the 
17 countries of the region that succeeded in stabilizing their economic and political 
circumstances by the mid-1990s, average TFP growth rates soared from negative and 
unstable rates to positive TFP growth since 1995 on the order of 1.5 percent per year.8 
In summary, sources of growth analyses suggest that capital accumulation is the 
main source of growth for developing countries, consistent with the Solow growth 
model. TFP can play an important part in the growth process in the appropriate 
8Steven Radelet, Emerging Africa: How 17 Countries Are Leading the Way. Washington, DC: Cen-
ter for Global Development, 2010. Radelet’s 17 emerging African countries are Botswana, Burkina Faso, 
Cape Verde, Ethiopia, Ghana, Lesotho, Mali, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Rwanda, São Tomé and 
 Príncipe, Seychelles, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia.
Industrial countries
1970s
1.75
0.95
0.52
0.28
1980s
1.82
0.69
0.24
0.90
1990s
1.52
0.75
0.22
0.54
Latin America
1970s
2.69
1.25
0.34
1.10
1980s
-1.77
0.04
0.47
-2.28
1990s
0.91
0.16
0.34
0.41
Middle East
1970s
1.92
2.08
0.45
-0.61
1980s
1.15
0.55
0.53
0.07
1990s
0.84
0.34
0.52
-0.01
South Asia
1970s
0.68
0.56
0.34
-0.23
1980s
3.67
1.02
0.40
2.25
1990s
2.78
1.19
0.42
1.17
Source: Susan M. Collins and Barry Bosworth, “The Empirics of Growth: An Update,” Brookings Papers 
on Economic Activity 2 (2003), 113–79.

74   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
 policy and structural context. In rapidly growing economies, both factor accumula-
tion and TFP growth appear to play an important role. TFP growth tends to become 
more important as income rises and is a major contributor to growth in the high-
income industrialized countries.
CHARACTERISTICS OF RAPIDLY GROWING COUNTRIES
We identified the key proximate causes of economic growth: factor accumulation 
(accumulating additional productive assets) and productivity growth. Productiv-
ity growth, in turn, comes either from efficiency gains or new technology. Sustain-
ing economic growth requires both generating new investment and ensuring that the 
new investment is productive. These basic points, however, raise a new set of ques-
tions. What are the more fundamental characteristics that explain a country’s abil-
ity to attract investment and accumulate capital, increase efficiency, and obtain new 
technologies? More broadly, what are the deep characteristics that distinguish more 
rapidly growing economies from slowly growing ones?
A large body of research over the last few decades tried to answer this question 
by searching for broad characteristics common to rapidly growing economies. Until 
relatively recently, it was difficult for researchers to systematically examine these 
issues due to severe data limitations. Many researchers examined trends in individ-
ual countries, but it was difficult to draw general conclusions from these case stud-
ies. A few pioneering efforts, such as Irma Adelman and Cynthia Taft Morris’s Society, 
Politics, and Economic Development—A Quantitative Approach,9 paved the way for 
today’s cross-country empirical growth research. In recent years, this type of research 
has grown very rapidly, in line with the emergence of many new and large data sets 
on income in PPP terms, education levels, health characteristics, quality of gover-
nance, and a host of related items.10
Most of the recent studies are modeled on research conducted by economist 
Robert Barro in the early 1990s. These studies try to explain the variance in growth 
rates across countries. With country growth rates as the dependent variable, this 
approach examines several variables that might affect growth through one of the 
channels identified earlier (controlling for the initial level of income in each coun-
try). These variables include levels of education and health, policy choices, resource 
endowments, geographic characteristics (latitude, whether the country is land-
locked, etc.), and political systems.
9Irma Adelman and Cynthia Taft Morris, Society, Politics, and Economic Development—A Quantitative 
Approach (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1967).
10The vast literature on cross-country growth empirics began with Robert Barro, “Economic Growth in a 
Cross Section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, no. 2 (May 1991), 407–43. For the most com-
prehensive recent survey of this type of research, see S. Durlauf, P. Johnson, and J. Temple, “Growth Econo-
metrics,” in P. Aghion and S. Durlauf eds., Handbook of Economic Growth (Amsterdam: North Holland, 2005).

C H A R A CT E R I S T I C S  O F  R A P I D LY  G R O W I N G  C O U N T R I E S   75
This type of research has been controversial, and there is far from a consensus 
on the exact group of variables that affects growth.11 For one thing, although this 
research starts with the Solow model, for many of the variables tested, there is no 
well-developed theoretical link between the variable and either economic growth 
or the proximate causes of growth (factor accumulation or productivity growth). The 
existing theories on economic growth simply are not explicit enough about exactly 
what variables determine the shape of the production function, the rate of invest-
ment, the profitability of investment, efficiency, and the rate of change in technology. 
Some characteristics may appear statistically important in one research study that 
includes a certain group of variables but unimportant in another study with a differ-
ent group of variables.12
A second issue has to do with interpretation of the statistical results. For exam-
ple, most economists would agree that high saving rates are associated with rapid 
economic growth. But which causes which? Higher saving can lead to more rapid 
growth, as suggested by the Solow model, while faster economic growth might pro-
vide more disposable income and a higher saving rate (we discuss this issue more in 
Chapter 10). It is a major statistical challenge to precisely estimate the magnitude of 
these two effects.
Despite these issues, such empirical growth research has helped analysts better 
understand some of the broad characteristics associated with rapid growth, albeit 
very imperfectly. The broad thrust of the conclusions from research across coun-
tries is consistent with many studies of individual countries. Although the debate is 
far from over about which variables influence long-run growth, how they do so, and 
the magnitude of the effect, this research has helped provide broad clues about why 
some economies grow faster than others. The most rapidly growing developing coun-
tries tend to share six broad characteristics.13
1. MACROECONOMIC AND POLITICAL STABILITY
Stability is good for growth. Economic and political instability undermine investment 
and growth and are especially hard on the poor, who are least able to protect them-
selves against volatility. Consider the Democratic Republic of the Congo  (formerly 
Zaire), which suffered through inflation rates averaging an astonishing 2,800 percent 
11For critiques of the cross-country approach, see Durlauf et al., “Growth Econometrics;” and David 
Lindauer and Lant Pritchett, “What’s the Big Idea? The Third Generation of Policies for Economic Growth,” 
Economia 3, no. 1 (Fall 2002).
12A seminal study on the robustness of explanatory variables across different specifications is Ross 
Levine and David Renelt, “A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth Regressions,” American Eco-
nomic Review 82, no. 4 (September 1992), 942–63.
13Economist Xavier Sala-i-Martin has examined a wide range of studies and identified a list of variables 
that are most consistently and robustly found to be closely associated with economic growth. See Xavier X. 
Sala-i-Martin, “I Just Ran Two Million Regressions,” American Economic Review 87, no. 2 (May 1997), 178–83. The 
specific list of key areas used here is similar to that suggested by Lawrence Summers and Vinod Thomas in 
“Recent Lessons of Development,” World Bank Research Observer 8, no. 2 (July 1993), 241–54.

76   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
per year between 1990 and 2002 and civil and cross-border wars involving troops 
from at least five other countries. It is not surprising that its growth and development 
performance was about the worst in the world: “growth” of -7.2 percent per year 
(meaning that average incomes fell by 60 percent over 12 years), life expectancy fell 
from 52 to 45 years, and infant mortality rose from 128 to 139 per thousand.
Relatively low budget deficits over time (with corresponding high rates of govern-
ment saving), prudent monetary policy (which keeps inflation in check), appropriate 
exchange rates, suitable financial markets (depending on the stage of development), 
and judicious foreign borrowing at sustainable levels are the key  elements to macro-
economic stability. Stability reduces risk for investors, whether they are multi national 
conglomerates or coffee farmers considering planting more trees. A high rate of infla-
tion, for example, makes prices and profits much less predictable, undermining 
growth.14 Volatile short-term capital flows can lead to wide swings in the exchange 
rate, affecting prices throughout the economy and undermining investment. In 
extreme situations, volatile capital flows can lead to full-blown financial crises, as we 
explore more deeply in Chapter 13.
Political stability is, of course, also good for growth and development. Civil and 
cross-border wars, military coups, and other incidences of political instability under-
mine investment and growth. Once again, the poor are the most vulnerable and 
least able to protect themselves from the consequences of political unrest. In the 
late 1990s, nearly one-third of the 42 countries in sub-Saharan Africa were embroiled 
in cross-border or civil wars, which took a huge toll on human lives, infrastructure, 
institutions, and economic activity and commerce. Figure 3–2 shows sharp declines 
in income, averaging 28 percent, after civil war in seven developing countries. By 
contrast, most of the relatively successful developing countries during the last sev-
eral decades were politically stable for long periods of time. Although some of the 
successful countries experienced periods of instability, for the most part they were 
short-lived. Economist Paul Collier and others have pointed out the insidious nega-
tive cycle of civil war in low-income countries: poverty increases the risk of conflict, 
and conflict undermines growth and entrenches poverty.15 Of course, the absence of 
war is no guarantee of economic growth. Cuba, Jamaica, and Kenya were politically 
stable for decades but still experienced low growth.
14The negative association between inflation and growth has been demonstrated in numerous studies, 
prominent among them Robert Barro, “Inflation and Growth,” Review [Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis] 
78, no. 3, 153–69 (May–June 1996).
15See Paul Collier, “On the Economic Consequences of Civil War,” Oxford Economic Papers 51 (1999), 
168–83; and Paul Collier, V. L. Elliot, Håvard Hegre, Anke Hoeffler, Marta Reynal-Querol, and Nicho-
las Sambanis, Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy (Washington, DC: World 
Bank and Oxford University Press, 2003). Collier summarizes this and related work in The Bottom Billion: 
Why the Poorest Countries are Failing and What Can Be Done About It, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2007).

C H A R A CT E R I S T I C S  O F  R A P I D LY  G R O W I N G  C O U N T R I E S   77
Peru
Congo,
Dem. Rep.
Nicaragua
Georgia
Djibouti
El Salvador
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
Average per capita income (US$)
Before civil war
After civil war
FIGURE 3–2 GDP per Capita before and after a Civil War
In these six countries, average income was 28 percent lower after the civil war than before.
Sources: Civil war data from Paul Collier, V. L. Elliot, Håvard Hegre, Anke Hoeffler, Marta Reynal-Querol, 
and Nicholas Sambanis, Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy (Washington, DC: 
World Bank and Oxford University Press, 2003). Gross domestic product per capita data from World Development 
Indicators 2004, (Washington, DC: World Bank), http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development
-indicators.
2. INVESTMENT IN HEALTH AND EDUCATION
Countries with longer life expectancy (and therefore better health) tend to grow faster, 
after accounting for other factors affecting growth, as shown in Figure 3–3.16 A  longer 
life expectancy indicates general improvements in the health of a population, which 
in turn means a healthier and more productive labor force. Thus, one way that life 
expectancy affects growth is by influencing productivity. In addition, a higher life 
expectancy might also boost saving and capital accumulation because businesses 
may be more likely to invest where workers are healthier and more productive. 
Moreover, people are more likely to invest in education to deepen their skills if they 
expect to live longer and reap greater benefits. Accessible basic healthcare facilities, 
clean water and sanitation, disease control programs, and strong reproductive and 
16See, for example, World Health Organization, Macroeconomics and Health: Investing in Health for 
Economic Development, Report of the Commission on Macroeconomics and Health (Geneva: World Health 
Organization, 2001). For a brief nontechnical summary, see David E. Bloom, David Canning, and Dean 
Jamison, “Health, Wealth, and Welfare,” Finance and Development 41, no. 1 (March 2004), 10–15.

78   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
 maternal and child health programs help countries lengthen life expectancy and 
improve worker productivity.
Malaysia’s efforts to reduce malaria and improve health are a good example. 
When settlers first began to arrive in what is now Kuala Lumpur in the 1850s in 
search of tin, nearly half died of malaria. A century later, things had improved, but 
malaria and other diseases were still a problem, and life expectancy in 1960 was just 
54 years. Growth during the 1960s was still a respectable 3.4 percent per year. An 
active government malaria control program began to make significant inroads, and 
by 1975, the number of malaria cases had been cut by two-thirds relative to 1960. 
Partly as a result, life expectancy increased to 64 years. Improved health (along with 
several other factors) contributed to a surge in growth, which accelerated to about 
5 percent per year between 1976 and 1996, slowing only in the wake of the 1998 East 
Asian financial crisis. The incidence of malaria has continued to decline, falling to 
just above 7,000 confirmed cases in 2009.17
Note that the relationship between life expectancy and growth works both ways: 
Better health helps spur faster growth, and faster growth (and higher income) helps 
improve life expectancy, as we discuss in more detail in Chapter 9. That is, better 
17The data on the incidence of malaria come from the World Health Organization, World Malaria 
Report 2011,” available at www.who.int/malaria/world_malaria_report_2011/en, accessed February 
2012. The country profile for Malaysia is available at www.who.int/entity/malaria/publications/country
-profiles/profile_mys_en.pdf, accessed February 2012.
40
30
10.00
8.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
0.00
–2.00
–6.00
–4.00
Life expectancy at birth, 1975
GDP per capita growth, 1975–2002
50
60
70
80
90
FIGURE 3–3 Growth and Life Expectancy

C H A R A CT E R I S T I C S  O F  R A P I D LY  G R O W I N G  C O U N T R I E S   79
health is both an input to and outcome of the growth process. In Chapter 2, we dis-
cussed increased life expectancy as an important development goal as part of the 
human development index (HDI). Here we emphasize the role of good health as an 
input to the growth process. These two positions are not contradictory—far from it. 
Rather, they imply a positive reinforcing cycle in which better health supports faster 
economic growth, and the higher income from growth facilitates even better health.
Similarly, both increased levels and improved quality of education should trans-
late into a more highly skilled workforce and increased productivity. A skilled work-
force should be able to work more quickly with fewer errors, use existing machinery 
more effectively, and invent or adapt new technologies more easily. As with bet-
ter health, a more highly educated workforce may also help attract new investment, 
thereby contributing to capital accumulation as well. Also, like better health, education 
has a pro-cyclical relationship with growth, in which better education helps support 
growth and growth generates the resources to finance stronger educational systems. 
Education of girls has a particularly strong effect on growth, both the direct impact on 
their skills and the indirect impact in the next generation on their children’s health and 
education. The impact of education on growth can take a long time because invest-
ments in primary school education today may not show up as improved worker pro-
ductivity for many years. The quality of service delivery is just as important as quantity. 
It is not enough to build schools and increase enrollment rates; teachers have to show 
up, be motivated, and have adequate basic supplies (such as textbooks) to do their job.18
As discussed in Chapter 8, most micro-level studies in individual developing 
countries show very high rates of return to education, especially girl’s education. 
However, in macro-level cross-country studies, the statistical strength of the rela-
tionship often is relatively modest. This may be due to difficulties in accurately mea-
suring the quantity and quality of education across a large number of countries in 
a consistent way. It also suggests that a better-educated workforce is no guarantee 
of more rapid economic growth. Human capital, just like physical capital, can be 
squandered in an environment that is not otherwise supportive of economic growth.
3. EFFECTIVE GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONS
The role of governance and institutions in economic growth in development began 
to receive serious attention only beginning in the early 1990s (Box 3–3). This work was 
heavily influenced by the research and writing of Nobel Prize–winning economist 
Douglass C. North of Washington University.19 Since that time, many studies have 
found a positive relationship between economic growth and the strength of the rule 
18These issues are explored more deeply in Chapter 8 and in the World Bank’s world development report, 
Making Service Work for Poor People (Washington, DC: World Bank and Oxford University Press, 2004).
19See, for example, Douglass C. North, Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990).

80   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
BOX 3–3 INSTITUTIONS, GOVERNANCE, AND GROWTHa
The role of institutions and governance in supporting and sustaining economic 
growth began to receive strong attention in the 1990s, following the path- breaking 
work by Nobel Prize–winning economist Douglass C. North.b In its broadest defini-
b
tion, institutions include a society’s formal rules (for example, constitutions, laws,
and regulations), informal constraints (such as conventions, norms, traditions, and 
self-enforced codes of conduct), and the organizations that operate within these
rules and constraints.c There are many different kinds of institutions that influence
c
growth and development. Dani Rodrik and Arvind  Subramanian suggest four broad
types of economic institutions, to which we add a fifth for political institutions:
• Market-creating institutions protect property rights, ensure that
s
contracts are enforced, minimize corruption, and generally support the
rule of law. Without these institutions in place, markets are likely not to 
exist or to perform poorly; by contrast, strengthening them can help boost
investment and entrepreneurship. Examples include an independent
judiciary, an effective police force, and enforceable contracts.
• Market-regulating institutions deal with market failures, such as
s
imperfect information and economies of scale. These institutions limit
monopoly power and help provide the basis for building and managing
public goods, such as roads and fisheries. Examples include regulatory
agencies in telecommunications, transportation, water and forestry
resources, and financial services.
• Market-stabilizing institutions ensure low inflation, minimize
s
macroeconomic volatility, ensure fiscal stability, and avert financial
crises. Central banks, exchange rate systems, ministries of finance, and
fiscal and budgetary rules are all market-stabilizing institutions.
• Market-legitimizing institutions provide social protection and insurance,
s
focus on redistribution, and manage conflict. These institutions help
aThis text draws heavily on the discussion of institutions found in Finance and Development 40, 
no. 2 (June 2003), particularly Dani Rodrik and Arvind Subramanian, “The Primacy of Institutions 
(and What This Does and Does Not Mean)”; and Jeffrey D. Sachs, “Institutions Matter, but Not for 
Everything.”
bDouglass C. North, Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1990).
cNorth distinguishes between the formal rules and informal constraints (which he includes in his 
definition of institutions) and organizations (which he excludes). He refers to institutions as the “rules 
of the game” and organizations as “the players.” In common usage, however, many people use the 
term institutions to cover both the rules and the organizations.

C H A R A CT E R I S T I C S  O F  R A P I D LY  G R O W I N G  C O U N T R I E S   81
protect individuals and corporations from shocks or disasters or from 
adverse market outcomes. Examples include pension systems,
unemployment insurance schemes, welfare programs, and other social
funds.
• Political institutions determine how society is governed and the extent
s
of political participation. In many countries, there is a strong focus on 
the key institutions that support democracy, including a free press,
elections, competitive political parties, and participatory politics.
A large body of evidence now shows a robust relationship between stronger
institutions, rapid economic growth, and improved development outcomes. The
evidence is based partly on major advancements in the ability to better measure
governance and institutions, such as the data compiled by Dani Kaufmann and
Aart Kraay at the World Bank Institute.d Strong institutions are central to man-
d
aging financial systems, building public education and health systems, ensuring
efficient trade and commerce, and governing legal systems. Much of neoclas-
sical economic theory on well-functioning markets is based on the assumption
that fundamental institutions are in place (such as contract enforcement, perfect
information, and the rule of law). But in many low-income countries, these key
institutions are weak or nonexistent.
Understanding the importance of institutions for growth brings us only so
far, however. Economic analysis tells us very little about the specific forms of
institutions that are best suited for a particular environment (for instance, com-
mon law versus civil law). There is significant debate about which institutions
are most important for low-income countries, their specific form, and the rela-
tive importance of institutions versus other factors. Although some analysts claim
that institutions dominate all other factors in the growth process, the bulk of the
evidence suggests that other factors play an important role, such as policies,
geography, and resource endowments. Much of the research indicates that insti-
tutions themselves are heavily influenced by geography, history, resource endow-
ments, and the extent of integration with the global economy.
Perhaps even more important, theory and research do not tell us much about
how institutions change and how a country with weak institutions can best
strengthen them. Institutions change only slowly, but fortunately they do change.
Deepening our understanding of how institutions affect growth and development,
the appropriate form for institutions in different circumstances and how institu-
tions change over time are major challenges for economists and development
specialists in the future.
dAvailable at http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.asp.
d

82   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
of law, the extent of corruption, property rights, the quality of government bureau-
cracies, and other measures of governance and institutional quality.20
Stronger governance and institutions help improve the environment for invest-
ment by reducing risk and increasing profitability. Investors are more likely to 
make long-term investments where they feel property rights are secure and their 
factory, machines, or land will not be confiscated. Strong legal systems can help 
settle commercial disputes in a predictable, rational manner. Low levels of corrup-
tion help reduce the costs of investment, reduce risks, and increase productivity, as 
managers focus their attention on production rather than influencing politicians 
and government officials. Strong government economic institutions, such as the 
central bank, ministry of finance, ports authority, and ministry of trade can help 
establish effective government policies that influence both factor accumulation 
and productivity.
The most effective governments established institutions that helped facilitate 
(rather than hinder) strong economic management, effective social programs, and 
a robust private sector. Governance in the most rapidly growing countries varied 
widely from very effective (Singapore and Botswana) to more mixed (Indonesia and 
Thailand) but generally was better than in slower-growing countries.
4. FAVORABLE ENVIRONMENT FOR PRIVATE ENTERPRISE
Sustained economic growth requires millions of private individuals to make deci-
sions every day regarding saving, investment, education, and job opportunities. 
Small-scale farmers, business owners, factory workers, and market stall vendors all 
strive daily to increase their incomes, and the regulatory and policy environment has 
a significant effect on their success or failure. For many countries, agricultural policies 
are central to the growth process. Where governments have pushed farm-gate prices 
low to keep food prices cheap or forced farmers to sell their products to government-
owned marketing boards, agricultural production (and farmer income) has suffered. 
The most dramatic example of reducing restrictions of farmers is China’s moves to 
decollectivize agricultural production in the early 1980s and to allow farmers to sell 
their produce on markets. China’s agricultural output soared in the decade that fol-
lowed. Farmers need reasonable access to fertilizers, seeds, and pesticides, and the 
construction of rural roads has had a dramatic impact on rural incomes in many 
countries, such as Indonesia. Absolute free markets are not necessarily the  solution—
some countries have subsidized fertilizer or other inputs to encourage their use, 
20See, for example, Stephen Knack and Philip Keefer, “Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross 
Country Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures,” Economics and Politics 7, no. 3 (1995), 207–27; 
Daniel Kaufmann, Aart Kraay, and Pablo Zoido-Lobatón, “Governance Matters,” World Bank Policy 
Research Paper No. 2196, October 1999; World Bank, Washington, DC; and Daron Acemoglu, Simon 
 Johnson, and James Robinson, “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical 
 Investigation,” American Economic Review 91, no. 5 (December 2001), 1369–401.

C H A R A CT E R I S T I C S  O F  R A P I D LY  G R O W I N G  C O U N T R I E S   83
whereas others have used buffer stocks to counter large swings in prices—but poli-
cies that consistently push against markets (rather than helping strengthen markets) 
almost always fail in the long run.
The climate for small-scale businesses and manufacturing is also important for 
long-term growth. While some regulation is crucial for well-functioning markets, 
most governments in developing countries impose unnecessarily high costs on busi-
nesses through licensing, permits, and other restrictions. Hernando de Soto’s The 
Mystery of Capital demonstrated the damaging effects of heavy business regulation 
and weak property rights.21 When the regulatory burden to start a business is high, 
fewer entrepreneurs bother to start businesses, and when they do, they tend to oper-
ate on a smaller scale and in the informal sector. Moreover, government investments 
in infrastructure, at the core of capital formation, are central. No matter how favor-
able the policy environment, businesses cannot operate if the electricity shuts off every 
day, the water is brown, and the phones do not work.
5. TRADE, OPENNESS, AND GROWTH
Most economists agree that international trade plays an important role in  economic 
growth. In discussing this role, however, it is important to distinguish between the 
volume of trade and trade policy. Economists Jeffrey Frankel and David Romer sur-
mounted significant statistical challenges to demonstrate that trade (as a proportion 
of GDP) causes growth.22 They find that a 1 percentage point increase in the ratio of 
trade to a country’s GDP increases income per capita by at least 0.5 percent. Trade, 
they conclude, plays this role by encouraging countries to accumulate both physi-
cal and human capital and by increasing productivity. This finding is consistent with 
earlier studies that hypothesized trade could contribute to growth by facilitating 
transfers of both capital and technology and by creating incentives for competitive-
ness. Yet the conclusion that trade as a share of GDP contributes to growth says noth-
ing directly about the relationship between trade policy and growth.
Casual observation suggests that outward orientation (a set of policies designed 
to encourage exports) contributes to growth. For instance, it’s widely accepted that 
outward-oriented trade policies contributed to the rapid growth of many  economies 
in East Asia, whereas inward-oriented trade policies (that had the effect of dis-
couraging exports) contributed to slow growth in much of Latin America and sub-
Saharan Africa. Yet, economists continue to debate the evidence in support of such 
21Hernando de Soto, The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Every-
where Else (New York: Basic Books, 2000). The World Bank and International Finance Corporation 
maintain an extensive program to monitor the costs of doing business in 183 economies. Data and pub-
lications from the Doing Business project are available at www.doingbusiness.org, accessed February 
2012.
22Jeffrey Frankel and David Romer, “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic Review 89, no. 3 
(June 1999), 379–99.

84   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
 conclusions. Part of the controversy lies in constructing measurable indicators of 
trade policy orientation. For instance, economist David Dollar constructed an indica-
tor of outward orientation based on real exchange rate distortion and volatility.23 He 
found that, for the period 1976–85, the developing countries that were most open to 
trade had an average annual growth rate of 2.9 percent per capita, whereas the most 
closed portion of his sample countries experienced negative growth of -1.3 percent.
In a highly influential study, economists Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner con-
structed a composite indicator of openness to trade in which countries were deemed 
either open or closed based on several trade policy indicators.24 They found openness 
to have a substantial influence on growth, concluding that open countries (between 
1970 and 1989) grew at least 2 percentage points faster on average than did closed 
countries. Applying the Sachs-Warner indicator to a longer time period, economists 
Romain Wacziarg and Karen Horn Welch found that open economies over the period 
1950–1998 had an average growth rate of income per capita of 2.7 percent as com-
pared with an average growth of of 1.18 percent in closed economies, a margin of 
nearly 1.5 percentage points.25 In a prominent response to these studies, however, 
economists Francísco Rodriguez and Dani Rodrik question the validity, interpreta-
tion, and robustness of these policy indicators, concluding that the evidence linking 
pro-trade policies to growth remains inconclusive.26 We address these issues in depth 
in Chapters 17 and 18.
6. FAVORABLE GEOGRAPHY
A striking fact is that there are no rich economies located between the Tropic of 
 Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn other than Singapore and a few small, oil-rich 
countries. Figure 3–4 shows that the poorest countries in the world are almost all in 
the tropics, while the richest countries tend to be in more temperate zones. Even 
within the temperate zones, the regions closer to the tropics tend to be less well off: 
Northern Europe is richer than southern Europe, the northern part of the United 
States is wealthier than the southern parts, and southern Brazil is better off than the 
north part of the country. In Latin America and Africa, the wealthiest countries are 
located in the temperate south: Chile, Argentina, and South Africa.
23David Dollar, “Outward-Oriented Developing Economies Really Do Grow More Rapidly: Evidence 
from 95 LDCs, 1976–1985,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 40, no. 3 (April 1992), 523–44.
24Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner, “Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration,” Brook-
ings Papers on Economic Activity 26 (1995), 1–118.
25Romain Wacziarg and Karen Horn Welch, “Trade Liberalization and Growth: New Evidence,” World 
Bank Economic Review 22, no. 2 (June 2008), 187–231.
26Francísco Rodriguez and Dani Rodrik, “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to 
the Cross-National Evidence” (pp. 261–338), in Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER Macro-
economics Annual 2000 (Cambridge, MIT Press: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2001).

C H A R A CT E R I S T I C S  O F  R A P I D LY  G R O W I N G  C O U N T R I E S   85
Several studies have shown a strong relationship between location in the trop-
ics, other geographical characteristics, and growth.27 Figure 3–5 shows that the aver-
age growth rate per capita between 1975 and 2009 for countries located in the tropics 
was significantly lower than for countries outside the tropics. Tropical countries have 
to deal with a greater burden from virulent diseases, erratic climate, and at least in 
some areas, very poor-quality soil for agriculture. Most of the world’s most virulent 
diseases are centered in the tropics, including malaria and HIV/AIDS. These diseases 
seriously undermine worker productivity and add to healthcare costs. Similarly, 
although erratic climate can occur anywhere around the world, floods, droughts, 
and violent storms tend to be more concentrated in the tropics. Hurricanes and 
typhoons, of course, are by definition tropical phenomena. Hotter climates make 
a long, hard day of outdoor work much more difficult, reducing labor productivity 
(one way Singapore has compensated for being in the tropics is by air-conditioning 
the vast majority of buildings in the country, a step that is much easier for a small 
city-state like Singapore than for most other countries). And while some tropical 
regions have very fertile soils (as in the rich lands in Java, one of the main islands 
of Indonesia), most of the great Sahara desert is in the tropics, as are the arid lands 
of northern Brazil. These characteristics work to reduce both factor productivity and 
27Studies that explore the impact of geographical factors on levels of income and growth rates include 
Robert Hall and Charles Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per Worker Than 
Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (February 1999), 83–116; and John Gallup and Jeffrey Sachs, 
“Geography and Economic Development” (127–78), in Boris Pleskovic and Joseph Stiglitz, eds., World 
Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics 1998 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1998).
< 1,751
1,751 — 4,333
4,333 — 9,488
9,488 — 21,987
> 21,987
No data
Key
FIGURE 3–4 Income Levels and Geography
Data are gross domestic product per capita in 2009 (constant 2005 international dollars, PPP).
Source: World Bank, “World Bank Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

86   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
the incentives for investment and factor accumulation. Location in the tropics does 
not necessarily preclude growth and development because some of the burdens can 
be alleviated at least partially through policies and institutional development, but it 
clearly creates difficulties and obstacles that make growth and development more 
difficult.
Another geographical feature that can affect growth is isolation from major mar-
kets, such as for landlocked countries and for small island nations (for example, 
located in the Pacific Ocean). These isolated countries face higher transport costs 
and fewer economic opportunities than do coastal economies and countries located 
nearer to major markets. Landlocked African countries face overland shipping costs 
that can be three times higher than their coastal neighbors’. Higher transport costs 
make imports more expensive, which both reduces income left for consumption and 
raises production costs. They also make it more expensive to export products to other 
countries, reducing profits.
Not all landlocked countries have had poor economic performance.  Switzerland 
and Austria are in some ways the exceptions that prove the rule. Although they are 
landlocked, they are far from being isolated, as they are located in the heart of Europe. 
Perhaps the clearest exception is Botswana, which has deftly managed its vast dia-
mond mines to generate sustained growth for the last four decades. Figure 3–5 shows 
that economic growth in landlocked countries has averaged 1.29 percent since 1975 
(excluding Bhutan and Botswana, this figure falls to 0.99 percent), while in coastal 
economies, growth averaged 1.71 percent, about one-third higher (and nearly twice 
as high excluding Botswana). Being landlocked does not mean growth is impossible, 
Others
Countries in the tropics
Others
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Real GDP growth per capita, 1975—2009
Landlocked countries
FIGURE 3–5 Geography and Growth
GDP, gross domestic product.
Source: Penn World Tables 7.0, http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/php_site/pwt_index.php, accessed May 2011.

S U M M A R Y   87
but it does limit options and add to production costs. Geographical isolation can be 
overcome by investments that reduce overland transport costs (for example, better 
roads or trucks) or by producing goods that rely more on air rather than sea trans-
port. Landlocked Uganda, for example, grows flowers near its international airport 
for export to Europe. Advancements in satellite communications open up new pos-
sibilities for isolated countries, such as data entry or accounting services provided for 
firms located in other countries.
Note that some countries face multiple geographical obstacles that significantly 
limit their development options. Perhaps the most challenging are the landlocked 
countries in the midst of the Sahara desert; Burkina Faso, Chad, Ethiopia, Mali, Niger, 
and Sudan are among the very poorest countries in the world. These countries have 
far fewer options and face much more difficult challenges than the average developing 
country.
These six broad areas are not a complete list of the characteristics that influ-
ence factor accumulation, productivity, and economic growth, but they are among 
the most prominent attributes identified by research and experience. It is important 
to recognize that this list is not absolute: There is significant variation across coun-
tries, and these characteristics are neither a guarantee of success nor a set of rigid 
requirements for growth. Some countries have done relatively well in many of these 
areas and still have not experienced rapid economic growth. At the same time, while 
almost all of the fastest-growing countries score well in most of these areas, some do 
not. Our understanding of the precise pathways through which each of these factors 
influence growth is far from complete. However, the evidence does show that these 
characteristics are among the most important factors supporting factor accumula-
tion, productivity, and growth.
SUMMARY
• Countries have varied widely in their experiences of economic growth since 
1960. While some economies, such as Madagascar and Zambia shrank 
slightly in per capita terms, others such as Botswana and China increased 
their per capita incomes by factors of 15 to 19 between 1960 and 2009.
• Theories of economic growth have identified several key dimensions of the 
growth process. Factor accumulation—the expansion of a country’s capital 
stock along with the growth of its labor force—is critical. These are the 
principal inputs for production of national output.
• In the long run, factor accumulation alone cannot sustain rapid growth 
in per capita income. Long-run growth depends on being able to produce 
more output per unit of input. This is the definition of productivity growth. 
Productivity growth is ultimately a reflection of technical change (which 

88   [CH. 3] E C O N O M I C G R O W T H :  C O N C E PT S  A N D PAT TE R N S
we can think of as the invention of better recipes for producing national 
output).
• Productivity growth is measured as a residual. It is the increase in 
output that is not explained by increased use of inputs. Any errors in the 
measurement of either inputs or output spill over into our estimate of 
productivity growth. The goal of sources of growth analysis is to decompose 
a change in output into the portion explained by the changing use of 
each input and the unexplained portion that we designate as productivity 
growth.
• Sources of growth analyses indicate that capital accumulation tends to 
contribute substantially to growth in low-income countries, while increases 
in the size and quality of the labor force and productivity growth also make 
important contributions. Productivity growth tends to account for a larger 
share of growth in high-income countries.
• Some of the key country characteristics most closely associated with rapid 
growth include economic and political stability, investments in health and 
education, strong governance and institutions, a favorable environment for 
private enterprise (including agricultural, regulatory policies), and more-
favorable geography. Participation in international trade is also strongly 
associated with economic growth. Our understanding of precisely how 
these and other factors affect the growth process is far from complete.

89
Th eories of 
Economic Growth
4
E
conomists have long puzzled over the question of economic growth. What is it 
that makes some countries rich while others remain poor? Formal studies of 
this question date back at least to the eighteenth-century writings of Scottish 
social philosopher Adam Smith. The search for answers continues to dominate 
economic thinking. In a lecture presented in 1985, Nobel Prize–winning economist 
Robert Lucas noted the then-rapid economic growth of Indonesia and Egypt and 
slow growth of India, famously asking,
Is there some action a government of India could take that would lead the Indian 
economy to grow like Indonesia’s or Egypt’s? If so,what exactly? If not, what is 
it about the “nature of India” that makes it so? The consequences for human 
welfare involved in questions like these are simply staggering: Once one starts to 
think about them it is hard to think of anything else.1
More than a quarter century later, economists Dani Rodrik, Arvind  Subramanian, 
and Francesco Trebbi noted,
Average income levels in the world’s richest and poorest nations differ by a factor 
of more than 100. Sierra Leone, the poorest economy for which we have national 
income statistics, has a per-capita GDP of $490, compared to Luxembourg’s 
$50,061. What accounts for these differences, and what (if anything) can we do 
1Robert E. Lucas, “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics 22, 
no. 1 (July 1988), 3–42.

90   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
to reduce them? It is hard to think of any question in economics that is of greater 
intellectual significance, or of greater relevance to the vast majority of the world’s 
population.2
Two observations emerge from the juxtaposition of these strikingly similar 
quotations: (1) Long-run economic growth may be the single most fundamental 
determinant of human welfare around the world, and (2) despite substantial efforts 
and significant progress toward solving the puzzle of economic growth during the 
27 years that separate these comments, we remain far from a complete and policy- 
relevant understanding of the deep determinants of growth.
This chapter explores key contributions to the theory of economic growth. We 
began to explore these issues in the last chapter by examining some of the basic 
processes and patterns that characterize economic growth in low-income coun-
tries. We emphasized that growth depends on two processes: the accumulation of 
assets (such as capital, labor, and land), and making those assets more productive. 
Saving and investment are central, but investments must be productive for growth 
to proceed. Our approach was largely empirical, as we examined much of the data 
on growth and some of the key findings from research on the determinants of 
growth across countries. We saw that government policy, institutions, political and 
economic stability, geography, natural resource endowments, and levels of health 
and education all play some role in influencing economic growth. We emphasized 
that growth is not the same as development, but it remains absolutely central to the 
development process.
This chapter develops these ideas more formally by introducing the underly-
ing theory and the most important basic models of economic growth that influ-
ence development thinking today. These models provide consistent frameworks 
for understanding the growth process and provide a theoretical foundation for the 
empirical approach we took in the last chapter. Here, we identify specific mathemati-
cal relationships between the quantity of capital and labor, their productivity, and the 
resulting aggregate output. It is important that these models also explore the process 
of accumulating additional capital and labor and increasing their productivity, which 
shifts the model from determining the level of output to the rate of change of output, 
which of course is the rate of economic growth.
As we begin to examine the models, it is useful to consider the words of Robert 
Solow, the father of modern growth theory, who once wrote: “All theory depends on 
assumptions that are not quite true. That is what makes it theory. The art of success-
ful theorizing is to make the inevitable simplifying assumptions in such a way that 
2Dani Rodrik, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi, “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institu-
tions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,” Journal of Economic Growth, 9, no. 2 
(2004), 131–65.

T H E  B A S I C  G R O W T H  M O D E L   91
the final results are not very sensitive.”3 The best models are simple, yet still manage 
to communicate powerful insights into how the real world operates. In this spirit, the 
models presented here make assumptions that clearly are not true but allow us to 
simplify the framework and make it easier to grasp key concepts and insights. For 
example, we begin by assuming that our prototype economy has one type of homo-
geneous worker and one type of capital good that combine to produce one standard 
product. No economy in the world has characteristics even closely resembling these 
assumptions, but making these assumptions allows us to cut through many details 
and get to the core concepts of the theory of economic growth.
THE BASIC GROWTH MODEL
The most fundamental models of economic output and economic growth are 
based on a small number of equations that relate saving, investment, and popula-
tion growth to the size of the workforce and capital stock and, in turn, to aggregate 
production of a single good. These models initially focus on the levels of invest-
ment, labor, productivity, and output. It then becomes straightforward to examine 
the changes in these variables. Our ultimate focus is to explore the key determinants 
of the change in output—that is, on the rate of economic growth. The version of the 
basic model that we examine here has five equations: an aggregate production func-
tion, an equation determining the level of saving, the saving-investment identity, a 
statement relating new investment to changes in the capital stock, and an expression 
for the growth rate of the labor force.4 We examine each of these in turn.
Standard growth models have at their core a production function. At the indi-
vidual firm or microeconomic level, a production function relates the number of 
employees and machines to the size of the firm’s output. For example, the production 
function for a textile factory would reveal how much more output the factory could 
produce if it hired (say) 50 additional workers and purchased five more looms. Pro-
duction functions often are derived from engineering specifications that relate given 
amounts of physical input to the amount of physical output that can be produced 
with that input. At the national or economywide level, production functions describe 
the relationship of the size of a country’s total labor force and the value of its capital 
stock with the level of that country’s gross domestic product (GDP; its total output). 
These economywide relationships are called  aggregate production functions.
3Robert Solow, “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 70 
(February 1956), 65–94.
4This five-equation presentation is based on teaching notes compiled by World Bank economist 
 Shantayanan Devarajan, to whom we are indebted.
THE BASIC GROWTH MODEL

92   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
Our first equation is an aggregate production function. If Y represents total 
 output (and therefore total income), K is the capital stock, and L is the labor supply, 
at the most general level, the aggregate production function can be expressed as
 
Y = F(K, L) 
[4–1]
This expression indicates that output is a function (denoted by F) of the capi-
tal stock and the labor supply. As the capital stock and labor supply grow, output 
expands. Economic growth occurs by increasing either the capital stock (through 
new investment in factories, machinery, equipment, roads, and other infrastruc-
ture), the size of the labor force, or both. The exact form of the function F (stating 
precisely how much output expands in response to changes in K and L) is what dis-
tinguishes many different models of growth, as we will see later in the chapter. The 
other four equations of the model describe how these increases in K and L come 
about.
Equations 4–2 through 4–4 are closely linked and together describe how the 
capital stock (K) changes over time. These three equations first calculate total sav-
ing, then relate saving to new investment, and finally describe how new investment 
changes the size of the capital stock. To calculate saving, we take the most straightfor-
ward approach and assume that saving is a fixed share of income:
 
S = sY 
[4–2]
In this equation, S represents the total value of saving, and s represents the average 
saving rate. For example, if the average saving rate is 20 percent and total income is 
$10 billion, then the value of saving in any year is $2 billion. We assume that the sav-
ing rate s is a constant, which for most countries is between 10 and 40 percent (typi-
cally averaging between 20 and 25 percent), although for some countries it can be 
higher or lower. China’s savings rate in 2008 (along with those of several large oil 
exporters) exceeded 50 percent, while several countries (including Mozambique, 
Guinea, the Seychelles, and Georgia) reported savings rates less than 5 percent of 
GDP. Actual saving behavior is more complex than this simple model suggests (as we 
discuss in Chapter 10), but this formulation is sufficient for us to explore the basic 
relationships between saving, investment, and growth.
The next equation relates total saving (S) to investment (I). In our model, with 
only one good, there is no international trade (because everyone makes the same 
product, there is no reason to trade). In a closed economy (one without trade or 
foreign borrowing), saving must be equal to investment. All output of goods and 
 services produced by the economy must be used for either current consumption 
or investment, while all income earned by households must be either consumed or 
saved. Because output is equal to income, it follows that saving must equal invest-
ment. This relationship is expressed as
 
S = I 
[4–3]

T H E  B A S I C  G R O W T H  M O D E L   93
We are now in a position to show how the capital stock changes over time. Two main 
forces determine changes in the capital stock: new investment (which adds to the 
capital stock) and depreciation (which slowly erodes the value of the existing capital 
stock over time). Using the Greek letter delta () to represent the change in the value 
of a variable, we express the change in the capital stock as K, which is determined 
as follows:
 
K = I - (dK) 
[4–4]
In this expression d is the rate of depreciation. The first term (I) indicates that the 
capital stock increases each year by the amount of new investment. The second term 
-(d * K) shows that the capital stock decreases every year because of the deprecia-
tion of existing capital. We assume here that the depreciation rate is a constant, usu-
ally in the range of 2 to 10 percent.
To see how this works, let us continue our earlier example, in which total income 
is $10 billion and saving (and therefore investment) is $2 billion. Say that the value of 
the existing capital stock is $30 billion and the annual rate of depreciation is 3 percent. 
In this example, the capital stock increases by $2 billion because of new investment 
but also decreases by $0.9 billion (3 percent * $30 billion) because of depreciation. 
Equation 4–4 puts together these two effects, calculating the change in the capi-
tal  stock as K = I - (d * K) = $2 billion - (0.03 * $30 billion) = $1.1 billion. 
Thus the capital stock increases from $30 billion to $31.1 billion. This new value of 
the capital stock then is inserted into the production function in equation 4–1, allow-
ing for the calculation of a new level of output, Y.
The fifth and final equation of the model focuses on the supply of labor. To keep 
things simple, we assume that the labor force grows exactly as fast as the total popu-
lation. Over long periods of time, this assumption is fairly accurate. If n is equal to the 
growth rate of both the population and the labor force, then the change in the labor 
force (L) is represented by
 
L = nL 
[4–5]
If the labor force consists of 1 million people and the population (and labor force) is 
growing by 2 percent, the labor force increases annually by 20,000 (1 million * 0.02) 
workers. The labor force now consists of 1.02 million people, a figure that can be 
inserted into the production function for L to calculate the new level of output. (If we 
divide both sides of equation 4–5 by L, we can see directly the rate of growth of the 
labor force, L>L = n.)
These five equations represent the complete model.5 Collectively, they can be 
used to examine how changes in population, saving, and investment initially affect 
5Note that because the model has five equations and five variables (Y, K, L, I, and S) it always can be 
solved. In addition, there are three fixed parameters (d, s, and n), the values of which are assumed to be 
fixed exogenously, or outside the system.

94   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
the capital stock and labor supply and ultimately determine economic output. New 
saving generates additional investment, which adds to the capital stock and allows 
for increased output. New workers add further to the economy’s capacity to increase 
production.
One way these five equations can be simplified slightly is to combine equa-
tions 4–2, 4–3, and 4–4. The aggregate level of saving (in equation 4–2) determines 
the level of investment in equation 4–3, which (together with depreciation) deter-
mines changes in the capital stock in equation 4–4. Combining these three equa-
tions gives us
K = sY - dK 
[4–6]
This equation states that the change in the capital stock (K) is equal to saving (sY) 
minus depreciation (dK). This expression allows us to calculate the change in the 
capital stock and enter the new value directly into the aggregate production function 
in equation 4–1.
THE HARROD-DOMAR GROWTH MODEL
As we have stressed, the aggregate production function (shown earlier as equation 
4–1) is at the heart of every model of economic growth. This function can take many 
different forms, depending on what we believe is the true relationship between the 
factors of production (K and L) and aggregate output. This relationship depends on 
(among other things) the mix of economic activities (for example, agriculture, heavy 
industry, light labor-intensive manufacturing, high-technology processes, services), 
the level of technology, and other factors. Indeed, much of the theoretical debate 
in the academic literature on economic growth is about how to best represent the 
aggregate production process.
THE FIXED-COEFFICIENT PRODUCTION FUNCTION
One special type of a simple production function is shown in Figure 4–1. Output in 
this figure is represented by isoquants, which are combinations of the inputs (labor 
and capital in this case) that produce equal amounts of output. For example, on the 
first (innermost) isoquant, it takes capital (plant and equipment) of $10 million and 
100 workers to produce 100,000 keyboards per year (point a). Alternatively, on the 
second isoquant, $20 million of capital and 200 workers can produce 200,000 key-
boards (point b). Only two isoquants are shown in this diagram, but a nearly infinite 
number of isoquants are possible, each for a different level of output.
The L-shape of the isoquants is characteristic of a particular type of produc-
tion function known as fixed-coefficient production functions. These production 
THE HARROD-DOMAR GROWTH MODEL

T H E  H A R R O D - D O M A R  G R O W T H  M O D E L   95
 functions are based on the assumption that capital and labor need to be used in a 
fixed proportion to each other to produce different levels of output. In Figure 4–1, 
for the first isoquant, the capital–labor ratio is 10 million:100, or 100,000:1. In other 
words, $100,000 in capital must be matched with one worker to produce the given 
output. For the second isoquant, the ratio is the same: $20 million:200, or 100,000:1. 
This constant capital–labor ratio is represented in Figure 4–1 by the slope of the ray 
from the origin through the vertices (a and b) of the isoquants. These vertices rep-
resent the least cost and hence most efficient mix of capital and labor to produce 
a given quantity of output. In the case of fixed coefficients, this mix is the same for 
every quantity of output.
With this kind of production function, if more workers are added without invest-
ing in more capital, output does not rise. Look again at the first isoquant, starting at 
the elbow (with 100 workers and $10 million in capital). If the firm adds more work-
ers (say, increasing to 200 workers) without adding new machines, it moves hor-
izontally to the right along the first isoquant to point c. But at this point, or at any 
other point on this isoquant, the firm still produces just 100,000 keyboards. In this 
kind of production function, new workers need more machines to increase output. 
Adding new workers without machines results in idle workers, with no increase in 
output. Similarly, more machinery without additional workers results in underused 
machines. On each isoquant, the most efficient production point is at the elbow, 
FIGURE 4–1 Isoquants for a Fixed-Coefficient Production Technology
With constant returns to scale, the isoquants will be L-shaped and the production function 
will be the straight line through their minimum-combination points.
100
$10
$20
200
a
c
b
Quantity of labor (person-years)
Quantity of capital (million $)
Isoquant II
(200,000
keyboards)
Isoquant I
(100,000
keyboards)

96   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
where the minimum amounts of capital and labor are used. To use any more of either 
factor without increasing the other is a waste.
The production technology depicted in Figure 4–1 also is drawn with constant 
returns to scale, so if capital is doubled to $20 million and labor is doubled to 200 
workers, output also exactly doubles to 200,000 keyboards per year.6 With this further 
assumption, two more ratios remain constant at any level of output: capital to output 
and labor to output. If keyboards are valued at $50 each, then 100,000 keyboards are 
worth $5 million. In this case, in the first isoquant, $10 million in capital is needed to 
produce $5 million worth of keyboards, so the capital–output ratio is $10 million:
$5 million, or 2:1. In the second isoquant the ratio is the same ($20 million:$10 mil-
lion, or 2:1). Similarly, for each isoquant the labor–output ratio is also a constant, 
in this case equal to 1:50,000, meaning that each worker produces $50,000 worth of 
keyboards, or 1,000 keyboards each.
THE CAPITAL–OUTPUT RATIO AND 
THE HARROD-DOMAR FRAMEWORK
The fixed-coefficient, constant-returns-to-scale production function is the center-
piece of a well-known early model of economic growth that was developed inde-
pendently during the 1940s by economists Roy Harrod of England and Evsey Domar 
of MIT, primarily to explain the relationship between growth and unemployment 
in advanced capitalist societies.7 It ultimately focuses attention on the role of capi-
tal accumulation in the growth process. The Harrod-Domar model has been used 
extensively (perhaps even overused) in developing countries to examine the relation-
ship between growth and capital requirements. The model is based on the real-world 
observation that some labor is unemployed and proceeds on the basis that capital is 
the binding constraint on production and growth. In the model, the production func-
tion has a very precise form, in which output is assumed to be a linear function of 
capital (and only capital). As usual, the model begins by specifying the level of out-
put, which we later modify to explore changes in output, or economic growth. The 
production function is specified as follows:
 
Y = 1>v * K        or       Y = K>v 
[4–7]
where v is a constant. In this equation, the capital stock is multiplied by the fixed 
number 1>v to calculate aggregate production. If v = 3 and a firm has $30 million 
in capital, its annual output would be $10 million. It is difficult to imagine a simpler 
6In a constant-returns-to-scale production function, if we multiply both capital and labor by any num-
ber, w, output multiplies by the same number. In other words, the production function has the following 
property: wY = F(wK, wL).
7Roy F. Harrod, “An Essay in Dynamic Theory,” Economic Journal (1939), 14–33; Evsey Domar, “Capital 
Expansion, Rate of Growth, and Employment,” Econometrica (1946), 137–47; and Domar, “Expansion and 
Employment,” American Economic Review 37 (1947), 34–55.

T H E  H A R R O D - D O M A R  G R O W T H  M O D E L   97
production function. The constant v turns out to be the capital–output ratio because, 
by rearranging the terms in equation 4–7, we find
 
v = K>Y 
[4–8]
The capital–output ratio is a very important parameter in this model, so it is worth 
dwelling for a moment on its meaning. This ratio essentially is a measure of the pro-
ductivity of capital or investment. In the earlier example in Figure 4–1, it took $10 mil-
lion in investment in a new plant and new equipment to produce $5 million worth of 
keyboards, implying a capital-output ratio of 2:1 (or just 2). A larger v implies that more 
capital is needed to produce the same amount of output. So, if v were 4 instead, then 
$20 million in investment would be needed to produce $5 million worth of keyboards.
The capital–output ratio provides an indication of the capital intensity of the pro-
duction process. In the basic growth model, this ratio varies across countries for two 
reasons: either the countries use different technologies to produce the same goods 
or they produce a different mix of goods. Where farmers produce maize using trac-
tors, the capital–output ratio will be much higher than in countries where farmers 
rely on a large number of workers using hoes and other hand tools. In countries that 
produce a larger share of capital-intensive products (that is, those that require rela-
tively more machinery, such as automobiles, petrochemicals, and steel), v is higher 
than in countries producing more labor-intensive products (such as textiles, basic 
agriculture, and foot wear). In practice, as economists move from the v of the model 
to actually measuring it in the real world, the observed capital–output ratio can also 
vary for a third reason: differences in efficiency. A larger measured v can indicate 
less-efficient production when capital is not being used as productively as possible. A 
factory with lots of idle machinery and poorly organized production processes has a 
higher capital–output ratio than a more-efficiently managed factory.
Economists often calculate the incremental capital–output ratio (ICOR) to 
determine the impact on output of additional (or incremental) capital. The ICOR 
measures the productivity of additional capital, whereas the (average) capital–output 
ratio refers to the relationship between a country’s total stock of capital and its total 
national product. In the Harrod-Domar model, because the capital–output ratio is 
assumed to remain constant, the average capital–output ratio is equal to the incre-
mental capital–output ratio, so the ICOR = v.
So far, we have been discussing total output, not growth in output. The produc-
tion function in equation 4–7 easily can be converted to relate changes in output to 
changes in the capital stock:
 
Y = K>v 
[4–9]
The growth rate of output, g, is simply the increment in output divided by the total 
amount of output, Y>Y. If we divide both sides of equation 4–9 by Y, then
 
g = Y>Y = K>Yv 
[4–10]

98   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
Finally, from equation 4–6, we know that the change in the capital stock K is equal 
to saving minus the depreciation of capital (K = sY - dK). Substituting the 
 right-hand side of equation 4–6 into the term for K in equation 4–10 and simplify-
ing8 leads to the basic Harrod-Domar relationship for an economy:
 
g = (s>v) - d 
[4–11]
Underlying this equation is the view that capital created by investment is the main 
determinant of growth in output and that saving makes investment possible.9 It rivets 
attention on two keys to the growth process: saving (s) and the productivity of capital 
(v). The message from this model is clear: Save more and make productive invest-
ments, and your economy will grow.
Economic analysts can use this framework either to predict growth or to calculate 
the amount of saving required to achieve a target growth rate. The first step is to try 
to estimate the incremental capital–output ratio (v) and depreciation rate (d). With a 
given saving rate, predicting the growth rate is straightforward. If the saving (or invest-
ment) rate is 24 percent, the ICOR is 3, and the depreciation rate is 5 percent, then the 
economy can be expected to grow by 3 percent (because 0.24>3 - 0.05 = 0.03).
How does this model work in practice? Consider Indonesia, which from 2002 
to 2007 had an investment rate of about 30 percent and recorded a GDP growth just 
under 5.5 percent per year. Assuming a depreciation rate of 5 percent, the implied 
ICOR was approximately v = 2.86.10 Would these figures have helped the Indo-
nesian government predict the 2007–08 growth rate? In 2008, the investment rate 
was 29 percent, so the Harrod-Domar model would have predicted growth of 
5.1 percent (g = 0.29>2.86 - 0.05). The actual growth rate in 2007–08 was 6.0 per-
cent, within sight of the prediction but not highly accurate.
STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF THE 
HARROD-DOMAR FRAMEWORK
The basic strength of the Harrod-Domar model is its simplicity. The data requirements 
are small, and the equation is easy to use and to estimate. And, as we saw with the 
example of Indonesia, the model can be somewhat accurate from one year to the next. 
Generally speaking, in the absence of severe economic shocks (such as a drought, a 
financial crisis, or large changes in export or import prices), the model can do a reason-
able job of estimating expected growth rates in most countries over very short periods 
of time (a few years). Another strength is its focus on the key role of saving. As discussed 
8Substituting equation 4–6 into 4–10 leads to g = (sY - dK)>Y * 1>v, which can be simplified to 
g = (s - d * K>Y) * 1>v. Since K>Y = v, we have g = (s - dv) * 1>v, which leads to g = s>v - d.
9For an important early contribution to the discussion of the importance of capital accumulation to the 
growth process, see Joan Robinson, The Accumulation of Capital (London: Macmillan, 1956).
10Because g = s>v - d, then v = s>(g + d). For Indonesia between 2002 and 2007, v = 0.30>(0.055 +
0.05) = 2.86.

T H E  H A R R O D - D O M A R  G R O W T H  M O D E L   99
in Chapter 3, individual decisions about how much income to save and consume 
are central to the growth process. People prefer to consume sooner rather than later, 
but the more that is consumed, the less that can be saved to finance investment. The 
Harrod-Domar model makes it clear that saving is crucial for income to grow over time.
The model, however, has some major weaknesses. One follows directly from the 
strong focus on saving. Although saving is necessary for growth, the simple form of 
the model implies that it is also sufficient, which it is not. As pointed out in Chap-
ter 3, the investments financed by saving actually have to pay off with higher income 
in the future, and not all investments do so. Poor investment decisions, changing 
government policies, volatile world prices, or simply bad luck can alter the impact of 
new investment on output and growth. Sustained growth depends both on generat-
ing new investment and ensuring that investments are productive over time. In this 
vein, the allocation of resources across different sectors and firms can be an impor-
tant determinant of output and growth. Because (for simplicity) the Harrod-Domar 
assumes only one sector, it leaves out these important allocation issues.
Perhaps the most important limitations in the model stem from the rigid 
assumptions of fixed capital-to-labor, capital-to-output, and labor-to-output ratios, 
which imply very little flexibility in the economy over time. To keep these ratios 
constant, capital, labor, and output must all grow at exactly the same rate, which is 
highly unlikely to happen in real economies. To see why these growth rates must all 
be the same, consider the growth rate of capital. If the capital stock grew any faster or 
slower than output at rate g, the capital–output ratio would change. Thus the capi-
tal stock must grow at g to keep the capital–output ratio constant over time. With 
respect to labor, in our original five-equation model, we stipulated (in equation 4–5) 
that the labor force would grow at exactly the same pace as the population at rate n. 
 Therefore, the only way that the capital stock and the labor force can grow at the 
same rate is if n happens to be equal to g. This happens only when n = g = s>v - d, 
and there is no particular reason to believe the population will grow at that rate.
In this model, the economy remains in equilibrium with full employment of 
the labor force and the capital stock only under the very special circumstances that 
labor, capital, and output all grow at the rate g. On the one hand, if n is larger than g, 
the labor force grows faster than the capital stock. In essence, the saving rate is not 
high enough to support investment in new machinery sufficient to employ all new 
workers. A growing number of workers do not have jobs and unemployment rises 
indefinitely. On the other hand, if g (or s>v - d) is larger than n, the capital stock 
grows faster than the workforce. There are not enough workers for all the available 
machines, and capital becomes idle. The actual growth rate of the economy no lon-
ger is g, as the model stipulates, but slows to n, with output constrained by the num-
ber of available workers.
So, unless s>v - d (or g) is exactly equal to n, either labor or capital is not fully 
employed and the economy is not in a stable equilibrium. This characteristic of the 
Harrod-Domar model has come to be known as the knife-edge problem. As long as 

100   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
g = n, the economy remains in equilibrium, but as soon as either the capital stock 
or the labor force grows faster than the other, the economy falls off the edge with con-
tinuously growing unemployment of either capital or labor.
The rigid assumptions of fixed capital–output, labor–output, and capital–labor 
ratios may be reasonably accurate for short periods of time or in very special cir-
cumstances but almost always are inaccurate over time as an economy evolves and 
develops. Each of these varies among countries and, for a single country, over time. 
Consider the incremental capital–output ratio. The productivity of capital can change 
in response to policy changes, which in turn affects v. Moreover, the capital inten-
sity of the production process can and usually does change over time. A poor country 
with a low saving rate and surplus labor (unemployed and underemployed workers) 
can achieve higher growth rates by utilizing as much labor as possible and thus rela-
tively less capital. For example, a country relying heavily on labor-intensive agricul-
tural production will record a low v. As economies grow and per capita income rises, 
the labor surplus diminishes and economies shift gradually toward more capital-
intensive production. As a result, the ICOR shifts upward. Thus a higher v may not 
necessarily imply inefficiency or slower growth. ICORs can also shift through market 
mechanisms, as prices of labor and capital change in response to changes in supplies. 
As growth takes place, saving tends to become relatively more abundant and hence 
the price of capital falls while employment and wages rise. Therefore, all producers 
increasingly economize on labor and use more capital and the ICOR tends to rise.
Consider again the example of Indonesia. The ICOR changed from approxi-
mately 2.4 during the 1980s, to 4.1 during the 1990s, to 3.6 during 2000–09, reflect-
ing a trend toward more capital-intensive production processes. To continue to use 
the 1980s ICOR in 2009 would have been very misleading and betrayed a significant 
misunderstanding of the growth process. The structure of the economy had changed 
substantially during that time period and, with it, the ICOR. Thailand provides a sim-
ilar example, as described in Box 4–1.
As a result of these rigidities, the Harrod-Domar framework tends to become 
increasingly inaccurate over longer periods of time as the actual ICOR changes and, 
with it, the capital–labor ratio. In a world with fixed-coefficient production functions, 
little room is left for a factory manager to increase output by hiring one more worker 
without buying a machine to go with the worker or to purchase more machines for 
the current workforce to use. The fixed-proportion production function does not 
allow for any substitution between capital and labor in the production process. In the 
real world, of course, at least some substitution between labor and capital is possible 
in most production processes. As we see in the next section, adding this feature to the 
model allows for a much richer exploration of the growth process.
A final weakness of the Harrod-Domar model is the absence of any role for pro-
ductivity growth—the ability to produce increasing quantities of output per unit of 
input. In Figure 4–1, increased factor productivity can be represented by an inward 
shift of each isoquant toward the origin, implying that less labor and capital would 

T H E  H A R R O D - D O M A R  G R O W T H  M O D E L   101
BOX 4–1 ECONOMIC GROWTH IN THAILAND
In the 1960s, Thailand’s agrarian economy depended heavily on rice, maize, rub-
ber, and other agricultural products. About three-quarters of the Thai population 
derived its income from agricultural activities. Gross domestic product (GDP) per 
capita in 1960 (measured in 2005 international dollars) was around $1,200—less
than one-tenth the average income in the United States. Life expectancy was 
53 years and the infant mortality rate was 103 per 1,000 births. Few observers
expected Thailand to develop rapidly.
However, since the mid-1960s, the Thai economy has grown rapidly (if not
always steadily), benefiting from relatively sound economic management and a
favorable external environment. The government regularly achieved surpluses on
the current account of its budget and used these funds (plus modest inflows of
foreign assistance) to finance investments in rural roads, irrigation, power, tele-
communications, and other basic infrastructure. At least until the mid-1990s, 
the government’s fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate policies kept the macro-
economy relatively stable with fairly low inflation, despite the turbulent period of
world oil price shocks in the 1970s and 1980s. Beginning in the 1970s, the
government began to remove trade restrictions and promote the production of 
labor-intensive manufactured exports. These products found a ready market in
the booming Japanese economy of the 1980s and provided a growing number 
of jobs for Thai workers.
Thailand’s ability to make investments and deepen its capital stock
depended on its capacity to save. The country’s saving rate averaged about
20 percent in the 1960s, already high for developing countries, and increased 
steadily over time to an average of 35 percent in the 1990s, falling to about 
32 percent during the 2000s. These high saving rates, combined with rela-
tively prudent economic policies, supported very rapid economic growth and
development.
Thailand’s development experience has been far from completely smooth,
however. In mid-1997, a major financial crisis erupted. Huge short-term offshore
borrowing combined with a fixed exchange rate and weak financial institutions 
led to a collapse of a real estate bubble, rapid capital flight, a substantial depre-
ciation of the Thai baht, and a deep recession (see Chapter 13). In some ways,
Thailand had become the victim of its own success, with its rapid growth attract-
ing significant numbers of investors looking to gain quick profits, who rapidly 
fled once the bubble began to collapse. After two years of negative growth (with
GDP falling 10 percent in 1998), the economy began to recover and growth
rebounded to 3.9 percent between 1999 and 2007.

102   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
Over the longer period between 1960 and 2007, per capita growth averaged
4.5 percent, so that the average income in Thailand is now more than eight times
higher than it was in 1960. By 2009, life expectancy grew to 69 years, infant 
mortality fell to 12 per thousand, and adult literacy reached 93 percent. During
this period, the structure of the economy changed significantly. By 2009, manu-
facturing accounted for 34 percent of GDP, up from just 14 percent in 1965, 
while the share of agricultural production dropped commensurately. The com-
position of exports shifted away from rice, maize, and other agricultural com-
modities toward labor-intensive manufactured products, which now account for a
large majority of all exports. As the Harrod-Domar model predicts, Thailand’s high
saving rate and resulting capital accumulation was accompanied by a dramatic
increase in output (and income) per capita. Contrary to the Harrod-Domar model, 
however, the ICOR did not remain constant. As the stock of capital grew and the 
economy shifted toward more capital-intensive production techniques, the ICOR 
increased from 2.6 in the 1970s to nearly 5 by the early 2000s. The rising ICOR 
indicated that, as the Thai economy expanded and the level of capital per worker
increased, an ever-larger increment of new capital was required to bring about a
given increase in total output.
be needed to produce the same amount of output. The simplest way to capture this 
in the Harrod-Domar framework is to introduce a smaller ICOR, but of course, this 
would contradict the idea of a constant ICOR.
Despite these weaknesses, the Harrod-Domar model is still used to a surpris-
ingly wide extent. Economist William Easterly documented how the World Bank and 
other institutions use the model to calculate “financing gaps” between the amount of 
available saving and the amount of investment supposedly needed to achieve a target 
growth rate.11 He shows how simplistic and sometimes careless use of the model can 
lead to weak analysis and faulty conclusions. In essence, analysts enamored by the sim-
plicity of the model tend to overlook its shortcomings when applying it to the real world.
The Harrod-Domar model provides some useful insights but does not take us 
very far. The fixed-coefficient assumption provides the model with very little flexibil-
ity and does not capture the ability of real world firms to change the mix of inputs in 
the  production process. The model can be reasonably accurate from one year to the 
next (in the absence of shocks), and it rightly focuses attention on the importance 
11See William Easterly, “Aid for Investment,” The Elusive Quest for Growth (Cambridge: MIT Press, 
2001), chap. 2; and Easterly, “The Ghost of the Financing Gap: Testing the Growth Model of the Interna-
tional Financial Institutions,” Journal of Development Economics 60, no. 2 (December 1999), 423–38.

T H E  S O L O W  ( N E O C L A S S I C A L )  G R O W T H  M O D E L   103
of saving. But it is quite inaccurate for most countries over longer periods of time 
and implies that saving is sufficient for growth, although it is not. Indeed, in the late 
1950s, Domar expressed strong doubts about his own model, pointing out that it was 
originally designed to explore employment issues in advanced economies rather 
than growth per se and was too rigid to be useful for explaining long-term growth.12
Instead, he endorsed the new growth model of Robert Solow, to which we now turn 
our attention.
THE SOLOW (NEOCLASSICAL) GROWTH MODEL
THE NEOCLASSICAL PRODUCTION FUNCTION
In 1956, MIT-economist Robert Solow introduced a new model of economic growth 
that was a big step forward from the Harrod-Domar framework.13 Solow recognized 
the problems that arose from the rigid production function in the Harrod-Domar 
model. Solow’s answer was to drop the fixed-coefficients production function and 
replace it with a neoclassical production function that allows for more flexibility 
and substitution between the factors of production. In the Solow model, the capital–
output and capital–labor ratios no longer are fixed but vary, depending on the relative 
endowments of capital and labor in the economy and the production process. Like 
the Harrod-Domar model, the Solow model was developed to analyze industrialized 
economies, but it has been used extensively to explore economic growth in all coun-
tries around the world, including developing countries. The Solow model has been 
enormously influential and remains at the core of most theories of economic growth 
in developing countries.
The isoquants that underlie the neoclassical production function are shown 
in Figure 4–2. Note that the isoquants are curved rather than L-shaped as in the 
fixed-coefficient model. In this figure, at point a, $10 million of capital and 100 
workers combine to produce 100,000 keyboards, which would be valued at $5 mil-
lion (because, as stated earlier, keyboards are priced at $50 each). Starting from 
this point, output could be expanded in any of three ways. If the firm’s managers 
decided to expand at constant factor proportions and move to point b on isoquant II 
to  produce 200,000 keyboards, the situation would be identical to the fixed propor-
12Evsey Domar, Essays in the Theory of Economic Growth (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1957).
13The two classic references of Solow’s work are his “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic 
Growth” and “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,” Review of Economics and Sta-
tistics 39 (August 1957), 312–20. For an excellent and very thorough undergraduate exposition of the Solow 
and other models of economic growth, see Charles I. Jones, Introduction to Economic Growth (New York: 
W. W. Norton and Company, 2001). In 1987, Solow was awarded the Nobel Prize in economics, primarily 
for his work on growth theory.
THE SOLOW (NEOCLASSICAL) GROWTH MODEL

104   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
tions case of Figure 4–1. The capital–output ratio at both points a and b would be 2:1, 
as it was before ($10 million of capital produces $5 million of keyboards at point a, 
and $20 million of capital produces $10 million of keyboards at point b). Note that 
the Solow model retains from the Harrod-Domar model the assumption of constant 
returns to scale, so that a doubling of labor and capital leads to a doubling of output. 
But by dropping the fixed-coefficients assumption, production of 200,000 keyboards 
could be achieved by using different combinations of capital and labor. For example, 
the firm could use more labor and less capital (a more labor-intensive method), such 
as at point c on isoquant II. In that case, the capital–output ratio falls to 1.8:1 ($18 
million in capital to produce $10 million in keyboards).
Alternatively, the firm could choose a more capital-intensive method, such as at 
point d on isoquant II, where the capital–output ratio would rise to 2.2:1 ($22 million 
in capital to produce $10 million in keyboards). The kinds of tools that policy makers 
use to try to decrease or increase the capital–output ratio are discussed in depth in 
several chapters later in this text.
THE BASIC EQUATIONS OF THE SOLOW MODEL
The Solow model is understood most easily by expressing all the key variables in 
per-worker terms (for example, output per worker and capital per worker). To do 
so, we divide both sides of the production function in equation 4–1 by L, so that it 
takes the form
FIGURE 4–2 Isoquants for a Neoclassical Production Technology
Instead of requiring fixed factor proportions, as in Figure 4–1, output can be achieved with 
varying combinations of labor and capital. This is called a neoclassical production function. 
Note that the isoquants are curved rather than L-shaped.
100
$10
$18
$20
$22
200
a
c
b
d
Quantity of labor (person-years)
Quantity of capital (million $)
Isoquant II
(200,000
keyboards)
Isoquant I
(100,000
keyboards)

T H E  S O L O W  ( N E O C L A S S I C A L )  G R O W T H  M O D E L   105
 
Y>L = F(K>L, 1) 
[4–12]
The equation shows that output per worker is a function of capital per worker.14 If we 
use lower-case letters to represent quantities in per-worker terms, then y is output 
per worker (that is, y = Y>L) and k is capital per worker (k = K>L). This gives us the 
first equation of the Solow model, in which the production function can be written 
simply as
 
y = f (k) 
[4–13]
Solow’s model assumes a production function with the familiar property of dimin-
ishing returns to capital. With a fixed labor supply, giving workers an initial amount 
of machinery to work with results in large gains in output. But as these workers are 
given more and more machinery, the addition to output from each new machine gets 
smaller and smaller. An aggregate production function with this property is shown 
in Figure 4–3. The horizontal axis represents capital per worker (k), and the vertical 
axis shows output per worker (y). The slope of the curve declines as the capital stock 
increases, reflecting the assumption of the diminishing marginal product of  capital. 
14We can divide both sides by L because the Solow model (like the Harrod-Domar model) assumes 
the production function exhibits constant returns to scale and has the property that wY = F(wK, wL). To 
express the Solow model in per-worker terms, we let w = 1>L.
FIGURE 4–3 The Production Function in the Solow Growth Model
The neoclassical production function in the Solow model displays diminishing returns to 
capital so that each additional increment in capital per worker (k) is associated with smaller 
increases in output per worker (y).
k
y
)k(f
=
y

106   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
Each movement to the right on the horizontal axis yields a smaller and smaller 
increase in output per worker. (By comparison, the fixed-coefficient production func-
tion assumed in the Harrod-Domar model would be a straight line drawn through 
the origin.)
The first equation of the Solow model tells us that capital per worker is funda-
mental to the growth process. In turn, the second equation focuses on the determi-
nants of changes in capital per worker. This second equation can be derived from 
equation 4–615 and shows that capital accumulation depends on saving, the growth 
rate of the labor force, and depreciation:
 
k = sy - (n + d)k 
[4–14]
This is a very important equation, so we should understand exactly what it means. 
It states that the change in capital per worker (k) is determined by three things:
• The k is positively related to saving per worker. Because s is the saving rate 
and y is income (or output) per worker, the term sy is equal to saving per 
worker. As saving per worker increases, so does investment per worker, and 
the capital stock per worker (k) grows.
• The k is negatively related to population growth. This is shown by the 
term -nk. Each year, because of growth in the population and labor force, 
there are nL new workers. If there were no new investment, the increase in 
the labor force would mean that capital per worker (k) falls. Equation 4–14 
states that capital per worker falls by exactly nk.
• Depreciation erodes the capital stock. Each year, the amount of capital per 
worker falls by the amount -dk simply because of depreciation.
Therefore, saving (and investment) adds to capital per worker, whereas labor 
force growth and depreciation reduce capital per worker. When saving per capita, sy, 
15To derive equation 4–14, we begin by dividing both sides of equation 4–6 by K so that
K>K = sY>K - d
We then focus on the capital per worker ratio, k = K>L. The growth rate of k is equal to the growth rate 
of K minus the growth rate of L:
k>k = K>K - L>L
With a little rearranging of terms, this equation can be written as K>K = k>k + L>L. We earlier 
assumed that both the population and the labor force were growing at rate n, so L>L = n. By substitu-
tion we obtain
K>K = k>k + n
Note that in both the first equation of this footnote and the equation just given, the left-hand side is 
equal to K>K. This implies that the right-hand sides of these two equations are equal to each other, as 
follows:
k>k + n = sY>K - d
By subtracting n from both sides and multiplying through by k, we find that
k = sy - nk - dk     or    k = sy - (n + d)k

T H E  S O L O W  ( N E O C L A S S I C A L )  G R O W T H  M O D E L   107
is larger than the amount of new capital needed to compensate for labor force growth 
and depreciation, (n + d)k, then k is a positive number. This implies that capital 
per worker k increases.
The process through which the economy increases the amount of capital per 
worker, k, is called capital deepening. Economies in which workers have access to 
more machines, computers, trucks, and other equipment have a deeper capital base 
than economies with less machinery, and these economies are able to produce more 
output per worker.
In some economies, however, the amount of saving is just enough to provide 
the same amount of capital to new workers and compensate for depreciation. An 
increase in the capital stock that just keeps pace with the expanding labor force 
and depreciation is called capital widening (referring to a widening of both the 
total amount of capital and the size of the workforce). Capital widening occurs 
when sy is exactly equal to (n + d)k, implying no change in k. Using this termi-
nology, equation 4–14 can be restated as saying that capital deepening (k) is 
equal to saving per worker (sy) minus the amount needed for capital widening 
[(n + d)k].
A country with a high saving rate can easily deepen its capital base and rapidly 
expand the amount of capital per worker, thus providing the basis for growth in out-
put. In Singapore, for example, where the saving rate has averaged more than 40 per-
cent since the early 1980s, it is not difficult to provide capital to the growing labor 
force and make up for depreciation and still have plenty left over to supply existing 
workers with additional capital. By contrast, Kenya, with a saving rate of about 15 per-
cent, has much less saving to spare for capital deepening after providing machines to 
new workers and making up for depreciation. As a result, capital per worker does not 
grow as quickly, and neither does output (or income) per worker. Partly because of 
this large difference in saving rates, output per person in Singapore grew by an aver-
age of 4.9 percent per year between 1960 and 2009, while Kenya’s growth averaged 
about 0.34 percent.
We can summarize the two basic equations of the Solow model as follows. The 
first [y = f (k)] simply states that output per worker (or income per capita) depends 
on the amount of capital per worker. The second equation, k = sy - (n + d)k, 
says that change in capital per worker depends on saving, the population growth 
rate, and depreciation. Thus, as in the Harrod-Domar model, saving plays a central 
role in the Solow model. However, the relationship between saving and growth is not 
linear because of diminishing returns to capital in the production function. In addi-
tion, the Solow model introduces a role for the population growth rate and allows for 
substitution between capital and labor in the growth process.
Now that we are equipped with the basic model, we can proceed to analyze the 
effects of changes in the saving rate, population growth, and depreciation on eco-
nomic output and economic growth. This is accomplished most easily by examining 
the model in graphical form.

108   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
THE SOLOW DIAGRAM
The diagram of the Solow model consists of three curves, shown in Figure 4–4. The 
first is the production function y = f (k), given by equation 4–13. The second is a 
saving function, which is derived directly from the production function. The new 
curve shows saving per capita, sy, calculated by multiplying both sides of equation 
4–13 by the saving rate, so that sy = s * f (k). Because saving is assumed to be a 
fixed fraction of income (with s between 0 and 1), the saving function has the same 
shape as the production function but is shifted downward by the factor s. The third 
curve is the line (n + d)k, which is a straight line through the origin with the slope 
(n + d). This line represents the amount of new capital needed as a result of 
growth in the labor force and depreciation just to keep capital per worker (k) con-
stant. Note that the second and third curves are representations of the two right-
hand terms of equation 4–14.
The second and third curves intersect at point A, where k = k0. (Note that, on 
the production function above the sy curve, k = k0 corresponds to a point directly 
above A where y = y0 on the vertical axis.) At point A, sy is exactly equal to (n + d)k, 
so capital per worker does not change and k remains constant. At other points along 
the horizontal axis, the vertical difference between the sy curve and the (n + d)k line 
determines the change in capital per worker. To the left of point A (say, where k = k1 
FIGURE 4–4 The Basic Solow Growth Model Diagram
In the basic Solow diagram, point A is the only place where the amount of new saving, sy, is 
exactly equal to the amount of new capital needed to compensate for growth in the workforce and 
depreciation (n + d)k. Point A is the steady state level of capital per worker and output per worker.
k
)k(f
=
y
y2
k1
k0
k2
y0
y1
y
A
k
n
d )
+
(
sy

T H E  S O L O W  ( N E O C L A S S I C A L )  G R O W T H  M O D E L   109
and on the production function y = y1), the amount of saving in the economy per 
person (sy) is larger than the amount of saving needed to compensate for new work-
ers and depreciation [(n + d)k]. As a result, the amount of capital per person (k) 
grows (capital deepening) and the economy shifts to the right along the horizontal 
axis. The economy continues to shift to the right as long as the sy curve is above the 
(n + d)k curve, until eventually the economy reaches an equilibrium at point A. In 
terms of the production function, the shift to the right implies an increase in out-
put per worker, y (or income per capita), from y1 to y0. To the right of point A (say, 
where k = k2 and y = y2), saving per capita is smaller than the amount needed for 
new workers and depreciation, so capital per worker falls and the economy shifts to 
the left along the horizontal axis. Once again, this shift continues until the economy 
reaches point A. The shift to the left corresponds to a decline in output per worker 
from y2 to y0.
Point A is the only place where the amount of new saving, sy, is exactly equal 
to the amount of new capital needed for growth in the workforce and depreciation. 
Therefore, at this point, the amount of capital per worker, k, remains constant. Saving 
per worker (on the vertical axis of the saving function) also remains constant, as does 
output per worker (or income per capita) on the production function, with y = y0. 
As a result, point A is called the steady state of the Solow model. Output per capita 
at the steady state (y0) is alternatively referred to as the steady state, long run, or 
potential level of output per worker.
It is very important to note, however, that all the values that remain constant are 
expressed as per worker. Although output per worker is constant, total output con-
tinues to grow at rate n, the same rate the population and workforce grow. In other 
words, at the steady state GDP (Y) grows at the rate n, but GDP per capita (y) is con-
stant (average income remains unchanged). Similarly, although capital per worker 
and saving per worker are constant at point A, total capital and total saving grow.
CHANGES IN THE SAVING RATE AND POPULATION 
GROWTH RATE IN THE SOLOW MODEL
Both the Solow and Harrod–Domar models put saving (and investment) at the core 
of the growth process. In the Harrod-Domar model, an increase in the saving rate 
translates directly (and linearly) into an increase in aggregate output. What is the 
impact of a higher saving rate in the Solow model?
As shown in Figure 4–5, increasing the saving rate from s to s shifts the saving 
function sy up to sy, without shifting either the production function or the capital 
widening line (n + d)k. The increase in the saving rate means that saving per worker 
(and investment per worker) now is greater than (n + d)k, so k gradually increases. 
The economy shifts to a new long-run equilibrium at point B. In the process, capital 
per worker increases from k0 to k3 and output per worker increases from y0 to y3. 
The aggregate economy initially grows at a rate faster than its steady-state growth 

110   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
FIGURE 4–5 An Increase in the Saving Rate in the Solow Model
An increase in the saving rate from s to s results in an upward shift in the capital deepening 
curve, so that capital per worker increases from k0to k3.
A
k
B
sy
s'y
y
)k(f
=
y
k3
k0
y3
y0
k
n
d )
+
(
rate of n until it reaches point B, where the long-run growth rate reverts to n. Thus, 
the higher saving rate leads to more investment, a permanently higher stock of capi-
tal per worker, and a permanently higher level of income (or output) per worker. In 
other words, the Solow model predicts that economies that save more have higher 
standards of living than those that save less. (The increase in per capita income, how-
ever, is smaller than for a similar increase in s in the Harrod-Domar model because 
the Solow model has diminishing returns in production.) Higher saving also leads to 
a temporary increase in the economic growth rate as the steady state shifts from A to 
B. However, the increase in the saving rate does not result in a permanent increase in 
the long-run rate of output growth, which remains at n.
The Solow diagram also can be used to evaluate the impact of a change in the 
population (or labor force) growth rate. An increase in the population growth rate 
from n to n rotates the capital widening line to the left from (n + d)k to (n + d)k, 
as shown in Figure 4–6. The production and saving functions do not change. Because 
there are more workers, savings per worker (sy) becomes smaller and no longer is 
large enough to keep capital per worker constant. Therefore, k begins to decline, and 
the economy moves to a new steady state, C. More workers also means that capital 
per worker declines from k0to k4and saving per worker falls from sy0 to sy4. Output 
per worker (or income per capita) also declines, from y0 to y4. Thus, an increase in 
the population growth rate leads to lower average income in the Solow model. Note, 
however, that the new steady-state growth rate of the entire economy has increased 

T H E  S O L O W  ( N E O C L A S S I C A L )  G R O W T H  M O D E L   111
from n to n at point C. In other words, with a higher population growth rate, Y needs 
to grow faster to keep y constant.16 By contrast, a reduction in the population growth 
rate rotates the (n + d)k line to the right and leads to a process of capital deepening, 
with an increase in both k and in the steady-state level of income per worker, y. How-
ever, the relationship between population growth and economic growth is not quite 
so simple, as described in Box 4–2.
The Solow growth model (as described to this point) suggests that growth rates 
differ across countries for two main reasons:
• Two countries with the same current level of income may experience 
different growth rates if one has a higher steady-state level of income than 
the other. To the extent that two countries with the same current level 
of income have different aggregate production functions, saving rates, 
population growth rates, or rates of change in productivity (described later), 
their steady-state income levels will differ and so will their growth rates 
during the transition to their respective steady states.
• Two countries with the same long-run steady-state level of income may 
have different growth rates if they are in different points in the transition to 
16A similar exercise can be used to determine the impact of an increase in the depreciation rate, d. Such 
an increase results in a reduction in k and y to a lower steady-state income per capita. The subtle differ-
ence between an increase in n and an increase in d is that the latter case does not lead to a change in the 
long-run growth rate of Y, which remains equal to n.
FIGURE 4–6 Changes in the Population Growth Rate in the Solow Model
An increase in the rate of population growth from n to n causes the capital widening curve to 
rotate to the left. Equilibrium capital per worker drops from k0to k4.
k
sy
y
A
C
)k(f
=
y
k0
k4
y0
y4
sy0
sy4
k
n
d )
+
(
k
n'
d )
+
(

112   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
BOX 4–2 POPULATION GROWTH AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
The inverse correlation between population growth and economic growth sug-
gested by the Solow model has a lot of intuitive appeal. Countries such as Belize,
Burkina Faso, Liberia, Niger, and Yemen have some of the world’s fastest rates
of population growth. They are also among some of the poorest nations in the
world. But closer inspection of the Solow model reveals other predictions about
how population growth may affect economic growth, and a further examination
of empirical trends suggests a much more complex relationship.
Figure 4–6 illustrates that, in the Solow model, an increase in the rate of pop-
ulation growth lowers the steady-state level of income, y. However,
y
y refers to
y
output per worker, whereas the more common measure of aggregate economic
r
welfare is output per person, y *. These two measures of output, of course, are
related to one another, as follows:
y * = y * (N/
N Pop)
p
where N equals the number of workers, and
N
Pop is the total population. Differ-
p
ences in the level of output per capita, therefore, depend on both the amount 
of output per worker and the ratio of workers to total population. Growth in per
capita output, similarly, depends on growth in output per worker and the growth 
in the worker-to-population ratio.
The Solow model suggests that more rapid population growth reduces capi-
tal deepening and hence reduces growth in output per worker. But the effect 
of population growth on the ratio of workers to total population is more com-
plex. It depends on the age structure of the population. Because of rapid popula-
tion growth, most developing countries have a young age structure, with a larger
share of younger people than is the case in developed nations that have grow-
ing populations of more elderly people. As a result of previously higher popula-
tion growth rates, many developing nations today are experiencing an increase in
their ratio of workers to total population. This positive effect of a changing age
structure on per capita incomes, sometimes referred to as a demographic gift,
can play a positive and large role in determining economic growth rates.
The impact of population growth on economic growth goes beyond its effects
on capital widening and a nation’s age structure. In the Solow model, saving and
technological change are considered exogenous. But population growth can
affect these parameters as well. The net effect of population growth on eco-
nomic growth is therefore an empirical matter. Econometric investigations of the
impact of population growth on economic growth generally show no systematic
relationship (see Chapter 7). Population growth influences many aspects of eco-
nomic growth and development, not only those described by the Solow model.

T H E  S O L O W  ( N E O C L A S S I C A L )  G R O W T H  M O D E L   113
the steady state. For example, consider two countries that are identical in 
every way except that one has a higher saving rate than the other and, so, 
initially has a higher steady-state level of income. At the steady states, the 
country with the higher saving rate has a higher level of output per worker, 
but both are growing at the rate n. If the country with the lower saving rate 
suddenly increases its saving to match the other country, its growth rate will 
be higher than the other country until it catches up at the new steady state. 
Thus, even though everything is identical in the two countries, their growth 
rates may differ during the transition to the steady state, which may take 
many years.
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE IN THE SOLOW MODEL
The Solow model, as described to this point, is a powerful tool for analyzing the inter-
relationships between saving, investment, population growth, output, and economic 
growth. However, the unsettling conclusion of the basic model is that, once the econ-
omy reaches its long-run potential level of income, economic growth simply matches 
population growth, with no chance for sustained increases in average income. How 
can the model explain the historical fact reported in Chapter 2 that many of the 
world’s countries have seen steady growth in average incomes since 1820? Solow’s 
answer was technological change.17 According to this idea, a key reason why France, 
Germany, the United Kingdom, the United States, and other high-income countries 
have been able to sustain growth in per capita income over very long periods of time 
is that technological progress has allowed output per worker to continue to grow.
Technological progress is a key driver, but not the only driver, of productivity 
growth. Historically, most technological innovation has originated in today’s devel-
oped countries, where technological progress has played a central role in explaining 
productivity growth. Technological progress is also important for today’s developing 
countries; yet, most such progress in developing countries is adopted and adapted 
from developed countries. In developing countries, the productivity-enhancing 
effects of technological innovation have played a smaller role in driving productiv-
ity growth than in developed countries. In the former, productivity growth has also 
resulted from improvements in physical infrastructure, increased education of the 
labor force, and improvements in regulatory environments and incentives. Absent 
these (and related) factors, technology adoption in developing countries tends to be 
more limited and less effective in enhancing factor productivity. With these impor-
tant caveats, we proceed to introduce productivity growth into the Solow model using 
technological progress as a shorthand.
17See Solow, “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.” For an early discussion about 
the relationship between capital accumulation and technological progress, see Joan Robinson, Essays in 
the Theory of Economic Growth (London: Macmillan, 1962).

114   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
To incorporate an economy’s ability to produce more output with the same 
amount of capital and labor, we slightly modify the original production function and 
introduce a variable, T, to represent technological progress, as follows:
 
Y = F(K, T * L) 
[4–15]
In this specification, technology is introduced in such a way that it directly enhances 
the input of labor, as shown by the specification in which L is multiplied by T. This 
type of technological change is referred to as labor augmenting.18 As technology 
improves (T rises), the efficiency and productivity of labor increases because the 
same amount of labor can now produce more output. Increases in T can result from 
improvements in technology in the scientific sense (new inventions and processes) 
or in terms of human capital, such as improvements in the health, education, or 
skills of the workforce.19
The combined term T * L is sometimes referred to as the amount of effective 
units of labor. The expression T * L measures both the amount of labor and its effi-
ciency in the production process. An increase in either T or L increases the amount of 
effective labor and therefore increases aggregate production. For example, an insur-
ance sales office can increase its effective workforce by either adding new workers 
or giving each worker a faster computer or better cell phone. An increase in T differs 
from an increase in L, however, because the rise in aggregate income from new tech-
nology does not need to be shared with additional workers. Therefore, technological 
change and productivity growth more broadly allow output (and income) per worker 
to increase.
The usual assumption is that technology improves at a constant rate, which we 
denote by the Greek letter theta (u), so that T>T = u. If technology grows at 1 percent 
per year, then each worker becomes 1 percent more productive each year. With the 
workforce growing at n, growth in the effective supply of labor is equal to n + u. If 
the workforce (and population) grows by 2 percent per year and technology grows by 
1 percent per year, the effective supply of labor increases by 3 percent per year.
To show technological change in the Solow diagram, we need to modify our 
notation. Whereas earlier we expressed y and k in terms of output and capital per 
worker, we now need to express these variables in terms of output and capital per 
effective worker. The change is straightforward. Instead of dividing Y and K by L as 
18Two other possibilities are capital-augmenting technological change [Y = F(T * K, L)], which 
enhances capital inputs, and Hicks-neutral technological change [Y = F(T * K, T * L)], which enhances 
both capital and labor input. For our purposes, the specific way in which technology is introduced does 
not affect the basic conclusions of the model.
19Keep in mind, however, that, while these two broad categories of improvements in technology have 
similar general effects in this aggregate model, their true effects are somewhat different in the real world. 
Technological change in the mechanical sense or from the spread of a new idea can be shared widely 
across the workforce and considered a public good. Improvements in human capital, by contrast, are spe-
cific to individual workers and are not necessarily widely shared. However, both have the effect of aug-
menting the supply of labor and increasing total output.

T H E  S O L O W  ( N E O C L A S S I C A L )  G R O W T H  M O D E L   115
previously (to obtain y and k), we now divide each by (T * L). Thus output per 
effective worker (ye) is defined as ye = Y>(T * L). Similarly, capital per effective 
worker (ke) is defined as ke = K>(T * L).20
With these changes, the production function can be written as ye = f (ke) and 
saving per effective worker expressed as sye. With effective labor now growing at the 
rate n + u, the capital accumulation equation (4–14) changes to
 
ke = sye - (n + d + u)ke 
[4–16]
The new term (n + d + u)ke is larger than the original (n + d)k, indicating that 
more capital is needed to keep capital per effective worker constant.
These changes are shown in Figure 4–7, which looks very similar to the basic 
Solow diagram, with only a slight change in notation. There still is one steady-state 
point, at which saving per effective worker is just equal to the amount of new capi-
tal needed to compensate for changes in the size of the workforce, depreciation, and 
technological change in order to keep capital per effective worker constant.
One change, however, is very important. At the steady state, output per effective 
worker is constant, rather than output per worker. Total output now grows at the rate 
n + u, so that output per actual worker (or income per person) increases at rate u. 
20Note that this is consistent with the earlier notation. If there is no technological change (our earlier 
assumption), so that T = 1 (and remains unchanged), then ye = y and ke = k.
FIGURE 4–7 The Solow Model with Technical Change
In the Solow model with technical change, the equilibrium level of effective capital per worker 
(Ke0) is determined by point A, the intersection of the effective capital widening curve 
(n + d + u) and the effective saving curve (sye).
A
)
ke(f
 =
ye
sy
k
y
0
sy
0
y
0
k
k
n
d
θ)
+ +
(
e
e
e
e
e
e

116   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
With the introduction of technology, the model now incorporates the possibility of an 
economy experiencing sustained growth in per capita income at rate u. This mecha-
nism provides a plausible explanation for why the industrialized countries never 
seem to reach a steady state with constant output per worker but instead historically 
have recorded growth in output per worker of between 1 and 2 percent per year.
STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF THE SOLOW FRAMEWORK
Although the Solow model is more complex than the Harrod-Domar framework, 
it is a more powerful tool for understanding the growth process. By replacing the 
fixed coefficients production function with a neoclassical one, the model provides 
more reasonable flexibility of factor proportions in the production process. Like the 
 Harrod-Domar framework, it emphasizes the important role of factor accumulation 
and saving, but its assumption of diminishing marginal product of capital provides 
more realism and accuracy over time. It departs significantly from the Harrod-Domar 
framework in distinguishing the current level of income per worker from the long-
run steady-state level and focuses attention on the transition path to that steady state. 
The model provides powerful insights into the relationship between saving, invest-
ment, population growth, and technological change on the steady-state level of out-
put per worker. The Solow model does a much better job, albeit far from perfect, of 
describing real world outcomes than the Harrod-Domar model.
A particularly important contribution of the model is the simple yet powerful 
insights it provides into the role of technological change and productivity growth 
in the growth process. For policy makers, key questions then become how to best 
acquire new technologies and how to magnify their potential contributions to pro-
ductivity growth through complementary investments and policies. For most low-
income countries, while some domestic innovation is possible, for many industries 
it is probably most cost-effective for entrepreneurs to acquire the bulk of their new 
technologies from other countries (one of the benefits of “globalization”) and adapt 
them to local circumstances. The willingness of entrepreneurs to make such invest-
ments, however, may depend on a number of factors that government can influence. 
Investments in education (for example, improvements in the quality of the labor 
force) may enable firms in developing countries to make better use of imported tech-
nologies. Investments in physical infrastructure might motivate technology adoption 
by better connecting firms to markets. Improved public institutions to protect prop-
erty rights and extend the rule of law may also provide powerful incentives for firms 
to invest in improving their own productivity. However, the model’s focus on the role 
of factor accumulation and productivity (including technology) as the proximate 
determinants of the steady state raises a new set of questions that the model does not 
answer.
The model’s most troubling limitation is that Solow specified  productivity 
growth as exogenous (that is, determined independently of all the variables and 

D I M I N I S H I N G R E T U R N S  A N D  T H E  P R O D U CT I O N  F U N CT I O N   117
parameters specified in the model). He did not spell out exactly how it takes place 
or how the growth process itself might affect it. In this sense, productivity growth 
has been called “manna from heaven” in the Solow model. This is an appropriate 
abstraction for the purpose of explaining the theoretical role of technological change. 
In practice, policy makers in developing countries need to know the sources of this 
manna.
What are the more fundamental determinants of factor accumulation and pro-
ductivity that affect the steady state and the rate of economic growth? The empirical 
evidence in Chapter 3 suggests that the most rapidly growing developing countries 
share certain common characteristics: greater economic and political stability, rela-
tively better health and education, stronger governance and institutions, more export 
oriented trade policies, and more favorable geography. Box 4–3 provides an estimate 
of the quantitative importance of these factors in East Asia’s rapid growth relative to 
other countries. In the language of the Solow model, these characteristics operate 
through factor accumulation and productivity to help determine the precise shape 
of the production function and the steady-state level of output per worker. Changing 
any of these factors—say, encouraging more open trade—changes the steady-state 
level of output per worker and therefore the current rate of economic growth as the 
economy adjusts to the new steady state. Thus, the model helps us focus attention 
on these more fundamental influences on the steady state and the growth rate, but 
it does not provide a full understanding of the precise pathways through which these 
factors influence output and growth.
Certain characteristics of the neoclassical production function embedded in the 
Solow model also lead to one of the model’s broadest and most problematic empiri-
cal predictions—that initially poorer countries will grow more rapidly than initially 
wealthier countries and eventually catch up. To understand this theoretical predic-
tion, we begin by reviewing the neoclassical production function introduced in 
Chapter 3.
 DIMINISHING RETURNS AND THE PRODUCTION 
FUNCTION
For output and income to continue to grow over time, a country must continue to 
attract investment and achieve productivity gains. But as the capital stock grows, the 
magnitude of the impact of new investment on growth may change. Most growth 
models are based on the assumption that the return on investment declines as the 
capital stock grows. We illustrate this aspect of the aggregate neoclassical produc-
tion in Figure 4–8. The shape of this production function reflects the important but 
common assumption of diminishing returns to capital or, more precisely, a dimin-
ishing marginal product of capital (MPK). This property is indicated by the gradual 

118   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
BOX 4–3 EXPLAINING DIFFERENCES IN GROWTH RATES
Many recent studies have shown that the initial levels of income, openness to trade,
healthy populations, effective governance, favorable geography, and high saving 
rates all contribute to rapid economic growth. But which are most important? One
study sought to explain differences in growth during the period 1965–90 among 
three groups of countries: 10 East and Southeast Asian countries (in which per
capita growth averaged 4.6 percent), 17 sub-Saharan African countries (in which 
growth averaged 0.6 percent), and 21 Latin American countries (in which growth
averaged 0.7 percent).a
Policy variables explained much of the differences in growth rates. The East
and Southeast Asian countries recorded higher government saving rates, were 
more open to trade, and had higher-quality government institutions. Together, 
the differences in these policies accounted for 1.7 percentage points of the
4.0 percentage point difference between the East and Southeast Asian and
sub- Saharan African growth rates, and 1.8 percentage points of the difference
between East and Southeast Asia and Latin America. Openness to trade stood
out as the single most important policy choice affecting these growth rates.
Initial levels of income also were important, as the Solow model predicts.
Because the Latin American countries had higher average income (and therefore 
greater output per worker) than the East Asian countries in 1965, the Solow 
model would predict somewhat slower growth in Latin America. Sure enough, 
this study estimates that Latin America’s higher initial income slowed its growth 
rate by 1.2 percentage points relative to East and Southeast Asia, after con-
trolling for other factors. By contrast, the sub-Saharan African countries had
lower average initial income, indicating that (all else being equal) these coun-
tries could have grown 1.0 percentage point faster than the East and Southeast
Asian countries, rather than the actual outcome of 4.0 percentage points slower.
This suggests that the other factors had to account for a full 5.0 percentage 
point difference in growth rates between East and Southeast Asia and sub-
Saharan Africa.
Initial levels of health, as indicated by life expectancy at birth, were a major
factor contributing to sub-Saharan Africa’s slow growth. Life expectancy at birth 
averaged 41 years in sub-Saharan Africa in 1965, compared to 55 years in East 
aSteven Radelet, Jeffrey Sachs, and Jong-Wha Lee, “The Determinants and Prospects for Eco-
nomic Growth in Asia,” International Economic Journal 15, no. 3 (Fall 2001), 1–30. These results 
are summarized in the Asian Development Bank’s study Emerging Asia: Changes and Challenges
(Manila: Asian Development Bank, 1997), 79–82.

D I M I N I S H I N G R E T U R N S  A N D  T H E  P R O D U CT I O N  F U N CT I O N   119
and Southeast Asia. The study estimates that this reduced sub-Saharan Africa’s
growth rate by 1.3 percentage points relative to East and Southeast Asia. By
contrast, because average life expectancy in Latin America in 1965 was almost 
the same as in East and Southeast Asia, health explains little of the difference in 
growth between these regions.
Favorable geography helped East and Southeast Asia grow faster. The com-
bination of fewer landlocked countries, longer average coastline, fewer countries 
located in the deep tropics, and less dependence on natural resource exports all
favored Asia. Taken together, these factors accounted for 1.0 percentage point
of East and Southeast Asia’s rapid growth compared to sub-Saharan Africa, and 
0.6 percentage points relative to Latin America. Differences in initial levels of 
education and the changing demographic structure of the population accounted
for the remaining differences in growth rates across these regions.
Of course, this simple accounting framework does not fully explain the com-
plex relationships that underlie economic growth. Each of the variables in the
study captures a range of other factors that affect growth rates. For example,
differences in government saving rates probably reflect differences in fiscal pol-
icy, inflation rates, political stability, and many other factors. Because of lack of 
sufficient data, the analysis omits several factors (such as environmental deg-
radation) that may be important. And it certainly does not begin to explain why 
different policy choices were made in different countries. As a result, studies like
these should be seen as a first step to understanding growth, rather than as a
precise explanation for the many complex differences across countries.
 flattening (or declining slope) of the curve as capital per worker grows. It is important, 
however, to bear in mind the distinction between diminishing returns to individual 
factors of production holding constant the use of all other factors and the returns 
to scale of the entire production function. The production functions illustrated in 
Figure 4–8 exhibit diminishing returns to capital per worker but (by assumption) still 
have constant returns to scale. This latter characteristic means that if producers dou-
bled all inputs (rather than just one input) then total output would also double.
Looking at the production function in Figure 4–8, we can see that at low lev-
els of capital per worker (such as point a), new investment leads to relatively large 
increases in output per worker. But at higher levels of capital per worker (such as 
point b), the same amount of new investment leads to a smaller increment in output. 
Each addition of a unit of capital per worker (moving to the right along the x-axis) 
yields smaller and smaller increases in output per worker. More generally, giving the 
same number of workers more and more machinery yields smaller and smaller addi-
tions to output.

120   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
FIGURE 4–8 Diminishing Marginal Product of Capital
Along production function I, an addition of 1 unit of capital per worker at point a yields 
a much larger increase in output per worker than the same investment at point b. The 
incremental output produced by adding an additional unit of capital is called the marginal 
product of capital (MPK).
b
a
Output per worker
Capital per worker (thousands)
MPK 2
Production
function I
1
1
MPK 1
The assumption of a diminishing marginal product of capital has many impli-
cations, but three are particularly important for developing countries. Consider 
countries located toward the left on the x-axis of Figure 4–8, such as at point a. These 
countries have both relatively small amounts of capital per worker and low levels of 
output per worker. The latter means, by definition, that these countries are relatively 
poor. By contrast, countries toward the right have both higher levels of capital per 
worker and more output per worker, the latter implying that they are relatively rich. 
In general, low-income countries tend to have much less capital per worker than do 
richer countries. Therefore, if all else is equal between the two countries—a crucial 
qualifier—new investment in a poor country will tend to have a much larger impact 
on output than the same investment in a rich country. The three key implications are 
as follows:
• If all else is equal, poor countries have the potential to grow more rapidly 
than do rich countries. In Figure 4–8, a country located at point a has the 
potential to grow more rapidly than does a country at point b because the 
same investment will lead to a larger increase in output.
• As countries become richer (and capital stocks become larger), growth 
rates tend to slow. In other words, as a country moves along the production 

D I M I N I S H I N G R E T U R N S  A N D  T H E  P R O D U CT I O N  F U N CT I O N   121
function from point a to point b over a long period of time, its growth rate 
tends to decline.
• Because poor countries have the potential to grow faster than do rich 
countries, they can catch up and close the gap in relative income. To the 
extent this happens, income levels between rich and poor countries would 
converge over time.
These are very powerful implications. It is important to recognize that they rest 
on the assumption that all else is equal between the two countries, in particular that 
countries have the same rates of savings, population growth, and depreciation, and 
hence the same steady-state level of capital and income per capita. As this interpreta-
tion of the Solow model is not conditional on countries differing from one another in 
these key parameters, it is known as unconditional convergence. For all else to be 
equal, both countries also have to be operating along the same production function, 
have access to the same technology. If they are not, the predictions for rich and poor 
countries do not necessarily hold. For instance, a given poor country might actually 
be operating along different, and perhaps much flatter, production function than the 
one shown in Figure 4–8 if it does not have access to the same technology as reflected 
in the production function in Figure 4–8. In that case, each new investment (at a given 
level of the capital stock) would produce less output on the margin than that same 
additional investment would produce on the steeper production function. In that case, 
the poor country might not be expected to grow faster than the rich country and may 
never catch up. The phrase ceteris paribus (all else being equal), which is much used 
and often overlooked in economics, is of great importance in the convergence debate.
THE CONVERGENCE DEBATE
If it were true that poorer countries could grow fast while richer countries experience 
slower growth, poorer countries (at least those in which all else is equal) could begin 
to catch up and see their income levels begin to converge with the rich countries. Has 
this actually happened?
The short answer is that it has for some countries but not for most. Consider the 
example of Japan. In the 1960s, Japan’s income per capita was only about 35 percent 
of average U.S. income, and it had a much smaller capital stock, giving it the potential 
for very rapid growth. (We use the United States as the benchmark for convergence 
because it has among the highest per capita incomes in the world and is usually con-
sidered the global technological leader.) Indeed, Japan’s GDP growth rate exceeded 
9 percent during the 1960s. By the time Japan had reached 70 percent of U.S. per cap-
ita income in the late 1970s, its GDP growth rate had slowed to about 4 percent. As 
its income continued to grow, its growth rate fell further, and growth was very slow 
after Japan reached about 85 percent of U.S. income in the early 1990s. Japan’s expe-
rience illustrates the preceding three points very well: (1) When it was relatively poor, 

122   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
it could grow fast; (2) as its income increased, its growth rate declined; and (3) as a 
result, its income converged significantly toward U.S. income. People who boldly 
 predicted in the 1960s and 1970s that Japan could grow at 7 to 9 percent per year 
indefinitely—and many people did—ignored the impact of diminishing returns of 
capital on long-term growth rates.
Japan is not the only country whose income has converged with the world 
leaders since 1960. Look again at the group of rapidly growing countries shown in 
Table 3–1. All these countries were relatively poor in 1960, and all grew by an average 
of between 3 and 6 percent per capita for nearly 50 years. Rich countries cannot grow 
that fast over a period of many years (in the absence of a continuous infusion of new 
technology), but poor countries can because they start with low levels of capital.
However, being poor and having low levels of capital per worker by no means guar-
antees rapid growth. As the upper sections of Table 3–1 show, many low-income coun-
tries recorded low growth. Not only did these countries not catch up but they fell further 
behind and their incomes diverged even more from the world leaders. The point is that 
low-income countries have the potential for rapid growth, if they can attract new invest-
ment and if that new investment actually pays off with a large increment in output.
Looking beyond the experience of a few individual countries, is there a general 
tendency for poor countries to grow faster and catch up with the richer countries? 
Broadly across all countries, the short answer is no. Figure 4–9 shows the initial level 
of per capita income in 1960 and subsequent rates of growth from 1960 to 2009 for 
FIGURE 4–9 Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Growth, Unconditional
See Table 3–1 for data.
Source: Penn World Tables 7, http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/php_site/pwt_index.php, accessed June 2011.
Botswana
Argentina
USA
Singapore
Madagascar
Turkey
Pakistan
0
2
4
6
Growth Rate of GDP per capita, 1960—2009 (percent)
6
7
8
9
10
Log GDP per capita in1960 (2005 International $)

D I M I N I S H I N G R E T U R N S  A N D  T H E  P R O D U CT I O N  F U N CT I O N   123
the 38 countries listed in Table 3–1. If it were true that poor countries were growing 
faster than rich countries, the graph would show a clear downward slope from left 
to right. Poor countries would record a high rate of growth (and appear in the upper 
left part of the figure) and rich countries would display a slower growth rate (and be 
in the bottom right). But there is no clear pattern evident in the figure. For example, 
income per capita in 1960 was approximately the same in Botswana, Pakistan, and 
Madagascar; yet while Botswana subsequently grew at nearly 6 percent per year, 
Pakistan’s subsequent growth was only 2.3 percent per year and Madagascar’s 
income per capita actually declined. Similarly, Pakistan, Turkey, and the United 
States all grew at roughly the same rate from 1960 to 2009, yet they began the period 
with quite different levels of income. The only part that seems accurate is that almost 
all the rich countries display relatively slow growth rates, as expected. Such results 
have been documented in many studies using larger samples and more sophisticated 
statistical techniques. The empirical fact is clear: There has been no general tendency 
for poor countries to catch up to the world leaders. If anything, the opposite has been 
true. As we saw in Figure 2–1, for the last two centuries, the gap between the richest 
and the poorest regions of the world has grown, implying a divergence of incomes for 
these countries.
However, the simple graph in Figure 4–9 does not really do justice to the predic-
tions of convergence, which are based on the critical assumption that all else is equal 
across countries. This assumption clearly is not true for all countries in the world. 
Instead, if convergence were to occur, we should expect to find it among countries 
that share some broad key characteristics, such as a similar underlying production 
function and similar rates of saving, population growth, depreciation, and technol-
ogy growth. Some of the poor countries in Figure 4–9, for example, have low saving 
rates or very little growth in technology compared with other countries and, there-
fore, have much less potential for rapid growth. To see if the convergence predic-
tions of the Solow model hold under these stricter conditions, we have to dig a little 
deeper.
Figure 4–9 demonstrates the lack of unconditional convergence, unconditional in 
the sense that it imposes the assumption that all countries share the same key param-
eters (depreciation, savings, and population growth rates in particular). Digging 
deeper into the Solow model’s predictions, however, we consider the implications 
for convergence of allowing each country to take on its own individual combina-
tion of these key parameters. This allows each country to have its own individual 
steady-state level of capital and income per capita. Once we allow that, the question 
is whether initially poorer countries grow faster as they approach their own steady 
state. Figure 4–10 applies statistical techniques to relax the previous assumption that 
all countries have the same rates of population growth. Looking at the data from the 
same countries as in Figure 4–9, but conditional on the countries’ population growth 
rates, we begin to see the predicted negative association between initial income lev-
els and subsequent growth rates. This is known as conditional convergence.

124   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
Another approach is to pick a group of countries from all income levels that are 
similar in their policy choices, geographic characteristics, or some other variable. 
Economists Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner, for example, examined the evidence 
for convergence among all countries that had been consistently open to world trade 
since 1965.21 Open economies, as discussed in Chapter 3, are similar in that they 
have similar (global) markets for their products, purchase their inputs on world 
markets, and can acquire new technology relatively quickly from other open econo-
mies through imports of new machinery and their connections to global production 
networks. What if we include countries’ openness to trade among the conditioning 
variables? Figure 4–11 conditions GDP growth on countries’ rates of savings and 
population growth in addition to the proportion of time between 1960 and 2009 that 
they were open to trade. Clearly, these additional conditioning variables sharpen the 
inverse correlation between initial income and subsequent growth as indicated by 
the tighter fit around the trend line.22 Initially wealthier countries may still grow faster 
in absolute terms than initially poorer countries if the former are converging toward 
21Jeffrey D. Sachs and Andrew Warner, “Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 26, no. 1 (1995), 1–118.
22Tracing the countries highlighted in Figure 4–9 through Figures 4–10 and 4–11, we note that, despite 
the additional conditioning variables, Botswana and Singapore consistently grew faster than predicted for 
their initial incomes (indicated by their positions above the trend lines), whereas Madagascar and Argen-
tina consistently grew more slowly than predicted.
FIGURE 4–10 Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Growth, Conditional on Population Growth
See Table 3–1 for data.
Sources: Penn World Tables 7, http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/php_site/pwt_index.php, accessed June 2011; World 
Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
Botswana
Singapore
Pakistan
Turkey
USA
Madagascar
Argentina
—2
0
2
4
Growth Rate of GDP per capita, 1960—2009 (percent)
—2
—1
0
1
2
Log GDP, 1960 (2005 International $)

B E Y O N D  S O L O W :  N E W  A P P R O A C H E S  TO G R O W T H   125
much higher steady-state levels of capital per capita. That is why we do not observe 
unconditional convergence across rich and poor countries’ levels of income. On the 
other hand, if each country is allowed to have its own steady-state level, we do see 
faster growth among initially poorer countries, as predicted by the Solow model and 
its implication of conditional convergence.
BEYOND SOLOW: NEW APPROACHES TO GROWTH
A new generation of models takes off where Solow left off, by moving beyond the 
assumptions of an exogenously fixed saving rate, growth rate of the labor supply, 
workforce skill level, and pace of technological change. In reality, the values of these 
parameters are not just given but are determined partially by government policies, 
economic structure, and the pace of growth itself. Economists have begun to develop 
more-sophisticated models in which one or more of these variables is determined 
within the model (that is, these variables become endogenous to the model).23
23The seminal contributions to the new growth theory are Paul Romer, “Increasing Returns and Long-
Run Growth,” Journal of Political Economy 94 (October 1986), 1002–37; Robert Lucas, “On the Mechan-
ics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics 22 (January 1988), 3–42; and Paul Romer, 
“Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy 98 (October 1990), S71–S102.
BEYOND SOLOW: NEW APPROACHES TO GROWTH
FIGURE 4–11 Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Growth, Conditional on Openness, Savings, 
and Population Growth
See Table 3–1 for data.
Sources: Penn World Tables 7, http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/php_site/pwt_index.php, accessed June 2011; World 
Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
Botswana
Singapore
Pakistan
Turkey
USA
Madagascar
Argentina
—3
—2
—1
0
1
2
Growth Rate of GDP per capita, 1960—2009 (percent)
—2
—1
0
1
2
log GDP, 1960 (2005 International $)
—1

126   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
These models depart from the Solow framework by assuming that the national 
economy is subject to increasing returns to scale, rather than constant returns to 
scale. A doubling of capital, labor, and other factors of production leads to more than 
a doubling of output. To the extent this occurs, the impact of investment on both 
physical capital and human capital would be larger than suggested by Solow.
How can a doubling of capital and labor lead to more than a doubling of output? 
Consider investments in research or education that not only have a positive effect on 
the firm or the individual making the investment but also have a positive “spillover” 
effect on others in the economy. This beneficial effect on others, called a positive 
externality, results in a larger impact from the investment on the entire economy. 
The benefits from Henry Ford’s development of the production line system, for 
example, were certainly large for the Ford Motor Company, but they were even larger 
for the economy as a whole because knowledge of this new technique soon spilled 
over to other firms that could benefit from Ford’s new approach.
Similarly, investments in research and development (R&D) lead to new knowl-
edge that accrues not only to those that make the investment but to others who even-
tually gain access to the knowledge. The gain from education is determined not just 
by how much a scientist’s or manager’s productivity is raised by investment in his or 
her own education. If many scientists and managers invest in their own education, 
there then will be many educated people who will learn from each other, increasing 
the benefits from education. An isolated scientist working alone is not as productive 
as one who can interact with dozens of well-educated colleagues. This interaction 
constitutes the externality. In the context of the “sources of growth” analysis intro-
duced in Chapter 3, such externalities suggest that the measured contribution of 
physical and human capital to growth may be larger than that captured by the Solow 
framework. Among other implications, this outcome could account for a significant 
portion of the residual in the Solow accounting framework, meaning that actual TFP 
growth is smaller than many studies have suggested.
Another important implication is that economies with increasing returns to scale 
do not necessarily reach a steady-state level of income as in the Solow framework. 
When the externalities from new investment are large, diminishing returns to capi-
tal do not necessarily set in, so growth rates do not slow, and the economy does not 
necessarily reach a steady state. An increase in the saving rate can lead to a perma-
nent increase in the rate of economic growth. These models can explain continued 
per capita growth in many countries without relying on exogenous technological 
change. Moreover, they do not necessarily lead to the conclusion that poor coun-
tries will grow faster than rich countries because growth does not necessarily slow 
as incomes rise, so there is no expectation of convergence of incomes. Initial dispari-
ties in income can remain, or even enlarge, if richer countries make investments that 
encompass larger externalities.
Because growth can perpetuate in these models without relying on an assump-
tion of exogenous technological change, they often are referred to as endogenous 

S U M M A R Y   127
growth models. They are potentially important for explaining continued growth in 
industrialized countries that never reach a steady state, especially those engaged in 
R&D of new ideas on the cutting edge of technology.
For developing countries, the new models reinforce some of the main messages 
of the Solow and Harrod-Domar models. Like their forerunners, these models show 
the importance of factor accumulation and increases in productivity in the growth 
process. The potential benefits from both of these sources of growth are even greater 
in endogenous growth models because of potential positive externalities. The core 
messages of saving, investing in health and education, using the factors of produc-
tion as productively and efficiently as possible, and seeking out appropriate new 
technologies are consistent across all these models.
The applicability of endogenous growth models to developing countries is ques-
tionable, however, because many low-income countries can achieve rapid growth by 
adapting the technologies developed in countries with more advanced research capac-
ities rather than making the investments in R&D themselves. For many low-income 
countries, the Solow model’s assumptions of exogenous technological change and 
constant returns to scale in the aggregate production function may be more appropri-
ate. Productivity growth in such countries may also depend as much on appropriate 
complementary investments and policies as on technological change itself.
SUMMARY
• Formal growth models provide a more precise mechanism to explore 
the contributions to economic growth of both factor accumulation 
and productivity gains. These models allow us to understand better 
the implications of changes in saving rates, population growth rates, 
technological change, and other related factors on output and growth.
• The Harrod-Domar model assumes a fixed-coefficients production 
function, which helps simplify the model but introduces strict rigidity in 
the mix of capital and labor needed for any level of output. In this model, 
growth is directly related to saving in inverse proportion to the incremental 
capital–output ratio.
• The Harrod-Domar model usefully emphasizes the role of saving, but at 
the same time overemphasizes its importance by implying that saving (and 
investment) is sufficient for sustained growth, which it is not. Also, the 
model does not directly address changes in productivity. In addition, the 
model’s assumption of a fixed ICOR leads to increasing inaccuracy over 
time as the structure of production evolves and the marginal product of 
capital changes.
SUMMARY

128   [CH. 4] TH E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C G R O W T H
• The Solow model improves on some of the weaknesses in the Harrod-
Domar framework and has become the most influential growth model in 
economics. The model allows for more flexibility in the mix of capital and 
labor in the production process and introduces the powerful concept of 
diminishing marginal product of capital. It allows for exploration of the 
impact on growth of changes in the saving rate, the population growth rate, 
and technological change. The model helps provide a deeper understanding 
of a much wider range of growth experiences than the Harrod-Domar 
model. Nevertheless, the model does not provide a full explanation for 
growth. It does not provide insights into the more fundamental causes of 
factor accumulation and productivity growth and, as a one-sector model, 
does not address the issue of resource allocation across sectors.
• The Solow model has several powerful implications, including (1) poor 
countries have the potential to grow relatively rapidly; (2) growth rates tend 
to slow as incomes rise; (3) across countries that share important common 
characteristics, the incomes of poor countries potentially can converge with 
those of the rich countries; and (4) acquiring new technology is central to 
both accelerating and sustaining economic growth.
• Some poor countries have achieved rapid growth and seen their incomes 
converge with those of richer countries, but many have not and have seen 
their incomes fall further behind. There is no evidence of unconditional 
convergence across countries, but there is strong evidence of conditional 
convergence, in which countries sharing certain characteristics are able 
to achieve rapid growth and begin to catch up with the richer countries. 
We find evidence of conditional convergence in the inverse relationship 
between initial income and subsequent growth rates, when we account for 
countries differing in key parameters and hence in their steady-state levels.
• In the 1990s, new theories of economic growth gained popularity. These 
theories sought to fill in key gaps in the neoclassical model. In particular, 
these models sought to explain the rate of technological progress, which 
Solow had identified as the determinant of long-term growth in per capita 
income but that remained exogenous in his model. These new growth 
theories are thus known as endogenous growth models.

129
States and Markets
5
W
ho is it that makes economic development happen? Is it all done by indi-
viduals pursuing their various goals, relying on the market to coordinate 
and make sense of their diverse actions? Or does the government play 
a central role in achieving sustained increases in per capita income and 
 output? The debate over the proper role for government in achieving economic prog-
ress has been going on for more than two centuries. In the Wealth of Nations (1776) 
Adam Smith argued against conventional wisdom of the time, which assumed it was 
 government that led the development process. For example, the king and queen of 
Spain supported Columbus’s exploration of the Americas, and a royal monopoly gave 
the British East India Company its dominant role in development of trade with India 
and beyond. Smith proposed instead that economic progress was achieved by indi-
viduals who worked through the market to specialize in the production of one par-
ticular product (his example was the manufacture of pins) and then exchanged that 
product on the market for what else they, as producers, needed.
In England at least, Smith’s view dominated development thinking for much of 
the country’s growth in the 1800s, as the leaders of the nation promoted free trade 
and a minimal role for government in the economy. Elsewhere, the state often played 
a major role in the development of new industries. As one moved eastward from 
England to France, Germany, and finally Russia, the government played a steadily 
increasing role in nineteenth-century economic development.1
1This is the basic thesis of Alexander Gerschenkron in Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective 
(Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1962).

130   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
After David Ricardo and later Karl Marx, however, the attention of most econ-
omists shifted to trying to understand how markets worked, and economic growth 
was more or less taken for granted, at least in Europe and North America.2 This focus 
changed dramatically after the end of World War II, which had devastated much of 
Europe and Japan. The challenge was how to achieve economic recovery before war-
time devastation brought to power new totalitarian regimes and further warfare. In 
what we now know as the developing countries of the world, former colonies were 
rapidly becoming independent states. These countries wanted programs that would 
facilitate their rise out of poverty and make it possible for them to catch up with the 
already industrialized nations. The United States, the one industrialized country not 
devastated by war, stood ready to help.
The first decades after the end of World War II witnessed a major effort to achieve 
modern economic growth throughout the world. There were some successes, mainly 
the rapid recovery of western Europe, but also many failures, and that set off a debate 
that continues to this day over just what countries need to do to achieve sustained 
economic development. At the center of this debate is the question of the proper 
role for government in development. In the remainder of this chapter we trace the 
evolution of ideas since the end of World War II about the proper role of the state 
in economic development. For the most part thinking about the role of the state has 
been a learning process because successes and failures have helped develop a more 
sophisticated understanding of the role of government and government-created 
institutions in the development process. In addition, old ideas that did not initially 
work well have crept back into the debate. And despite all of the development think-
ing since the 1950s, there are still a great many poor countries and poor people in the 
world. In the remainder of this chapter we describe and analyze how thinking about 
the role of the state has evolved through these debates. In the chapters that follow we 
return again and again in much greater detail to the role of government as part of the 
solution to the full panoply of specific development questions.
DEVELOPMENT THINKING AFTER WORLD WAR II
There were several key influences on development thinking after the end of World 
War II. For economists, the main ideas about growth dated back a century or more. 
Adam Smith had stressed markets and technological progress as the key, but David 
Ricardo writing three decades later stressed the importance of saving and investment 
and of the accumulation of capital. Karl Marx published Das Kapital in 1867 and also 
took the accumulation of capital as the central driving force of growth. Furthermore, 
the Harrod-Domar model (see Chapter 4) put investment and capital at the center of 
2The notable exception in the first half of the twentieth century was Joseph Schumpeter.

D E V E L O P M E NT  TH I N K I N G  A F T E R  W O R L D  W A R  I I   131
growth. One influential book published in 1960 argued that the key to growth was to 
raise the rate of investment and capital formation to a level above 15 percent of gross 
domestic product (GDP), although there were numerous voices at the time that said 
the process was more complicated than that.3
If capital is at the center of the growth story, it would seem to follow that one key 
to growth would be to raise the rate of saving so that one could increase the rate of 
investment. But in poor countries, it was argued, there was a vicious circle of poverty 
that had to be broken first. Poor countries were too poor to save much and so did not 
have the resources to invest and so could not grow. The obvious solution was for rich 
countries to contribute some of their saving to poor countries to break this cycle. In 
the 1960s the idea was refined further with the development of Hollis Chenery’s two-
gap model.4 There was not just a saving gap but also a foreign exchange gap, and the 
latter was the major constraint on development in most countries. Emphasis on the 
foreign exchange gap reinforced the view that the key to economic development was 
for rich countries to provide aid (in the form of dollars or another convertible cur-
rency) to fill both the savings and foreign exchange gaps.
This view of development was greatly reinforced at the time by the experience 
of the Marshall Plan in rescuing the economies (and the democracies) of western 
Europe and Japan. The Marshall Plan supplied $25 billion to rebuild western Europe, 
with immediate and dramatic results.5 Europe recovered rapidly, with GDPs growing 
so quickly that these countries caught up to the level of income that they would have 
achieved if they had not been engulfed by war. Much the same experience occurred 
in Japan. In 1945 virtually all of the cities of Japan lay in ruins, and malnutrition was 
common throughout the country. But by the 1950s the nation was well launched on 
two decades of unprecedented 10 percent a year GDP growth. Large injections of 
capital, mostly from the United States, had done the trick, or so it seemed.
What was missing from the analysis of these success stories was the role of the 
supporting institutions required for economic development. Western Europe had 
fully developed legal systems designed for a modern industrial economy; had educa-
tion systems capable of providing required training; and despite the enormous loss of 
life, had large numbers of people who knew how to organize a company (and a gov-
ernment) and who understood modern technology. Much of the physical infrastruc-
ture was gone, but many of the key institutions were embodied in people, and all that 
was needed was a little help to get started. When the same emphasis on foreign aid, 
capital, and foreign exchange was applied a decade later to developing countries, 
3Walter W. Rostow, The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto (Cambridge: 
 Cambridge University Press, 1960).
4Hollis Chenery and Alan Strout, “Foreign Assistance and Economic Development,” American Eco-
nomic Review, 56, no. 4 (1966).
5Technically the Marshall Plan itself supplied only half of the $25 billion; the other half was contributed 
by the United States in the years between the end of World War II and the formal beginning of the plan in 
April 1948. The total amount of aid converted into today’s dollars would be over US$200 billion.

132   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
many of the critical institutions were missing. Developing poor and underdeveloped 
nations proved to be a very different process from reconstructing already developed 
economies destroyed by war.
Most developing countries did not start with the Smith view that well- functioning 
markets were the key to successful development. To begin with, markets in develop-
ing countries were associated with capitalism, and capitalism in the minds of many 
was associated with colonialism and being kept poor by colonial powers. Many lead-
ers in developing countries were looking for an alternative path, and they had plenty 
of support from people and events elsewhere.
In the industrialized West there was the obvious fact that markets had not 
 functioned all that well before the war. The Great Depression of the 1930s was a 
 market failure on an unprecedented scale. But economists and others had long been 
aware that all economies suffer market failures, albeit on a smaller scale (Box 5–1). 
The question was not whether these market failures existed but how prevalent they 
were and thus what (if anything) the government should do about them. Among the 
Fabian socialists in Britain whose ideas were reflected in the Labour Party then in 
power in Britain, market failures were common and called for active intervention by 
government in many areas of economic activity. The British Labour government of 
the time also supported outright government takeover of certain major businesses. 
The relevance of this to developing countries is that many were former British colo-
nies whose leaders had been educated in Britain at universities where Fabian social-
ist views were common and widely discussed. It is interesting to note that this was 
true of Jawaharlal Nehru and other leaders of the Indian Congress Party, which ruled 
India for several decades after the country achieved independence from Britain in 
1948.
Some of the most prominent theories of development economists in this early 
period also argued that the situation facing developing countries required broad 
government intervention. The big push idea of economist Paul Rosenstein-Rodan 
argued that it was difficult for one modern industry to start up in a developing 
country (his example was shoes) because there would not be enough people with 
the money to buy the products of one shoe factory.6 Instead one needed to develop 
a wide range of industries all at the same time so that the workers in each factory 
would have the income needed to buy the products of the other factories. The only 
way to achieve this broad-based development of a wide range of industries was to 
have a government plan that could guide individual producers and guarantee that 
the demand would be there when they went into production. Economist Albert 
Hirschman countered this argument with the view that countries instead could 
start by emphasizing industries with strong linkages so the creation of one indus-
try, machinery for example, would create demand for steel and steel would create 
6Paul Rosenstein-Rodan, “Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe,” Eco-
nomic Journal 53, nos. 210–11 (1943), 202–11.

D E V E L O P M E NT  TH I N K I N G  A F T E R  W O R L D  W A R  I I   133
BOX 5–1  MARKET FAILURE
The term market failure refers to situations in which markets fail to achieve effi-
e
cient outcomes. Efficiency in this context has a precise definition, based on the
y
concept of Pareto efficiency. A Pareto efficient market outcome is one in which
no one can be made better off without making someone else worse off. (Note
that this definition, conceived by nineteenth-century Italian economist Vilfredo
Pareto, says nothing about equity.) Market failures can occur for various reasons,
including the presence of externalities and the existence of monopolies, public
goods, and information asymmetries. The common theme across these catego-
ries of market failure is the divergence in equilibrium between marginal social
costs and marginal social benefits. Market equilibrium occurs when private
actors equate their marginal costs with their marginal benefits. Under conditions
of perfect competition, with no externalities and no public goods, the marginal
costs and benefits faced by private actors equal the marginal social costs and
benefits faced by society. Yet, imagine a situation in which a factory sits along
a riverbank upstream from a fishery. That factory chooses a profit-maximizing
quantity of output by equating its private marginal costs and benefits and thus
releases the related quantity of effluent into the river. If the cost of the pollution
is reflected in the loss of revenue to the fishery, that cost is borne by society but
does not enter into the private cost–benefit calculations of the factory owner. It
is an externality and leads to a divergence between marginal private costs and
marginal social costs. This constitutes a market failure in which the factory over-
produces both its output and pollution. On a larger scale, the overproduction of
greenhouse gasses, widely seen as a cause of global warming, has been called,
“the biggest market failure the world has ever seen.”
a (We return to this theme
extensively in Chapter 19.)
A similar divergence between private and social marginal costs and benefits
occurs in the presence of monopolies. Profit-maximizing monopolists restrict
output below the level that would occur under perfect competition. In doing so,
the monopolist is equating private marginal costs and benefits (the basic condi-
tion for profit maximization). Yet, reducing the quantity of product available in the
monopolized market results in an equilibrium in which the marginal social ben-
efits of an additional unit of output exceed the marginal social costs of producing
that last unit, another instance of market failure. Society would be better off with
additional output in this market.
The market failure associated with public goods arises from the incentive
for individuals to act as free riders. Public goods have the characteristic that no
aN. Stern, Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change (London: HM Treasury, 2006).
e

134   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
one can be excluded from consuming them (for example, national defense). The
resulting distinction between public and private goods is that to consume the 
latter, each individual must reveal his or her true willingness to pay for that good, 
but with the former, because no one can be excluded, the incentive is for indi-
viduals to conceal their true willingness to pay for consumption. Markets thus fail 
by undersupplying public goods (here, too, implying a divergence between private
and social marginal costs and benefits).
Information asymmetries are situations in which one party to a transaction has
more information than the other party. Such situations commonly arise in insur-
ance markets, where the insured knows more about his or her own risk profile
and behavior than does the insurer. Thus, high-risk individuals will tend to drive up 
the price of insurance for low-risk individuals and drive them out of the market
(the adverse selection problem). Similarly, having insurance might lead some to 
engage in riskier behavior than otherwise, thus driving up the price of insurance 
for those who continue to behave more cautiously (the “moral hazard” problem).
In both cases, the information asymmetry creates an externality, leading to mar-
ket failure.
Faced with these (and other) potential sources of market failure, the chal-
lenge for government policy makers lies in deciding if, when, and how to inter-
vene. Potential policy interventions to correct market failures are varied and
complex. They might include taxing polluters (to internalize the cost of externali-
ties), breaking or regulating monopolies, and directly providing public goods. In 
practice, diagnosing market failures is rarely a straightforward task, and public 
intervention brings with it the risk of making the situation worse than it would
have been without the intervention. Such instances are known as government
failure. The tension between the risks of market failure and government failure
lies at the heart of the debates described in this chapter.
demand for iron ore and coal (what Hirschman called backward linkages).7 The big 
push theory implicitly assumed that solving the demand problem by exporting a new 
product was not a realistic option, an assumption that was not unreasonable given 
that Rosenstein-Rodan was writing during and shortly after World War II. Some ana-
lysts still use the term big push, but mostly when arguing for making a large effort, 
such as an unprecedented increase in foreign aid to get over one or another major 
7Albert O. Hirschman, The Strategy of Economic Development (New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 1958).

D E V E L O P M E NT  TH I N K I N G  A F T E R  W O R L D  W A R  I I   135
obstacle to growth. More recent uses of the big push terminology are discussed at 
greater length in Chapter 14.
Of comparable or greater influence than these intellectual debates was the per-
ceived success of the model of growth pioneered by the Soviet Union.8 This model 
had three basic components:
 
1. The proponents of the model, like Marx, emphasized the role of capital and 
high rates of investment achieved by limiting consumption by farmers and 
others.
 
2. The model gave priority to the development of heavy industry that would 
provide physical capital products, such as machinery, that were assumed not 
to be available unless produced domestically.9
 
3. Management of the economy rejected the use of market forces except in areas 
peripheral to most economic activity.
The allocation of goods was to be done by large government bureaucracies 
guided by a central plan drawn up in Moscow. The appeal of the Soviet approach was 
based on the widely held perception that it had transformed a poor and backward 
country into an industrial powerhouse that defeated the strongest military power in 
the world, Nazi Germany. Three decades later this economic model would appear to 
be far less formidable within the Soviet Union itself as well as elsewhere, but in the 
1950s many developing countries were inspired by it. Ghana under Kwame Nkrumah, 
for example, the first African nation to achieve independence from its colonial ruler, 
focused on heavy industry during its initial growth phase. India went even further in 
attempting to adapt major parts of the Soviet economic model, and China, after the 
1949 revolution, adopted the Soviet system in its entirety.
Finally, the attitude toward the prospects of achieving growth through reliance 
on foreign trade had limited appeal in most developing countries. The belief among 
many was that dependence on foreign trade would force these countries to be for-
ever the source of raw material from their mines and agriculture and never industri-
alized countries in their own right. More important, the one region of the developing 
world that had begun industrial development before World War II (South America, in 
particular Brazil, Argentina, Columbia, and Chile) had done so by developing indus-
try behind high protective barriers, called import substituting industrialization (dis-
cussed at greater length in Chapter 18). There was no belief at the time that growth 
could be achieved to a large degree by the export of manufactures, and there was a 
solid reason for this belief. During World War I and II, there were few international 
markets for South American manufactures because submarine war, among other 
8Strictly speaking, the Soviet model of economic growth was patterned in part on the German wartime 
economic model used during World War I (1914–18).
9Strictly speaking, the Soviet model assumed that the economy was basically closed to foreign trade; 
hence exporting consumer goods or natural resources to purchase capital goods from abroad was not an 
option or was, at best, a very limited option.

136   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
things, prevented most normal trading relationships. In between the two wars was 
the Great Depression, when industrialized countries vied with each other to raise 
 tariff barriers to protect their own domestic industry. The very high Smoot-Hawley 
Tariff, enacted in 1930, was the American contribution to this trade war.
By the 1950s and 1960s this emphasis on import substituting industrializa-
tion was further reinforced in South America. Industries developed behind high 
trade barriers were an important part of those economies and gave them sub-
stantial political influence to keep the trade barriers in place. In addition, econo-
mists such as Raul Prebisch, based at the Economic Commission for Latin America 
(ECLA) in Santiago, Chile, and Hans Singer, based at the United Nations Industrial 
Development Organization (UNIDO) provided an intellectual rationale for import 
substituting industrialization. The low income and price elasticities of demand for 
developing countries’ exports of raw materials and the inability of such nations to 
compete against the economic head start of the industrialized nations meant that all 
or most of the benefits of foreign trade went to the already industrialized nations, or 
so Prebisch and Singer argued.
The result of these various influences is that most developing countries in the 
1950s and 1960s believed that a high level of government planning and govern-
ment intervention in the economy was desirable and even absolutely necessary if 
economic growth were to be achieved. All over the world, countries introduced one 
government intervention after another. Sometimes these interventions were based 
on strategy articulated in a national plan; at other times they had a much narrower 
focus, including the personal interests of the government officials introducing the 
measures. All of this was occurring, however, while the governments of the indus-
trialized nations were in the process of dismantling most of their trade barriers 
under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), formed 
in 1949 and now superseded by the World Trade Organization (WTO). Economists 
from industrialized countries who had lived through the trade wars of the 1930s 
and a much wider group of political leaders felt that these trade disagreements had 
contributed directly to global warfare and were determined to move the industri-
alized world back to the open trading system that had existed before World War I. 
Some of these same economists argued vigorously against the protectionist trends 
in the developing world, but not many policy makers in developing countries were 
listening.
The main approach of economists working with developing countries in the 
1950s and 1960s was not to try to reduce the role of government in the economy 
but to try to make government intervention more rational and geared to achieving 
well thought out development objectives. One such measure was to help countries 
set up planning commissions that would draw up economic development plans and 
provide sound economic advice to development officials in general. The Harvard 
Development Advisory Service (later the Harvard Institute for International Devel-
opment), heavily funded by the Ford Foundation, for example, provided technical 

F U N D A M E N TA L  C H A N G E S  I N T H E  1970 s  A N D 19 8 0 s   137
 support mostly in the form of economic analysis and training to planning commis-
sions in Iran, Pakistan, Indonesia, Malaysia, Ghana, and other countries in the 1960s 
and early 1970s.10
By the early 1970s, therefore, a high level of intervention and a high level of gov-
ernment investment in the economy of developing countries was the norm, although 
there were exceptions. The role of industrialized countries was to provide aid mainly 
to governments either through bilateral or multilateral aid programs (for example, 
the World Bank) and to provide technical assistance to help design and manage 
aid projects and help more generally with government economic policy making. In 
countries within the sphere of influence of the Soviet Union, the full Soviet model, 
where the government controlled and administered most economic activity outside 
of agriculture, was the norm.
FUNDAMENTAL CHANGES IN THE 1970s AND 1980s
By the 1970s a reaction against the approaches of the earlier decades was building, 
particularly among economists and other policy makers in the bilateral and multi-
lateral aid agencies and in the governments of the industrialized world. There was a 
growing disillusionment with the results of the considerable amounts of aid given out 
over the previous two decades. In Africa, most governments that had gained indepen-
dence in the 1960s were experiencing little or no growth, and total factor productivity 
in the continent as a whole was negative. In Latin America import substituting indus-
trialization had run into the limits caused by the small size of most of the domestic 
markets and growth had slowed in much of the region. By the 1980s (and in China by 
the late 1970s), interest in the Soviet model had waned because most of the countries 
with a Soviet-type economic system began to stagnate and in certain cases to build 
up unsustainable levels of international debt.
The analysis of what had gone wrong, however, had several different strains to it, 
and analysts and policy makers often did not agree about which one was the major 
source of weak performance. One strain of criticism of the policies of the 1950s and 
1960s argued that too much attention had been paid to the growth rate of GDP and 
not enough to how the benefits of growth were distributed.
Too many of the benefits of growth, it was argued, were going to a narrow group 
of wealthy business people and their government and politician supporters. The 
share of the population trapped in poverty was not declining rapidly enough even 
in areas where GDP growth was relatively robust, and it was not declining at all in 
10Edward S. Mason, The Harvard institute for International Development and Its Antecedents (Cam-
bridge: Distributed by Harvard University Press, 1986).
FUNDAMENTAL CHANGES IN THE 1970s AND 1980s

138   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
much of the developing world.11 Inequality also had a regional component. In many 
countries growth appeared to be concentrated in one part of the country, often near 
the capital city, while other regions stagnated. The breakup of West Pakistan and 
East Pakistan with the latter becoming Bangladesh in 1971, for example, was in part 
caused by the belief that all or most of the benefits of foreign aid and development 
were flowing to West Pakistan.
Economists had recognized for decades that an efficient economic system did 
not necessarily mean the system was equitable or that the fruits of the system were 
fairly distributed. Efficiency in economic theory was typically defined as a system that 
could not make anyone better off without making someone else worse off, a concept 
called Pareto optimality. Markets were efficient in this sense (or at least perfectly 
competitive markets were efficient), but that could be consistent with an economy 
with a concentration of income and wealth in the hands of the few. If markets could 
not necessarily solve the problem of inequality, it seemed to many economists that 
it was up to the government to correct this failure. They argued that government was 
best suited to address basic needs and target aid to the poor. Private charities and 
other nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) could play a role in these efforts, but 
they lacked the resources possessed by governments.
Counter to this argument for even more government intervention in the econ-
omy was a growing awareness based on research and experience that many govern-
ment interventions did not work out as intended or planned. Many simply created 
obstacles to economic growth. Trade restrictions in Indonesia, for example, forced 
importers to obtain 70 different stamps of approval before a good could be brought 
into the country. This approach may have protected a few domestic industries, but 
it made it difficult for most businesses to get needed inputs in a timely manner, 
something that was essential if they were to compete in the international market-
place. Other interventions such as those of Kwame Nkrumah in Ghana were based 
on a flawed development strategy unsuited to the conditions then prevailing in the 
 country (Box 5–2). Many governments had no economic rationale at all for their 
interventions or justified their actions as solving some particular market failure when 
the real motivation lay elsewhere. Often policies that had the stated goal of helping 
the poor were really designed to provide jobs or illicit income for well-off government 
officials. Other interventions, whether well intended or not, provided government 
officials with discretionary authority to issue permits, providing the opportunity for 
illegal payments.
For the increasing number of economists and policy makers who held these 
views, the clear implication was that governments of developing countries needed to 
11One study at the time that had an important influence on thinking about redistribution, particularly 
in the World Bank, was the book by Hollis Chenery, Richard Jolly, Montek S. Ahluwalia, C. L. Bell, and John 
H. Duloy, Redistribution with Growth: Policies to Improve Income Distribution in Developing Countries in 
the Context of Economic Growth (World Bank, 1974).

F U N D A M E N TA L  C H A N G E S  I N T H E  1970 s  A N D 19 8 0 s   139
BOX 5–2  GHANA AFTER INDEPENDENCE
On March 6, 1957, with great celebration, Ghana became the first sub-Saharan
African country to gain its independence. Optimism was in the air: Ghana was
the world’s largest cocoa producer, it had the highest per capita income in sub-
Saharan Africa (except South Africa), and its foreign exchange reserves were
equivalent to over three years of imports. Ghana’s prospects looked bright.
But it was not to be. President Kwame Nkrumah, who was brilliant in leading
Ghana to independence, proved to be much less effective as an economic and
political leader. In a push for rapid industrialization, Nkrumah introduced exten-
sive state intervention in the economy, with many controlled prices, restrictions
on trade and investment, and state-owned enterprises. Based on its cocoa earn-
ings, Ghana borrowed heavily to establish a wide range of industries designed
to substitute for imports and for processing many of Ghana’s raw materials.
But cocoa prices collapsed in the mid-1960s, and the state’s heavy hand led to
widespread corruption, poor investment decisions, distorted prices, and growing
instability. In 1966, a group of army officers overthrew Nkrumah in what was
only the first of a series of coups and countercoups over the following 17 years.
The economy fluctuated wildly, with growth plunging to –6 percent in 1966, then
climbing to 7 percent in 1970 as cocoa prices recovered, only to collapse again
to –5 percent 2 years later and to a disastrous –14 percent in 1975. By 1983,
the economy had collapsed. Cocoa production was only half as large as it once
had been, inflation exceeded 120 percent, growth had been below –6 percent
for 3 years in a row, and per capita income was about one-third lower than it had
been 26 years before at independence.
In 1983, President Jerry Rawlings (who had taken power himself in a coup
2 years earlier as Flight Lieutenant Rawlings), with few options at his disposal,
turned to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank for financial
assistance and, in return, accepted their strict conditions for changes in economic
policy. Rawlings introduced Ghana’s Economic Recovery Program, which in many
ways was a prototype for reform programs introduced by many other develop-
ing countries under the auspices of the IMF and World Bank in the 1980s and
early 1990s. The reforms were widespread: Ghana devalued its currency, freed
interest rates from restrictions, and substantially reduced its budget deficit. It
removed or modified a range of price controls (including raising the price paid to
cocoa farmers), reduced tariffs on many imported products, and otherwise took
steps to liberalize the trade regime. It partially or fully privatized dozens of enter-
prises over several years, including transport, the marketing of cocoa, banking,
and other areas. The IMF and World Bank heralded Ghana’s progress in reforms

140   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
and predicted that these changes would lay the foundation for greater macro-
economic stability, sustained economic growth, and a reduction in poverty.
The results were a clear improvement although not as dramatic as many at the
time had hoped. The economy stabilized: Inflation fell (although it still remained
above 20 percent), the trade deficit shrank, and foreign exchange reserves grew.
Growth became far less volatile, and per capita GDP grew at 1.6 percent through 
the mid-1990s and at a higher rate of just over 2.9 percent from 1996 through 
2010. Growth after 2004 was further boosted by the international commu-
nity forgiving nearly $6 billion of Ghana’s debt, although Ghana then borrowed
another $750 million in 2007. The discovery, also in 2007, of major off-shore 
oil reserves promised further support for Ghana’s economy. The first oil began
to flow in 2010 and the per capita GDP growth rate in 2011 jumped to over 
8 percent. Whether this oil windfall will lead to sustained higher growth or will be
mismanaged with negative consequences for growth remains to be seen. The
evidence as to whether this will be the case as of 2011 is mixed.
step back from meddling in the economy and better design whichever existing poli-
cies seemed to be working. The shortcomings of import substituting industrialization 
have been particularly well documented.12 Even Nobel laureate Gunnar Myrdal, an 
early advocate of import substituting protection as a means of mobilizing under-
employed labor, eventually recognized that intervention often leads to corruption, 
which in turn inhibits development.13 By the 1970s and early 1980s the World Bank 
also began to push harder on these issues.
While these debates over the role of government were proceeding, two major 
developments occurred that were to have a profound impact on how the role of gov-
ernment in development was perceived. The first development was the rise in oil prices 
engineered by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) in 1973 
and 1979. These price increases led to large amounts of money flowing into the treasur-
ies of oil-exporting countries, expanding the role of government investment in those 
countries, often by a very large amount. Of equal if not greater importance over the 
12One of the early influential articles questioning import substitution industrialization was John 
Sheahan, “Import Substitution and Economic Policy: A Second Review,” Research Memorandum No. 50 
(Williamstown: Williams College, Center for Development Economics, 1972). See also his study of import 
substitution in Latin America, John Sheahan, Patterns of Development in Latin America: Poverty, Repres-
sion and Economic Strategy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987).
13In his Asian Drama: An Inquiry into the Poverty of Nations, 3 vols. (New York: Twentieth Century 
Fund, 1968), Gunnar Myrdal introduced the concept of the soft state, which was ineffective in carrying out 
its development goals and was typically riddled with corruption arising from these ineffective efforts.

F U N D A M E N TA L  C H A N G E S  I N T H E  1970 s  A N D 19 8 0 s   141
longer run, however, was that several of the largest exporters acquired large reserves of 
foreign exchange that they reinvested with the cooperation of the international banks.
The enormous amount of money involved led to low interest rates on loans world-
wide, and governments of developing countries were encouraged to borrow large 
sums to fund their development programs. Particularly in Latin America, debts to the 
major private international banks began to accumulate. By the mid-1980s, the situa-
tion had changed dramatically. Alarmed by rising inflation, due in part to the OPEC 
oil shocks, the U.S. Federal Reserve sharply contracted the U.S. money supply, caus-
ing interest rates to rise precipitously. This had two highly detrimental effects on devel-
oping nations that had borrowed abroad. First, many loans were written with variable 
interest rates; second, they were denominated in dollars, not local currency. When the 
U.S. dollar rapidly appreciated as markets responded to the policies of U.S. monetary 
authorities, heavily indebted nations had trouble servicing their debts as their interest 
payments rose and the value of their currencies against the U.S. dollar fell. The ensuing 
debt burden on Latin American countries forced several major countries to consider 
defaulting on their debts. The full nature of the debt problem in this period is discussed 
at length in Chapter 13; here we note that the buildup of debt first made it possible for 
developing country governments to finance a wide array of development projects, and 
then created a payment crisis that brought many of these projects to a premature end 
in what in Latin America has often been called the lost decade of the 1980s. The impact 
of this lost decade went far beyond the immediate debt problems. It called into ques-
tion the whole subject of the appropriate role for government in development.
The other profound event of the 1970s really began in the 1960s, but its impact 
on development thinking was felt only a decade later, and its lessons are still being 
debated today. This event was the rise of the Four East Asian Tigers: South Korea, 
 Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore. By the late 1970s these economies had been grow-
ing at rates comparable to those of Japan for over a decade and were increasingly 
seen as economic success stories. The basis for their growth was a direct challenge 
to the view that the path to successful development rested on an emphasis on import 
substituting industrialization. All four built their rapid economic growth on the 
export of labor-intensive manufactures. There was a period of import substitution, 
but the four quickly moved to a reliance on exports, manufactured exports in par-
ticular. The model for the economies of South Korea and Taiwan was Japan, which 
had pioneered a similar strategy during the first phases of its development and again 
after World War II. Hong Kong and Singapore had long been trading entrepôts and 
possessed all of the infrastructure and institutions that trading economies required. 
What was added in the latter two economies was a manufacturing sector oriented 
toward export markets. In Hong Kong’s case, it was manufacturers in Shanghai who 
moved their base of operation to Hong Kong after the Communist revolution in China 
in 1949. All Four East Asian Tigers exported first and foremost to the United States 
whose market, unlike in the 1930s, was wide open to foreign imports. These nations 
demonstrated that a development strategy based on the export of manufactures was 

142   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
not only possible but superior to the import substituting strategies then prevailing in 
much of the developing world.
More controversial is the influence of the Four East Asian Tigers on the role of 
government in their economic development strategy. The facts themselves are not 
really in dispute. The governments of South Korea and Taiwan were actively involved 
in export promotion and in industrial development more generally. They devalued 
their currencies, subsidized exports in various ways, and promoted education and 
research in technology in support of industry. Government support, including tem-
porary protection against imports, was predicated on performance, and performance 
by Korean and Taiwanese firms was measured by their ability to export. By any stan-
dard these governments were interventionist, but they had a clear strategy behind 
their intervention, which was not allowed to be diverted toward the private interests 
of government officials. Corruption existed in the two economies, but it had little 
influence on industrial and export policies. It is also the case, however, that state-
led economic development became less and less viable as these economies became 
more sophisticated and complex. By the first decade of the twenty-first century, both 
South Korea and Taiwan had eliminated much of the intervention that characterized 
their first decades of rapid growth (Box 5–3).
The experience with the role of government in development in Hong Kong and 
to a large degree Singapore as well could not be more different. Hong Kong was as 
close to a pure laissez faire market economy as any in the world. The government of 
Hong Kong maintained a completely open free trade economy. In the few areas in 
which it did intervene, such as land policy, the government imposed policies unre-
lated to the main development strategy. The role of government was to maintain a 
stable macroeconomic environment, support education and health, and maintain 
security. Singapore’s government was similar in most respects, but there the govern-
ment did play a role in supporting particular industries and several of the key cor-
porations (Singapore Airlines, for example) were government owned. For the most 
part, however, Singapore’s industrial policy focused on creating a favorable climate 
for foreign direct investment (see Chapter 10).
Some studies have tried to press these rather different experiences of the Four 
East Asian Tigers into a story consistent across all the groups.14 More common has 
been the selective choice of one experience over another to support a particular pre-
conceived view of the role of government intervention (Hong Kong for those who 
support laissez faire markets;15 South Korea’s heavy and chemical industry drive of 
14World Bank, The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1993), ably describes many of the reasons for the success of the four economies but less success-
fully tries to fit the experiences of the four into a single development model that relied mostly on market 
forces for its success. This reasonably portrays the policies of Hong Kong and Singapore but not those of 
South Korea and Taiwan.
15See for example Milton Friedman, “The Real Lesson of Hong Kong,” National Review, December 31, 
1997.

F U N D A M E N TA L  C H A N G E S  I N T H E  1970 s  A N D 19 8 0 s   143
BOX 5–3  THE DECLINING EFFECTIVENESS OF GOVERNMENT
INTERVENTION IN THE MARKET: KOREA, 1960s–2010
South Korea in the 1960s and 1970s pursued an industrial policy that involved
heavy intervention by the government to promote exports in general and specific
industries in particular. The government provided bank loans to favored indus-
tries at below-market rates, gave these industries special access to government-
controlled foreign exchange and imports, and helped build the infrastructure they
required. The president of the country even met monthly with the heads of the
major industries to review and help solve their problems, many of them related
to intervention by government in their efforts to expand. The government saw
itself as correcting for market failures, even though many of these market fail-
ures were the creation of earlier and continuing government controls that were
part of its import substituting policies.
These industrial policies appear to have worked reasonably well, although
the heavy industry and chemical industry drive of the 1970s remains controver-
sial to this day. President Park Chung Hee, who led this effort, kept politics and
corruption out of most of these industrial policy decisions. Because he ran an
authoritarian regime supported mainly by a modern army, he felt no need to use
industrial policies to pay off his political supporters. By the early 1980s, however,
many Korean economists and others felt that this activist government indus-
trial policy was causing too many economic distortions and the country should
move toward a more market-oriented system. This change proved to be difficult
because of promises made to private companies that had carried out the govern-
ment’s wishes in the past. Such companies felt that they had an implicit guaran-
tee that they would be helped out if, by doing the government’s bidding, they got
into trouble. In the 1980s, they did get into trouble, and the government spent
much of its time in that decade providing them with subsidies and other means
of support.
By the 1990s, Korea had a democratic government led, from 1992 to 1997,
by President Kim Young Sam, who had little interest in an activist industrial pol-
icy. Like his predecessors, however, he saw how these policies could be used to
raise large sums of money to support his political campaigns. Increasingly the
principal criterion for getting government support for a particular firm or industry
depended on whether that firm contributed to the political campaigns. Such con-
tributions existed in the 1960s and 1970s as well, but they were not allowed to
influence major industrial policy decisions. By contrast, in the 1990s, industrial
policy interventions were driven more by politics than by a concern for building
efficient, competitive industries. Industrial policy in the earlier period had produced

144   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
such firms as POSCO, one of the largest and most efficient steel companies
in the world, a firm that remained profitable right through the Asian financial 
crisis of 1997–98. The industrial policy in the 1990s produced such firms as
the Hanbo Steel company, whose bankruptcy contributed in a significant way to 
Korea’s involvement in the Asian financial crisis.
Finally, in the 1998–2008 period, the Korean government under two new
presidents, Kim Dae Jung and then Roh Moo Hyun, began to make a major effort
to get themselves out of the business of supporting particular industries and 
firms. The objective was to create a level playing field for all, but to do so without
triggering another financial crisis caused by the collapse of the older firms that
had relied so much on government support. Moving away from extensive govern-
ment intervention and relying entirely on market forces, however, is not as simple
as simply telling the government to stop intervening. In many cases, the govern-
ment felt it had to introduce new interventions to undo the damage of previous
ones. This same conflict of goals continued during the government of President
Lee Myung-Bak who took office in 2009.
the 1970s for those who believe in extensive government intervention). As the expe-
rience of these four economies became better understood, however, two conclu-
sions became increasingly clear. One was that developing countries could grow at 
very rapid rates with the right policies. The other was that growth could be based on 
exports, at least on exports of manufactures. Exports based on natural resources (dis-
cussed in Chapter 17) were another matter, but none of the four tigers had significant 
exports of natural resources.
The influence of the experience of the Four East Asian Tigers was particularly 
strong regionally, notably in China after 1978 and Vietnam after 1986, but it also 
changed the thinking of many economists and policy makers in South America and 
elsewhere in the developing world.
STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT, THE WASHINGTON 
CONSENSUS, AND THE END OF THE SOVIET MODEL
The response of the multilateral and bilateral aid agencies, particularly the World 
Bank, was to use their aid programs to support changes in the approach to develop-
ment in countries whose economic performance was weak. By the late 1980s the list 
of countries struggling but largely failing to achieve rapid economic development 
included most of those in Africa, Latin America, and South Asia. The term used by 

S TR U CTU R A L A DJ U S T M E N T,  T H E  W A S H I N GTO N  C O N S E N S U S   145
the World Bank for many of the changes it proposed was structural adjustment, a 
broad term that includes reforms aimed at changing the structure of the economy to 
be more market based, more efficient, more open to international trade, and more 
focused on the production of tradable commodities. The result was a wide range of 
reform proposals, initially somewhat ad hoc, that were often made conditional if a 
country wanted to receive assistance from the World Bank or other aid agencies.
A major objective of structural adjustment reforms was to reduce or remove dis-
tortions generated by government intervention. In the majority of developing coun-
tries, the list of distorted prices was long and included high and uneven tariffs, cheap 
interest rates on loans (which discourage saving and lead to poor loan decisions), 
high minimum wages that help some workers but hurt others, subsidized fuel or 
food, and limits on prices paid to farmers to control food prices. For every govern-
ment-determined price, there are winners who receive more for their output or pay 
less for their inputs, and losers who experience the opposite. Price distortions most 
often occur when the beneficiaries of a price change are few and concentrated, and 
the losers are many and dispersed. A tariff raises profits for the well-connected fac-
tory owner. But even though millions of people might be paying a higher price for the 
tariff-protected goods, they are scattered unevenly across the country and unlikely to 
organize to protest the increase. Because the tariff is built into retail prices, consum-
ers may not even be aware that government intervention caused the higher prices. 
The owners of the company, however, know and are happy to share their increased 
profits with those who helped them, thus creating political barriers to reform.
Sometimes, correcting a distortion may lead to lower prices, as in removing a tar-
iff, but it can also lead to higher consumer prices, as in the removal of food or fuel 
subsidies. These subsidies are often paid for out of the budget and can be major con-
tributors to budget deficits and inflation, or they can come from scarce tax revenues 
that might be better spent on schools, roads, or health clinics. However, removing 
such subsidies can create enormous political pressure because consumers immedi-
ately see the costs but not always the benefits. Removal of a food or fuel subsidy fre-
quently triggers rioting that can topple governments.
Thus there is often stiff resistance to structural adjustment reforms designed 
to correct price distortions, either because they hurt powerful and well-connected 
people or because they affect many consumers. In central and eastern Europe and 
in Russia and China, most state enterprises saw themselves as beneficiaries of state 
price controls because it meant that they received key inputs at artificially low prices. 
To get around the resistance of large state enterprises, China created a dual price sys-
tem in the 1980s by which steel going to a large enterprise in accordance with the 
annual plan was charged a low state-set price and all other steel was sold on the 
 market at much higher market-determined prices. This dual system overcame much 
of the political resistance to price reform, but it also created opportunities for corrup-
tion by those who could use their influence to buy at the low state price and quickly 
resell at the high market price, corruption that contributed to the discontent that 

146   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
fueled the demonstrations on Tiananmen Square in 1989. Many of the other social-
ist and former socialist countries, from Russia to Vietnam, therefore, opted for elimi-
nating state-set prices altogether and using one market-determined price for most 
goods and services. By the latter half of the 1990s, China had largely eliminated the 
two-price system in favor of a unified market-price system. The gradual elimination 
of the dual price system resulted in part from deliberate decisions by the  Chinese 
government to reduce the quantity of goods sold at low state-set prices. For the most 
part, however, the state-set prices disappeared because producers increasingly were 
unwilling to sell their goods at below market prices, and they found numerous ways 
to circumvent government instructions requiring them to do so.
There were many other elements to most structural adjustment programs, and 
over time what started as an ad hoc country-by-country approach gradually evolved 
into a comprehensive view of what successful development involved. In later years 
this came to be known as the Washington Consensus, but a comprehensive view 
of what was wrong began to appear well before that term was coined. In 1981, for 
example, the World Bank published an influential report, Accelerated Development 
in Sub-Saharan Africa: An Agenda for Action, better known as the Berg Report after 
its principal author, economist Eliot Berg. It presented a wide range of policy changes 
that would be needed if Africa were to reach its potential growth. The report focused 
heavily on agriculture because that is where most people lived and worked. The 
Berg Report called for an end to overvalued exchange rates then common in Africa, 
and an elimination of trade restrictions that favored inefficient industries over effi-
cient farms. The expanding role of the state in managing the economy, particularly 
the role of state marketing boards as substitutes for private marketing mechanisms, 
came in for criticism. These marketing boards, such as the Ghana Cocoa Board, often 
extracted high taxes from farmers by setting output prices far below the true export 
price for the commodity. There also were recommendations for better debt and aid 
management and more emphasis on improving human resources through education 
and health measures. Similar reports followed in subsequent years but through the 
1980s African development remained sluggish.
It was a seminal essay by economist John Williamson, however, that laid out 
clearly the view of what the international and bilateral aid agencies thought was the 
core set of problems that countries needed to face if they were to accelerate their 
development. This growing strong agreement among the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF), the World Bank, the U.S. government, and other key international actors 
focused on the steps that were necessary for Latin American countries to reform their 
economies, but the implications went beyond Latin America. Williamson was the 
first to label this broadly agreed reform agenda the Washington Consensus.16 Williamson’s 
16The original article is John Williamson, “What Washington Means by Policy Reform” in Williamson, 
ed., Latin American Readjustment: How Much Has Happened (Washington, DC: Institute for International 
Economics, 1989).

S TR U CTU R A L A DJ U S T M E N T,  T H E  W A S H I N GTO N  C O N S E N S U S   147
purpose was to identify “the lowest common denominator” of policy advice prevailing 
at the time. In so doing, he highlighted how these policies differed from the conven-
tional wisdom that had prevailed 20 years before. The 10 components of Williamson’s 
Washington Consensus are as follows.
• Fiscal discipline. Balanced government budgets are essential to avoid 
inflation, balance of payments deficits, and capital flight. Government 
budget deficits of more than 1 or 2 percent of GDP are considered to be 
excessive and evidence of policy failure.
• Reordering public expenditure priorities. Expenditures on subsidies of various 
kinds (gasoline, food, and many other products) and politically sensitive 
areas, including the military, should be cut back and instead should be 
concentrated on education, health, key infrastructure, and maintaining 
essential public administration (but cutting back on bloated bureaucracies).
• Tax reform. To alleviate budget deficits, improve incentives, and achieve 
equity, reforms call for modest marginal tax rates and a broadening of the 
tax base.
• Liberalization of interest rates. Market forces should determine interest rates 
and the allocation of credit. Interest rates need to be positive in real terms—
that is, the nominal interest rate should be higher than the rate of inflation.
• Competitive exchange rates. The exchange rate also should be determined 
by market forces and at a level that maintains a balance-of-payments 
equilibrium and, in particular, facilitates the expansion of exports.
• Trade liberalization. Elimination of quantitative restrictions (import quotas 
and import licensing) and a move toward uniform and low tariffs on 
imported goods. Such measures, in part, would encourage domestic firms 
to sell to foreign markets rather than focus on protected domestic ones.
• Liberalization of foreign direct investment. Restrictions on foreign direct 
investment should be removed so as to facilitate the inflow of needed 
capital, skills, and know-how.
• Privatization. Public enterprises should be privatized, to both relieve 
pressures on the government budget (from subsidies to loss-making public 
enterprises) and promote greater efficiency. This reflected the prevailing view 
that private firms generally are more efficient than those in the public sector.
• Deregulation. The primary vehicle for promoting competition within the 
domestic economy is to greatly reduce or eliminate government regulation, 
especially those that limit the entry and exit of firms. However, regulations 
that ensure safety, environmental protection, and the supervision of the 
banking sector remain justified.
• Secure property rights. Private property rights matter and steps should be 
taken to strengthen these rights, including providing them at reasonable 
cost to the small-scale, informal sector.

148   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
The common thread of all of these recommendations was that growth was being 
inhibited by major distortions in the market, distortions for the most part introduced 
by inappropriate government policies. Removing these distortions was seen as the 
key to accelerating growth. Government failure, more so than market failure, was 
viewed as the primary impediment to economic growth and development.
Williamson’s original essay was written at the end of what was referred to above 
as the lost decade for economic growth and development in Latin America. The paper 
was meant both as a description of the policy reforms recommended to Latin Ameri-
can economies and a prescription for reforms needed in the region. This package of 
reforms, or close variants of it, which advocated prudent macroeconomic policies, 
greater outward orientation, and increased reliance on free markets, was also applied 
outside of Latin America. After the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, a large group of 
transition economies emerged, and they were encouraged to pursue similar policies. 
Sub-Saharan Africa, which had been stuck in its own growth crisis, also was urged to 
follow this same approach. When financial crises reemerged, first in Mexico in 1994, 
then in East Asia in 1997, followed soon thereafter by crises in Russia, Brazil, Turkey, 
and Argentina, elements of the Washington Consensus were applied to these situa-
tions, even though the underlying reasons for financial crises (see Chapters 12 and 
13) were often different from a failure to achieve sustained economic growth.
The 1980s and 1990s witnessed a significant shift toward the reform agenda cap-
tured by the Washington Consensus. The pendulum swung away from state planning 
toward the market. Fiscal discipline became more widespread, with budgets moving 
in the direction of greater balance; hyperinflation, which especially had plagued Latin 
America, became less common; exchange rates worldwide became less overvalued, 
with black market premiums tending to fall if not disappear entirely; financial repres-
sion (by which nominal interest rates are held below the rate of price inflation, with 
governments allocating scarce credit to favored firms) fell out of favor; produce market-
ing boards were disbanded and other forms of direct price control dismantled; trade 
barriers were reduced; and privatization of state-owned enterprises proceeded on all 
continents.17
SOVIET COMMAND MODEL TO MARKET 
ECONOMIES: THE GREAT TRANSITION
As the Latin American economies were beginning to pull out of the debt crisis of the 
1980s and were moving in the direction of the Washington Consensus, one of the 
17In Latin America, fiscal discipline reduced the average budget deficit from 5 percent of GDP to about 
2 percent—and lowered public external debt from about 50 percent of GDP to less than 20 percent. Trade 
liberalization brought average tariffs down from more than 40 percent to nearly 10 percent. . . .  Banks, 
power plants, telecommunication systems, and even roads and water and health services were sold off to 
the private sector. More than 800 public enterprises were privatized between 1988 and 1997. Nancy Bird-
sall and Augusto de la Torre, Washington Contentious: Economic Policies for Social Equity in Latin America 
(Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2001).

S TR U CTU R A L A DJ U S T M E N T,  T H E  W A S H I N GTO N  C O N S E N S U S   149
major events of the late twentieth century was occurring in Eastern Europe. Under 
the leadership of Mikhail Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, the countries in Eastern 
Europe were freed up to go their own way. In rapid succession beginning in 1989, 
the wall separating East Germany from West Germany was torn down and through-
out the countries of Eastern Europe, the ruling authoritarian communist parties were 
replaced by multiparty parliamentary systems. Soon thereafter, the Soviet Union itself 
collapsed and was broken up into 15 separate and independent countries.
For the countries of central and eastern Europe that had been independent 
before World War II and in the newly independent three Baltic states, the economic 
goal of the new governments was clear—they wanted to become as much like west-
ern Europe as possible, and that included the rapid replacement of Soviet-style cen-
tral planning and administrative allocation of most industrial products with a market 
economy. In Russia there was more division of opinion, but there too under Presi-
dent Boris Yeltsin the country set out to transform itself into a market economy as 
well as a more democratic polity.
The question in all of these transition economies was how to carry out this trans-
formation. Should the transition be carried out across the board in one dramatic 
leap, as many foreign and domestic economists were advising? Or should the pro-
cess be gradual? What exactly did the transition to a market economy involve? Some 
of these economies had allowed the market to exist alongside the command econ-
omy, notably in agriculture and in the distribution of many consumer products, but 
now the challenge was how to introduce market forces into the economy as a whole. 
Introducing a market system into an economy governed primarily through nonmar-
ket mechanisms is not the same as removing distortions in an existing market sys-
tem, but that difference was not well understood at the time. In a distorted market 
system, the institutions needed for a market system to function are often in place but 
are being distorted by government interference—for example, in the setting of prices. 
In a command economy in which most goods are distributed through government 
bureaucracies and not through markets, many of the institutions needed for a well-
functioning market system do not exist.
There are five key elements required for a market to function well:
 
1. There must be a reasonable degree of macroeconomic stability. High inflation, 
large balance of payments deficits, and large-scale unemployment are 
generally not consistent with a well-functioning market economy.
 
2. Most goods and services must be distributed through the market. This seems 
obvious, but remember that the Soviet-type economy mostly distributed goods 
and services using administrative means implemented by large government 
bureaucracies. Even in Western economies during wartime, it is typical for a 
large part of distribution to be handled by government officials rather than 
by the market. Commanders in the field do not buy their weapons on the 
market—the weapons are allocated to them by a government bureaucracy, 
such as a defense ministry. For goods to be distributed on the market, a 

150   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
market must exist. In the case of simple markets (for example, a farmer selling 
an egg to a consumer), markets can spring up overnight. More complicated 
markets, however, require institutions that often do not exist. Stock markets 
and futures markets, for example, operate in accordance with an elaborate set 
of rules that define what kinds of activities are allowed and what kinds are not 
allowed. Even the sale of automobiles typically requires a distribution network 
of dealers who not only sell the car but also service it. Because automobiles are 
expensive relative to the income of the typical consumer, there must also be a 
mechanism set up to help finance the purchase of the auto.
 
3. If the goods are going to go to their most efficient uses, prices must be freed up 
to reflect the relative scarcities in the economy. Prices are the signals that guide 
producers on what to produce and consumers on what best to consume. The 
wrong prices send the goods to the wrong (less efficient) uses.
 
4. There must be competition in the markets. Monopoly power distorts prices 
and hence distorts the signals sent by prices to producers and consumers. A 
mechanism thus needs to be in place that prevents producers from colluding 
with each other to establish monopoly control of particular markets.
 
5. Getting prices right in part through competition, however, is only half of the 
battle. If goods and services are to be directed to their most efficient uses, 
producers must respond to these prices in the appropriate way—they must 
behave in accordance with the rules of the market, which in their most basic 
form say that producers should attempt to maximize profits. Furthermore they 
need to maximize profits by increasing their sales or cutting their costs, not by 
getting larger subsidies through their connections with government.
The standard advice of economists involved in the Eastern European and Rus-
sian transitions was similar in many key respects to the program of the Washington 
Consensus, and it dealt with many key aspects of what a well-functioning market 
requires  but not all. These economic advisers typically recommended that govern-
ments should eliminate high levels of inflation and restructure the international debts 
that had built up because of long periods with balance of payments deficits. Assum-
ing that as background, or going ahead even if the macro situation was not under con-
trol, the remaining steps were to have all or most goods and services sold on a market 
and prices freed up to find their appropriate level. The final step was to privatize as 
much of the economy as possible so that producers would thus focus on the maximi-
zation of profit. All of these steps were to be taken as quickly as possible, preferably all 
at once in a year or two.
Not all of the countries involved in this transition process followed this advice 
closely, but many did. The result in almost all cases was a catastrophic drop in GDP 
and a rise in unemployment. The transition economies fell into an economic depres-
sion that lasted for years. What went wrong? Were the recommendations about how 
to make the transition from a state managed economy to a market economy wrong or 

S TR U CTU R A L A DJ U S T M E N T,  T H E  W A S H I N GTO N  C O N S E N S U S   151
did the transition uncover problems in several of these economies that had been hid-
den from view? The answer involves some of both.
The Soviet Union and several Eastern European countries had industries whose 
products were no longer as much in demand as in the past. The end of the cold war, 
for example, meant that the demand for military products fell off sharply in both 
Eastern Europe and the former states of the Soviet Union. Many other products had 
enjoyed captive markets through the trading system developed by the Soviet Bloc. 
The quality of many of those goods was too low to compete with similar products 
from Western Europe and other market economies, and it would take considerable 
time and learning to upgrade them to a competitive level. Many enterprises simply 
could not accomplish the necessary upgrading, and they lost their markets as con-
sumers in the former Soviet Bloc switched to higher quality goods that were available 
from elsewhere if one had the necessary foreign exchange to pay for them.
But the model of how to make the transition to a market economy was itself seri-
ously flawed in two ways. One was the view that everything had to be done together 
and rapidly more or less at the same time, the so-called big bang or shock therapy 
approach to reform. It was easy enough quickly to free up the prices of many prod-
ucts. It was also plausible to try to get inflation under control quickly. Bringing down 
inflation gradually from say 1,000 percent the first year to 500 percent the next, 
200 percent the next, and so on seldom makes sense. The anti-inflationary effort is 
much more likely to be credible and sustaining if the money supply is brought down 
sharply to a level compatible with price stability in a matter of weeks or months.
What does not make sense is the view that one can change the behavior of the 
management of a large industrial sector over night simply by privatizing the indus-
tries involved. Most of the enterprises in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe were 
run by managers who had learned to manage in the context of the Soviet command 
economy. They knew little about markets or how one organized a company to meet 
market demand. The concept of marketing as something that could be taught in 
business schools was unknown to most of these people. They produced what the 
plan told them to produce, and another bureaucracy delivered the end product to its 
user. Privatization could be a first step toward changing the behavior of these manag-
ers, but there were many other steps required to obtain the necessary knowledge and 
skills, and those took time.18
It is also the case that markets that did not exist in the past do not necessarily 
spring up quickly. This is particularly true for financial markets such as stock markets 
for which elaborate rules to guide and control transactions on the stock exchange need 
to be devised and enforcement mechanisms need to be introduced. But it also applies 
to less complex markets. In the early stages of the reforms in eastern Europe, the rush 
18Privatization of state-owned enterprises was done for political and economic reasons. Privatization 
was seen by many reformers as a way of breaking the power of the existing political system in which senior 
government and party officials were closely allied with state enterprise managers.

152   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
to change sometimes led to the abolition of the existing state-run purchasing and dis-
tribution system (for grain in one case) before an alternative system was in place.
In terms of the five criteria needed for a functioning market economy, the 
reforms advocated by those reflecting an approach similar to that of the Washing-
ton Consensus were on target with respect to items 1 (control of macro imbalances), 
3 (freeing up prices), and 4 (promoting market competition), but were less than ade-
quate with respect to 2 (creating the institutions needed for well functioning markets) 
and fell far short of what was required with respect to item 5 (changing the incentives 
and hence the behavior of plant managers in an appropriate way).
While Latin America was recovering from its lost decade, and the countries of 
eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union were undergoing their radical trans-
formation, at the other end of the Eurasian continent a similar and equally radical 
 economic transition was already under way, only this one by any reasonable measure 
was a success. China began its reform effort in late 1978 with decisions to open up 
its economy to foreign trade and foreign direct investment and to return the man-
agement of agricultural production back to the household where before it had been 
managed by production teams of 20 to 30 households working together collectively. 
China did not begin these reforms with a complete well thought out theory or view 
about how reform should proceed. What China’s leaders did know was that the pre-
vious system had worked badly and they wanted a system that would make China 
wealthy and powerful in as short a time as possible. The reforms in agriculture were 
followed in 1984 by replacing allocation of products by the administration with allo-
cation through markets at market prices. That led to a boom in what was called town-
ship and village industries. By the 1990s the legal and incentive environment for 
foreign investors had improved to a point where foreign companies were investing 
more than $50 billion a year in China—a figure that would more than double by 2010. 
GDP growth continued at over 9 percent per year for three decades, and China was 
well on its way to transforming a poor rural economy into a middle-income urban 
and industrial economy.
China, therefore, demonstrated that a sustained high growth rate was possible if 
one opened up the economy to the outside world, promoted the export of manufac-
tures, and introduced competitive market forces into most transactions. For simpler 
markets and production, China made some of these changes rapidly, but when large 
enterprises had to be transformed from creatures of central planning into interna-
tionally competitive market-oriented firms, change was very gradual. Further, China 
still lacks, for example, many of the institutions needed for a Western-style market 
economy and a legal system capable of settling major economic disputes without 
political interference. The more complex the institutions required, the longer it takes 
to introduce them and make them function properly.
Beginning in 1986 and accelerating after 1989, Vietnam followed a reform path 
similar to that of China. This demonstrated, among other things, that the success of 
China’s step-by-step approach was not a fluke.

S TR U CTU R A L A DJ U S T M E N T,  T H E  W A S H I N GTO N  C O N S E N S U S   153
The other major country that introduced broad-based reforms designed to 
increase the role of market forces and free up technical and entrepreneurial energy 
was India. India, as pointed out earlier, had been heavily influenced by both the 
Soviet economic model and the British Fabian socialists’ views on the importance 
of active regulation of the economy. The result for decades had been a slow rate of 
growth of GDP that raised per capita incomes by a little under 2 percent per year 
between 1952 and 1980 a rate similar to that of China in the same period. Modest 
reforms reducing regulation and freeing up markets led to some acceleration in per 
capita growth in the 1980s to a bit over 3 percent a year; then major reforms begin-
ning in and after 1991 led to East Asian–style growth rates of nearly 5 percent per 
capita through 2010. (Total GDP grew at nearly 8 percent per year over the reform 
period.) Unlike China where the most rapid growth was in industry, in India the 
highest growth sector was in services. The reason is that industry still retained a high 
degree of regulation and India’s political leaders had not yet made a full commitment 
to opening their economy. Hence, Indian manufactured exports remained far below 
those of the Four East Asian Tigers and particularly China, but India did achieve sig-
nificant success in exporting services. India’s lower level of dependence on exports, 
it should be noted, also reduced the impact of the 2008–10 world recession on India.
China and India thus present important examples of large economies that grew 
with a mixed model of state involvement, both adopting selective dimensions but 
neither adopting all of the Washington Consensus. Together India and China account 
for 37 percent of the world’s population, in contrast to 16 percent for all of the high-
income countries of Europe, North America, and Japan combined. Arguably their 
rise out of extreme poverty into middle-income status is the most significant event of 
the past half century.
WAS THE WASHINGTON CONSENSUS A SUCCESS OR A FAILURE?
During the first decade of the twenty-first century there has been a growing backlash 
against the forces of globalization, which in effect is also a backlash against many ele-
ments of the Washington Consensus. Demonstrations, often violent, have disrupted 
some international meetings set up to further the liberalization of international trade, 
for example in Seattle in 1999 and Cancun in 2003. The global recession of 2008–10 
also led many economists to question the effort of the past decades to reduce sharply 
the amount of government regulation in the economy. All of the high-income coun-
tries introduced new regulatory measures for their financial markets, and many 
developing countries have pulled back from efforts to further liberalize their sys-
tems. Was the earlier effort to reduce the government regulatory role in the economy 
wrong? Was it wrong for all countries or for only the few that took the process too far?
The issue for developing countries as of 2010 was whether the Washington Con-
sensus approach to development was wrong or whether it furthered their economic 
goals, even if it did not offer a complete solution. To begin with we note that many 

154   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
developing countries across the globe did make an effort to implement many of the 
recommended policies contained in the Washington Consensus. In Latin America 
in particular most countries succeeded in ending decade after decade of high rates 
of inflation. Exchange rates for the most part were no longer overvalued and import 
barriers were greatly reduced. Fiscal discipline was much improved, although this 
was not universal. Argentina, for example, tried to ensure stability by pegging its cur-
rency to the dollar from 1991 to 2002 in what amounted to a currency board arrange-
ment (that is, allowing full convertibility between the peso and the dollar at a fixed 
rate of exchange), but the central government could not control the spending of local 
governments, and maintaining the currency peg became impossible.
The data in Table 5–1 compare Latin America’s ability to control inflation and its 
rate of per capita GDP growth starting with the lost decade of the 1980s through to 
2008 and the beginning of the global financial crisis and inflation. The data are for 
the region as a whole (including the Caribbean nations) and for several of its largest 
and most important countries. The rate of inflation is chosen not only because it is an 
important indicator in its own right of the quality of government economic manage-
ment but because high rates of inflation are closely associated with government bud-
gets that are out of control and with a wide variety of other undesirable interventions, 
many of which are designed to ameliorate the effects of inflation.
The data in Table 5–1 make clear what was meant by the lost decade of the 1980s. 
Per capita GDP growth in the region as a whole and in most of the major countries 
was low or negative. In per capita terms the region as a whole suffered a decline in 
income. The 1980s were also a period of hyperinflation, the kind of inflation in which 
prices change almost daily (see Chapter 12). During the 1990s, particularly during 
the later years, Latin America began to get control of inflation, and by the first decade 
of the next century the rate of annual price increase was in the single digits through-
out the region.
TABLE 5–1 Economic Growth and Inflation in Latin America
 
PER CAPITA GDP GROWTH (%) 
INFLATION RATES (%)
REGION/COUNTRY 
1980–90 
1991–2000 
2001–08 
1980–90 
1991–2000 
2001–08
Latin America 
 
 
 
 
 
 and Caribbean 
–0.4 
1.6 
2.3 
14.6 
17.5 
6.1
Brazil 
0.1 
1.0 
2.3 
396.4 
308.9 
8.1
Mexico 
0.3 
1.8 
1.3 
60.7 
16.3 
7.8
Colombia 
1.5 
0.7 
3.0 
24.7 
22.5 
6.7
Argentina 
–2.4 
2.2 
3.2 
490.7 
10.3 
12.7
Venezuela 
–2.4 
0.0 
2.7 
22.1 
40.1 
25.0
Chile 
2.5 
4.8 
3.1 
20.9 
8.5 
5.7
GPD, gross domestic product.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

S TR U CTU R A L A DJ U S T M E N T,  T H E  W A S H I N GTO N  C O N S E N S U S   155
Did control of inflation together with all of the other reforms introduced in the 
1990s and after improve the overall performance of the economy? For the most 
part economic stagnation came to an end in the region as growth resumed, but the 
growth rates achieved were modest, particularly compared with what was happen-
ing in East and Southeast Asia and in India. The most plausible explanation for this 
performance was that the reforms designed to improve the functioning of markets 
in Latin America were necessary if higher growth was to be achieved, but were not 
by themselves sufficient to achieve the very high catch-up growth rates experienced 
in Asia in recent years. There is more to achieving a high rate of GDP growth than 
simply getting the prices right by removing market distortions caused by inappropri-
ate government interventions. There is a need for new technologies appropriate to 
the conditions in specific countries. It is also essential to have high-quality human 
resources, people who are well educated and healthy. Investors also require a stable 
political environment. These other elements in the development equation will come 
up again and again in the chapters that follow. Here we simply note that the level 
and nature of government intervention in Latin American in the 1980s and before 
was excessive, and the efforts to reduce and redirect the nature of government inter-
vention in the 1990s and during the first decade of the twenty-first century appear to 
have had a positive impact but not as large an impact as many of the advocates of the 
Washington Consensus reform program had hoped for.
It is also the case that market-oriented reforms in Latin America did little to 
improve the highly unequal distribution of income that characterizes many of the 
countries in the region. This in turn is part of the reason for the reaction in the first 
decade of the twenty-first century that brought many leftist governments to power. 
Some of these governments, notably Brazil, retained market oriented reforms while 
making a greater effort to improve social welfare initiatives. Others, notably Venezu-
ela, reverted to earlier approaches that used high oil prices to increase subsidies to 
political supporters, an approach that has generally proved to be unsustainable once 
oil prices fall.
Any attempt to assess the impact of market reforms on development in Africa is 
even more complex than for Latin America. Many countries in sub-Saharan Africa 
during the turn of the century did make a major effort to remove distortions in mar-
kets caused by inappropriate government intervention. Overvalued exchange rates 
were devalued, and the role of government marketing organizations was reduced. 
Trade restrictions were also cut back in much of the region. But sub-Saharan Africa 
is made up of 47 countries, some of which have made a major effort to reform, while 
others are mired in civil war or rampant corruption. To understand the impact of 
market-oriented reforms, therefore, one needs to separate out the countries that 
have made a major reform effort from those that have not. A recent study by Steven 
Radelet has done precisely that, dividing the countries in sub-Saharan Africa into 
three groups: emerging nations that have made major reforms and have enjoyed 
sustained increases in per capita income, oil-exporting countries whose income has 

156   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
tended to fluctuate with the ups and downs of petroleum prices, and the others that 
have not made much of a reform effort and/or are mired in civil war. He identifies 
17 emerging African countries that have carried out substantial reforms and have 
achieved sustained per capita growth since 1996 (Table 5–2).
These reforming or emerging African economies have lowered tariff rates, elimi-
nated overvalued exchange rates, and in a variety of other ways improved the climate 
for private businesses more than in the countries in Africa that did not perform as 
well (Table 5–3). Among the countries that had generally not done as well were the oil 
exporters that took in large amounts of foreign exchange from oil revenues; African 
governments typically could not manage the funds efficiently or without large-scale 
corruption. The poorest performers included countries wracked by civil war (notably 
the Congo) or those that were badly managed by an oligarchy willing to do almost 
anything to hold on to power (for example, Zimbabwe).
As in the case of Latin America, market-oriented reforms in parts of Africa did not 
eliminate all of the barriers to high growth in the region. The growth rates achieved 
by the emerging African countries were far below the per capita GDP growth rates 
achieved in Asia. But the growth rates in the 17 emerging African countries were also 
TABLE 5–2  Emerging African Countries and Growth in Average Incomes, 
    1996–2008
 
ANNUAL PER CAPITA  
CUMULATIVE INCREASE IN
EMERGING COUNTRIES 
INCOME GROWTH (%) 
AVERAGE REAL INCOME (%)
Botswana 
4.1 
68
Burkina Faso 
2.8 
43
Cape Verde 
4.0 
67
Ethiopia 
4.1 
65
Ghana 
2.6 
40
Lesotho 
2.3 
33
Mali 
2.5 
37
Mauritius 
3.7 
61
Mozambique 
5.3 
96
Namibia 
2.4 
36
Rwanda 
3.7 
60
São Tomé and Principe 
5.0 
40
Seychelles 
2.5 
37
South Africa 
2.0 
29
Tanzania 
3.0 
46
Uganda 
3.8 
61
Zambia 
1.8* 
25
Average 
3.2 
50
*We include Zambia even through its 13-year growth rate is slightly lower than 2 percent because its 
annual average growth rate for the 10-year period was 2.3 percent.
Source: Steven Radelet, Emerging Africa: How 17 Countries Are Leading the Way (Washington, DC: 
Center for Global Development, 2010).

S TR U CTU R A L A DJ U S T M E N T,  T H E  W A S H I N GTO N  C O N S E N S U S   157
TABLE 5–3  Average Rank in Doing Business of Sub-Sahara African (SSA) 
    Countries out of 181 Countries Worldwide, 2009
INDICATOR* 
EMERGING SSA 
OTHER SSA 
LOW INCOME (WORLDWIDE)
Total ease of doing business 
108 
158 
141
Starting a business 
97 
146 
118
Dealing with construction permits 
109 
121 
124
Employing workers 
100 
132 
114
Registering property 
113 
129 
118
Getting credit 
100 
135 
123
Protecting investors 
87 
131 
115
Paying taxes 
85 
128 
120
Trading across borders 
128 
139 
141
Enforcing contracts 
92 
134 
113
Closing a business 
108 
140 
135
*The lower the ranking, the greater the ease of doing business.
Source: Steven Radelet, Emerging Africa: How 17 Countries Are Leading the Way (Washington, DC: 
Center for Global Development, 2010).
far above what those countries had achieved in the past before 1996 and were also sig-
nificantly above what other sub-Saharan African countries were achieving after 1996.
What then can one conclude about the appropriate mix of market influences and 
the role of government intervention? Was the Washington Consensus approach and 
its variant dealing with reform of former Soviet-type economies the right answer? 
Or was that approach far off the mark? Economists and others continue to actively 
debate this question. Discussions of a post–Washington Consensus have tended to 
moderate the original’s exclusive focus on market liberalization, highlighting instead 
the role of good governance and strong institutions as pillars of development.19
The first conclusion that can be derived from an overview of the actual experi-
ence of developing countries is that there was considerable variation in the degree to 
which these countries, including the most reform minded among them, applied the 
policies recommended by the Washington Consensus. China and Vietnam, for exam-
ple, did not carry out privatization of most of their state-owned enterprises. Other 
countries retained restrictions on imports, and the Four East Asian Tigers model that 
inspired many reform efforts actually retained tight restrictions on imports during the 
first three decades of rapid growth. While few if any of the countries that attempted to 
implement market-oriented reforms carried out all of them, virtually all of the more 
successful countries, whether in Asia, Latin America, or sub-Saharan Africa, did make 
significant moves in the direction of reduced government intervention and greater 
19A good review of these debates as seen by one analyst is Derek Heady, “Appraising a post-Washington 
Paradigm: What Professor Rodrik Means by Policy Reform,” Review of International Political Economy 16, 
no. 4 (2009), 698–728.

158   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
reliance on market forces. No country, however, had to move all the way to a perfect 
market economy to achieve positive results.
When it comes to the question of what is the appropriate level and nature of gov-
ernment intervention in the economy of a developing country, there is no one-size- 
fits-all formula. The governments of some countries such as South Korea and Taiwan 
have actively promoted particular industries using a variety of subsidies and other 
interventions and have done so successfully, at least in the early stages of their accel-
erated growth period. Governments elsewhere, Indonesia in the 1990s, for example, 
pursued government-led industrial policies that put increasing emphasis on large 
state-supported import substituting industrial projects with disastrous results. Yet, 
Indonesia before the 1990s had done well as a result of policies that had steadily 
reduced the regulation of trade and industry and had created an environment con-
ducive to the export of labor-intensive products. Governments in most develop-
ing countries have played a dominant role in the provision of infrastructure (roads, 
railroads, electric power, and so on), and some have carried out these large capital 
investments with comparative efficiency, while in others the process has been rid-
dled with corruption and waste.
The point here is that some governments in developing countries are capable of 
carrying out a relatively efficient interventionist industrial and infrastructure devel-
opment policy, but other countries lack this ability. The terms sometimes used to 
describe these two kinds of governments are hard governments, which can inter-
vene actively in a way that promotes growth, and soft governments, which are not 
able to do so. Hard governments can carry out Korean-style interventionist policies 
with success; soft governments can also achieve successful development but must 
rely as much as possible on market forces to guide the effort. Being hard or soft is not 
something that is a permanent condition for the government of a particular country. 
Governments can move from being unable to set priorities and stick to them when 
implementing a development program to being able to do so and vice versa. What 
makes some governments hard and others soft at a point in time takes one back to 
the underlying conditions prevailing in particular countries—the nature of their 
colonial experience, their culture and politics, their natural resources, and much 
else. These topics go far beyond what can be covered in this book. Hard or soft, how-
ever, as economies become more advanced and sophisticated intervention becomes 
more and more difficult, market forces need to play a larger and larger role. Govern-
ment intervention should be carefully targeted toward areas in which market guid-
ance alone is clearly insufficient (the financial sector, environmental controls, and 
amelioration of extreme poverty are three important areas).
A second conclusion is that market-oriented reforms do not require that every-
thing be done at once and as quickly as possible. Reform can be achieved step by 
step over a substantial period of time—the big bang or shock therapy approach was 
not necessary, and in most cases was probably not feasible or even desirable. Finally, 
making greater use of market forces and reducing the role of government intervention 

S U M M A R Y   159
in the economy is not a magic bullet that solves all of the problems of development. A 
highly interventionist approach by which government actions are driven as much by 
politics and rent seeking or corruption can slow or even stop growth, but reliance on 
market forces by itself does not guarantee high economic growth rates. A large degree 
of reliance on market forces is generally helpful to development, but there is much 
more to the development process, as the chapters that follow make clear.
SUMMARY
• The respective roles of states and markets in shaping economic 
development have been a central focus of debate since the time of 
Adam Smith. This debate took on new urgency in the period after 
World War II, when today’s developing countries began to emerge from 
colonial rule.
• Early postwar development thinking focused on the accumulation of 
capital as the key to economic growth. This idea was formalized in early 
growth models, such as Harrod-Domar; yet, the intellectual origins of the 
focus on capital accumulation arose from such divergent sources as David 
Ricardo and Karl Marx.
• The experience of rebuilding western Europe after the war bolstered the 
capital-oriented view of development, but early analysts failed to note the 
important role played by supporting institutions that had long existed on 
the Continent.
• The experience of the Great Depression and massive market failure before 
World War II contributed to widespread skepticism among economists and 
policy makers in both emerging industrialized countries and developing 
countries about the ability of markets to guide development. The 
perceived early success of the Soviet growth model that rejected reliance 
on market forces in favor of an economy run almost entirely by large state 
bureaucracies also influenced developing country thinking, particularly in 
China and India.
• Market skepticism extended to international trade as well, leading many 
countries to turn inward and erect trade barriers to protect their domestic 
economies from what appeared to be unreliable international market 
forces. This import substituting approach to development was particularly 
prevalent in South America, where early industrialization had begun in 
the first half of the twentieth century, when two world wars and the Great 
Depression made export-oriented industrial growth virtually impossible; 
but industry began to stagnate as small domestic markets became 
saturated.
SUMMARY

160   [CH. 5] STAT E S  A N D  M A R K E T S
• By the late 1970s, poor economic performance in many developing 
countries following government-led models of development and import 
substitution, together with the rising debt burden of many Latin American 
countries, led to a broad questioning of that approach and a reexamination 
of the potential benefits of markets and trade for development. At the 
same time, economists and policy makers were becoming more aware 
of alternative and successful growth models being pursued in East Asia. 
These models stressed the export of manufactures as central to growth 
and limited import substituting protection to the first few years when a 
new industry was learning how to compete. The role of government in 
these successful countries, however, varied considerably from the highly 
interventionist model of South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan to the almost 
laissez faire model of Hong Kong.
• By the 1980s and early 1990s, the perceived development failures in the 
developing world outside of East Asia had led the major international 
development agencies and the U.S. government, among others, to 
be advocates of a development model that came to be known as the 
Washington Consensus. This model called for developing countries to 
practice fiscal discipline and rely for the most part on market forces to 
guide the economy. Foreign assistance and debt relief was often made 
conditional on a country implementing the components of this consensus.
• The Washington Consensus was first promoted in sub-Saharan Africa, even 
before the term was coined, but it was later central to international efforts 
to help Latin America recover from the lost decade caused by the debt crisis 
of the 1980s. This same set of policy prescriptions was then advocated for 
and to some degree implemented by the states of Eastern Europe and the 
former Soviet Union as they rejected the Soviet-style command economy 
in favor of market forces. The economic performance of the countries that 
adopted many or even most of the policies called for by the Washington 
Consensus, however, was often disappointing.
• While much of the international aid effort was focused on implementing 
the goals of the Washington Consensus, China, beginning in 1978, was 
implementing a model that had some of the components of that consensus 
but lacked many others. China moved step by step toward a model that 
relied increasingly on markets but with a high degree of state intervention 
and continued state ownership of many of the larger enterprises. By 2011, 
that model had produced decades of high, near double-digit growth.
• India and Vietnam by the 1990s were also moving away from the extreme 
levels of government intervention in the economy that characterized their 
earlier development strategies, but like China they implemented only some 
of the components of the Washington Consensus. Like China, they began to 

S U M M A R Y   161
grow very rapidly throughout the 1990s and the first decade of the twenty-
first century.
• Was the Washington Consensus a failure? There is no question that 
it oversimplified what was required to achieve sustained economic 
development. Not all of the elements in the consensus were necessary in 
all developing countries, and certain key elements, notably the quality of 
governance, were largely absent from the consensus. Nevertheless, when 
one looks at the performance of nations in Africa and Latin America, it 
is the countries that implemented much of what was called for by the 
consensus that have performed better than those that did not do so.


PART TWO
Distribution 
and Human Resources


165
Inequality and Poverty
6
B
angladesh is one of the world’s most heavily populated low-income nations. 
In 2010, per capita income among Bangladesh’s 164 million people was 
$1,486 (US$, PPP). On a daily basis, this amounts to a bit more than $4 per 
person per day, which would permit a meager standard of living at best. But 
$4 per day refers only to the average, the income level that would prevail if all of GDP 
was available for consumption and then was divided equally among the entire popu-
lation, which, of course, it is not. What income level is earned by those who fall below 
the average? How much do the poorest Bangladeshis depend on for their survival? 
Evidence from the World Bank suggests that 50 percent of Bangladeshis survive on 
$1.25 a day or less, the standard international definition for absolute poverty.1
The most recent estimates for global poverty are for 2005, although projections 
have been made for more recent years. In 2005, 1.4 billion people, or more than one 
out of every five people, were estimated to live below the $1.25 a day poverty line; 
2.6 billion people, about half the population of the developing world in 2005, survived 
on less than $2 a day. For most readers of this book, who are enrolled in a college or 
1The World Bank’s international poverty line originally referred to $1 a day, in 1985 US$ (PPP). It has 
been revised several times. The most recent estimates identify two poverty lines: $1.25 a day in 2005 US$ 
(PPP) is the mean of the national poverty lines for 15 of the world’s poorest countries and is considered 
a measure of extreme poverty; $2.00 a day is the mean national poverty line among all developing coun-
tries. The selection of these poverty lines is discussed in more detail later in the chapter. Global poverty 
estimates refer to 2005 and are from S. Chen and M. Ravallion, “The Developing World Is Poorer Than We 
Thought, but No Less Successful in the Fight Against Poverty,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, no. 4 
(2010). Estimates for Bangladesh and other countries referred to in this chapter are from World Bank, 
“World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org unless otherwise indicated.

166   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
 university, the idea of living on $1 to $2 a day is close to inconceivable. But these are the 
 circumstances facing tens of millions of Bangladeshis and billions of people worldwide.
The major explanation for the degree of absolute poverty in Bangladesh and other 
low income nations is the low level of total production per capita. But this is not the 
only factor. Mexico is an upper-middle-income nation with a 2010 GDP per capita 
income of US$15,224 (PPP), more than 10 times the level in Bangladesh. If GDP 
were distributed equally in Mexico, each Mexican would have about $42 per day. 
But income is not equally shared in Mexico, or in Bangladesh, or for that matter, in 
any other country. The richest 20 percent of Mexicans receive over 50 percent of total 
household income, almost 15 times as much as the poorest 20 percent who receive 
only 3.5 percent of total income. The distribution of income in Mexico results in over 
3.5 million Mexicans (about 3.4 percent of the population in 2008) living below the 
$1.25 a day poverty line and 8.1 percent living below $2 a day.
Raising people out of poverty requires economic growth. Increases in GDP per 
capita typically benefit those below the poverty line as well as those who live near 
or considerably above it. Without sustained economic growth, the most Bangladesh 
could achieve is the low level of income that $4 a day permits. But the distribution of 
national income plays a vital role, too. Inequality affects the amount of poverty gen-
erated by a given level of income. It may affect growth just as growth may affect levels 
of inequality, and inequality itself is something people care about, independent of its 
effects on poverty and growth.
If both economic growth and distribution affect poverty levels, what does this 
suggest about policy? Toward the end of this chapter, we consider potential elements 
of a pro-poor development strategy. These elements include encouraging more rapid 
economic growth, improving opportunities for the poor via investments in basic 
 education and healthcare, and designing social safety nets and other programs for 
especially vulnerable groups.
MEASURING INEQUALITY
Economists often are interested in the distribution of income among households 
within a nation. But these are not the only dimensions of inequality we might want 
to investigate. Instead of income, development economists often look at the distri-
bution of household consumption, usually measured by household expenditures, 
whether in-kind or in money terms. In poor countries income can be hard to mea-
sure, especially for subsistence farm households who consume rather than market 
most of what they produce. Consumption also may be a more reliable indicator of 
welfare than is income, in part because consumption tends not to fluctuate as much 
as income from one period to the next.
One might also be interested in the distribution of wealth, which always is more 
unequal than the distribution of either income or consumption. Distributions of 
MEASURING INEQUALITY

M E A S U R I N G  I N E Q U A L IT Y   167
assets, whether of land or education, are useful in understanding the opportunities 
 individuals have to be productive and generate household income. The distribution 
of income depends on ownership of factors of production (including the value of the 
labor services that one “owns”) and the role each factor plays in the production process. 
Ownership of land and capital often is highly concentrated, so anything that enhances 
the relative returns to these factors makes the distribution of income more unequal. 
 Conversely, relatively higher wages for unskilled labor, the most widely distributed 
 factor of production in developing nations, tend to lead to a more equal distribution.
In addition to deciding whether to look at the distribution of income, consump-
tion, or wealth within one nation, one might want to look at how each is distributed 
among nations. We assess the level of global inequality at the end of the chapter. One 
can also look within the household at patterns of intrahousehold inequality, which 
are critical for understanding gender issues and the welfare of children.
No matter what dimension of distribution one is interested in, one needs a set 
of analytical tools for describing and understanding distributional outcomes. The 
simplest way of depicting any distribution is to display its frequency distribution, 
which tells us how many (or what percent of) families or individuals receive different 
amounts of income. Figure 6–1a presents the frequency distribution of household con-
sumption per capita for Bangladesh. This distribution is based on a survey of about 
7,000 Bangladeshi families, selected to represent the over 24 million households in 
Bangladesh. Surveyed households responded to detailed questionnaires about their 
sources of income and consumption of a wide variety of goods. Researchers used this 
information to derive an estimate of each household’s per capita consumption.
Figure 6–1a tells us the percentage of individuals with different levels of annual 
consumption starting from the lowest reported level and rising in increments of 
650 taka, the Bangladeshi currency. Almost 1 million people, less than 1 percent of 
 Bangladesh’s population, reported the lowest annual consumption expenditures in 
the survey, under 3,250 taka per year (less than $270, PPP); 8.4 percent (the high-
est bar in the figure) had per capita consumption of between 5,850 and 6,500 taka 
(around $500, PPP); and less than 0.5 percent had the top amounts reported in Fig- 
ure 6–1a, over 22,750 taka (almost $1,900, PPP). There are households with even 
higher consumption in Bangladesh, but Figure 6–1a reports the distribution for only 
95 percent of individuals ranked by per capita consumption. Had the top 5 percent 
been included in the figure, the tail of the distribution would continue to extend 
much  farther to the right of the diagram.2
2Household income and expenditures surveys, like the one for Bangladesh, often fail to capture two 
groups of households. Both the poorest and richest families are likely to be underrepresented. The poor-
est families, including those who are homeless and live in places such as railway stations or river gullies, 
tend not to be adequately enumerated. Similarly, the most affluent, few in number, are unlikely to be part 
of the statistical sample. There also is a tendency for more affluent households not to respond to such sur-
veys or to underreport their incomes. Thus even in the best of surveys, the degree of inequality may be 
underestimated.

168   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
0—1,650
1,651—3,300
3,301—4,950
4,951—6,600
21,451—23,100
28,051—29,700
41,251—42,900
47,851—49,500
46,201—47,850
44,551—46,200
42,901—44,550
39,601—41,250
37,951—39,600
36,301—37,950
34,651—36,300
33,001—34,650
31,351—33,000
29,701—31,350
26,401—28,050
24,751—26,400
23,101—24,750
19,801—21,450
18,151—19,800
16,501—18,150
14,851—16,500
13,201—14,850
11,551—13,200
9,01—11,550
8,251—9,900
6,601—8,250
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0—3,250
3,251—3,900
3,901—4,550
4,551—5,200
6,501—7,150
5,851—6,500
5,201—5,850
7,151—7,800
7,801—8,450
8,451—9,100
9,101—9,750
9,751—10,400
10,401—11,050
11,051—11,700
11,701—12,350
12,351—13,000
13,001—13,650
13,651—14,300
14,301—14,950
14,951—15,600
15,601—16,250
16,251—16,900
16,901—17,550
17,551—18,200
18,201—18,850
18,851—19,500
19,501—20,150
20,151—20,800
20,801—21,450
21,451—22,100
22,101—22,750
22,751—23,400
Bangladesh 
Per capita consumption (taka/year) 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Percentage of population within consumption
bracket
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Per capita income (pesos/year) 
Percentage of population within income
bracket
Mexico 
0—5,000
5,001—10,000
10,001—15,000
15,001—20,000
20,001—25,000
25,001—30,000
30,001—35,000
35,001—40,000
40,001—45,000
45,001—50,000
50,001—55,000
55,001—60,000
60,001—65,000
65,001—70,000
70,001—75,000
75,001—80,000
80,001—85,000
85,001—90,000
90,001—95,000
95,001—100,000
100,001—105,000
105,001—110,000
110,001—115,000
115,001—120,000
120,001—125,000
125,001—130,000
130,001—135,000
135,001—140,000
140,001—145,000
145,001—150,000
150,001—155,000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Household income (dollars/year) 
United States
Percentage of households within income
bracket
FIGURE 6–1 The Distribution of Income: Bangladesh, Mexico, and the United States, 2000s
Sources: Collaboration with Claudio E. Montenegro, World Bank; U.S. Current Population Survey (March 2004).

M E A S U R I N G  I N E Q U A L IT Y   169
Take a look at the shape of the frequency distribution for Bangladesh in Fig -
ure 6-1a. The distribution is not rectangular, with every level of consumption repre-
sented by the same percentage of individuals, nor was it expected to be. The height 
of the bars, each bar representing a different consumption level, initially rises and 
then grows progressively shorter. If distributions were very equal, there would be a 
small number of very tall bars in the middle of the diagram, indicating that just about 
everyone had nearly the same level of consumption. The distribution also is not a 
normal distribution, the so-called bell curve, with which you may be familiar from 
courses in statistics. If consumption or income were distributed normally, there 
would be an equal number of households on either side of the mean and symmetric 
tails to the distribution suggesting equal percentages of the population at both low 
and high consumption and incomes. IQs are distributed normally, but consumption 
and income are not. The distribution instead is described as lognormal, meaning 
that if you took the logarithms of household consumption or incomes and redrew the 
frequency distribution it would approximate the more familiar bell curve.
The lognormal distribution captures what you already know about incomes. In 
virtually all societies there are a relatively small number of rich households (captured 
in the long, flat tail to the right) and a much larger number of lower-income families 
who make up “the hump” of the distribution, which is located at the lower end of 
the income range. This particular shape of the distribution of income is not unique 
to Bangladesh. Similar distributional outcomes characterize low-, middle-, and high-
income economies. Figure 6–1b–c illustrate this point. These income distributions 
are based on micro-level household surveys for Mexico and the United States. Note 
that all three nations exhibit similar lognormal distributions, each with its own long, 
flat tail to the right.
Bangladesh, Mexico, and the United States all have similarly shaped frequency 
distributions, but they are not identical. This means that the degree of inequality 
in the three nations varies. To get a sense of the differences we need to rearrange 
the data contained in the frequency distributions; these distributions have com-
plex shapes and are difficult to compare across nations or within nations over time. 
 Calculating the size distribution provides an easier way of identifying the degree of 
inequality present in the underlying distribution.
Size distributions tell us the share of total consumption or income received by 
different groups of households, ranked according to their consumption or income 
level. One can rank households or individuals by deciles or even percentiles, but the 
convention is to report on quintiles, ranking households from the poorest 20 percent, 
to the next 20 percent, all the way to the richest 20 percent of households. In the case 
of Bangladesh, each quintile represents about 30 million people. Summing all indi-
vidual consumption expenditures in each quintile and dividing by the country’s total 
consumption yields each quintile’s share.
Table 6–1 contains World Bank estimates of the size distribution of consumption 
for Bangladesh and household income for Mexico and the United States. This way of 

170   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
presenting the data makes it clear that, of the three nations, Bangladesh has the rela-
tively most equal distribution because the quintile shares are closer to one another 
than is the case for either Mexico or the United States. (If the distribution were com-
pletely equal, each quintile would receive 20 percent of the total.) In  Bangladesh, the 
top 20 percent receive 41 percent of total consumption, about 4.5 times the amount 
received by the poorest 20 percent. In Mexico and the United States, the ratio is much 
larger, roughly 15:1.3 Some of these differences are due to what precisely is being 
measured—consumption or income and whether on a per capita or household 
basis—but much of the difference is due to the underlying distribution within each 
nation.
The size distribution provides a means for introducing some other techniques 
commonly used to measure inequality, including some that reduce the entire dis-
tribution to a single number. Data from the size distribution can be used to draw a 
Lorenz curve (Figure 6–2), named after Max Lorenz, a statistician. Income recipients 
are arrayed from lowest to highest income along the horizontal axis. The curve itself 
shows the share of total income received by any cumulative percentage of recipients. 
Its shape indicates the degree of inequality in the income distribution. By definition, 
the curve must touch the 45-degree line at both the lower-left corner (0 percent of 
recipients must receive 0 percent of income) and the upper-right corner (100 per-
cent of recipients must receive 100 percent of income). If everyone had the same 
income, the Lorenz curve would lie along the 45-degree line (perfect equality). If 
only one household received income and all other households had none, the curve 
3Unlike most low- and middle-income nations, the United States has a comprehensive system of taxa-
tion of household incomes and government transfer payments (such as Social Security). The data reported 
here are for money incomes before taxes and after cash transfer payments. Noncash transfers, such as 
food stamps and Medicare, are not accounted for. Once taxes and all government transfer payments are 
included, the distribution becomes somewhat more equal. The ratio of the shares of the top 20 to the bot-
tom 20 falls to closer to 10:1 than the 15:1 reported in Table 6–1.
TABLE 6–1  Size Distributions of Consumption or Income within Quintiles in 
    Bangladesh, Mexico, and the United States, 2000s
 
SHARE OF TOTAL CONSUMPTION OR INCOME
QUINTILE 
BANGLADESH 
MEXICO 
UNITED STATES
Bottom 20% 
9.0 
3.5 
3.4
Second 20% 
12.5 
8.2 
8.7
Third 20% 
16.0 
13.3 
14.8
Fourth 20% 
21.5 
21.2 
23.4
Top 20% 
41.0 
53.7 
49.8
Sources: Collaboration with Claudio E. Montenegro, World Bank; U.S. Current Population Survey 
(March 2004).

M E A S U R I N G  I N E Q U A L IT Y   171
would trace the bottom and right-hand borders of the diagram (perfect inequal-
ity). In all actual cases the Lorenz curve lies somewhere in between. The farther the 
Lorenz curve bends away from the 45-degree line of perfect equality (the larger the 
shaded area, A) the greater the inequality. When comparing Lorenz curves, either 
for the same country at different points of time or for different countries, it is pos-
sible for the separate curves to intersect. When this happens it is ambiguous if 
inequality has increased or decreased over time (or if one country has more inequal-
ity than the other).4
Single numbers can also be used to describe the distribution of income. One 
commonly used statistic is the ratio of the income share of the top 20 percent of 
households to the share received by the bottom 20 or 40 percent. The most frequently 
used statistic, the Gini coefficient (named after statistician Corrado Gini,), can be 
derived from the Lorenz curve. This ratio is understood most easily as the value of 
area A divided by area A + B in Figure 6–2.5 The larger the share of the area between 
4To see the reason for this ambiguity, draw two Lorenz curves and label the point of intersection X. 
Below point X, there is relatively more equality along the Lorenz curve closer to the 45-degree line; but 
above point X, there is relatively more equality along the other Lorenz curve. Because both Lorenz curves 
have sections of greater equality, there is no way to decide, overall, if one represents a more equal distribu-
tion than the other.
5The Gini coefficient can be calculated using a relatively complex formula based on the absolute 
income differences across all observations in a population, which are then normalized by both the size 
and mean income of the population.
FIGURE 6–2 Lorenz Curve
25
25
50
75
100
50
75
100
45˚ line
Lorenz curve
B
Cumulative percent of consumption or income
Cumulative percent of recipients
A

172   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
the 45-degree line and the Lorenz curve, the higher the value of the Gini coefficient. 
The theoretical range of the Gini coefficient is from 0 (perfect equality) to 1 (perfect 
inequality). In practice, values measured in national income distributions have a 
much narrower range, ordinarily from about 0.25 to 0.65.
Collapsing all the information contained in the frequency distribution into a 
single number inevitably results in some loss of information about the underlying 
distribution. Argentina and Kenya both report similar Gini coefficients of around 
0.48, but the underlying distributions are not identical. Both nations have consider-
able amounts of inequality, but the lowest quintile received 4.7 percent of income 
in Kenya, and only 3.6 percent in Argentina. From the perspective of the poor in 
these countries, a more than 1 percentage point difference in income shares is a 
significant amount. Another criticism of the Gini coefficient is that it is more sensi-
tive to changes in some parts of the distribution than in others. Despite these short-
comings of the Gini, the desire among researchers to summarize inequality in a 
single number combined with some other attractive properties of the Gini, includ-
ing its geometric interpretation using Lorenz curves, have encouraged its wide-
spread use.6
PATTERNS OF INEQUALITY
Simon Kuznets, one of the early Nobel Prize winners in economics and a pioneer of 
empirical work on the processes of economic growth and development, was one of 
the first economists to investigate patterns of inequality. In his presidential address 
to the 1954 meeting of the American Economic Association, Kuznets reported on his-
torical data on income shares for England, Germany, and the United States. He then 
introduced a few data points for the developing world: Ceylon (now Sri Lanka), India, 
and Puerto Rico. The data were so limited that Kuznets did not include them in a 
table or figure; he simply listed them in the text.7 Some 50 years later, researchers are 
far less constrained. Data on inequality are available for most nations of the world, 
although for most countries they are updated only once or twice a decade. The qual-
ity and comparability of these data also are sometimes a concern: The World Bank, 
one of the primary compilers of such information, offers more than the usual caveats 
about data comparability across countries and over time.
Figure 6–3 presents one set of estimates of Gini coefficients of the distribution 
of household consumption or income for countries by region. What is  immediately 
6There are other single-number measures of inequality in addition to the Gini coefficient and top 20 to 
bottom 20 or 40 ratios. Discussion of the alternatives and the desirable properties of measures of inequal-
ity can be found in Gary Fields, Distribution and Development: A New Look at the Developing World
( Cambridge: MIT Press, 2001).
7Simon Kuznets, “Economic Growth and Income Inequality,” American Economic Review 45, no. 1 (1955).
PATTERNS OF INEQUALITY

PAT T E R N S  O F  I N E Q U A L IT Y   173
apparent is the variance in inequality both within and across regions. There is 
 evidence of a tendency toward higher inequality, with the Gini coefficient gener-
ally above 0.40 and in some cases approaching 0.65, in Latin America and parts 
of Africa (especially southern Africa). Low inequality is characteristic of the tran-
sition economies of eastern Europe and central Asia, many of the high-income 
 economies of the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development 
FIGURE 6–3 Gini Coeffiecients by Country and Region
Sources: Figure 2.9 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: World 
Development Report, 2006. Reprinted with permission.
Mauritius
Ethiopia
Niger
Tanzania
Benin
Mauritania
Guinea
Mali
Mozambique
Senegal
Angola
Burkina Faso
Nigeria
Burundi
Cameroon
Kenya
Cote d’lvoire
Madagascar
Zimbabwe
Gambia
Malawi
Zambia
South Africa
Lesotho
Swaziland
Central African Republic
Botswana
Namibia
Peru
Nicaragua
Jamaica
Venezuela
Uruguay
St Lucia
Guyana
Costa Rica
Guatemala
Panama
Dominican Republic
Mexico
El Salvador
Honduras
Chile
Colombia
Paraguay
Brazil
Vietnam
South Korea
Indonesia
Mongolia
Laos
Thailand
Cambodia
Philippines
Singapore
China
Papua New Guinea
Malaysia
Bolivia
Ecuador
Argentina
Trinidad and Tobago
Uganda
Ghana
Sub-Saharan Africa
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Latin America and Carribean
East Asia and Pacific
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Taiwan, China
Japan
Sweden
Belgium
Norway
Germany
Austria
Netherlands
Luxembourg
France
Switzerland
Italy
Ireland
Canada
Spain
Australia
Denmark
Finland
Azerbaijan
Hungary
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Czech Republic
Slovakia
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
Serbia
Bulgaria
Romania
Slovenia
Kyrgyzstan
Kazakhstan
Poland
Albania
Croatia
Russia
Tajikistan
Lithuania
Latvia
Macedonia
Turkey
Estonia
Georgia
Turkmenistan
Moldova
Belarus
Armenia
United States
Portugal
Hong Kong
Yemen
Egypt
Israel
Algeria
Jordan
Morocco
Tunisia
Iran
Pakistan
South Asia
Bangladesh
India
Nepal
Sri Lanka
New Zealand
Greece
United Kingdom
Gini based on income
Gini based on consumption
Middle East and North Africa
High Income
Europe and Central Asia

174   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
(OECD) economies, and much of South Asia. Nations in East Asia generally range 
from low to moderate levels of income inequality; the Middle East and North Africa 
report moderate levels.
What explains these differences? Are they related to specific characteristics of 
different regions or are regions a proxy for something else—income level, perhaps? 
One idea with a long history is that economic growth itself may be associated with 
the degree of inequality. The basic intuition is that growth is an inherently unbal-
anced process. Some individuals capture the benefits of growth early on, and it takes 
time for others to benefit and for returns to equalize.
GROWTH AND INEQUALITY
Kuznets was one of the first economists to speculate on the relationship between 
growth and inequality, suggesting that inequality might first increase as a nation 
makes the transition from a mostly agricultural economy to an industrial one. The 
underlying mechanism for this rise in income inequality is the result of differences 
in the returns to factors of production between agriculture (where they are lower and 
less dispersed) and industry. When everyone works in agriculture, income is distrib-
uted relatively equally, but as industrialization and urbanization progress, inequal-
ity rises. As more factors make the transition from farm to factory, inequality may 
then start to fall. Kuznets readily acknowledged that the basis for this relationship 
was “perhaps 5 percent empirical information and 95 percent speculation, some of it 
 possibly tainted by wishful thinking.”
Other economists offered alternative explanations for an association between 
growth and inequality. W. Arthur Lewis, a Nobel Prize winner, developed a theoreti-
cal model that predicts rising inequality followed by a “turning point,” which even-
tually leads to a decline in inequality. Employing a two-sector model, the modern 
or industrial sector faces “unlimited supplies” of labor as it is able to draw workers 
with low or even zero marginal product from agriculture. With wages held down by 
the elastic supply of workers, industrial growth is accompanied by a rising share of 
profits. As average incomes rise, labor receives a smaller share of the total, increas-
ing inequality. The turning point is reached when all the surplus labor has been 
absorbed and the supply of labor becomes more inelastic. Wages and labor’s share of 
income then start to rise and inequality falls.8
In Lewis’s surplus labor model, inequality is not just a necessary effect of eco-
nomic growth; it is a cause of growth. A distribution of income that favors high-
income groups contributes to growth because profit earners save to obtain funds 
8W. Arthur Lewis, “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor,” Manchester School 22 
(1954). The Lewis model is more fully developed in Chapter 16.

PAT T E R N S  O F  I N E Q U A L IT Y   175
for expanding their enterprises. The more income they receive, the more they 
invest. Their saving and investment increase the economy’s productive capacity 
and thus bring about output growth. Not only does inequality contribute to growth 
according to Lewis, but attempts to redistribute income prematurely run the risk 
that economic growth will be slowed. These were powerful conclusions. Could 
they be maintained in light of the empirical evidence on economic growth and 
inequality?
The ideas of Kuznets, Lewis, and others about growth and inequality held 
considerable sway among development economists for several decades. During 
the 1960s, a period of strong growth in many regions, some economists wondered 
why growth was not yielding more rapid reductions in poverty. One idea was that 
the relationship that came to be known as Kuznets inverted-U, or the Kuznets 
curve, might be at work. Twenty years after Kuznets’s original paper, researchers 
were armed with more data on inequality and reexamined the relationship using 
primarily cross-section analyses of countries, including many developing coun-
tries. A key assumption in this approach was that nations at different levels of 
per capita income could approximate what individual nations might experience 
over time as they achieved economic growth. Studies using this approach sup-
ported the existence of the Kuznets curve.9 The tendency for inequality to rise and 
then fall with rising levels of per capita income was maintained as a stylized fact 
about development until the late 1980s. Subsequent research has overturned this 
perspective.
Better and more abundant data on income inequality, especially time-series 
data on individual countries, coupled with more rigorous econometric methods, 
permitted researchers to identify patterns over time within individual nations. 
In India, a low-income nation with generally low-income inequality, there is evi-
dence of some decline in inequality from 1950 until the mid-1960s, but at least into 
the 1990s there was no distinct trend in either direction.10 Figure 6–4 illustrates the 
trend in the Gini coefficient since 1980 for Chile and Taiwan. Chile, one of Latin 
America’s most successful economies, has been a middle-income nation through-
out this period; Taiwan has gone from middle- to high-income status. Chile’s Gini 
coefficient fluctuates minimally from year to year but exhibits no particular pattern 
over time, except perhaps for a recent slight downward trend. What is most appar-
ent in Chile’s case is the persistence of a relatively high level of inequality.  Taiwan 
also exhibits little fluctuation over time. The most notable feature of Taiwan’s 
9Montek S. Ahluwalia, “Inequality, Poverty and Development,” Journal of Development Economics 3 
(1976).
10Michael Bruno, Martin Ravallion, and Lyn Squire, “Equity and Growth in Developing Countries: Old 
and New Perspectives on the Policy Issues,” in Vito Tanzi and Ke-young Chu, eds., Income Distribution and 
High-Quality Growth (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1998).

176   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
 experience is the persistence of a very low level of inequality.11 There is no evidence 
of any inverted-U for India, Chile, or Taiwan.
One should not generalize from a few cases, so it is important to look at the 
experience of a larger number of nations. Researchers who have done so find little 
evidence of a general tendency for income inequality to first rise and then fall with 
economic growth. It is as common for Gini coefficients to rise as per capita income 
grows as it is for them to fall.12 The persistence of a given level of inequality within 
nations may be the strongest trend. Support for the Kuznets curve in earlier cross-
section analysis was driven by the higher inequality of a subset of middle-income 
nations. Better econometric tests reveal that the inverted-U was driven not by 
11Taiwan’s record of rapid economic growth with low income inequality is somewhat unique. Some 
transition economies have similarly low or even lower levels of income inequality but none has yet 
achieved Taiwan’s per capita income level. Among rapidly growing economies, China has achieved similar 
growth rates, although not yet for as many years, but China has done so with significantly higher inequal-
ity. The same is true for Malaysia, Thailand, and Singapore. Korea’s record on growth and inequality comes 
closest to Taiwan’s.
12Klaus Deininger and Lyn Squire, “New Ways of Looking at Old Issues: Inequality and Growth,” Journal 
of Development Economics 57 (1998); Martin Ravallion and Shaohua Chen, “What Can New Survey Data 
Tell Us about Recent Changes in Distribution and Poverty?” World Bank Economic Review 11, no. 2 (1997).
FIGURE 6–4 Trends in Inequality: Gini Coefficients in Chile and Taiwan
Sources: Data for Chile: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org. Data 
for Taiwan: Statistical Bureau of the Republic of China (Taiwan), Report on the Survey of Family Income and 
Expenditure, “Percentage Share of Disposable Income by Percentile Groups of Income Recipients and Measures 
of Income Distribution,” 2007, link available at http://eng.stat.gov.tw/ct.asp?xItem=3417&CtNode=1596, accessed 
June 2009.
1987
Taiwan
Chile
0.25
0.20
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.50
0.45
0.55
0.60
0.65
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
Year
Gini coefficient

PAT T E R N S  O F  I N E Q U A L IT Y   177
 economic growth but by the coincidence of Latin America’s high levels of inequality 
and middle-income ranking. Investigation of the Kuznets curve offers a cautionary 
tale for empirical work on developing nations. Patterns observed across nations may 
not always provide reliable insight into what ultimately are dynamic processes that 
occur within nations.13
Rejection of the Kuznets curve as an overall tendency does not imply that eco-
nomic growth has no impact on inequality, nor does it deny that something like the 
Kuznets curve might occur in some countries. The lack of one general pattern simply 
confirms the complexity of the process that determines inequality. Research on the 
Kuznets curve identifies the large role played by country- or region-specific circum-
stances, which appear far more important in determining distributional outcomes 
than the level of per capita income. This is an encouraging finding. That all nations 
do not follow a similar distributional path suggests that there may be greater scope 
for government policy to influence the distributional outcomes that accompany eco-
nomic growth.
WHAT ELSE MIGHT CAUSE INEQUALITY?
If inequality is not systematically associated with the level of income, what else 
accounts for the observed differences across countries and regions shown in Fig-
ure 6–3? There is little doubt that history and politics have played an important role. 
An obvious example is South Africa, which has one of the world’s highest levels of 
income inequality. For decades, the apartheid government excluded blacks and 
other nonwhite South Africans from owning prime agricultural land, getting a decent 
education, and living in major urban areas. The legacy of these policies remains 
today, reflected in South Africa’s highly unequal distribution of income. According 
to the World Bank’s country brief on South Africa, the Gini coefficient in 2008 was 
0.67—one of the highest in the world.
History and politics also played key roles in other parts of the world. At the end 
of World War II, the United States administered a land reform in South Korea as part 
of the dissolution of 50 years of Japanese colonial rule. These reforms redistributed 
land from Japanese to Korean households, providing millions of Korean families with 
a key asset from which they could earn a living, resulting in a relatively equal distri-
bution of rural incomes. Low levels of inequality in eastern Europe and central Asia 
are, in part, the product of years of legislated wages and state ownership of the means 
of production. Citizens of these countries had limited opportunity to accumulate 
13Even the experience of the United States now rejects Kuznets’s original hypothesis. Income inequality 
in the United States fell over the four decades after the great Depression. But, after 1975, during a period 
of continued growth in the U.S. economy, household incomes became increasingly unequal, the opposite 
of the predictions of the Kuznets curve. Economists believe technological change, immigration, increased 
international trade, and a slowdown in the growth of school attainment are some of the factors that explain 
this post-1975 shift.

178   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
any productive assets other than an education. It is not surprising that, with the turn 
toward the market, inequality is now rising in many of these countries; in some of 
them this is happening alongside renewed economic growth.
Some of the high levels of inequality in Latin America may be traced to patterns 
of land ownership dating back centuries. Not only was the colonial legacy part of this 
process but the demands of specific crops, including the advantages of plantation-
style agriculture, were also a factor. In East Asia, rice cultivation was better suited 
to family farming and established a basis for higher income equality in this region. 
Conversely, mineral wealth, whether in diamonds or oil, tends to produce higher 
inequality. Factor endowments shaped distributional outcomes in the past and con-
tinue to do so today.
Resource endowments and the “persistence of the past” play significant roles in 
shaping a nation’s distribution of income, but policy choices made today also affect 
these outcomes. Government policy influences the accumulation of assets, including 
education. Policy decisions affect the diffusion of technology and access to markets, 
which condition productivity growth and the returns to factors of production. Taxes 
and government spending, including expenditures on social safety nets, directly 
influence how income is divided. The level of inequality in any nation is the result of 
complex interactions among history, politics, resource endowments, market forces, 
and government policies.
WHY INEQUALITY MATTERS
If economic development requires a reduction in the amount of poverty, then 
the simplest explanation for why income inequality matters is that the degree of 
inequality plus the level of income determines the extent of poverty. Even without a 
discussion of how to define poverty (which we will get to shortly), some examples of 
the relationship between economic growth, income inequality, and poverty should 
be  clear. If an economy grows and inequality remains unchanged, the income of 
the poor has grown in line with everyone else’s. The poorest quintiles have more 
income, which potentially helps raise some households out of poverty. If per cap-
ita income remains unchanged and inequality rises, the poorest quintiles have less 
income and some households probably have fallen into poverty. These propositions 
merely express the basic mathematics governing the relationship among poverty, 
growth, and inequality.
But inequality and growth are not determined independently of one another. 
There may not be one systematic tendency for how inequality changes as nations 
grow, but inequality often changes with rising per capita incomes. Similarly, inequal-
ity may affect the rate of growth an economy achieves. Do nations with more inequal-
ity tend to experience slower growth, thus doubly hurting the well-being of the poor? 
WHY INEQUALITY MATTERS

W H Y  I N E Q U A L IT Y  M AT T E R S   179
Finally, income inequality also matters in its own right. Societies have preferences 
concerning inequality and may (or may not) wish for their governments to intervene 
to achieve distributional outcomes.14
Just as there has been a long debate over the impact of growth on inequality, 
there is ongoing debate over how inequality affects economic growth. As discussed 
previously in this chapter, some early theories of economic development concluded 
that inequality might raise growth rates. By concentrating income in fewer hands, 
there might be more savings available to finance investments critical for capital 
accumulation. But this simple view of distribution and growth fails to capture other 
channels in which income inequality can be a drag on economic growth. Contem-
porary discussion of the relationship between inequality and growth explores these 
channels.
When inequality is high, worthwhile investments may not be undertaken. Poor 
people may have promising investment opportunities. Buying a farm animal or 
improving irrigation, investing in a piece of equipment or building a store, or sending 
a child to school all may yield a good economic return. But the individuals or families 
may not undertake these investments because they cannot afford them. Credit mar-
ket imperfections and the inability of the poor to offer lenders collateral lowers the 
amount of productive investment they engage in and leads to less economic growth. 
If the economy had a more equal income distribution, more of these productive 
investments could be financed and pursued.
Another channel that links inequality and growth is the political process. There 
are numerous “political economy” connections between distribution and growth. 
Some argue that, when inequality is high, the rich use their wealth to secure out-
comes favorable to their interests, influencing everything from government spend-
ing (disproportionate amounts spent on public universities, which the children of the 
rich attend, as compared to primary schools) to trade policy (using tariffs and other 
forms of trade protection to maintain domestic monopolies). These policies can lead 
to inefficient outcomes that lower growth rates. Others argue the opposite political 
response occurs. When inequality is high, populist movements may arise that focus 
more on redistribution and less on growth, leading, for example, to higher taxes and 
less investment. High inequality also tends to be associated with more violence, 
both personal and political, which in turn can reallocate expenditures to less pro-
ductive activities (more police and private security services) and discourage greater 
investment.
Given the multitude of connections between inequality and growth, the net 
effect is an empirical matter. Studies that attempt to sort out the relationship tend to 
rely on the cross-country growth regressions introduced in Chapter 3. Early studies 
found statistical support that high initial inequality, especially of landholdings, was 
14Evidence that people prefer fairness is presented in World Bank, “Equity and Well-Being,” 2006 World 
Development Report: Equity and Development (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2005.)

180   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
associated with slower subsequent growth. But later studies, using larger data sets 
and different econometric techniques, either found no such effect or even an oppos-
ing one.15 The inconclusive nature of these results is not surprising, given both the 
complexity and potential circularity of the relationship. Inequality affects growth and 
growth affects inequality, complicating statistical identification. It also is unlikely that 
one systematic pattern describes the relationship between inequality and growth 
for all countries at all times. This does not imply that, in a specific-country context, 
inequality and growth are unrelated. High inequality may be a constraint on growth, 
but easing this constraint is always a daunting challenge for policy makers.
MEASURING POVERTY
People sometimes refer to inequality and poverty as if they were the same thing. They 
are not. Inequality is an important determinant of poverty, but the two concepts are 
distinct. To see why, consider the following. Assume your lot in life was to fall in the 
bottom quintile of the income distribution. If you could pick the nation you would 
live in, would it be one where the bottom 20 percent received 3.4, 3.5, or 9.0 per-
cent of household income? If your answer is the nation where the poorest receive 
9.0 percent, you are confusing inequality with poverty. You also probably are for-
getting the results presented in Table 6–1. Recall from that table that the share of 
household income of the poorest quintile in Bangladesh was 9.0 percent; in Mexico, 
3.5 percent; and in the United States, only 3.4 percent!
In the United States the bottom 20 percent refers to over 60 million people. Some 
of these people are destitute but the overwhelming majority is not. Almost all live in 
a permanent dwelling with electricity, a gas or electric stove, clean water, and indoor 
plumbing. Most have access to medical care (even if it means an emergency room at 
a local hospital) and, during childhood, receive a full regimen of vaccinations against 
many infectious diseases. The likelihood of contracting malaria or dying of a diar-
rheal disease is remote, although both were common in the United States in its ear-
lier history. For those with children, the probability of an infant dying before its first 
birthday is low, and that child is likely to receive at least 12 years of education. Those 
in the bottom quintile in the United States are likely to own a television and a land-
line or cellular phone and perhaps a car, and have some access to a computer at a 
public library if not in their own homes.
15Two frequently cited papers that reach opposite conclusions relating inequality and growth are 
Alberto Alesina and Dani Rodrik, “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 109, no. 2 (1994); and Kristin Forbes, “A Reassessment of the Relationship between Inequality and 
Growth,” American Economic Review 90, no. 4 (2000).
MEASURING POVERTY

M E A S U R I N G  P O V E RT Y   181
The poorest 20 percent are poor relative to most other Americans and may find 
this demoralizing, but they have a substantially higher material standard of liv-
ing than the poor in either Bangladesh or Mexico. No one in the bottom quintile in 
 Bangladesh (or in most any quintile) is likely to receive the health or education ben-
efits or the material goods consumed by America’s poorest individuals. The 30 mil-
lion individuals who make up the bottom quintile in Bangladesh are likely to live in 
the most rudimentary of dwellings, those that can be washed away in a bad storm. 
Food is often scarce and clean water unavailable. Living with intestinal parasites is 
a regular occurrence; infectious diseases take a regular toll on young and old and 
infant deaths are a common event. School enrollment rates are rising, but the educa-
tional attainment of poor Bangladeshis, especially females, is well below that of their 
American counterparts. Consumer goods consist of a few articles of clothing, some 
cooking utensils and little else. Most of those in the bottom 20 percent have never 
placed a phone call or clicked on a mouse.
The bottom quintile in the United States receives only 3.4 percent of household 
income, whereas the bottom quintile in Bangladesh consumes 9.0 percent of total 
consumption expenditures in Bangladesh. But America’s bottom 20 percent com-
mands a much larger amount of total income and, therefore, enjoys a higher stan-
dard of living even if its relative share is so much less. The Gini coefficient is thus a 
measure of relative equity; it describes the outcomes for one group relative to other 
groups but provides no information about absolute standards of living.
POVERTY LINES
Just as a set of analytical tools is needed for describing and understanding distribu-
tional outcomes, a similar set of tools is needed to define and measure poverty. We 
focus mostly on a consumption or income definition of absolute poverty, but it is 
important to recognize that poverty is multidimensional and encompasses depriva-
tions not readily captured by income measures alone. This should be a familiar idea 
because it parallels the debate over how to define economic development. Both the 
human development index (HDI) and the millennium development goals (MDGs), 
discussed in Chapter 2, go well beyond GDP per capita as a measure of well-being 
and similar approaches are used in defining poverty.
Poverty lines, defined as having a certain amount of taka or pesos or dollars to 
spend per day, can capture the degree of material deprivation but may not reflect 
securing basic health and education. A family may have sufficient funds to purchase 
a minimal basket of food, but if they have no ready access to safe drinking water, 
food purchases are no guarantee of meeting nutritional needs because waterborne 
microbes may result in gastrointestinal illness and reduce the absorption of key 
nutrients. In this critical sense, access to safe drinking water joins money income 
as a determinant of absolute poverty. The availability of public services, including 
basic health and education, can also have an impact on poverty status today and the 

182   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
 transmission of poverty across generations, independent of current consumption 
levels. Another dimension of poverty is vulnerability to adverse shocks. Expenditures 
in one period may raise a family above the poverty line, but in a subsequent period, 
natural disasters, economywide downturns, or even the ill health or death of a fam-
ily’s breadwinner can push the family below the poverty line. Families often move in 
and out of poverty and reducing vulnerability is intrinsic to improving well-being.
Poverty is multidimensional, and it is possible to quantify many of its dimen-
sions.16 A great deal of attention is paid to quantifying income or consumption pov-
erty. Development economists often use a definition of absolute poverty by which a 
specific monetary value is defined as a dividing line between the poor and nonpoor. 
Most nations define their own poverty lines, usually basing the amount on the per 
capita cost of some minimal consumption basket of food and a few other necessities 
(Box 6–1). Food dominates these consumption bundles because it may account for 
two-thirds to three-quarters of poor people’s total expenditures. In many low-income 
nations, poverty lines are based on a standard of obtaining 2000 or more calories 
per day. While these caloric requirements seem “scientific,” the actual poverty line 
remains a social construct. The food purchased to achieve these calories depends on 
what individuals actually choose to buy. Expenditures even lower than the poverty 
line might achieve required calories but hardly anyone would actually purchase such 
a consumption basket.
Often governments specify more than one poverty line. Because of regional price 
differences, distinct poverty lines may be applied for urban versus rural areas or, as 
is the case in Bangladesh, for different regions of the country. Once a poverty line (or 
lines) is established and expressed in a nation’s own currency, that level of consump-
tion or income has to be adjusted on an annual basis to account for changes in the 
price of the underlying bundle of goods. The goal is to maintain a constant poverty 
line over time, holding constant the ability to purchase the core consumption basket 
of food and other necessities.17 This permits policy makers and researchers to chart 
the progress a country or region is making in lifting people out of absolute poverty.
16Multidimensional indices of poverty have been developed by scholars at the Oxford Poverty & Human 
Development Initiative (www.ophi.org.uk). With their assistance, the multidimensional poverty index 
(MPI) was introduced by the UN Development Programme (UNDP) in its 2010 human development 
report and serves as an alternative to measuring income poverty. The MPI defines someone as poor if he 
or she experiences deprivation in a number of areas, including education (for example, “if no household 
member has completed five years of schooling”), health (for example, “if any household member is mal-
nourished”), and standard of living (for example, “if the household has no electricity” or “if the household 
has a dirt, sand, or dung floor”).
17Poverty lines also can be expressed in relative terms. In the European Union, poverty is sometimes 
defined as living below 60 percent of median income. With this definition, the poverty line does not rep-
resent the ability to purchase a fixed bundle of goods but changes as median incomes change. Using this 
approach, absolute poverty declines only if incomes become more equally distributed, not if there is a 
general increase in per capita incomes.

M E A S U R I N G  P O V E RT Y   183
BOX 6–1 NATIONAL POVERTY LINES IN BANGLADESH,
MEXICO, AND THE UNITED STATES
Instead of one official poverty line, Bangladesh has many. Separate poverty lines
exist for each of 14 regions to reflect varying costs. Regional lines are further
divided into upper and lower levels to capture different intensities of poverty.
All poverty lines are based on securing a minimum daily caloric intake of 2,112
calories. The representative bundle of food to obtain these calories was speci-
fied in the early 1990s and is made up of 11 items: rice, wheat, pulses, milk, oil,
meat, freshwater fish, potatoes, other vegetables, sugar, and fruit. The cost of
this bundle is adjusted using a domestic price index. The lower poverty line in
each region represents the level of poverty at which a person does not have the
resources to meet both food and nonfood requirements and must sacrifice some
minimum daily caloric requirement to afford essential nonfood needs. The upper
poverty line represents a level of poverty at which a person is able to meet mini-
mum daily food requirements and afford some nonfood expenditures.
Mexico has three official poverty lines that capture a range of conditions of
poverty. Within these lines, there is differentiation between rural and urban popu-
lations. The lowest poverty line is estimated by calculating the cost of a represen-
tative bundle of food, taking into account the differing nutritional requirements
of rural versus urban dwellers in terms of daily calories and grams of protein.
Falling below this poverty line indicates that a person cannot meet even these
minimal daily nutrition requirements. Falling below the second poverty line means
the person does not have the resources to meet both daily nutritional require-
ments and minimum health and educational expenses. The third line indicates
that resources are insufficient to pay for all necessary costs of living, including
food, education, health, clothing and footwear, housing, and public transportation
expenses.
The United States also specifies multiple poverty lines that vary, not by loca-
tion, but according to household size and age of household members. U.S. pov-
erty lines, like those in Bangladesh and Mexico, start with the cost of a basket
of food items. Designed to meet a person’s nutritional needs at minimum cost,
the bundle of food items used is still based on a 1955 survey of household food
consumption. It is made up of servings of milk, cheese, and ice cream; meat,
poultry and fish; eggs; dry beans, peas, and nuts; flour, cereal, and baked goods;
citrus fruit and tomatoes; dark-green and deep-yellow vegetables; potatoes;
other vegetables and fruits; fats and oils; and sugars and sweets. The cost of the
bundle of food was multiplied by three to arrive at the poverty threshold because
the 1955 survey found that the average family of three or more people spent

184   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
approximately one-third of its disposable income on food. Since adopting these
poverty lines in 1965, the dollar value is adjusted annually to account for price 
inflation. Neither the bundle of food items nor the portion of income a family
spends on food has been adjusted in almost 60 years despite changes in diets
and evidence that even poor Americans spend less than one-third of their after-
tax income on food.
Sources: Fernando Cortés, Daniel Hernández, Enrique Hernández Laos, Miguel Székely, 
and Hadid Vera Llamas, “Evolución y características de la pobreza en México en la última 
década del siglo XX,” Economia Mexicana NUEVA EPOCA, vol. XII (2003), available at www
.economiamexicana.cide.edu/num_anteriores/XII-2/Fernando_Cortes.pdf. 
Eloise 
Cofer, 
Evelyn 
Grossman, and Faith Clark, “Family Food Plans and Food Costs: For Nutritionists and Other Lead-
ers Who Develop or Use Food Plans,” Home Economics Research Report 20 (Washington, DC: 
U.S. Government Printing Office, November 1962), available at http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty/
familyfoodplan.pdf, accessed July 2005; Constance Citro and Robert T. Michael, Measur-
ing  Poverty: A New Approach (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1995); World Bank,
h
“Poverty in Bangladesh: Building on Progress,” Report 24299-BD (Washington, DC: World Bank, 
December 2002).
Most nations have their own poverty lines, and these could be used to make 
international comparisons. One could combine the number who are deemed poor 
in Bangladesh (daily per person regional poverty lines of between roughly 19 and 32 
taka, or US$1.70 and $2.80, PPP) with the number said to be poor in Mexico (poverty 
lines of 30 to 45 pesos, or US$4.60 to $6.60, PPP) and in the United States (daily per 
person poverty line of around $15).18 This would offer a measure of poverty as per-
ceived by each nation. But the resulting differences in poverty rates across nations 
would themselves be functions of the poverty lines the nations choose. An alterna-
tive and more widely adopted approach is to establish a single global poverty line. 
By applying one common poverty line, often the $1.25-a-day or $2-a-day measure, it 
may be possible to obtain a more consistent picture of the degree of absolute poverty 
across countries and regions and of how the number of poor is changing over time.
Before investigating the origins of the $1.25-a-day line and regional trends in 
poverty, it is worth examining the use of poverty lines in a bit more detail and defin-
ing some alternative measures of poverty that can be based on such lines. Figure 6–5 
reproduces the frequency distribution of consumption per capita in Bangladesh with 
18The United States defines poverty depending on the size and composition of a household. House-
holds with children or elderly members are assumed to have different food requirements, leading to dif-
ferent poverty lines. Households with more members are assumed to achieve economies of scale in 
consumption and this, too, affects their poverty lines. In 2009, daily per capita requirements ranged from 
$30 for a household with one nonelderly member to $12 for a household of eight with six children. The 
$15 refers to the average poverty line for households with four members. The reported values for Bangla-
desh and Mexico refer to their upper poverty lines, as discussed in Box 6–1, for the years 2000 and 2002, 
respectively.

M E A S U R I N G  P O V E RT Y   185
the addition of the $1.25-a-day poverty line. Individuals with consumption below the 
poverty line, some 50 percent of all Bangladeshis, are considered absolutely poor. It 
should be evident that there is something arbitrary about this distinction between 
the poor and the nonpoor. Is someone just above the poverty line, with a few taka 
more of consumption expenditures, living that much differently from someone just 
below the poverty line? This arbitrary character of poverty lines is inevitable. But 
poverty lines still are useful in providing a sense of the extent of absolute poverty, a 
means for assessing the success of policies designed to alleviate poverty, and a mech-
anism for calling attention to and mobilizing support for reducing human depriva-
tion. Strategies that succeed in reducing the numbers below the poverty line usually 
spill over and also help the “near poor,” those just to the right of the poverty line in 
the frequency distribution.
Once a poverty line is selected, the extent of absolute poverty can be identified in 
a number of ways. The simplest is to report the number of people below the poverty 
line. Equally straightforward is the head-count index, the ratio of the number below 
the poverty line to total population. A third measure, the poverty gap, describes 
the severity of poverty. The severity of poverty refers to both how many people fall 
below the poverty line and how far they are from that line. Look again at Figure 6–5. 
Imagine if the frequency distribution below the $1.25-a-day poverty line was some-
what higher closer to the origin and somewhat lower closer to the poverty line. This 
would mean that poverty was more severe. The same number of individuals might 
FIGURE 6–5  Absolute Poverty in Bangladesh
Source: Collaboration with Claudio E. Montenegro, World Bank.
Absolute
poverty
$1.25-a-day poverty line
Percentage of population
Consumption per capita (taka/year)

186   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
fall below the poverty line but the total amount of income they would need to get to 
the poverty line is greater. The poverty gap (PG) captures such differences and can be 
calculated as
 
PG  [(PL  MC)/PL]  H 
where PL stands for the poverty line, MC is mean consumption per capita of all indi-
viduals below the poverty line, and H is the head-count index. The bracketed term in 
the equation indicates in relative terms how far the average poor person is from the 
poverty line; the head-count index then weights this amount by the percent of poor 
people in the population. The poverty gap, a measure of how much income is needed 
to get the poor to the poverty line, increases the farther mean consumption of the 
poor is from the poverty line and the higher the share of the population is below the 
poverty line.
The head-count index, tells us what proportion of the population is poor, and 
the poverty gap tells us proportionately how far below the poverty line the mean 
income of the poor falls. Neither indicator is sensitive to changes in the income 
distribution among the poor, and by relying on the mean income gap, PG places 
equal weight on an individual just below the poverty line and on another individual 
who might be quite far below the line. These shortcomings are addressed simply 
by squaring PG. This third indicator, known (it’s not surprising) as the poverty gap 
squared, places greater weight on incomes that fall farther below the poverty line 
and thus more fully captures the severity of poverty. These three indicators together 
provide a much richer picture of the various dimensions of poverty than any one of 
them alone.
WHY $1.25 A DAY?
The first widely used global poverty line was a $1 a day and had its origins in the late 
1980s. To determine the extent of absolute poverty in the world, the World Bank’s 
1990 World Development Report (WDR) examined a set of 34 country-specific pov-
erty lines from both developing and developed nations. As expected, these poverty 
lines generally rose with income level. Focusing only on the low-income nations in 
this group, the country-specific poverty lines tended to fall within a range of $275 to 
$370, measured in terms of 1985 PPP dollars per person per year. The upper bound of 
this range, just over $1 a day, was adopted as a global poverty threshold.
To chart changes in poverty over time, it is necessary to increase the poverty line 
in local currencies in response to changes in domestic prices. Ideally, this would be 
done using a price index based on the goods the poor tend to consume. In practice, 
a nation’s consumer price index is used. To assess what happened to regional and 
global poverty since 1985, researchers have done more than just adjust the original 
$1-a-day poverty line by domestic price inflation. The most recent estimate defines 
extreme poverty as living below $1.25, measured in terms of 2005 PPP dollars.

M E A S U R I N G  P O V E RT Y   187
To compute this latest global poverty line, researchers were aided by an expanded 
compilation of poverty lines, now including 74 developing countries, as well as new 
estimates of purchasing power parity, which, for the first time, included price surveys 
for China. The new compilation of poverty lines was especially important because the 
composition of low-income nations changed between 1985 and 2005. The original 
$1-a-day poverty line reflected national poverty lines, including those of Bangladesh, 
Egypt, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Morocco, and Tanzania. Economies in sub-Saharan 
Africa were underrepresented. Rather than relying on an inflation-adjusted value of 
the poverty line defined by this earlier group of countries, researchers at the World 
Bank repeated the original exercise and determined a new poverty line based on 15 
of today’s poorest countries.19 The new group includes 13 sub-Saharan countries, 
Nepal, and Tajikistan. The average of the national poverty lines of this group is $1.25 
a day, which is thought to be more representative of how the poorest nations define 
absolute poverty. The median poverty line of all developing economies in the sample 
was $2.00 a day, which is often used as a measure of poverty in middle-income econ-
omies, especially in Latin America and eastern Europe.
New estimates of purchasing power parity were equally important in establishing 
the $1.25-a-day poverty line and in assessing the extent of poverty. If two people have 
the same purchasing power, they should be considered poor or not poor independent 
of where they live. But if they live in different countries they use different currencies 
and face different prices. As discussed in Chapter 2, we cannot rely on comparisons 
made using market exchange rates as a way to ensure that these two people living in 
different countries will be evaluated similarly. This is because of the importance of 
nontraded goods in consumption. To capture PPP, economists rely on detailed price 
surveys in individual countries. Prices in shops and stalls of specific items, including 
everything from 500-gram packages of durum spaghetti to low-heeled ladies’ shoes, 
are collected. These surveys are conducted under the auspices of the United Nations 
International Comparison Program (ICP) and offer estimates of PPP.
The most recent poverty estimates rely on ICP surveys from 2005, which have 
several important advantages over previous rounds. One problem in comparing 
prices in different countries is accounting for the quality of goods. Nontraded goods 
may be cheaper in poor countries than in rich countries, but some of this differ-
ence may be due to inferior quality, leading to an underestimation of PPP in poor 
countries. The 2005 ICP made corrections for this problem. It also expanded coun-
try coverage; China participated for the first time. Given the size of China’s popula-
tion and its success in reducing poverty, accurate measures of its PPP were critical 
for improved estimates of global poverty. Finally, the most recent estimates of global 
poverty were aided by improved coverage of the household surveys needed to make 
poverty estimates. Over 1.2 million households were part of 1 of 675 surveys taken 
19S. Chen, M. Ravallion, and P. Sangraula, “Dollar a Day Revisited,” World Bank Economic Review 23, 
no. 2 (2009).

188   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
in 115 countries and covering over 90 percent of the population of low- and middle-
income nations. Based on these new sources of information, it was possible not only 
to estimate poverty in 2005 but also to reestimate values back to 1981.
Figure 6–6 presents the most recent poverty estimates by World Bank econo-
mists Shaohua Chen and Martin Ravallion. The headline news from these new 
estimates was that “the developing world is poorer than we thought, but no less suc-
cessful in the fight against poverty.” The key reason for finding more poverty was 
that the latest PPP estimates indicated that the cost of living in developing coun-
tries, including China and India, was higher than previously thought. Consumption 
expenditures therefore purchased less, causing poverty levels to rise, not only for 
2005 but also in the revised poverty counts going back to 1981. As far as the world’s 
poor was concerned, nothing had changed. The difficulty of their circumstances 
remained the same. It was only the official count of the number of poor that had 
 gotten worse.
Employing the $1.25-a-day poverty line, the good news is that the number of 
people living in absolute poverty fell by almost 520 million people, from 1.90 in 1981 
to 1.38 billion in 2005. This represents an incredible achievement in reducing human 
deprivation. The bad news is that 1.38 billion people in poverty still accounts for 
more than one out of every five people living in developing nations. A closer look at 
regional patterns also reveals how isolated and uneven the fall in poverty has been. 
Almost the entire decline occurred in East Asia, and within East Asia most of the 
FIGURE 6–6 Number of People Living Below $1.25 a Day
Source: S. Chen and M. Ravallion, “The Developing World Is Poorer Than We Thought, but No Less Successful in 
the Fight Against Poverty,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, no. 4 (2010).
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
1,800
2,000
1981
1984
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
World Poverty
China
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Asia
Latin America, Caribbean, Middle East, North Africa,
Eastern Europe, and Central Asia
Millions of people
Year
East Asia and Pacific (excluding
China)

M E A S U R I N G  P O V E RT Y   189
decline is due to China’s success. Over 600 million fewer Chinese people lived below 
$1.25 a day in 2005 than did in 1981. Many observers trace the start of China’s suc-
cess to the economic reforms of the late 1970s, which decollectivized agriculture and 
encouraged farm households to produce and market more of their output, pulling 
them out of poverty.
Poverty reduction was dramatic throughout all of East Asia, with large declines 
in Indonesia, Malaysia, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand. But in absolute terms, 
given the size of China’s population, China’s success dominates the global decline. 
By comparison, South Asia, dominated by India, saw an increase of almost 50 mil-
lion in the number of poor. In sub-Saharan Africa, the trend was worse. As the 
population of this region grew, so did absolute poverty, from 214 million in 1981 to 
391 million in 2005.20 Trends in other regions add little to the aggregate picture 
for two reasons: Their population size is relatively small and, as mostly middle-
income nations, the share of their populations living at only $1.25 a day was and 
remains low.
Trends in absolute numbers are one way to mark the progress made against 
absolute poverty. But it is not the only way. The head-count index presents pov-
erty relative to population size and reinforces both the good and bad news on pov-
erty (Table 6–2). In 1981, China’s head-count index was 84 percent; by 2005, it was 
down to only 16 percent. In South Asia, the incidence of poverty also declined 
 significantly, from just over 59 percent to 40 percent. Sub-Saharan Africa showed a 
modest decrease, from 54 to 51 percent. Latin America also had limited success at 
decreasing its poverty rate; the head-count index fell from 11.5 to 8.4 percent. Given 
their generally middle-income status, $1.25 a day is not the most meaningful pov-
erty line for eastern Europe and central Asia (ECA) or for the Middle East and North 
Africa (MENA). Both regions have had poverty rates in the single digits for the past 
25 years, although ECA experienced an increase in poverty since 1981 while MENA 
saw a decline. For the developing world as a whole, there has been a significant 
decline in the percentage of people who experience the grinding poverty of living 
below $1.25 a day. Approximately 52 percent of the developing world fell below the 
$1.25-a-day poverty line in 1981; 24 years later, this ratio stood at 25. Can similar 
progress be made over the next 20 years?
Before trying to answer that question, it is worth considering the severity of pov-
erty as measured by the poverty gap (Table 6–2). In 1981, absolute poverty was severe 
in the most populous regions of the developing world. In East and South Asia, as well 
as in sub-Saharan Africa, the poverty gap ranged from 20 to 36 percent. But, by 2005, 
the poverty gap had fallen to 10 percent or less everywhere but in sub-Saharan Africa, 
20S. Chen and M. Ravallion, “How Have the World’s Poorest Fared Since the Early 1980s?” World Bank 
Research Observer 19, no. 2 (2004). The authors point out that the earlier their estimates, the less confident 
they are in the results because of the paucity of household surveys from the early 1980s. This is especially 
true in Africa. The trend toward increasing absolute poverty in sub-Saharan Africa is not in doubt, but the 
magnitude of this increase may not be precise.

190   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
where it remained at over 20 percent. Almost 1.4 billion people still lived on less than 
$1.25 a day in 2005, but most of them had gotten a good deal closer to this bare mini-
mum of consumption.
China’s success at lowering its poverty gap from 39 to 4 percent is an unprec-
edented achievement in human history. It also holds some promise for what is 
possible and, therefore, what nations in sub-Saharan Africa might achieve in the 
next few decades. Much of sub-Saharan Africa began the twenty-first century with 
a poverty gap well below China’s level 25 years earlier. However, the challenge fac-
ing Africa is greater. In 1981, China had a more equal distribution of income than 
is typical of most African nations. Therefore, African growth rates have to be even 
faster than China’s or policies of redistribution greater for absolute poverty to 
fall as rapidly. It is hard to envision such outcomes. China benefited from a fun-
damental transformation in its economy, which brought tremendous economic 
progress. It is hard to identify anything in Africa comparable to China’s transition 
out of socialism and toward the market that has the potential to produce sustained 
growth rates in output approaching double digits. Reducing absolute poverty 
in sub-Saharan Africa remains a huge challenge to both African nations and the 
global community.
TABLE 6–2 Absolute Poverty* by Region, 1981–2005
 
NUMBER OF POOR 
HEAD-COUNT INDEX 
POVERTY GAP
 
(MILLIONS) 
(PERCENT) 
(PERCENT)
REGION 
1981 
1990 
2005 
1981 
1990 
2005 
1981 
1990 
2005
East Asia 
1,071.5 
873.3 
316.2 
77.7 
54.7 
16.8 
35.5 
18.2 
4.0
(China only) 
(835.1) 
(683.2) 
(207.7) 
(84) 
(60.2) (15.9) (39.3) (20.7) (4.0)
South Asia 
548.3 
579.2 
595.6 
59.4 
51.7 
40.3 
19.6 
15.2 10.3
Sub-Saharan 
213.7 
299.1 
390.6 
53.7 
57.9 
51.2 
22.9 
26.6 21.1
    Africa
Latin America 
42.0 
42.9 
46.1 
11.5 
9.8 
8.4 
4.0 
3.6 
3.2
    and Caribbean
Middle East 
13.7 
9.7 
11.0 
7.9 
4.3 
3.6 
1.6 
0.9 
0.8
    and North Africa
Eastern Europe 
7.1 
9.1 
17.3 
1.7 
2.0 
3.7 
0.4 
0.6 
1.1
    and Central Asia
Total† 
1,896.2 
1,813.4 
1,376.7 
51.8 
41.6 
25.2 
21.3 
14.2 
7.6
(Total excluding 
(1,061.1) (1,130.2) (1,169.0) 
(39.8) (35.0) (28.2) 
(n.a.)‡ (n.a.) (n.a.)
    China)
*Absolute poverty refers to a poverty line of $1.25 a day (PPP, 2005).
†Total refers to low- and middle-income nations only.
‡n.a., not available.
Source: S. Chen and M. Ravallion, “The Developing World Is Poorer Than We Thought, but No Less 
Successful in the Fight Against Poverty,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, no. 4 (2010).

M E A S U R I N G  P O V E RT Y   191
DISSENTING OPINIONS ON THE EXTENT OF ABSOLUTE POVERTY
With something as complex as estimating the amount of absolute poverty in the 
world, it should come as no surprise that not everyone agrees with the numbers. 
Some criticize the estimates as too low; others claim they are too high.
The somewhat arbitrary nature of any poverty line already has been identified. Is 
someone living on just less than $1.25 a day poor, whereas someone consuming just 
over $1.25 a day not poor? Princeton economist Angus Deaton has a different con-
cern. He devoted his 2010 presidential address to the American Economic Associa-
tion to the latest round of poverty estimates and argued that the $1.25-a-day poverty 
line is too high! The latest poverty estimates raise the number of poor in 2005 by close 
to half a billion people compared to using the previous method and applying it to 
2005. This is a huge increase for a measure of absolute poverty, which is intended to 
stay constant in real terms over time.
Deaton traces the problem to how the poverty line was constructed. He is not 
persuaded that the 15 countries used to establish the new poverty line were the 
right ones. He notes that the small nation of Guinea-Bissau, with a population of 
about 1.5 million people, was included in the construction of the new poverty line, 
but India, with a population exceeding 1 billion people, was excluded. India has 
a national poverty line below $1.25 a day but is now judged as having many more 
poor people because of a standard determined by the poverty conditions prevail-
ing in Guinea-Bissau (where the poverty line is above $1.25 a day) and other smaller 
economies. Deaton favors using a weighted average of national poverty lines from 
a much larger group of developing nations so that the weights reflect the number 
of poor people living in each nation. These and other recommended adjustments 
result in a global poverty line of less than $1 a day and a world poverty count in 2005 
of well under 1 billion.21
Some commentators disagree with Deaton and see $1.25 a day as too low 
a threshold for defining absolute poverty at a global level. This cutoff has been 
described as “destitution” and may be too low to serve as an effective benchmark 
for poverty alleviation. Others are critical of what they consider the particularly arbi-
trary nature of any international poverty line. They argue that the use of one global 
poverty line bears too little relationship to national poverty lines and therefore 
defines poverty in way that may have little relevance to the actual bundles of goods 
poor people need to purchase to attain their basic needs.22 This latter argument has 
special merit for middle-income nations whose poverty lines tend to be above $1.25 
a day. Still others contend that even $2 a day is too low a threshold for a global pov-
erty line (Box 6–2).
21A. Deaton, “Price Indexes, Inequality, and the Measurement of World Poverty,” American Economic 
Review 100, no. 1 (2010).
22See In Focus: Dollar a Day: How Much Does It Say? International Poverty Centre, UN Development 
Programme, September 2004. www.ipc-undp.org/pub/IPCPovertyInFocus4.pdf.

192   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
BOX 6–2 WHO IS NOT POOR?
T
Economist Lant Pritchett argues against $1.25 a day and even $2 a day as legit-
imate measures of global poverty. He suggests instead a poverty line no less
l
than $15 a day (2000, PPP), close to the lower bound of the prevailing poverty
lines in high-income nations. Pritchett argues as follows:
Because poverty is a social construct each country should be free to set its own 
definitions of poverty and its own poverty line. . . .  But for setting a common,
international standard for income poverty—for what constitutes “unacceptable”
deprivation in the human condition or inadequate income in a globalized world—it
seems grossly unfair that a person is “poor” if born in one country and yet is “not 
poor” with a level of real income ten times lower if born in another. That is, while
s
India might set a poverty line that is attuned to its capabilities and circumstances 
and the USA another, for international comparisons choosing the lower line implies
that what is “unacceptable” deprivation for a US resident is acceptable for another 
human being simply because of their residence.
Pritchett goes on to demonstrate that the World Bank’s poverty lines are grossly
inconsistent with achieving minimally acceptable levels of such indicators of
physical well-being as infant mortality and stunting, the latter referring to the
fraction of children whose height for age is less than two standard deviations
below medical norms.
Pritchett recommends defining $1.25 a day as “destitution,” $2 a day as 
“extreme poverty,” and $15 a day as global poverty. He concludes, “This simple
l
shift in definitions allows continuity and comparability with previous measures of
poverty while embracing a new bold vision of what the dream of a world free of
poverty really means.”
Sources: Lant Pritchett, “Who Is Not Poor? Proposing a Higher International Standard for Pov-
erty” CGD Working Paper 33 (Washington, DC: Center for Global Development, November 2003);
Lant Pritchett, “Who Is Not Poor? Dreaming of a World Truly Free of Poverty,” World Bank Research 
Observer 21, no. 1 (2006).
r
POVERTY TODAY
In 2005, 2.6 billion people, 47 percent of the population of all low- and middle-
income economies, fell below the $2-a-day poverty line. Regional head-count indices 
reached as high as 73 percent in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. China stood at 
36 percent, and Latin America at 17 percent. When comparing world regions at $2 a 
day, poverty remained most severe in sub-Saharan Africa (it has the highest poverty 
gap), but there were still more than three times the number of poor in all of Asia than 
in sub-Saharan Africa (Figure 6–7). What has happened since 2005?

M E A S U R I N G  P O V E RT Y   193
The simple answer is that we do not really know. The data required for making 
estimates of global poverty are considerable and the exercise is not undertaken fre-
quently. Following the financial crisis of 2008, which began in the United States and 
quickly spread to other nations, there was considerable fear that developing nations 
would be hit hard. Many were but certainly not all; China and India continued to 
grow rapidly. The World Bank estimated that 64 million people in developing nations 
were pushed into “extreme poverty” (under $1.25 a day) because of the crisis. But 
the years leading up to the crisis were years of strong growth in many regions of the 
world, and 2010 saw a faster rebound for developing regions than many expected. Far 
more people are thought to have escaped poverty between 2005 and 2010 than the 
number pushed back into poverty because of the global financial crisis. Because eco-
nomic growth tends to be good for the poor, a point we return to below, there is every 
reason to believe that the number of absolutely poor people as well as the percent-
age that are poor will be much lower in the second decade of the twenty-first century 
than in the first.
WHO ARE THE POOR?
If the World Bank’s estimates for 2005 are correct and nearly three out of every 
four Africans and South Asians lived below the $2-a-day poverty line, it might be 
easier to identify the nonpoor than the poor. This is a somewhat cynical response 
FIGURE 6–7 Regional Distribution of People Living below the $2-a-Day Poverty Line, 2005
Source: S. Chen and M. Ravallion, “The Developing World Is Poorer Than We Thought, but No Less Successful in 
the Fight Against Poverty,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, no. 4 (2010).
East Asia
28%
South Asia
43%
Latin America and the
Caribbean
3%
Eastern Europe
and Central Asia
2%
Middle East and North Africa
2%
Sub-Saharan Africa
22%

194   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
to the question, Who are the poor? Even though the majority of African and South 
Asian populations live in conditions that qualify as poverty, some live well below 
the poverty line and are poorer than others. There are defining characteristics of 
extreme poverty.
The twenty-first century is the first time in human history that the majority 
of the world’s population lives in areas defined as urban. Nevertheless, rural pov-
erty, in terms of absolute numbers and rates, tends to be higher than urban pov-
erty. This may come as a surprise to the casual observer who contrasts the image of 
rural villages, with their open spaces and often picturesque arrangements of straw 
huts and basic dwellings, with the urban squalor and densely settled and seeming 
disorganization in the shantytowns and favelas23 common to large cities in low- 
and middle-income nations. What the casual observer fails to see are the lack of 
opportunities in rural areas. There are fewer ways to earn income, less education 
and healthcare, and often more vulnerability to the weather and forces of nature. 
Within rural areas, poverty often is most common among landless casual laborers 
or, in sub-Saharan Africa, among pastoralists. Individuals often choose to leave the 
countryside for the slums of the city because there are more economic opportuni-
ties in urban areas.
In addition to the rural–urban divide, poverty rates vary by regions within 
countries. Two examples are northeast Brazil and the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh, 
which for decades have been pockets of deep and persistent poverty compared to 
the rest of their respective countries. The persistence of regional poverty reflects 
both the limits of spreading development from one region to another and the con-
straints individuals may face in escaping poverty by migrating from one region to 
another. Poverty also has a racial and ethnic face. Scheduled castes in India, cer-
tain ethnic minorities in eastern Europe including Roma, and indigenous groups 
in the Andean region all experience poverty rates in excess of others in their 
societies.
Looking at poverty from the perspective of gender requires consideration of 
intra-household distribution, the sharing of resources within family units. Most 
studies of gender roles and opportunities in developing and developed nations 
conclude that women are disadvantaged relative to men along many dimensions.24 
Women have less access to property rights, including ownership of land, and often 
are denied inheritance. Girls have tended to receive less primary and secondary 
education than boys, although in many countries and regions this is no longer the 
case. Labor markets tend to discriminate against women, paying them less than men 
for the same work. Combining the work done at home with that done for income, 
23The origin of the word favela is the Morro de Favela hillside in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, where freed 
slaves established a community of squatters in the late nineteenth century. Over time the term has been 
adopted to describe any urban slum, especially in Latin America.
24This discussion draws from World Bank, Engendering Development (Washington, DC: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2001).

M E A S U R I N G  P O V E RT Y   195
women tend to work many more hours per week. Domestic violence against women 
is all too common. Sex-selective abortion favors the birth of boys over girls in many 
parts of the world.
Given all these disadvantages, the feminization of poverty seems straightforward. 
But it is not. Measures of individual consumption are based on household data, and it 
is difficult to disentangle who consumes what within the family. Some goods, includ-
ing housing, are jointly consumed. Given the lack of data on individual consumption 
by gender, some studies compare poverty rates between households headed by men 
and women. The results are inconclusive. Some categories of women-headed house-
holds do quite poorly. For example, widows without male heirs in India and elderly 
women on pensions in eastern Europe have particularly high poverty rates. But other 
women-headed households, including unmarried women working in urban areas 
and married women with husbands working abroad and sending remittances, may 
experience lower-than-average poverty rates. Studies of nutrition that assess the 
degree to which the needs of females versus males are met find some evidence of the 
relative deprivation of females but the results vary widely across regions of the world 
and even within countries. Despite the lack of evidence on the feminization of pov-
erty, it is hard to imagine that reducing gender inequality would not also help reduce 
poverty in general.
LIVING IN POVERTY
You now know how economists define poverty, how many poor people there are, and 
a bit about the characteristics of the poor. What do we know about the lives of the 
poor? You might think living below $1.25 a day implies living on the edge of subsis-
tence and leading a monotonous life with few choices. But this is not the case. The 
poor are a heterogeneous group who do not devote all their resources to food, who 
engage in a variety of economic activities, and who pursue strategies to reduce the 
risks associated with their vulnerable economic situations.
Social scientists, especially anthropologists, have been studying the poor for 
a long time.25 This work has been complemented more recently with the collection 
of household-level surveys that include the poorest families. Many of these surveys 
have been part of the World Bank’s Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS) 
surveys, the first of which were undertaken in Côte-d’Ivoire and Peru in 1985. The 
LSMS and other similar surveys have been used to obtain counts of the poor and to 
understand the circumstances and behavior of poor households. MIT economists 
25In 1953, Sol Tax, an anthropologist, published Penny Capitalism (Washington, DC: Smithsonian) 
based on his observation of the lives of a poor indigenous community in Guatemala. Tax observed 
that members of the community were efficient in their use of time and other resources despite their 
poverty.

196   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo employ 13 of these surveys from around the devel-
oping world to create a profile of the economic lives of the poor.26
Banerjee and Duflo find that, on average, poor households do not put every penny 
into purchasing more calories. Food represents about half to three-quarters of total con-
sumption expenditures. For those living under $1.25 a day, the elasticity of spending on 
calories relative to total food expenditures is about 0.5,27 suggesting that the poor care 
about what they eat as well as how much they eat; how food tastes matters even when 
one is poor. The poor, like the rest of us, spend money on nonessential items, including 
alcohol, tobacco, festivals (funerals, weddings, and religious holidays), radios, and tele-
visions. The health of the poor is far more compromised than that of the nonpoor. In a 
number of surveys that ask about health, Banerjee and Duflo find that a family member 
often is reported to have been bedridden for a day or more during the past month. In 
the Udaipur district in India, 43 percent of households reported that members did not 
have enough to eat throughout the year, and 55 percent of adults were anemic.
In their productive activities, the poor tend to diversify their labor time, pur-
suing multiple opportunities rather than specializing. Among rural households, 
almost all farm their own land, but this is not their only or even their primary 
source of income. Poor men often work as daily laborers; poor women might sew, 
gather fuel, or run small eateries (for example, selling dosas in the morning in 
India). In one survey of rural West Bengal in India, the median family had three 
working members engaged in seven different occupations. Household members in 
poor families may engage in temporary migration to obtain work, usually for not 
more than a month or two. Permanent migration of the poor out of West Bengal 
is rare, and most migration for work is not far from where the poor live. Reliance 
on multiple occupations and a willingness to temporarily migrate to find work 
are strategies that reduce risk. If one activity is no longer available or remunera-
tive, another can be pursued. Such a strategy has its costs. By not specializing and 
investing in specific skills, it is hard to achieve economies of scale and to gain the 
productivity required for higher income.
While the poor are often entrepreneurial and lead diverse lives, it would be a 
mistake to romanticize their situation. Living under $1.25 is a constant struggle filled 
with uncertainty and vulnerability. Among the poor we can identify a group of “ultra-
poor,” who find themselves barely surviving. A study by the International Food Policy 
Research Institute (IFPRI) found that in 2004, 162 million people were ultra-poor, 
26A. Banerjee and E. Duflo, “The Economic Lives of the Poor,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, no. 1 
(2007). Also see their book Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global Poverty (New 
York: Public Affairs, 2011).
27Calories are obtained from different types of food. Coarse grains, like rice and wheat, are inexpensive 
to buy and offer an individual relatively cheap calories. Meat is expensive making the calories obtained 
from meat consumption more costly ones. By investigating the foods poor households consume to 
obtain their calories, it is possible to estimate the elasticity of spending on calories relative to total food 
expenditures.

S T R AT E G I E S  TO R E D U C E  P O V E RT Y   197
 living on less than 50 cents a day.28 In another series of studies, researchers asked the 
poor to describe poverty. Some of their responses follow:29
Don’t ask me what poverty is because you have met it outside my house. Look at 
the house and count the number of holes. Look at my utensils and the clothes that 
I am wearing. Look at everything. . . .  What you see is poverty.—A man in Kenya
Poverty is hunger, loneliness, nowhere to go when the day is over, deprivation, 
discrimination, abuse, and illiteracy.—A mother in Guyana
Poverty is pain; it feels like a disease. It attacks a person not only materially but 
also morally. It eats away one’s dignity and drives one into total despair.—A 
woman in Moldova
When asked to describe poverty and its causes, poor people reveal poverty to be 
more than just a lack of money. Not only do the poor suffer from material depriva-
tion but poverty exacts an often severe psychological toll. There are many causes of 
poverty. The poor lack assets, especially land, and are aware that illiteracy often con-
strains their opportunities. Illness is dreaded because it can drive a family into desti-
tution. The poor are vulnerable to environmental risks as well, whether droughts or 
floods or the degradation of their land. The poor often feel exploited by markets, in 
which private traders charge exorbitant prices for necessities or levy usurious rates 
for credit, and by governments, who do not provide essential services to the essen-
tially voiceless poor unable to affect change.
STRATEGIES TO REDUCE POVERTY
The World Bank’s 1990 World Development Report not only provided an estimate of 
the amount of world poverty but also outlined a strategy for alleviating it. The strategy 
had two main elements: (1) promote market-oriented economic growth and (2) direct 
basic health and education services to the poor. Market-oriented growth included 
many of the familiar recommendations of the Washington Consensus discussed in 
Chapter 5: macroeconomic stability, greater economic openness to trade and invest-
ment, increased public investment in infrastructure, improved credit markets, and the 
28Estimates of the number of ultra-poor are from Akhter U. Ahmed, Ruth Vargas Hill, Lisa C. Smith, 
Doris M. Weismann, and Tim Frankenberger, “The World’s Most Deprived,” 2020 Discussion Paper 43, 
International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC, 2007. This study was undertaken before the 
latest round of the ICP. With the new PPP estimates, the number of ultra-poor would be higher. At over 160 
million, the ultra-poor collectively represent a population similar to that of Pakistan’s, the world’s sixth 
most populous nation.
29The quotations are from United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report 
1997 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997), and D. Narayan, Voices of the Poor: Can Anyone Hear Us?
(Washington, DC: World Bank, 2000).
STRATEGIES TO REDUCE POVERTY

198   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
like. Combined, these policies would lead to labor-demanding growth, which would 
benefit the poor because the primary asset the poor rely on is their labor. The second 
element of the strategy called for investing in people. Directing government health 
and education services to the poor would increase their productivity and thereby 
contribute to poverty reduction. A third but less emphasized part of the strategy was 
to develop social safety nets to assist individuals unable to take advantage of market 
opportunities. This group includes the sick and the old but also all those who suffer 
from systemic shocks, such as natural disasters and macroeconomic crises.
Most strategies for reducing poverty call for increasing the rate of overall eco-
nomic growth, because the poor are expected to benefit from economic growth 
along with the rest of the population. To quote a popular metaphor for development 
economists, “A rising tide lifts all boats.” But there are dissenting voices. In 1996, 
the United Nations Development Progamme (UNDP) wrote in its flagship publica-
tion, The Human Development Report, “Policy-makers are often mesmerized by the 
quantity of growth. They need to be more concerned with its structure and qual-
ity.” The report goes on to specify problems with economic growth: “jobless—where 
the overall economy grows but does not expand opportunities for employment,” 
“ruthless—where the fruits of economic growth mostly benefit the rich, leaving mil-
lions of people struggling in ever-deepening poverty,” “voiceless—where growth in 
the economy has not been accompanied by an extension of democracy or empower-
ment,” rootless—which causes people’s cultural identity to wither,” and “futureless—
where the present generation squanders resources needed by future generations.”30
The UNDP report raises many concerns. One of them is to question whether (or 
at least how often) economic growth is good for the poor or whether the benefits are 
more likely to be concentrated on the rich. The basic mathematics of growth, distribu-
tion, and poverty suggests that, generally, growth should be good for the poor. Earlier 
in this chapter, we saw that inequality does not systematically increase with economic 
growth. This implies that in most cases growth should benefit the poor just as it benefits 
others in a society. As long as GDP grows faster than the population, average incomes 
within each quintile usually also increase. Numerous studies support this conclusion.
GROWTH IS GOOD FOR THE POOR
Figure 6–8 reproduces the data from one of the studies supporting the notion that 
growth is good for the poor.31 This figure compares the growth in income of the poor, 
here defined as the bottom 20 percent of the income distribution, with overall eco-
30United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1996), p. 3–4.
31David Dollar and Aart Kraay, “Growth Is Good for the Poor,” Journal of Economic Growth 7, no. 3 (2002). 
Earlier studies that reached similar conclusions are Michael Roemer and Mary Kay Gugerty, “Does Economic 
Growth Reduce Poverty?” CAER Discussion Paper No. 5, Harvard Institute for International Development, 
Cambridge, 1997; and John Gallup, Steve Radelet, and Andrew Warner, “Economic Growth and the Income of 
the Poor,” CAER Discussion Paper No. 36, Harvard Institute for International Development, Cambridge, 1999.

S T R AT E G I E S  TO R E D U C E  P O V E RT Y   199
nomic growth (growth in GDP per capita). Each observation refers to a growth spell 
of five or more years in a given country. In many cases, there is more than one obser-
vation per country. This occurs when information on the distribution of income is 
available for multiple years. Growth spells have a median length of six years. These 
spells occur between the years 1956 to 1999, with most taking place in the 1980s and 
1990s. Not all countries are represented in the data set, but there is good coverage by 
region and for the world population as a whole.32
The trend shown in Figure 6–8 is consistent with the view that growth is gen-
erally good for the poor. The fitted regression line has a positive slope of 1.2, indi-
cating that, on average, the incomes of the poor grow at a slightly higher rate than 
does GDP per capita. The slope of 1.2 means that if GDP per capita grows, say, at 
5 percent, the regression predicts that the incomes of the poor will grow by 6 percent. 
Most observations lie in the quadrant in which both the growth in per capita income 
32Departing from the original study, the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development 
(OECD) economies are excluded from the figure, as are a few statistical outliers.
FIGURE 6–8  Is Growth Good for the Poor?
Source: David Dollar and Aart Kraay. “Growth Is Good for the Poor,” Journal of Economic Growth 7 (September 
2002). Dataset available at http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/0,,contentMDK
:22802584∼pagePK:64165401∼piPK:64165026∼theSitePK:469372,00.html.
Average annual growth in per capita income (percent/year)
Average annual growth in per capita income, poorest
quintile (percent /year)
—0.15
—0.10
—0.05
0.15
0.10
0.05
—0.05
—0.10
—0.15
0.10
0.05
0.15
0
= 1.20   − 0.01
2 = 0.54
y
x
R

200   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
and the growth in the incomes of the poor are positive. This quadrant can be further 
divided in two. More than half the observations lie above the 45-degree line (not 
shown), where the incomes of the poor grow faster than average incomes. Growth is 
still “good for the poor” among the observations that lie below the 45-degree line but 
above the x-axis. In these cases the incomes of the poor grow at a rate somewhat less 
than the rest of the economy.
Returning to Figure 6–8, there also are cases of immiserizing growth, situations 
in which the poor witness a decline in their average incomes despite growth in the 
economy. The UNDP’s concern over ruthless growth appears to have merit in some 
cases. In about one in five cases of positive economic growth, the income levels of 
the poor decrease. For Latin America this occurs about one-third of the time. Rapid 
growth, however, minimizes such outcomes. In these data, when growth is over 
5  percent, there are only two cases of immiserizing growth.33 Rapid growth seems 
especially good for the poor and nonpoor alike. The opposite also is true. The poor 
are particularly vulnerable during periods of economic decline. This is shown in the 
lower-left-hand quadrant, where many of the observations lie well below the regres-
sion line (a substantial number from eastern Europe and central Asia during the 
late 1980s and early 1990s). Although there are important exceptions, the empirical 
record suggests that economic growth benefits the poor more often than it leaves the 
poor behind.
SOMETIMES GROWTH MAY NOT BE ENOUGH
The centrality of economic growth in achieving economic development is a major 
theme of this textbook, as is the role of markets in achieving more rapid economic 
growth. But, in some situations, more than economic growth and market forces may 
be needed to reduce absolute poverty. First, there are the cases just identified, in 
which the well-being of the bottom quintile falls despite increases in GDP per capita. 
These are cases in which the increase in income inequality that accompanied eco-
nomic growth was so large as to reverse any potential gains for the poor from rising 
GDP per capita. Second are cases in which, despite economic growth, too few of the 
poor cross the poverty line because their initial share of income is so low. This sit-
uation is not depicted by the data in Figure 6–8 because the vertical axis measures 
changes in the mean income of the bottom 20 percent, not changes in the head-
count index or poverty gap. This makes a difference. Imagine an economy in which 
average incomes are low and inequality is high. If the bottom 20 percent receives 
only 2 to 3 percent of the total income, as they do in many countries in Latin America
and southern Africa, the well-being of the poor makes little progress even if their 
33The two cases are Puerto Rico (1963–69) and Singapore (1978–83).

S T R AT E G I E S  TO R E D U C E  P O V E RT Y   201
incomes grow at the same rate as the nation’s average income. If high  levels of 
inequality further reduce the prospects for more rapid economic growth, the  situation 
of the poor is that much worse.
A third situation is where distributional changes reduce the amount of poverty 
alleviation generated by economic growth. Latin America during the 1990s experi-
enced only modest economic growth accompanied by rising income inequality. 
Even the modest growth that was achieved, assuming no change in inequality, would 
have reduced the numbers living under $2 a day by 90 million people.34 But, because 
inequality increased during the 1990s, the number of people living in poverty fell by 
only 45 million. Poverty in Latin America would have fallen further had there been 
both faster growth and less inequality.
The data in Figure 6–8 report on rates of growth. But how does growth affect the 
absolute amount of income individuals in different quintiles actually receive? Even 
when the growth in income of the poor exceeds that of the rich, higher income quin-
tiles usually still receive a much larger increase in absolute income. This is because a 
small percentage of a large number always represents much more additional income 
than a larger percentage of a small number. Consider the cases of Bangladesh and 
Mexico presented at the beginning of this chapter. If economic growth is distribu-
tionally neutral (GDP per capita rises but inequality remains the same), then for each 
increase of 100 taka or 100 pesos going to someone in the bottom 20 percent, some-
one in the top 20 percent, on average, receives roughly 450 more taka in Bangladesh 
and 1,500 more pesos in Mexico. In other words, even when growth is good for the 
poor and the number below the poverty line falls,35 the absolute income gap between 
rich and poor continues to widen.
PRO-POOR GROWTH
With increasing attention paid to global poverty, captured by the MDG of cutting 
poverty in half by 2015, development experts frequently refer to the need for devel-
opment strategies that adopt a poverty focus (Box 6–3). Sometimes this is referred to 
as pro-poor growth. This is not a well-defined term. Pro-poor growth is sometimes 
described as the situation in which income growth among the poor is faster than 
average income growth. The problem with this definition is that it favors circum-
stances in which the incomes of the poor grow, for example, at 3 percent while the 
GDP per capita grows at 2 percent over situations in which the incomes of the poor 
34“Is Growth Enough?” Latin American Economic Policies 14 (2001).
35The elasticity of the poverty rate with respect to growth in GDP per capita is reported by Ravallion to 
be around –2 but with lots of variation. With a 95 percent confidence interval, a 2 percent rate of growth in 
average household income generates a 1 to 7 percent decline in the poverty rate. Martin Ravallion, “Pov-
erty and Growth” in David Clark, ed., The Elgar Companion to Development Studies (Cheltenham, UK: 
Elgar Publishing, 2006).

202   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
BOX 6–3 WHY SHOULD DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES
HAVE A POVERTY FOCUS?
In an interview appearing in Finance and Development, a journal of the Interna-
t
tional Monetary Fund, Harvard University economist Dani Rodrik makes a com-
pelling case for reform strategies to adopt a poverty focus.
First, in considering social welfare, most people, and democratically elected
governments in particular, would give more weight to the well-being of the poor
than to that of the rich. The economy’s growth rate is not a sufficient statistic
for making welfare evaluations because it ignores not only the level of income
but also its distribution. A policy that increases the income of the poor by one 
rupee can be worthwhile at the margin, even if it costs the rest of society more
than a rupee. From this perspective, it may be entirely rational and proper for a
government considering two competing growth strategies to choose the one that 
has a greater potential payoff for the poor, even if its impact on overall growth is 
less assured.
Second, even if the welfare of the poor does not receive extra weight, 
interventions aimed at helping the poor may still be the most effective way to
raise average incomes. Poverty is naturally associated with market imperfections
and incompleteness. The poor remain poor because they cannot borrow against
future earnings to invest in education, skills, new crops, and entrepreneurial
activities. They are cut off from economic activity because they are deprived of 
many collective goods (such as property rights, public safety, and infrastructure) 
and lack information about market opportunities. It is a standard tenet of economic 
theory that raising real average incomes requires interventions designed to close 
gaps between private and social costs. There will be a preponderance of such
opportunities where there is a preponderance of poverty.
Third, focusing on poverty is also warranted from the perspective of a broader, 
capabilities-oriented approach to development. An exclusive focus on consumption 
or income levels constitutes too narrow an approach to development. As Nobel
Laureate Amartya Sen has emphasized, the overarching goal of development is 
to maximize people’s ability to lead the kind of life they value. The poor face the 
greatest hurdles in this area and are therefore the most deserving of urgent policy 
attention.
Source: Excerpt from Dani Rodrik, “Growth Versus Poverty Reduction: A Hollow Debate,” Finance and 
Development 37, no. 4 (December 2000). Reprinted by permission of the International Monetary Fund.
t
grow at 4 percent while the GDP per capita grows at 6 percent, even though more 
rapid poverty reduction would occur in the latter case. This is not a hypothetical
 distinction; China’s experience reflects the second scenario. An alternative and more 
general definition of pro-poor growth is economic growth that includes any growth in 
the incomes of the poor.

S T R AT E G I E S  TO R E D U C E  P O V E RT Y   203
While not well-defined, at least the intentions of pro-poor growth are clear. 
What can governments do to achieve economic growth that rapidly improves the 
well-being of the poor? Answers lie in better understanding the complex interac-
tions among growth, inequality, and poverty. Pro-poor growth does not represent a 
choice between being pro-growth and being pro-poor. The strategy calls for combin-
ing more rapid growth with increased opportunities for the poor to participate in that 
growth. Policies that both accelerate growth and address inequality may be needed 
to achieve these goals.
Those who question whether growth is good for the poor may also be skepti-
cal about the ability of markets to help poor people. Competition may be seen as 
exploiting poor people, by paying them too little for their labor or by charging too 
much for the inputs they purchase or the goods they buy. Policies associated with the 
Washington Consensus are often viewed critically as protecting the interests of rich 
countries or rich citizens in poor nations at the expense of the masses of poor people 
in low- and middle-income countries. But are these criticisms valid? Can market-
friendly strategies serve the interests of the poor?
Consider China’s experience. Before 1980, China’s farm system was dominated 
by collectives and communes. Market forces played little role in the allocation of 
farm inputs or in returns to agricultural work. Market reforms under the household 
responsibility system changed everything. It transferred control (but not owner-
ship) over farmland to individual farmers. After meeting output quotas to the state, 
farmers were free to keep or sell additional output on relatively open markets. The 
unleashing of personal incentives resulted in a massive supply response and lifted 
hundreds of millions of Chinese peasants out of poverty. This outcome was sup-
ported by a relatively equal distribution of land, which occurred after the breakup of 
the communes. Low inequality in access to farmland was essential for the pro-poor 
growth that followed.36
Macroeconomic stability and economic openness are major elements of the 
Washington Consensus. What impact do these policies have on the poor? Maintain-
ing fiscal discipline and reducing price inflation are key features of macroeconomic 
stability. Such stability usually entails reducing budget deficits, achieved by cutting 
government expenditures. This in turn often brings forth protests that the poor are 
hurt by reduced government spending on basic services. There can be consider-
able truth to such concerns, but it is not the whole picture. Government spending 
frequently fails to reach the poor, as programs, including those on health and educa-
tion, often are targeted at higher income quintiles.
Maintaining unsustainable budget deficits also leads to price inflation, which 
tends to hurt the poor much more than the rich. Higher income individuals have 
ways to avoid the negative consequences of rapid price inflation. They can send 
36Martin Ravallion, “A Comparative Perspective on Poverty Reduction in Brazil, China and India,” World 
Bank Research Observer 26, no. 1 (2011).

204   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
their savings abroad or hold their wealth in land or real estate, which often are a 
hedge against inflation. But the poor lack these options. What minimal savings they 
have can disappear under persistent price inflation, the costs of even their minimal 
borrowing escalate, and any type of fixed income, like a pension, for example, soon 
becomes relatively worthless. Price inflation usually leads to the depreciation of the 
currency, which raises the price of imported goods, including fuel and other essen-
tial commodities. When fuel prices go up, transportation costs increase, affecting 
many items the poor depend on. Price inflation also acts like a brake on investment 
and economic growth, and slower economic growth is not in the interests of the 
poor. Overall, macroeconomic stability tends to be good for both economic growth 
and the poor.
Trade liberalization and greater economic openness entail reducing trade bar-
riers, encouraging foreign direct investment and freeing up exchange rates. Anti-
globalization advocates see such measures as hurting the poor, who cannot protect 
themselves from the vagaries of world capital markets or the onslaught of cheap 
exports. Once again, there is merit to this position in some circumstances. The Asian 
financial crisis of the late 1990s hurt both the rich and the poor in many economies. 
Cheap crops, the result (in part) of farm subsidies in the European Union and the 
United States, hurt farmers in some economies. Cotton growers in West Africa are 
often cited as an example.
But there is another side to increased economic openness. If nations export 
goods in which they have a comparative advantage, many low-income nations spe-
cialize in goods that rely on unskilled labor. This leads to an increase in the employ-
ment of such workers and, over time, to an increase in their wages. Because poverty 
is likely to be common among the least skilled, trade increases labor demand and 
reduces poverty. Greater openness, including the exchange of technology and the 
capital accumulation that results from foreign direct investment, can improve pro-
ductivity and raise overall economic growth. In addition, trade may also reduce the 
prices the poor must pay for goods and services, further improving their welfare.
The textbook case for trade is compelling, and the success in poverty reduction 
throughout East Asia often identifies trade, especially exports of labor-intensive man-
ufactured products, as an engine of growth. But there is more to economic openness 
than increasing exports, and a full account of the impact of globalization on pov-
erty does not yield one simple conclusion. Trade reform can help some of the poor 
while hurting others. In Mexico, the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) 
brought more liberalized trade, which hurt farmers who previously were protected 
by tariffs on corn at the same time that it helped those who found employment in the 
growing export sector. (See Chapters 18 and 19 for a fuller account of the impact of 
trade on growth, development, and poverty.) Trade reforms illustrate an important 
principle: Market forces create new opportunities that benefit some and hurt oth-
ers. Helping the poor get the most out of new opportunities is a challenge facing all 
economies.

S T R AT E G I E S  TO R E D U C E  P O V E RT Y   205
IMPROVING OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE POOR
Improving the operation of markets helps the poor only if they can take advantage 
of these opportunities. This is why expanding basic education and health services is 
often a main element of strategies to reduce poverty. Education tends to make  people 
more productive. It permits them to access new information and helps them take 
advantage of new opportunities, from new seed varieties that increase farm yields to 
new jobs that require the ability to read and write and new medicines that increase 
child survival or improve adult health. Education is not, however, a panacea. In a 
bad economic environment, education can yield a low return (see Chapter 8). But 
without an education, many of the poor may get trapped in intergenerational cycles 
of poverty. Similar arguments can be made for the importance of basic health (see 
Chapter 9). The debilitating effects of a host of diseases, including malaria and HIV/
AIDS, prevent those who are infected from engaging in work and seizing new oppor-
tunities. No matter how well markets work, if someone is too sick to take advantage of 
such opportunities, poverty persists.
Investing in education and health—that is, in the human capital of the poor—
is part of an agenda for improving the opportunities of the poor. Other reforms also 
warrant consideration. Most of the poor live in rural areas and either directly or indi-
rectly depend on agriculture as a source of income. Studies of India find that growth 
in the rural economy alleviates both rural and urban poverty, whereas urban growth 
primarily reduces only urban poverty.37 Supporting the rural economy is not some-
thing governments in low- and middle-income nations always do. More attention 
needs to be paid to rural infrastructure, including better roads and telecommunica-
tions, so that poor farmers can more easily market their crops and obtain informa-
tion about prices. Tube wells for safe drinking water, improved irrigation, agriculture 
extension services, research and development on crop varieties, and expanded access 
to credit are other interventions that can contribute to the improved performance of 
the rural economy and a decline in rural poverty (see Chapters 16 and 17 for further 
discussion of agricultural development and its impact on the poor.)
Spending more on the poor, whether on their education or healthcare, on the 
infrastructure on which they depend, or in the rural economy where most of the 
poor live, means spending less on other groups in society. Reforming the allocation 
of government expenditures can be both pro-poor and pro-growth. But it is bound 
to encounter resistance as interest groups act to maintain government expenditures 
they have come to expect. Even more controversial are proposals to redistribute 
assets, most often land, to the poor.
Explanations for the economic growth and success at poverty alleviation among 
East Asian countries, including China, Korea, and Taiwan, often point to the role 
37Martin Ravallion and Gaurav Datt, “Why Has Economic Growth Been More Pro-Poor in Some States 
of India than Others?” Journal of Development Economics 68 (2002).

206   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
played by earlier policies of land redistribution. These were fairly radical interven-
tions that included the expropriation of land by the state with minimal or no compen-
sation to owners. Land reforms in East Asia occurred during times of extreme political 
upheaval, whether social revolution in China or the end of foreign occupation in 
Korea. Despite the ultimate success of these economies and the role redistribution 
of agricultural land played in these nations’ subsequent economic development, 
land reforms and other types of asset redistribution receive less support today. They 
often are seen as politically difficult, if not unfeasible, by both national governments 
and multilateral institutions like the International Monetary Fund and World Bank. 
Land reforms also have gone badly in many countries. Zimbabwe’s land reform is but 
one element of the destructive actions taken by the government of Robert Mugabe 
that turned Zimbabwe from a net food exporter into a nation dependent on food aid. 
Zimbabwe’s experience is an extreme example; it demonstrates that solely redistrib-
uting assets offers little promise of alleviating poverty. A much broader set of com-
plementary policies is needed to permit the poor to take advantage of any increase 
in their assets. But even when such policies are in place, asset redistribution is often 
politically too difficult to play much of a role in a pro-poor growth strategy.
INCOME TRANSFERS AND SAFETY NETS
Every nation has individuals who are poor because they lack economic opportunity 
or are beyond the reach of the market. The latter include those who are too old, too 
young, or too sick to work and are without family networks to care for them. There 
are also situations in which systemic shocks, whether due to natural catastrophes 
or economic crises, require government action because the marketplace cannot 
resolve them.
Situations of chronic poverty tend to call for income transfers. These may take 
the form of cash grants or food pricing/distribution programs. The challenge facing 
all such programs is making them cost effective and having them reach the target 
population and not “leak” to higher-income groups. Food price subsidies, for exam-
ple, aid the poor but also subsidize the purchases of the nonpoor. The net result can 
be an unsustainable fiscal burden on the budget.
Conditional cash transfers (CCTs) increasingly are employed in all regions to 
address both current and future poverty. These programs provide cash payments to 
eligible households and in return families must satisfy program goals, usually enroll-
ing children in school and requiring them to attend at least 80 to 85 percent of school 
days. Some CCTs also require families to visit health clinics for periodic checkups, 
vaccinations of young children, prenatal care for expecting mothers, and other ser-
vices. Cash payments address current poverty. By encouraging school enrollment 
and better healthcare, the programs simultaneously increase the human capital of 
children with the goal of reducing the transmission of poverty from one generation 
to the next.

S T R AT E G I E S  TO R E D U C E  P O V E RT Y   207
Two of the most well known programs are Bolsa Familia Program (family allow-
ance) in Brazil and Oportunidades (opportunities) in Mexico (originally called 
PROGRESA: Programa de Educación, Salud y Alimentación). Oportunidades uses 
geographic targeting based on census data to identify the poorest rural areas and 
urban blocks. It then uses household surveys on income and assets (“Do you have 
a dirt or cement floor?” “Do you own a hot-water heater?”) in the identified areas 
to direct benefits to eligible households. This approach reduces the leakage of pro-
gram benefits to the nonpoor. Transfers are made to the female head of a household 
(usually the mother, but sometimes a grandmother), consistent with evidence that 
women are more likely than men to spend financial resources on their children and 
to improve the well-being of their families. Banks rather than government agen-
cies handle the transfer of funds to individual recipients, reducing the number of 
intermediaries involved and cutting down on corruption. A high percentage of the 
program’s budget goes directly to beneficiaries who spend the money on local busi-
nesses, often small in scale and located within the poor Mexican communities where 
recipients live. From its inception, Oportunidades set up systems for data collection 
and rigorous program evaluation so that the impact of CCTs could be determined 
and verified.38
Bolsa Familia offers eligible households about $13 a month per child, helping to 
lift many families above Brazil’s poverty line. The program has been especially effec-
tive in rural areas but somewhat less so in urban ones, where costs are higher and the 
$13 does not go as far. Problems of drug addiction, violence, child labor, and family 
breakdown also compound the causes of income poverty in urban areas. Bolsa 
Familia today covers families representing almost 50 million Brazilians, about one 
quarter of the population, but the aggregate cost is small, about 0.5 percent of Brazil’s 
GDP and 2.5 percent of total government expenditures. This modest amount is seen 
as having played a role in reducing poverty and inequality in Brazil.
Social safety nets are similar to income transfers but, in their design, recognize 
that household poverty often is transitory rather than chronic. Panel data that trace 
individuals or households over time find that there are fewer families who are always 
poor than there are families who are poor some of the time. This outcome is true in 
low- and middle-income economies as well as in high-income settings. The transi-
tory nature of poverty does not minimize the hardship families endure nor does it 
imply that those living on amounts just over a nation’s poverty line are satisfying their 
material needs. But it does recommend designing policies that help individuals and 
households when income and consumption shortfalls occur, not in a permanent 
fashion. Public employment schemes are one example.
38Because of the linkage with schooling, we discuss CCTs again in Chapter 8; see especially Box 8–3. 
A  comprehensive review of CCTs is provided by Ariel Fiszbein and Norbert Schady, Conditional Cash 
Transfers: Reducing Present and Future Poverty (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2009).

208   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
The Employment Guarantee Scheme (EGS) in the Indian state of Maharashtra 
and the Trabajar program in Argentina were designed to ensure poor people a source 
of income and reduce the variability of their incomes. The EGS guarantees employ-
ment within a few weeks of the individual’s request and provides a job relatively 
close to a person’s home. These jobs involve public works, such as road construc-
tion and repair, irrigation systems, and prevention of soil erosion. To solve the tar-
geting problem, wages in public employment schemes must be kept low relative to 
market alternatives. By offering the prevailing market wage for unskilled rural labor, 
EGS encourages self-targeting, which increases the likelihood that those who choose 
to participate are individuals the program is intended to benefit. This maintains the 
cost-effectiveness of the scheme by minimizing the number of nonpoor people seek-
ing these jobs. There also is a ceiling on the number of days per year such employ-
ment will be available.
To encourage self-targeting, Trabajar in Argentina offered a monthly wage set at 
75 percent of the average monthly earnings of workers in the bottom 10 percent of 
households living in and around Buenos Aires. Evaluation of these public employ-
ment schemes finds that they were well used and well targeted. ESG provides about 
100 million person-days of employment, varying both by season and by year. Par-
ticipation falls during the busy season in agriculture, confirming that poor families 
use the program to counter the variability in monthly incomes. The majority of par-
ticipants in the ESG and Trabajar programs were from the lowest income deciles. 
Participants realized significant increases in their incomes, lifting many above pov-
erty.39 The experience with ESG is one of the reasons why India launched a similar 
nationwide initiative, the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act, which promises up to 100 days of unskilled manual labor on rural public works 
projects per family per year. Pay is equal to the official minimum wage rate for agri-
cultural labor.
GLOBAL INEQUALITY AND THE END OF POVERTY
Our discussion of inequality and poverty reduction has so far focused on nations. We 
looked carefully at levels and trends in inequality within nations and pro-poor poli-
cies that governments might pursue. Most policy making occurs at a national level, 
so this focus is warranted. But there also is a global dimension to issues of inequal-
ity and poverty. The gap between rich and poor across countries tends to be greater 
than it is within most nations. Should anything be done to change this outcome? Is 
39World Bank, “Principles of Successful Workfare Programs,” World Development Report 2000/2001: 
Attacking Poverty (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2001), Box 8.9.
GLOBAL INEQUALITY AND THE END OF POVERTY

G L O B A L  I N E Q U A L IT Y  A N D  T H E  E N D  O F  P O V E RT Y   209
 reducing world poverty a global goal? Is there a role for actions that go beyond the 
nation-state? There is considerable debate over the answers to these questions.
A simple way of portraying global inequality is to divide the world into the 
high- versus low- and middle-income economies. In 2010, the high-income nations 
accounted for 16 percent of world population and consumed 55 percent of world out-
put. The low- and middle-income nations represented the rest: 84 percent of world 
population and 45 percent of world output. This level of global inequality is compa-
rable to that in Brazil and South Africa, two of the world’s most unequal nations. This 
degree of global inequality is not a recent outcome. About 30 years ago the results 
were similar: in 1980 the high-income nations represented 18 percent of world popu-
lation and consumed 62 percent of world output.40 This simple division of the world 
provides a fairly reliable snapshot of global inequality, but it ignores important dif-
ferences between countries within each of these groups. In addition, not everyone 
in a high-income economy is rich, nor is everyone in a low-income nation poor. To 
resolve these problems, three measures often are used in debates over whether the 
world is becoming a more equal or unequal place.
One approach is to define international inequality by comparing aver-
age incomes across countries. For some questions, it is appropriate to rely on this 
method. For example, the convergence debate, discussed in Chapter 4, asks whether 
there is a tendency for the income levels across nations to converge over time. Com-
paring mean incomes is warranted here. This approach treats each of the world’s 
nations equally, whether the Caribbean nation of Dominica, with a population of 
about 75,000, or China with more than 1.3 billion people. But for a discussion of 
human welfare, treating each nation the same without regard to its population seems 
less warranted. An alternative index of international inequality is to weight each 
nation’s mean income by its population. A population-weighted measure of interna-
tional inequality is better suited for some questions but still leaves a key issue unre-
solved. By multiplying the average level of income by population, no account is taken 
of the domestic distribution of income; everyone in China or Dominica is assumed 
to have the same income as everyone else in the nation. To avoid this problem, one 
needs a measure of global inequality that compares the income or consumption 
of each individual regardless of where that person lives. Such a measure describes 
inequality among all individuals, not just among all nations. It is not surprising that 
the level of inequality and its trend varies according to which of these definitions is 
employed.
Figure 6–9 compares two estimates of international inequality, one weighted 
and the other unweighted by population, from 1961 to 2008. Gini coefficients are 
40The share of world output refers to gross national income (GNI) measured in terms of PPP. If GNI is 
measured at market exchange rates, the high-income nations’ share of GNI was closer to 80 percent in 
1980 and 70 percent in 2010.

210   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
estimated annually for each of these series.41 The unweighted trend (counting each 
country the same) shows little systematic change until the early 1980s, after which 
there is an almost continuous rise in inequality until 2000, when it begins to decline. 
The weighted series (giving larger countries more influence) shows something differ-
ent. First, it suggests a higher level of inequality until the very end of the series. Sec-
ond, the time trend never systematically rises and starts to decrease earlier and more 
rapidly, beginning around 1990. 
The differences in trends between the two series are easy to explain. The rise in 
the unweighted measure of international inequality between 1980 and 2000 reflects 
the regional growth trends we first encountered in Chapter 2. The 1980s were a “lost 
decade” for Latin America, with debt crises followed by economic stagnation and 
decline. In the 1990s, the transition experience in eastern Europe and central Asia 
was accompanied by steep declines in income. These reversals of fortune contrast 
with positive growth in the high-income economies and parts of Asia and account 
for rising international inequality. Decreasing international inequality in the 2000s is 
evidence of faster growth in most low- and middle-income economies.
41Much of this discussion of trends in global inequality draws from Branko Milanovic, Worlds Apart: 
Measuring International and Global Inequality (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005); and 
Branko Milanovic, “Global Inequality Recalculated: The Effect of New 2005 PPP Estimates on Global 
Inequality,” Policy Research Working Paper 5061 World Bank, Washington, DC, September 2009.
FIGURE 6–9 Trends in International Inequality, 1961–2008
Source: Figure 1 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: Policy 
Research Working Paper 5061 by Branko Milanovic, 2009. Reprinted with permission.
1960
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
Gini coefficient (percent)
Unweighted
Year
Population weighted
Population weighted
without China
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010

G L O B A L  I N E Q U A L IT Y  A N D  T H E  E N D  O F  P O V E RT Y   211
The population-weighted measure of international inequality shows a different 
trend. For four decades, the measure declined, picking up speed after 1990. Given the 
construction of this measure, what happened in heavily populated nations drives the 
outcome. China’s experience explains much of the observed trend. This is evident 
when one compares the population-weighted trend in Figure 6–9 that includes China 
versus the one that excludes it. China’s post-1978 economic transformation quickly 
moved the nation from low- to middle-income status. This closed some of the gap 
between China and the high-income nations, especially the heavily populated United 
States, but increased the income gap between China and the remaining low-income 
nations. On net, the Chinese population’s move toward the middle of the world dis-
tribution of income resulted in a significant decline in the population-weighted Gini 
ratio. Rapid growth since 2000 in India, another heavily populated nation, accounts 
for the decrease in the population-weighted trend in international inequality exclud-
ing China. Rapid income growth in China and India helps explain why by 2008 the 
population-weighted measure finally falls below the unweighted measure.
Population-weighted international inequality assigns all citizens within a 
nation the same level of per capita income or consumption—that is, it assumes 
“perfect income equality” within every nation. This is a poor assumption for mea-
suring inequality for the world’s population. Correcting this problem requires more 
than data on GDP per capita and population size. Household-level data are needed 
to assign a more precise estimate of income levels to every person in the world and 
to compute what might be called global inequality. There is considerable variance 
in the level of global inequality predicted by various studies and no consensus on 
trends in recent decades. But what all these studies show is that global inequality is 
significantly higher than population-weighted international inequality. Estimates of 
global Gini coefficients range from about 0.60 to 0.80.42 China, India, and the United 
States, the three most populous nations in the world, contribute significantly to this 
level of inequality. In recent decades, all three have had economic growth accompa-
nied by rising domestic Gini coefficients.
Measured this way, global inequality at the beginning of the twenty-first century 
exceeds the level of inequality of almost any nation in the world. It should come as no 
surprise that the world is a very unequal place, but the degree of inequality is striking. 
Your response to the evidence on the degree of global inequality may be, “Something 
should be done about this!” If it is, it is important to be clear on the nature of the 
problems created by global inequality that you wish to resolve.
Consider the following: Global inequality would be lower if, all else equal, 
economic growth in high-income economies were slower. Some may be in favor 
of slower economic growth in the United States and elsewhere, but their reasons 
42Reviews of alternative studies can be found in Branko Milanovic, Worlds Apart: Measuring Interna-
tional and Global Inequality (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005), 119–27; and in World Bank, 
World Development Report 2006: Equity and Development (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2006), chap. 9.

212   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
may have little to do with global inequality or with the well-being of people in poor 
nations. You may reject the relentless consumerism of the United States. Americans 
buy ever-larger houses, fill them with a seemingly endless supply of goods, and 
drive bigger vehicles on increasingly congested roads. There is much in the life-
styles and consumption habits of high-income economies to criticize. But slower 
economic growth in rich nations, even if it led to lower global inequality, might 
have an adverse impact on low- and middle-income nations. If rich nations grew 
more slowly, their demand for goods from other nations would fall, affecting these 
nations’ growth rates. Global inequality brought about by slower growth in high-
income economies could prove a detriment to progress in reducing global poverty. 
There is no reason to believe that if the United States grew more slowly, Africa or 
some other poor region would grow more quickly. In all likelihood, the opposite 
would be true.
There are many ways in which global inequality could be lower today. What if 
income inequality in China had not risen over the past 20 years? Remember that 
China has had an exceptionally high growth rate for more than two decades and has 
been able to lift over 400 million of its citizens above the $1.25-a-day poverty line. 
China’s economic miracle also contributed to reducing global inequality, but the 
effect would have been even greater if income inequality within China had not risen. 
Could China have grown rapidly, dramatically reduced poverty, and kept its level of 
inequality from rising? We really do not know because we cannot observe the coun-
terfactual. But there is some chance that lower inequality within China might have 
required slower economic growth.
Calls for reducing global inequality may be misplaced unless proper consider-
ation is taken of how greater equality might be achieved. Even before considering 
how to achieve greater global equality, the question of why to do so remains. We have 
encountered some of these arguments before on a national level and some are also 
applicable on a global level. First, on the grounds of economic efficiency, the con-
centration of world incomes may lower productivity growth. Market failures limit 
poor people from borrowing to finance worthwhile projects, and some redistribution 
of income could increase the return on total global investments. Second, it may be 
in the self-interest of higher-income households, wherever they may live, to support 
redistribution. Health risks, for example, cross borders faster than in the past. The 
rapid transmission of HIV/AIDS across continents is one example. A redistribution 
of world resources might mitigate the health risks facing both the poor and the rich. 
Another reason why it may be in the interest of high-income households to favor 
greater global equality is that, in an information age, people around the world are 
aware of the gap between rich and poor. This knowledge and frustration over feeling 
left out may play a destabilizing role in international affairs, affecting the interests of 
the rich as well as the poor. Third, a more equitable distribution may be the right goal 
to strive for on moral grounds. Philosophers since Plato have been writing about this 
subject. Especially given the size of the income gap between those on the top versus 

G L O B A L  I N E Q U A L IT Y  A N D  T H E  E N D  O F  P O V E RT Y   213
those on the bottom, global inequality should be seen as an opportunity to address 
the absolute poverty that has been a central focus of this chapter.
If those in higher income quintiles are averse to high levels of inequality and 
willing to move toward a world of less poverty and greater equality of incomes and 
opportunities, what might they do? Columbia University economist Jeffrey Sachs 
offers both a diagnosis and a blueprint. In his book The End of Poverty, he writes,
The greatest tragedy of our time is that about one sixth of humanity is not even 
on the development ladder. A large number of the extreme poor are caught in a 
poverty trap, unable on their own to escape from extreme material deprivation. 
They are trapped by disease, physical isolation, climate stress, environmental 
degradation, and by extreme poverty itself. Even though life-saving solutions 
exist to increase their chances for survival—whether in the form of new farming 
techniques, or essential medicines, or bed nets that can limit the transmission 
of malaria—these families and their governments simply lack the financial 
means to make these critical investments. The world’s poor know about the 
development ladder: they are tantalized by images of affluence from halfway 
around the world. But they are not able to get a first foothold on the ladder, and 
so cannot even begin the climb out of poverty.43
Sachs proposes a global compact to end absolute poverty by 2025. As with any 
compact there are at least two parties: poor countries and rich ones. Poor coun-
tries are to be held accountable for their efforts to reduce poverty. Corrupt regimes 
and those that pursue war rather than development cannot be part of this compact. 
Sachs makes it clear, however, that even among low- and middle-income nations 
that sign onto the compact, their actions alone may not be enough to end poverty. 
Conditions in parts of Africa are so dire that many of the poor, lacking the basics 
of food, clean water, medicines, and healthcare facilities, are, in Sachs’s words, “too 
poor to stay alive.”
Given the degree of absolute poverty in the world, there is a need for rich nations 
to do more to alleviate poverty. Some of Sachs’s suggestions meet with wide support 
among development economists: the need for rich countries to keep their markets 
open to exports from poor nations and the need for rich nations to invest in global 
public goods, such as basic science on combating tropical diseases and improv-
ing agricultural yields. Other elements of his global compact are more controver-
sial: the need for better environmental stewardship by the rich nations to minimize 
the impact of climate change on poor nations, the need for debt forgiveness of the 
accumulated international debts of poor nations owed to multilateral institutions 
like the IMF and World Bank, and the need for a significant increase in the foreign 
aid from rich nations to poor ones. We explore these ideas in later chapters. Despite 
43Jeffrey Sachs, The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time (New York: Penguin Press, 
2005), p. 19–20.

214   [CH. 6] I N E Q U A L I T Y  A N D  P O V E RT Y
 disagreement about elements of this global compact to end poverty, it is hard 
to argue against one of its central ideas: Rich nations have a critical role to play in 
reducing global poverty.
SUMMARY
• The number of people in poverty in a given country depends on both 
the level of per capita income or consumption and its distribution. 
Distributional outcomes are described using size distributions, which 
report inequality in terms of shares going to each population quintile 
ranked from poorest to richest; the Lorenz curve, which offers a geometric 
portrait of inequality; and the Gini coefficient, which provides a single 
summary statistic.
• Income and consumption inequality exhibits significant regional variation. 
Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa have relatively high levels of 
inequality; eastern Europe and central Asia, South Asia, and the high-
income economies generally have low levels; and inequality in East Asia 
generally falls in the medium range. These regional patterns seem to have 
less to do with the level of per capita income than with underlying historical 
and political determinants as well as factor endowments.
• According to World Bank studies, in 2005 nearly 1.4 billion people, 
representing 25 percent of the developing world’s population, lived 
below the international poverty line of $1.25 a day, sometimes referred 
to as absolute poverty or extreme poverty. The number of people living in 
absolute poverty declined by 520 million between 1981 and 2005. Most 
of this decline happened in East Asia, especially in China. With generally 
strong economic growth in many low- and middle-income economies since 
2005, absolute poverty probably has declined since then.
• Because world population grew significantly from 1981 to 2005, success at 
poverty reduction can also be measured in relative terms. Estimates of the 
head-count index suggest that the incidence of poverty fell significantly 
in East and South Asia. In sub-Saharan Africa, the level remained at over 
50 percent. Most of the world’s poor still live in East and South Asia, 
although both the poverty rate (head-count index) and the severity of 
poverty (poverty gap) are highest in sub-Saharan Africa.
• Poverty tends to be greater in rural than in urban areas. Racial and ethnic 
minorities often face higher poverty rates. Women are discriminated 
against throughout the world. They earn lower wages on average, often are 
denied inheritance or the right to own land, and traditionally have received 
less education than men. However, because household resources tend to 
SUMMARY

S U M M A R Y   215
be shared as a result of intra-household distribution decisions, there is less 
evidence that income poverty rates for women are higher than for men.
• Empirical studies confirm that economic growth tends to be good for the 
poor. Across countries, the incomes of the bottom 20 percent grew at the 
same rate as GDP per capita. This is an average tendency, and in some 
cases and in some time periods, the average income of the poorest quintile 
fell despite increases in GDP per capita.
• Pro-poor growth refers to a development strategy that combines more rapid 
economic growth with increased opportunities for the poor to participate 
in the economy. Many economists believe that market-friendly policies, 
including maintaining fiscal discipline, reducing price inflation, and 
increasing economic openness, serve the interests of the poor. But these 
interventions alone are not enough; some of the poor will benefit and 
others will be hurt.
• Growth strategies designed to include the poor may have the greatest 
potential to promote pro-poor growth. Because poverty tends to be 
disproportionately rural, growth strategies that include agricultural 
development may be particularly important to pursue.
• Governments must also invest in the education and health of the poor 
and in the infrastructure on which the poor rely. Conditional cash transfer 
programs, such as Bolsa Familia in Brazil and Oportunidades in Mexico, 
have proven cost-effective in reducing current poverty and making 
investments in children that should reduce future poverty. Social safety 
nets, such as guaranteed employment schemes, are designed for those 
temporarily unable to take advantage of the opportunities markets provide.
• Just as we can measure inequality within nations, it is possible to estimate 
the degree of global inequality. The most comprehensive measure of global 
inequality compares the income (or consumption) of each individual 
regardless of where that person lives. Estimates of this measure report Gini 
coefficients of global inequality of 0.60 to 0.80, values higher than for almost 
any single nation. Given both the level of absolute poverty in the world and 
the degree of global income inequality, it is important to consider the steps 
rich nations can take to help poor nations.


217
Population
7
I
n 1973, marking the completion of his first term as president of the World Bank, 
Robert McNamara wrote One Hundred Countries, Two Billion People, which 
brings together his basic views on economic development. There is no ambigu-
ity about McNamara’s beliefs. He writes, “The greatest single obstacle to the eco-
nomic and social advancement of the majority of the peoples in the underdeveloped 
world is rampant population growth.”1
Before coming to the World Bank, McNamara was a professor at the Harvard 
Business School, president of the Ford Motor Company, and secretary of defense in 
the Kennedy and Johnson administrations. A man of incredible intellectual reach, 
McNamara understood much about the role of capital accumulation and techno-
logical change and their contributions to economic growth. But he maintained the 
view that rapid population growth was a threat that would have “catastrophic con-
sequences” unless dealt with. “The underdeveloped world needs investment capital 
for a whole gamut of productive projects, but nothing would be more unwise than to 
allow these projects to fail because they are finally overwhelmed by a tidal wave of 
population.”2
The “Two Billion People” in the title of McNamara’s book refers to the early 
1960s when the world’s population was close to 3 billion, with 2 billion, or about two- 
thirds of the total, living in the developing nations. Since then the world has grown, 
1Robert McNamara, One Hundred Countries, Two Billion People (New York: Praeger, 1973), p. 31.
2MacNamara, One Hundred Countries, p. 31.

218   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
 reaching 7 billion in 2011. Over 5.8 billion of these people reside in low- and middle-
income economies.
Despite this massive increase in numbers of people, the views of James  Wolfensohn, 
World Bank president from 1995 to 2005, could not be more different from those of his 
predecessor. Wolfensohn’s speeches and publications reveal only limited reference to 
population growth. Most often these references indicate how population growth exac-
erbates another problem, whether improving access to clean water or making a dent in 
the numbers suffering from absolute poverty. The same is true for Wolfensohn’s succes-
sor, Robert Zoellick. After his first 100 days in office, Zoellick delivered a speech identi-
fying six strategic themes to meet global challenges. Reducing population was not one 
of them; in fact, “population growth” is not mentioned even once.3
Was McNamara unnecessarily alarmist? Or did Wolfensohn and Zoellick make 
irreversible mistakes by not focusing on rising population numbers? Was the United 
Nations similarly wrong in not including reductions in population growth as one of 
the original millennium development goals (MDGs; introduced in Chapter 2)? We 
begin to address these questions by reviewing the world’s population history and 
exploring the demographic transition that has characterized today’s high-income 
nations and increasingly the low- and middle-income nations as well. We also con-
sider population projections for the future before turning our attention to the com-
plex relationship between population growth and economic development. This 
relationship is viewed both at an aggregate level and at the level of individual families 
making decisions about how many children to have. We conclude by reviewing the 
options nations face in pursuing policies to limit the size of their populations.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF WORLD POPULATION
Anthropologists debate when our first ancestors appeared. For our purposes, we 
do not have to go that far back in time. We might begin at the end of the last Ice 
Age,  about 13,000 years ago, when humans on all continents were still living as 
hunter–gatherers, or 12,000 years ago with the first signs of agricultural settlements, 
or 7,000 years ago with the first indications of urbanization. For most of the thousands 
of years since then, population growth has been close to zero, with annual births 
roughly offsetting annual deaths. Opportunities for human survival slowly improved, 
and by 1 c.e. the world’s population is estimated at about 230 million.4 To gain some 
perspective on this number, today Indonesia by itself has a population that size.
3Robert Zoellick, “An Inclusive & Sustainable Globalization,” speech to the National Press Club, 
 Washington, DC, October 10, 2007.
4Angus Maddison, The World Economy: Historical Statistics (Paris: Development Centre of the Organ-
isation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2003).
A BRIEF HISTORY OF WORLD POPULATION

A  B R I E F  H I S TO R Y  O F  W O R L D  P O P U L AT I O N   219
Figure 7–1 charts world population from 1 c.e. through 2011. The figure makes 
it abundantly clear that population growth is a recent and unprecedented event 
in  human history. From the beginning of human settlements, it took more than 
10,000 years for the world’s population to reach 1 billion in 1820. But the next billion 
were added in only about 110 years and, for the last four decades, the world added 
1 billion people every 12 to 15 years. No wonder McNamara was so worried.
We have a broad understanding of how world population went from a period 
of relatively small and stable population numbers to the 7 billion (and still grow-
ing) that inhabit the planet today. The introduction of settled agriculture revolu-
tionized the earth’s capacity to sustain human life. During the years leading up to 
the Industrial Revolution of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the 
food supply grew and became more reliable. The death rate fell, life expectancy 
increased, and population growth gradually accelerated. This growth, however, 
was set back at intervals by famines, plagues, and wars, any of which could wipe 
out as much as half of the population in a given area. As late as the fourteenth cen-
tury, the black death (bubonic plague) killed one-third of the population of Europe. 
Despite these catastrophic events, by 1800, the world’s population had grown to 
almost 1 billion, implying an annual growth rate of a mere 0.08 percent between 
1 c.e. and 1800.
2011
1500
1999
1750
1250
1
500
250
750
1000
3
2
4
1
5
8
7
6
0
Population (billions)
Year
2011
1987
1975
1960
1927
1820
FIGURE 7–1 World Population Growth through History: Years Needed to Add 1 Billion 
More People
Source: Angus Maddison, “Statistics on World Population, GDP, and Per Capita GDP, 1–2008 AD,” www.ggdc
.net/MADDISON/Historical_Statistics/vertical-file_02-2010.xls.

220   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
The Industrial Revolution, which marked the start of modern economic 
growth, further expanded the earth’s population-carrying capacity. Innovations in 
 agriculture matched innovations in industry, permitting labor to be transferred to 
industry while the productivity of the remaining agricultural laborers rose quickly 
enough to feed the growing urban population. Transcontinental railroads and fast, 
reliable ocean shipping further boosted world food output in the late nineteenth cen-
tury, making it possible to grow more basic foodstuffs in the areas best suited for this 
activity and get supplies to food-deficit areas in record time in emergencies. Famines, 
especially in what are now the high-income nations, decreased in frequency and 
severity. Food prices fell. Meanwhile, modern medicine, sanitation, and pharma-
ceutical production began to develop. All these factors helped reduce the death rate 
and accelerate population growth. By 1945, the population of the world was slightly 
less than 2.5 billion, meaning that global population grew by 0.6 percent per year 
between 1800 and 1945.
After World War II, there were further dramatic improvements in food supply and 
disease control. Techniques introduced in the developed countries during the pre-
ceding era spread throughout the globe. The result was a veritable revolution in fall-
ing death rates and rising life expectancy in both the developed and the developing 
world. Plummeting death rates in many areas raised population growth rates to  levels 
the world had never known before. Reference to a worldwide population explo-
sion, unthinkable for most of human history, became commonplace in the 1960s and 
1970s as the world’s population grew to 3 and then 4 billion. World population passed 
5 billion in 1987, 6 billion in 1999, and 7 billion early this decade; almost all this growth 
has occurred in the developing countries. Between 1945 and 2009, the growth in world 
population averaged a historically unprecedented rate of 1.6 percent per annum, 
twenty times faster than the estimated 0.08 percent between 1 c.e. and 1800.
THE DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION
The relationship between annual births and deaths determines population growth. 
Figure 7–2 depicts the basic stages in the demographic transition in a now- developed 
nation, Finland. Finland’s experience is typical of what most high-income countries 
have experienced over the past several centuries. The top line in Panel a refers to the 
crude birth rate, the number of live births per year per 1,000 people. The lower line 
refers to the crude death rate, the number of deaths per year also per 1,000 people. 
The difference between these two rates, the excess of births over deaths, is the rate of 
natural increase in the population, which often is expressed as a percentage. For the 
world as a whole, the natural increase in the population equals the population growth 
rate; for an individual country, population growth is the difference between the rate of 
natural increase and net migration.
For hundreds of years before the eighteenth century, Finland was in the first 
stage of the classic demographic transition. High birth rates were matched by high 
death rates and the natural increase in population was close to zero. In some years, 

A  B R I E F  H I S TO R Y  O F  W O R L D  P O P U L AT I O N   221
39
24
17
38
32
29
11
9
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Annual births/deaths per 1,000 people
1780
2008
1980
1930
1880
1830
Death rate
Birth rate
Year
(a)
0
0.2
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
Natural increase (percent)
1780
2008
1980
1930
1880
1830
Year
(b)
0.6
1.5
1.2
0.2
FIGURE 7–2 Demographic Transition for Finland (1785–2008)
Source: Arthur Haupt, Thomas Kane, and Carl Haub, PRB’s Population Handbook 6th edition (Washington, DC: 
Population Reference Bureau, 2011).
births exceeded deaths; in other years, the opposite occurred. By 1785, before the 
start of industrialization and the first year for which data are available, Finland still 
had high birth and death rates, but the gap between the two resulted in a 0.6 percent 
rate of natural increase. If this rate had been maintained, it would have taken 117 
years for Finland’s population to double.

222   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
By the early 1800s, Finland was in the second stage of the demographic transi-
tion, characterized by death rates declining more quickly than birth rates. This was 
before the advent of modern medicine and public health interventions; so much of 
this decline can be attributed to improved nutrition as food supplies became more 
abundant and less variable. With no change in the birth rate and a fall in deaths, 
the rate of natural increase in the population reached 1.5 percent by 1830. At this rate, 
the population would double in just under 50 years. After 1830, death rates contin-
ued to fall but not as quickly. At the same time, birth rates started to drop as Finnish 
families decided to have fewer children. Note that they did so in the absence of mod-
ern forms of contraception. Finland was now in the third stage of the demographic 
transition, with birth rates falling more quickly than death rates. By 1915, Finland’s 
natural increase in population had slowed to 1.2 percent.
By 2008, Finland reached the fourth stage of its demographic transition in which 
its population growth had fallen close to zero, this time with low birth and death 
rates. The nation had gone from relatively high birth and death rates producing a 
low rate of population growth before 1785, through a period of more rapid natural 
increase in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, back down to a very low rate 
of population growth characterized by both low birth and death rates. Today, Finland 
has a population of 5 million, growing at 0.2 percent per annum. Abstracting from 
changes due to migration, at this rate Finland’s population would require 350 years 
to double in size. But Finland’s population probably will never double again. As has 
happened elsewhere in Europe, birth rates may fall even further and the crude death 
rate will rise as the population ages. In coming decades, Finland may even experi-
ence negative population growth, just as Germany and Italy already are.
Based on the few observations available, Finland’s rate of natural increase 
never exceeded 1.5 percent. Compare this to the experience of the developing 
countries where, as a group, the rate of natural increase reached 2.5 percent during 
the 1960s. Even today, Pakistan’s population is growing by 2.1 percent, Jordan’s by 
3.2 percent, and Madagascar’s by 2.9 percent. Why draw so much attention to a 1- or 
1.5- percentage point difference in population growth rates? Because doubling time 
drops from around 50 years at a growth rate of 1.5 percent to only 28 years at 2.5 percent 
to 22 years at 3.2 percent. Seemingly small differences in growth rates provide socie-
ties with even less time to achieve a demographic transition before population levels 
increase by substantial amounts.
Clearly, there are major differences between the historical experience of today’s 
industrialized nations and the contemporary demographic transition of the develop-
ing nations. Figure 7–3 portrays the movement of crude birth and death rate for the 
less-developed nations as a group from 1950 to 2005. Panel b charts the correspond-
ing rate of natural increase over the same years. By 1950, the rate of natural increase 
in the developing nations was 2.1 percent, far larger than the rate ever experienced by 
today’s industrialized countries. The higher rate was the result of somewhat higher 
birth rates than historically had been the case in today’s high-income nations due, 

A  B R I E F  H I S TO R Y  O F  W O R L D  P O P U L AT I O N   223
FIGURE 7–3 Demographic Transition for Less-Developed Regions (1950–2008)
Source: Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, 
World Population Prospects: The 2002 Revision and World Population Prospects: The 2008 Revision.
Annual births/deaths per 1,000 people
24
15
10
8
22
31
40
45
Year
(a)
1945
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
1955
1965
1975
1985
1995
2005
Birth rate
Death rate
Natural increase (percent)
2.1%
2.5%
2.1%
1.4%
Year
(b)
1945
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
1955
1965
1975
1985
1995
2005

224   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
in part, to earlier age at marriage. Of even greater significance, the decline in death 
rates in the developing nations began at much lower levels of per capita income and 
fell much faster than it had historically in the now-developed countries. The transfer 
of public health interventions and other medical advances, including vaccines and 
improvements in water and sanitation services, from the developed to the develop-
ing world contributed to this outcome.
Between 1950 and 1970, death rates in the developing world continued to drop 
faster than birth rates, and the natural increase in populations rose. It peaked at 
around 2.5 percent in the late 1960s, shortly before McNamara warned of the cata-
strophic consequences of rapid population growth. With little evidence of falling 
birth rates, it is not surprising that McNamara was so alarmist about population 
trends. But a demographic transition already was under way. Between 1950 and 
2005, the crude birth rate fell from 45 to 22 per 1,000, and even though death rates 
also fell, from 24 to 8 per 1,000,5 the natural increase of the developing nations slowed 
to 1.4 percent, still high by historical standards but with an unmistakable trend. In all 
regions of the world and in almost every nation, women started having fewer chil-
dren and total fertility rates (TFRs) fell (Box 7–1). These trends help explain why the 
World Bank and other multilateral organizations appear less concerned about popu-
lation growth today. The world population is still growing and will continue to do so 
for several more generations, but the rate of growth has slowed and population explo-
sion no longer seems an appropriate metaphor.
THE DEMOGRAPHIC SITUATION TODAY
In 2009, world population exceeded 6.7 billion. Only 16 percent resided in the 
high-income countries, 84 percent lived in the low- and middle-income nations 
(Table 7–1). Almost 3 out of every 10 inhabitants of the planet lived in East Asia. 
China alone accounted for just under 20 percent of world population. South Asia, 
dominated by India’s more than 1 billion inhabitants, represented another 23 percent 
of the world’s people. Sub-Saharan Africa accounted for 12 percent of world popula-
tion, but this share is expected to rise in the future. At 2.4 percent, sub-Saharan Africa 
had the most rapid rate of natural increase in population of any region.
The situation in the high-income countries could not be more different from 
that in sub-Saharan Africa. With aging populations, crude death rates are likely to 
rise, and with declining fertility, crude birth rates will fall. Rates of natural increase 
already have slowed to 0.4 percent. Almost all population growth in the high-income 
countries is attributable to immigration, with openness to immigrants at a higher 
5Careful inspection of Figures 7–2 and 7–3 reveals that the death rate in 2008 in Finland, at 9 per 
1,000 people, is almost identical to the death rate in 2005 in the less-developed regions. This does not 
mean that life expectancy and the overall survival chances in the two places are the same. If one compares 
age-specific mortality rates, survival probabilities in Finland exceed those of the developing countries for 
every age group, especially for infants. But, in the aggregate, because Finland has a much older population 
than the developing world, the crude death rates, coincidentally, average to almost the same number.

A  B R I E F  H I S TO R Y  O F  W O R L D  P O P U L AT I O N   225
BOX 7–1 TOTAL FERTILITY RATES
Another way to assess population trends is to examine fertility behavior. One of
the most common measures of fertility is the total fertility rate (TFR). TFR some-
times is thought of as a measure of the average number of children a woman will 
bear, but this is not entirely correct. TFR is a synthetic measure. It sums the age-
c
specific fertility rates of women in a given year, where age-specific fertility rates 
refer to the average number of children born to women of a specific age (usually, 
15–19, 20–24, . . .  , 40–44). In other words, TFR is the number of children the
average woman would have in her lifetime if age-specific fertility rates remained 
constant. But these rates change over time as younger women delay having their
children and as women have fewer children over all. TFR is a reliable indicator of
the number of children women currently are having, and trends in TFR reveal a
y
great deal about the world’s demographic transition.
The figure below charts TFRs over the past 40 years for the World Bank’s
seven geographical regions. In 1967 in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, TFR was 
5.5 children or more. Only the high-income economies and the nations of Europe
and central Asia had reached low TFRs of fewer than 3 children. Over the next 
four decades, and at varying speeds, fertility rates fell in every region. In East and
1967
1987
2007
7.0
5.4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
6.8
6.4
5.1
5.8
4.5
5.8
5.6
3.5
1.9
2.9
2.4
2.8 2.6
1.7
2.6
1.8 1.8
2.9
Middle East and
North Africa
Sub-Saharan
Africa
South Asia
East Asia and
Pacific
Latin America
and Caribbean
Europe and
Central Asia
High-income
nations
2.8
Total fertility rate

226   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
South Asia and in Latin America and the Middle East, TFR fell by half or more.
Sub-Saharan Africa’s demographic transition took longer to begin, but even in
this poorest part of the world, TFR, now at 5.1 children per woman, has fallen
by more than one child since 1987. Most demographers expect the decline in
Africa’s TFR to follow that of other regions and the rate to continue to fall.
level in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States than in Europe and 
Japan. Total fertility rates in many of the high-income economies already have 
dropped below replacement levels. Women must have at least two children each dur-
ing their childbearing years for the population to replace itself. Allowing for infant 
and child mortality, demographers estimate that the replacement level of total fertil-
ity is around 2.1. In countries such as Germany, Italy, and Japan, where the TFR is 
below the replacement level and immigration rates also are low, policy makers are 
concerned about a population implosion rather than a population explosion. These 
societies can anticipate smaller populations overall as well as an increasing number 
of elderly people becoming dependent on a shrinking labor force.
Below replacement level, TFR also characterizes eastern Europe and central 
Asia, where the rate of natural increase is only 0.4 percent. East Asia’s TFR has dipped 
TABLE 7–1 Levels and Trends in the World Population, 2009
 
TOTAL POPULATION 
POPULATION GROWTH
 
 
 
BIRTH 
DEATH 
NATURAL
 
NUMBER 
PERCENT 
RATE 
RATE 
INCREASE
 
(MILLIONS) 
OF TOTAL 
(PER 1,000) 
(PER 1,000) 
(PERCENT)
World 
6,775 
100 
20 
8 
1.2
Income category 
 
 
 
 
Low income 
846 
13 
34 
11 
2.3
Middle income 
4,813 
71 
19 
8 
1.1
High income 
1,117 
16 
12 
8 
0.4
Region 
 
 
 
 
East Asia 
1,944 
29 
14 
7 
0.7
South Asia 
1,568 
23 
24 
7 
1.7
Sub-Saharan Africa 
840 
12 
38 
14 
2.4
Latin America 
572 
8 
18 
6 
1.2
Europe and Central Asia 
404 
6 
15 
11 
0.4
Middle East and North Africa 
331 
5 
24 
6 
1.8
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators Online,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

A  B R I E F  H I S TO R Y  O F  W O R L D  P O P U L AT I O N   227
below replacement levels (1.9 in 2007). By contrast, neither Africa, Latin America, nor 
the Middle East has progressed as far along its demographic transitions, implying 
faster growth in population and an increasing share of the world’s total.
THE DEMOGRAPHIC FUTURE
When extrapolated into the future, even modest population growth rates generate 
projected total populations that seem unthinkable. Continued growth at the world’s 
2010 rate of natural increase, 1.2 percent, would bring population to 11 billion by 
2050 and 26 billion by 2100. This type of projection, beloved by some popular writers, 
is frightening to many. It is hard to imagine life in a world with three to four times as 
many people as there are today. How will this expanded population live? How will 
the globe’s finite supplies of space and natural resources be affected?
While a significant increase in world population can be expected during your 
lifetime, it is unlikely to double. Linear extrapolations of current trends are badly 
misleading because after accelerating for more than two centuries, world population 
growth has been slowing down for the past four decades. This trend is likely to con-
tinue, but no one can be certain how quickly the transition to lower fertility levels will 
be or whether there will be any reversals in recent trends.
Every few years the United Nations produces forecasts of future population 
growth.6 These projections offer a variety of scenarios based on a similar set of 
assumptions about declining mortality but using different assumptions about the 
amount and speed of fertility declines. Figure 7–4 combines estimates of the world 
population from 1820 to 2000 with the United Nations’ low-, medium-, and high-
population projections for the twenty-first century. The high scenario assumes the 
world TFR does not reach replacement levels, world population reaches 10.8 billion 
people by 2050, and continues to expand to over 15 billion by 2100. The medium sce-
nario has the world reaching slightly less than replacement levels by 2050. Under the 
medium variant, world population rises to over 9 billion by 2050. Population growth 
then continues to slow throughout the century, leveling off at around 10 billion in 
2100. The low scenario assumes a future TFR well below replacement levels. Under 
these assumptions world population hits a maximum of 8.1 billion shortly before 
2050 and declines to 6 billion by the end of the century. The United Nations offers 
the three variants as alternative projections without assigning probabilities to which 
outcomes are more likely.
What all three scenarios share in common is the projection that world popula-
tion will continue to grow over the next 50 years, in other words, over the adult life-
time of a university student today. The scenarios differ in the size of the projected 
6In addition to the United Nations, the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis in Austria, 
the U.S. Census Bureau, and the World Bank produce independent population projections. A useful intro-
duction to how such projections are made appears in Brian O’Neill and Deborah Balk, “World Population 
Futures,” Population Bulletin (Population Reference Bureau) 56, no. 3 (September 2001).

228   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
growth within a broad range: from 1 to almost 4 billion. There are three basic reasons 
for this projected continued increase. The first two explain why the TFR may remain 
above replacement levels: (1) a desire for large families and (2) a failure to achieve 
the desired number of children (so-called unwanted children). The third reason is 
population momentum, a demographic concept requiring some explanation.
Populations that have been growing rapidly, as they have been especially in the 
developing world, have large numbers of people in, or about to enter, the most fertile 
age brackets. Even if all the world’s couples today were to start having just enough 
children to replace themselves, the total population would continue to grow for 
many more decades before eventually leveling off. This is because today’s children, 
who outnumber their parents, will become tomorrow’s parents. Stated differently, 
past fertility decisions echo far into the future (Box 7–2). Population momentum 
alone could add several billion more people to the world’s population in the twenty-
first century.7
Another way of appreciating the demographic future is to focus on specific coun-
tries, especially those projected to be the world’s most populous. Table 7–2 lists the 
7John Bongaarts estimated that half of the projected increase in the world’s population during the 
twenty-first century could be attributed to population momentum alone. John Bongaarts, “Population 
Policy Options in the Developing World,” Science 263, no. 5148 (February 11, 1994).
FIGURE 7–4 World Population Historical Trends and Projections
UN population projections for 2000–2100. The scenarios presented here represent different 
future levels of fertility.
Source: Angus Maddison, “Statistics on World Population, GDP, and Per Capita GDP, 1–2008 AD,” www.ggdc
.net/MADDISON/Historical_Statistics/vertical-file_02-2010.xls. U.N. Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs, Population Division, Population Estimates and Projection Section, World Population Prospects, The 2010 
Revision, October 20, 2011, available at http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/index.htm; accessed February 2012.
High
Medium
Low
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
1820
1860
1900
1940
1980
2020
2060
2100
Population (billions)
Year

A  B R I E F  H I S TO R Y  O F  W O R L D  P O P U L AT I O N   229
BOX 7–2 POPULATION MOMENTUM
The impact of population momentum on future population levels can be illus-
trated by the following example of two families. The first generation of each fam-
ily consists of one man and one woman. Each woman has four children over her
reproductive life. This second generation includes four females and four males.
PERIOD ONE
Fertility above Replacement Level; Total Population, 12
First generation:
Second generation:
PERIOD TWO
Fertility at Replacement Level; Total Population, 16
First generation dies:
Second generation marries:
Third generation is born:
—
—
—
—
PERIOD THREE
Fertility at Replacement Level; Total Population, 16
Second generation dies:
Third generation marries:
Fourth generation is born:
—
—
—
—

230   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
In period two, the first generation dies and everyone in the second generation
marries. Each woman in the four resulting couples has two children, producing a 
third generation of four males and four females. Even though the second gen-
eration reaches replacement levels of fertility, population momentum causes a 
33 percent increase in total population, from 12 to 16, between period one and
period two.
The process is repeated in period three. The second generation dies; the
third generation marries and produces a fourth generation. If the third genera-
tion remains at replacement levels of fertility, the total population stabilizes. The 
size of the steady-state population in the final period is the result not only of the 
fertility decisions of the second and third generations, but of those of the first
generation as well.
Population momentum also can work in reverse. If subsequent generations 
have lower than replacement fertility, the decline in total population could be 
rapid, reflecting the fertility decisions of both current and previous generations.
TABLE 7–2 Projections: The World’s 10 Most Populous Nations in 2050*
 
2050 
2010 
POPULATION INCREASE
 
POPULATION 
 
POPULATION 
 
 
COUNTRY 
(MILLIONS) 
RANK 
(MILLIONS) 
RANK 
MILLIONS 
PERCENT
India 
1,748 
1 
1,189 
2 
559 
47
China 
1,437 
2 
1,338 
1 
99 
7
United States 
423 
3 
310 
3 
113 
36
Pakistan 
335 
4 
185 
6 
150 
81
Nigeria 
326 
5 
158 
8 
168 
106
Indonesia 
309 
6 
235 
4 
74 
31
Bangladesh 
222 
7 
164 
7 
58 
35
Brazil 
215 
8 
193 
5 
22 
11
Ethiopia 
174 
9 
85 
13 
89 
105
Congo 
166 
10 
68 
19 
98 
144
Total (share of 
 
 
 
 
 
 world’s population)  5,355 (0.56)  
3,925 (0.57) 
 
1,430 (0.55)†
*Projections are based on the “United Nations” medium variant.
†The absolute increase in the population of the 10 most populous nations in 2050 divided by the change 
in total world population between 2010 and 2050.
Source: Population Reference Bureau, 2010 World Population Data Sheet, www.prb.org/
pdf10/10wpds_eng.pdf.

T H E  C A U S E S  O F  P O P U L AT I O N  G R O W T H   231
10 most populous nations in 2050 according to the United Nations’ medium-variant 
projections. The table also lists the population of those countries in 2010. These 10 
nations are projected to account for 5.4 billion people in 2050, over half of the pro-
jected world population at that time.
China, India, and the United States will continue to be the three most populated 
nations, although India will replace China in the top spot. Increases in China’s popu-
lation, which already is well below TFR replacement levels, will be due exclusively to 
population momentum; in the United States, immigration will be the primary factor 
for increasing numbers; and in India, both population momentum and fertility above 
replacement levels will contribute to a projected increase of over 550 million more
inhabitants than the 1.1 billion who live in India today.
Just as striking are the expected population gains elsewhere in South Asia. 
 Pakistan is projected to increase its population by 81 percent and Bangladesh by 
35 percent. In sub-Saharan Africa, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, 
and Nigeria all are projected to experience even greater percentage increases in their 
populations. Projections for the Congo and Ethiopia are so large as to catapult them 
into the top-10 category in 2050, replacing Japan and Russia, which were among the 
top 10 in 2010.
It must be remembered that all these estimates of population trends are only 
projections, which become less and less reliable the further out in time one goes, 
and much could happen to change these outcomes. The impact on future population 
size of infectious diseases, some unknown today, is difficult to predict. Civil strife and 
migration will play a role as well. But what these projections make clear is that we 
should expect significant increases in world population, almost exclusively in today’s 
low- and middle-income nations, over the next 50 years. Given the current difficul-
ties many of these nations face today, the challenge of achieving economic develop-
ment for ever-larger numbers of people seems daunting.
THE CAUSES OF POPULATION GROWTH
Discussions of the world’s population future often turn acrimonious. Questions of 
whether and whose populations are to be limited and by what means are sensitive. 
Before we can confront such issues intelligently, we must consider what is known 
about both the causes and the effects of rapid population growth. We must concern 
ourselves with the two-way relationship between the growth of population and eco-
nomic development—that is, with how population growth affects economic develop-
ment and how economic development affects population growth. We deal with the 
latter relationship first.
THE CAUSES OF POPULATION GROWTH

232   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
THOMAS MALTHUS, POPULATION PESSIMIST
The most famous and influential demographic theorist of all time was Thomas 
 Malthus (1766–1834). Malthus believed that “the passion between the sexes” would 
cause population to expand as long and far as food supplies permitted. People 
 generally would not limit procreation below the biological maximum. Should wages 
somehow rise above the subsistence level, workers would marry younger and have 
more children, more of whom would survive. But this situation could be only tempo-
rary. In time, the rise in population would create an increase in labor supply, which 
would press against fixed land resources. Eventually, through diminishing returns, 
food prices would rise and real wages would fall back to the subsistence level. If this 
process went too far, famines and rising deaths would result. Malthus did not think 
that the growth of the food supply could stay ahead of population growth in the long 
run. In a famous example, he argued that food supplies grow according to an arith-
metic (additive) progression, whereas population follows an explosive geometric 
(multiplicative) progression.
In the grim Malthusian world, population growth is limited primarily by factors 
working through the death rate, what he called positive checks. In this deceptively 
mild phrase, Malthus included all the disasters that exterminate people in large 
numbers: epidemics, famines, and wars. These phenomena, he believed, generally 
constitute the operative limitation on population. Only in later editions of his famous 
Essay on the Principle of Population did he concede the possibility of a second, less 
drastic, category of limiting factors: “preventive checks” that work through the birth 
rate. Here, Malthus had in mind primarily measures of “restraint,” such as a later age 
of marriage. Unlike latter-day Malthusians, he did not advocate birth control, which 
as a minister he considered immoral. Although he grudgingly admitted that human-
ity might voluntarily control its own numerical growth, Malthus invested little hope 
in the possibility.
The gloominess of the Malthusian theory is understandable when one consid-
ers that its author lived during the early years of the Industrial Revolution. In all 
prior history, population had tended to expand in response to economic gains. With 
unprecedented economic growth under way in the world he knew, what could Mal-
thus expect except an acceleration of natural increase as death rates fell? That indeed 
was happening during his lifetime.
Malthus did not live to witness the next stage in the European demographic tran-
sition. The early decline in death rates was followed, with a lag, by a fall in fertility; 
beginning in the middle of the nineteenth century, wages began to increase dra-
matically in contrast to Malthus’s prediction. Why did all this happen? Wages rose, 
despite accelerating population growth, because capital accumulation and techni-
cal change offset any tendency for the marginal product of labor to decline. Death 
rates fell through a combination of higher incomes (better nutrition and living condi-
tions) and better preventive and curative health measures. The fall in the birth rate is 

T H E  C A U S E S  O F  P O P U L AT I O N  G R O W T H   233
harder to understand. There are both biological and economic reasons to expect, as 
Malthus did, that fertility would rise, not fall, as income went up. Healthier, better-fed 
women have a greater biological capacity to conceive, carry a child full term, and give 
birth to a healthy infant. Also, people might marry earlier when times are good, and 
better-off families have the financial capacity to support more children. Why, then, 
do increases in income seem to lead to declines in  fertility? An answer to this ques-
tion must be sought in post-Malthusian  demographic theory.
WHY BIRTH RATES DECLINE
Two kinds of demographic change affect the crude birth rate. The first is change in 
the population shares of different age groups. A rise in the share of people of repro-
ductive age (roughly 15 to 45) increases the birth rate, as we saw earlier in the discus-
sion of population momentum. Conversely, if the proportion of older people in the 
population goes up, as is happening in many industrial countries today, the birth rate 
drops. The second factor is fertility, the rate at which women have children.
Why, then, do people have as many children as they do? Is it because they are 
moved by Malthus’s “passion between the sexes” and do not know how to prevent 
the resulting births? Or is it because they are tradition bound and custom ridden? 
Or is it rational in some economic and social settings to have large families? All three 
positions have some merit. The case for the first one, implicitly, is what those who 
recommend providing birth control as a response to rapid population growth prob-
ably have in mind. A Latin American doctor at an international conference put it 
bluntly. “People don’t really want children,” he said. “They want sex and don’t know 
how to avoid the births that result.” This viewpoint captures the element of sponta-
neity inevitably present in the reproductive process. Yet the evidence suggests that 
all societies consciously control human fertility. Rarely does the number of children 
that the average woman has over her childbearing years even approach her biologi-
cal capacity to bear children. One exceptional case is that of the Hutterites, a com-
munal sect that left Russia and settled in Canada and the northern Great Plains in 
the late 1800s. The group’s religious beliefs and lifestyle encouraged maximum fertil-
ity.  Hutterite women, on average, bore over 10 children, a fertility rate no contempo-
rary low- or middle-income nation comes close to approaching. All societies practice 
some method of controlling their numbers whether by aborting pregnancies, dispos-
ing of unwanted infants, or inhibiting conception. (Recall our earlier discussion of 
fertility decline in nineteenth-century Finland.)
As for the second proposition, it has been said that many children are the social 
norm in traditional societies, that society looks askance at couples who have no 
or few children, that a man who lacks wealth at least can have children, and that a 
woman’s principal socially recognized function in a traditional society is to bear and 
rear children. Such norms and attitudes are important, but they probably are not the 

234   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
decisive factors in human fertility. Fertility is determined by a complex combination 
of forces. Social scientists in recent years have given increasing credence to elements 
of individual rationality in the process. Simply stated, they believe that most families 
in traditional societies have many children because it is in their interest to do so.
This brings us to the third explanation. Although some might regard it as a cold, 
inhumane way of looking at the matter, it is nevertheless true that children impose 
certain costs on their parents and confer certain benefits. In some low-income set-
tings, especially in rural areas, children may supplement family earnings by work-
ing. On family farms and in other household enterprises, there usually is something 
that even a young child can do to increase production. In many poor societies, chil-
dren work outside the home. In the longer run, children also provide a form of social 
security, which is important in societies that lack institutional programs to assist the 
elderly. In some cultures, it is considered especially important to have a son who 
survives to adulthood; if infant and child mortality is high, this can motivate couples 
to keep having children until two or three sons have been born, just to be safe. In 
addition to these economic benefits, which are probably more important in a low-
income society than a more-affluent one, children also can yield psychic benefits 
(and costs!), as all parents know.
The economic costs of children can be divided into explicit and implicit costs. 
Children entail cash outlays for food, clothing, shelter, and often for education. 
Implicit costs arise when childcare by a member of the family, usually the mother, 
involves a loss of earning time. Some of the costs felt by parents parallel the costs of 
population growth experienced at the national level. For example, more children in 
a family may mean smaller inheritances of agricultural land, an example of a natural 
resource constraint operating at the family level. Similarly, it may be harder to send 
all the children in a larger family to school; this reflects the pressures on social invest-
ment felt when population growth is rapid.
Viewing childbearing as an economic decision has several important impli -
cations:
 
1. Fertility should be higher when children earn income or contribute to 
household enterprises than when they do not.
 
2. Reducing infant deaths should lower fertility because fewer births are needed 
to produce a given desired number of surviving children.
 
3. The introduction of an institutionalized social security system should lower 
fertility by reducing the need for parents to depend on their children for 
support in their old age.
 
4. Fertility should fall when there is an increase in opportunities for women to 
work in jobs that are relatively incompatible with childbearing, essentially 
work outside the home.
 
5. Fertility should be higher when income is higher because the explicit costs 
are more easily borne.

T H E  C A U S E S  O F  P O P U L AT I O N  G R O W T H   235
The first four predictions have received substantial support from empirical 
studies. The fifth, however, conflicts with observation. Fertility usually is negatively 
related to income. The negative relationship shows up both in time-series data (that 
is, fertility usually declines over time as income rises) and in cross-section data (fer-
tility generally is higher in poor countries than in rich ones; also, in most societies, 
middle- and upper-income families have fewer children than poor families).
Several theorists have wrestled with the seeming anomaly that household demand 
for children falls as income rises; in other words, children are “inferior goods.” Econo-
mist Gary Becker of the University of Chicago, a pioneer of the new household economics, 
analyzes children as a kind of consumer durable that yields benefits over time.8 Couples 
maximize a joint (expected) utility function in which the “goods” they can “buy” are (1) 
number of living children, (2) child quality (a vector of characteristics including educa-
tion and health), and (3) conventional goods and services. The constraints faced by par-
ents in Becker’s model are (1) their time and (2) the cost of purchased goods and services.
Becker explains the fall in fertility as income rises over time by saying that the cost 
of children tends to rise, especially because the opportunity cost of the parents’ time, 
particularly the mother’s, goes up. The familiar income and substitution effects that 
result from any price change are at work here. As a woman’s market wage rises, her 
income also rises, leading to an increase in her demand for any normal good, presum-
ably including the demand for more children. But as a woman’s wage rises, the oppor-
tunity cost of her time also goes up, so the price of raising children rises. As a result, 
her demand for any activity that is intensive in the use of her time decreases, including 
child rearing. If the substitution effect is greater than the income effect, couples may 
decide to have fewer offspring. Becker also argues that given the rising cost of child 
quantity, many parents opt to invest in child quality and spend more time and money 
on a smaller number of children. Wanting “higher-quality” children as income rises 
also reverts the demand for children back to the demand for a “normal good.”
Much of Becker’s work on the family was directed at understanding declining fer-
tility levels in the United States and other high-income economies. But the applica-
tion of the new household economics to the circumstances of developing nations also 
offers keen insights. Replacing Malthus’s assumption that people are driven solely by 
their passions, fertility now is seen as the outcome of a rational process. This does not 
mean that every child born, in rich and poor nations alike, is the result of a conscious 
cost–benefit calculation. Economics rarely can explain individual outcomes; its power 
is in explaining average tendencies. What the new household economics suggests is 
that rich and poor people alike weigh the consequences of their actions, and to under-
stand behavior, we may gain more insights by assuming people act in what they per-
ceive as their own best interests. Having large numbers of children then may be seen 
not as an irrational act but as the result of the difficult choices poor people face. For 
poor families, having many children may make economic sense.
8Gary Becker, A Treatise on the Family (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981).

236   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
The new household economics provides insights into the fertility decisions of 
families in the developing world and, in so doing, raises an apparent contradiction. 
If individual decisions about fertility are rational and in the perceived best interest of 
the family, why did McNamara, and many others, identify population growth as “the 
greatest single obstacle” to economic development? How could rational decisions at 
the household level result in so dire a society wide outcome?
POPULATION GROWTH AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Even if population growth is not the greatest obstacle, has population growth been a 
major impediment to achieving economic development and is it still one today? To a 
casual observer who has spent time in Cairo or Calcutta, Manila or Mexico City, or in 
hundreds of other cities or villages in the developing world, the answer might seem 
obvious. Looking at the masses of poor people in these places, it would be hard not 
to conclude that the situation could be measurably improved if only there were fewer 
people. (A casual observer might draw the same conclusion in New York or Tokyo.)
But more than casual observation is needed to understand the complex relation-
ship between population growth and economic development, especially if one is 
going to consider policy interventions to reduce population growth. First, we must be 
clear on the question we are asking. We cannot ask whether people who have been 
born would have been better off having never been born. This is a question econom-
ics cannot possibly answer. Our question can only be whether per capita income, life 
expectancy, educational attainment, or any other indicator of economic develop-
ment would be higher if a nation’s population had grown more slowly. Given the cen-
trality of economic growth to the development process, much of our attention is on 
the relationship between population growth and economic growth.
Simon Kuznets, a Nobel Prize winner in economics and a pioneer in the use 
of data to examine trends in economic growth, reported on a lack of correlation 
between population growth and per capita output growth for 40 less-developed 
nations between the early 1950s and 1964.9 Similar studies have been conducted 
since Kuznets’s work, many of which also report a low correlation between the two 
growth rates over various time periods.10 Starting in the 1980s, it was more common 
9For the 40 less-developed countries in Kuznets’s sample, the rank correlation between rates of popu-
lation growth and growth in per capita GDP was 0.111. From Simon Kuznets, “Population and Economic 
Growth,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 3 (June 1967), as reported in United Nations, 
The Determinants and Consequences of Population Trends, Department of Social Affairs, Population Divi-
sion, Population Studies No. 17 (New York: United Nations, 1973).
10Discussion of these studies can be found in Allen Kelley and Robert Schmidt, “Economic and Demo-
graphic Change: A Synthesis of Models, Findings and Perspectives,” in Nancy Birdsall, Allen Kelley, and 
Steven Sinding, eds., Population Matters: Demographic Change, Economic Growth, and Poverty in the 
Developing World (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001).
POPULATION GROWTH AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

P O P U L ATI O N G R O W T H  A N D  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E NT   237
to find a negative correlation between them. In growth regressions, which include 
many possible determinants of economic growth, the significance of population 
growth varies depending on what other variables are included.
The lack of one pattern relating population growth to economic growth should 
not be misinterpreted. It does not mean that population has no systematic effect on 
economic growth; it simply means that the relationship is complex. We need to ask, 
How does population growth affect the determinants of economic growth? What 
direction of causality is there between population growth and economic growth? And 
how important are the individual components of population growth—fertility, mor-
tality, and migration—to gross domestic product (GDP) growth (and vice-versa)?
We begin by challenging a naïve view of how population growth and economic 
growth are related. The growth rate in GDP per capita equals the growth rate of GDP 
minus the growth rate in population.11 The naïve view then holds that, for any given 
rate of GDP growth, per capita growth would be faster the slower the growth in popu-
lation. This conclusion is true, but its implicit assumption is false. Growth in output 
is not independent of growth in the population. The simplest reason is that children 
born today are the labor force of the future, and labor, along with land and capital, is 
one of the main factors of production for any economy. Stated differently, population 
growth affects both the level of GDP and how many people must share in that GDP. 
Once one recognizes these connections, the critical question becomes how popula-
tion growth affects the core determinants of economic growth: the accumulation of 
factors of production and the productivity of those factors.
POPULATION AND ACCUMULATION
A pioneering model of population’s effect on material welfare was written in 1958 by 
demographer Ansley Coale and economist Edgar Hoover.12 Their work falls squarely 
into the camp of population pessimists, or anti-natalists, those who perceive pop-
ulation growth as harmful to economic development. Coale and Hoover argue that 
a reduction in the birth rate could raise per capita income in three important ways. 
First, lower fertility levels would slow future labor force growth. The amount of invest-
ment then needed to provide a constant amount of capital per worker for a growing 
number of workers (capital widening) would go down and permit more investment 
to be used to increase capital per worker (capital deepening).13 Second, with lower 
11The growth rate of any fraction, A>B, is equal to the growth of the numerator, A, minus the growth of 
the denominator, B. This is because the growth rate of any variable, X, can be found by taking the deriv-
ative of the log of the variable with respect to time: d(ln X)>dt = (dX>dt)>X = g(X), where g is the rate 
of growth. If X = (A>B), then ln (A>B) = ln A - lnB, and d[ln(A/B)]>dt = d(lnA)>dt - d(lnB)>dt, or 
g(A>B) = g(A) - g(B). In the case of GDP per capita, g(GDP>population) = g(GDP) - g(population).
12Ainsley Coale and Edgar Hoover, Population Growth and Economic Development in Low-Income 
Countries: A Case Study of India’s Prospects (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1958).
13The implications of capital widening and capital deepening for economic growth are developed more 
fully in the discussion of the Solow growth model in Chapter 4.

238   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
fertility and fewer children, public funds could be diverted away from education and 
health expenditures and toward physical capital, which Coale and Hoover assumed 
would be a more productive use of government spending. Third, slower population 
growth would lower the dependency ratio, the ratio of the non-working-age popula-
tion (usually 0 to 14 years and 65 and over) to the working age population (Box 7–3). 
A lower dependency ratio, in turn, would reduce consumption and increase saving 
at any given level of income, permitting a higher rate of asset accumulation. Taken 
together, these three benefits from slower population growth could raise income lev-
els at both the household and aggregate levels.
Coale and Hoover’s conclusions, generally, have not always been supported by 
later research.14 For a given amount of investment, a larger labor force results in less 
capital per worker, but the quantitative significance of this effect on output often 
appears small. Coale and Hoover’s concern about the diversion of resources toward 
education also has not held up to later research. Demographic factors do not exert 
much of an independent effect on the share of GDP allocated to education and other 
social welfare programs. In addition, education and health increasingly are seen, not 
as consumption expenditures, but as investments in human capital that may have 
returns equal to or higher than the returns on investments in physical capital.
The third relationship highlighted by Coale and Hoover, among population 
growth, dependency ratios, and saving, has attracted a great deal of analysis. Some 
studies find little correlation. This may be because business and government savings 
are relatively independent of demographic change. Even household saving may be 
fairly insensitive to changes in population growth if most saving comes from wealthy 
families. Such households’ saving behavior would be affected by neither their own 
fertility decisions nor those of the poor. On the other hand, there is cross-country 
evidence that, as the share rises of the population 15 years of age and younger, the 
aggregate saving rate falls.
This last insight is part of a more recent analysis often referred to as the demo-
graphic dividend or bonus. The dividend refers to the opportunity created when 
a nation with rapid population growth experiences a fall in fertility. As fertility falls, 
population growth falls too, but for a period of time the working age population (15- to 
65-year-olds) grows more rapidly than the youth population (0 to 14). This is because 
the growth of the working age population depends on earlier and higher birth rates. 
The age pyramids in Box 7–3 experience a bulge in the number of young adults and a 
shrinking of the number of children. Not only are there now more potential workers 
per child, but more women join the labor force as fewer years are spent on childbear-
ing. With relatively more workers, the productive potential of the economy expands. 
During this phase of the demographic transition, the society still has a relatively small 
older age cohort so the problem of the dependency of the elderly is not yet a concern. It 
will eventually become one, as it has in an increasing number of developed and devel-
oping nations today, making the demographic dividend a temporary opportunity.
14Nancy Birdsall, “Economic Analysis of Rapid Population Growth,” World Bank Research Observer 4, 
no. 1 (January 1989).

P O P U L ATI O N G R O W T H  A N D  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E NT   239
BOX 7–3 POPULATION GROWTH, AGE STRUCTURE, AND
DEPENDENCY RATIOS
In 2009, Nigeria had a population of 153 million people compared to Russia
with 142 million. Although similar in population size, the two nations are at very
different points in their demographic transitions. Nigeria has a total fertility rate
0—4
5—9
10—14
15—19
20—24
25—29
30—34
35—39
45—49
50—54
55—59
60—64
65—69
70—74
75—79
80—84
85—89
90—94
95—99
100+
40—44
Nigeria
Male
Female
12,000
9,000
6,000
3,000
0
3,000
6,000
9,000
12,000
Population (thousands)
(a)
Age
0—4
5—9
10—14
15—19
20—24
25—29
30—34
35—39
45—49
50—54
55—59
60—64
65—69
70—74
75—79
80—84
85—89
90—94
95—99
100+
40—44
Russia
Male
Female
12,000
9,000
6,000
3,000
0
3,000
6,000
9,000
12,000
Population (thousands)
(b)
Age

240   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
of 5.7; Russia’s is 1.5. Nigeria’s population growth rate this past decade was
+2.1 percent per year; Russia’s was -0.35 percent. Only recently has Nigeria
reached the stage of the demographic transition where birth rates have started
to fall. Russia passed through this phase decades ago.
Differences in crude birth and death rates, in addition to their impact on
population growth, have a large effect on a nation’s age structure. Population
pyramids (on previous page) illustrate these effects. Each bar of the pyramid
refers to the number of males and females, respectively, in a given age cohort. 
Nigeria has the distinctive population pyramid of a nation in which population
growth is rapid. Each age cohort is larger than the one born before it, the result
of both high fertility and population momentum. In contrast, Russia’s population
pyramid is more rectangular, the result of low population growth. The base of
Russia’s pyramid is narrowing because fertility has fallen below replacement
levels. (Differences among population cohorts also reflect historical events. 
Russia’s 60- to 64-year-old cohort is especially small because this group was 
born between 1944 and 1948, during and just after World War II. Low fertility
and high infant mortality during those years explains the shortfall in this age
cohort today.)
Nigeria’s youth dependency ratio, the number of children (ages 0 to 14
years) divided by the number of people of working ages (15 to 64 years),
obviously will be higher than Russia’s. The ratio equals 0.87 for Nigeria and
only 0.21 for Russia. But Russia has a higher elderly (older than 64) depen-
dency ratio of 0.14 than Nigeria’s (0.03). Differences in age structure have
important implications for every aspect of a society, from what it consumes to
how it votes to the culture it creates. What implications differences in depen-
dency ratios have for overall economic growth and development is considered
in the text.
Source: Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations 
Secretariat, World Population Prospects: The 2008 Revision, available at www.un.org/esa/population
/publications/wpp2008/wpp2008_highlights.pdf.
The decline in fertility not only increases the size of the working age population 
relative to the youth population. It may also increase savings and capital accumu-
lation as more of the population is now in the working and savings part of the life 
cycle. But the demographic dividend is not a sure thing; it is only an opportunity. 
If other economic policies are not in place, the potential will not be realized. 
 Comparisons of Latin America with East Asia bear this out. Both regions expe-
rienced similar  demographic transitions, with falling birth rates and increasing 

P O P U L ATI O N G R O W T H  A N D  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E NT   241
working age cohorts. But the similarity ends there. East Asia boomed; Latin Amer-
ica did not.
Some researchers argue that East Asia’s demographic transition contributed 
substantially to the region’s rapid economic growth. Using cross-country growth 
regressions, they attribute one-third or more of the region’s growth to the rapid 
increase in its working age population after the decline in fertility. Others think 
the effect on growth was far smaller, finding little empirical evidence at the house-
hold level to support the life-cycle hypothesis of saving central to the demographic 
dividend.15 The relationship between population growth and saving remains 
unresolved.
POPULATION AND PRODUCTIVITY
In addition to its potential effects on the accumulation process, population growth 
also can influence the other important determinant of economic growth, the produc-
tivity of assets. Concern over these impacts dates back to Thomas Malthus. Malthus 
saw population growth leading to an inevitable decline in agricultural productivity 
and having devastating consequences for humanity. What Malthus did not envisage 
is the revolution in agricultural technology that would raise, not lower, the productiv-
ity of land. Malthus never would have believed that, in a world of 7 billion people, 
individuals, on average, would eat better than they did in his day, when world popu-
lation was closer to 1 billion. Economic historian Robert Fogel cites evidence that, in 
the late eighteenth century, about the time Malthus wrote his famous essay, the aver-
age daily caloric consumption in France was 1,753 and in England in the neighbor-
hood of 2,100. Contrary to Malthus’s predictions, in the developing world today the 
average is much higher, exceeding 2,600 calories.16
15The significance of the demographic dividend is presented in David Bloom and Jeffrey Williamson, 
“Demographic Transitions and Economic Miracles in Emerging Asia,” World Bank Economic Review 12, 
no. 3 (1998); David Bloom, David Canning, and Jaypee Sevilla, The Demographic Dividend: A New Perspec-
tive on the Economic Consequences of Population Change (Santa Monica: Rand, 2003). A dissenting view is 
presented in Angus Deaton and Christina Paxson, “Growth, Demographic Structure and National Saving 
in Taiwan,” Population and Development Review 26 (2000; Suppl.), 141–73.
16There is a group of countries that in recent years have consumed fewer than 1,750 calories per day, the 
level in France in the late eighteenth century. In 1999–2001, this group included Afghanistan, Burundi, the 
Congo, Eritrea, Somalia, and Tajikistan. Although all but Tajikistan had extraordinarily high TFRs of 6.0 or 
more at the time, what also distinguishes this group is that they were all failed states. It is likely that their 
malnutrition was caused less by overpopulation than by the disruption of agriculture due to massive politi-
cal instability. Historical data on caloric intake are from Robert Fogel, “The Relevance of Malthus for the 
Study of Mortality Today: Long-Run Influences on Health, Mortality, Labor Force Participation, and Popula-
tion Growth” (231–84), in Kerstin Lindahl-Kiessling and Hans Landberg, eds., Population, Economic Devel-
opment, and the Environment (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994). More recent data are from United 
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, The State of Food Insecurity in the World (Rome: FAO, 2003).

242   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
Despite these improvements, neo-Malthusian ideas still are popular. Concern 
over an imbalance between population and food supplies continues to be voiced, 
as is concern over how population pressures will affect the availability of fresh water 
and energy, the spread of infectious diseases, the degree of biodiversity and climate 
change, and the overall sustainability of the environment. Neo-Malthusians, like 
their intellectual predecessor, believe that there are limits to the carrying capacity of 
the planet and that science and technology cannot resolve fundamental problems of 
diminishing returns.17
Malthus’s thinking placed him squarely in the camp of population pessi-
mists. But some later economists, population optimists, would view population 
growth as having the potential to increase factor productivity. Several reasons 
for such a relationship have been proposed. First, a larger population, the result 
of more rapid population growth, can yield economies of scale in production 
and consumption. Roads are a good example. The return on an investment in 
a rural road is higher, up to a point, the more people there are to use the road. 
Other forms of infrastructure as well as public services in health and education 
exhibit similar scale effects. Second, there is some evidence that population 
pressures can induce technological change. Increasing population density in 
previously underpopulated regions can encourage more labor-intensive farming 
systems, increasing the return to land and, perhaps, to other inputs. Third, econ-
omist Julian Simon, perhaps the greatest population optimist of all, argued that 
a larger population contains more entrepreneurs and other creators, who can 
make major contributions to solving the problems of humanity. Simon called 
human ingenuity the “ultimate resource” that can overcome any depletion of 
other resources.18
Just as is true for the population pessimists, empirical support for the positions of 
the population optimists is spotty. Scale effects exist but often are realized at popula-
tion densities that already have been achieved; a possible exception is some sparsely 
settled regions of Africa. Diseconomies of scale also exist and city sizes in parts of the 
world may be approaching those levels. Finally, there is no simple one-for-one cor-
respondence between population pressures and technological change. Population is 
only one of many factors that affect the nature and quality of the institutional envi-
ronment that conditions the introduction of new technologies and methods of pro-
17The neo-Malthusian perspective is presented in Lester Brown, Gary Gardner, and Brian Halweil, 
Beyond Malthus: Nineteen Dimensions of the Population Challenge (New York: Norton, 1999). The oppos-
ing view, that the planet is not overreaching its carrying capacity, is presented in Bjorn Lomborg, The 
Skeptical Environmentalist: Measuring the Real State of the World (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2001).
18The seminal work on population pressures inducing changes in agricultural production is Ester 
 Boserup, The Conditions of Agricultural Growth (Chicago: Aldine, 1965.) On human ingenuity, see Julian 
Simon, The Ultimate Resource (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1981).

P O P U L ATI O N G R O W T H  A N D  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E NT   243
duction. Green revolution technologies, which can dramatically increase agricultural 
output for specific crops, such as rice and wheat, have been adopted in some densely 
populated areas but not in others. This suggests that population pressures alone have 
not been the deciding factor.
POPULATION AND MARKET FAILURES
In addition to the population pessimists and the population optimists who present 
such conflicting views, there is a third school of thought on population and devel-
opment: the population revisionists (referred to by some as population neutralists). 
The revisionists situate themselves between the two extreme camps, arguing that 
there is no one size that fits all on population matters. Because of the varied influ-
ences of population growth on economic and social variables, growing populations 
may or may not be detrimental to economic development, depending on time, place, 
and circumstances.
The revisionists also bring together micro models of fertility behavior with macro 
assessments of the consequences of population growth. This merging of micro and 
macro is critical. According to the prevailing microeconomic model of fertility, indi-
viduals have control over their fertility decisions and behave rationally. In other 
words, couples, on average, make decisions on the number of children they want in 
their own best interest. If this insight is correct, how is it possible that actually tens of 
millions of rational individual decisions concerning the number of children to have 
could result in detrimental outcomes for nations or even for the planet as whole? 
The revisionist answer is a familiar one to economists: market failures, situations in 
which the costs or benefits of reproductive behavior by individuals (households) are 
not fully borne by them.
Revisionists agree with some neo-Malthusians that rapid population growth may 
hasten depletion of natural resources or harm the environment. But unlike the neo-
Malthusians, revisionists argue the fundamental problem is not too many people, but 
the lack of well-defined property rights. As in the classic “Tragedy of the Commons,” 
population growth can destroy a common resource—for example, common grazing 
lands or a fishery—because no one family takes into consideration the impact of its 
use on others. A larger family might help that family gain greater benefits from the 
common resource (at least in the short run) but, at the same time, help speed its 
destruction, to the detriment of all.19 A similar argument can be made about many 
government services, whether in education, health, sanitation, or transport. Each 
family may be acting rationally, but if the population grows too quickly, government 
services may not expand quickly enough. The resulting congestion of government 
services may produce lower quality of life for all. The root cause of the problem is not 
19Garret Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons,” Science 162, no. 1 (1968), 243–48.

244   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
population growth but the inability of government to finance the increased demand 
for publicly provided goods and services. In both these examples, population growth 
may exacerbate an existing market failure.
Revisionists also call attention to a failure in the market for contraception. If 
there are poor, incomplete, or imperfect markets either for information on contra-
ception or for the contraceptives themselves, women have more children than they 
want and population growth is higher. One study reports that in Haiti 40 percent of 
women 15 to 49 years old preferred to avoid a pregnancy but were not using contra-
ception.20 To the extent that this was the result of a lack of information about or access 
to birth control, there is a market failure for contraceptives. In such circumstances, 
fertility levels do not fully reflect individual preferences and are too high. The ulti-
mate source of the market failure is less apparent. Is it due to lack of information, 
government restrictions on the sale of birth control devices, or something else? The 
price of birth control is far less than the price of raising a child. Free markets deliver 
Coca-Cola worldwide, why not contraceptives?21
In addition to drawing attention to market failures, population revisionists focus 
on the impact of fertility decisions on dimensions of human welfare other than 
growth in per capita income, such as income distribution. At a household level, 
high fertility may benefit parents, in terms of earnings from child labor and old age 
support. But these same advantages for parents may work to the disadvantage of 
children if they result in fewer resources available per child for human capital invest-
ments. Higher-birth-order children may be at a particular disadvantage. Looking 
across households, because higher fertility is inversely correlated with household 
income level, more rapid population growth may increase income inequality and 
worsen poverty outcomes.
Population revisionists have contributed to the otherwise polarized debate 
on population between the pessimists and optimists. The revisionists emphasize 
that rapid population growth is unlikely to be the primary impediment to eco-
nomic development, focusing instead on how population growth can exacerbate 
the failings in other markets or particular government policies. Even these nega-
tive effects are likely to be mitigated over the long run as households adjust to 
changing circumstances. Despite their more nuanced approach, the population 
revisionists seem unable to identify the specific circumstances and country set-
tings in which market failures are large and policies to limit births are warranted. 
Their perspectives, however, help frame the debate over appropriate population 
policies.
20Sara Maki, “Unmet Need for Family Planning Persists in Developing Countries” Population Reference 
Bureau (October 2007), www.prb.org/Articles/2007/UnmetNeed.aspx accessed March 2012.
21Adapted from William Easterly, The Elusive Quest for Growth (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2001), p. 89–90.

P O P U L AT I O N  P O L I C Y   245
POPULATION POLICY
While economic analysis cannot provide a definitive answer as to where, or even 
whether, intervention is warranted to slow population growth, most governments in 
developing nations and most donors favor slower population growth. In pursuit of 
this objective, governments implement a variety of population policies. Economic 
reasoning can help evaluate the relative merits of specific policies when the stated 
goal is to lower population growth rates.
The growth of a population can be reduced either by lowering the birth rate or 
raising the death rate. In practice, the only acceptable policy solution is reducing the 
birth rate. No one would advocate increasing the death rate as a way to slow popu-
lation growth, but nations and donors do not always follow a strictly anti-mortality 
approach. The initially slow donor response to the HIV/AIDS crisis in sub-Saharan 
Africa is a case in point.
If slowing the rate of population growth is the goal, then reducing the birth rate is 
the solution. This can be achieved by reducing the share of the population of repro-
ductive age or the fertility rate. Raising the average age of women at childbearing 
slows down population momentum and, in time, leads to a reduction in the share 
of the population of reproductive age. Providing women with more education and 
better employment opportunities can achieve these results. These interventions will 
also reduce fertility levels. And reduction in fertility, whether by direct or indirect 
means, is the primary target of population policies.
Two controversies surround population policies aimed at reducing fertil-
ity. One is the debate over the significance of family planning efforts versus broad-
based socioeconomic development. The other is the debate over the use of relatively 
authoritarian tactics, including elements of China’s 1979 one child campaign, to 
achieve population goals. Before getting to either of these controversies, we can iden-
tify some noncontroversial elements of population policy.
Educating girls is one of the least controversial and most effective means of 
achieving a long-term decline in fertility. As predicted by the new household eco-
nomics, women with more education have a higher opportunity cost of time 
and choose to have fewer children. This result has been born out empirically by 
 numerous studies. (Figure 7–5 provides evidence from four nations.) Because edu-
cating girls is valuable in its own right, all schools of thought on population agree 
to  support improvements in girls’ education. Any subsequent impact on fertility 
is as much a consequence as a motivation for such policies. The same can be said 
for interventions that reduce infant and child mortality. Such interventions, usually 
involving prenatal care, better birthing practices, and health initiatives directed at the 
young, can significantly improve survival chances. These interventions need not be 
motivated by a desire to lower fertility, even though they have this effect.
POPULATION POLICY

246   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
All policies that promote economic development and lead to more education, bet-
ter health, higher per capita incomes, and less poverty are associated with declining 
fertility, even if this is not their primary purpose. At the first United Nations World Pop-
ulation Conference, held in Bucharest in 1974, a popular slogan was, “Take care of the 
people and the population will take care of itself.” Some development specialists go so 
far as to conclude that economic development is the best contraceptive. But others dis-
agree and argue that more direct interventions to control fertility outcomes are needed.
FAMILY PLANNING
Family planning refers to a range of reproductive health information and services. 
It includes information on contraception and provision of contraceptives of various 
types, often highly subsidized or delivered at no cost to the user. Without govern-
ment family planning services, couples could purchase contraceptives available at 
market prices or could control their fertility using traditional methods (abstinence, 
rhythm method, withdrawal). More modern forms of contraception (condoms; hor-
mone therapies including birth control pills, patches, and injections; IUDs; male and 
female sterilization), however, are more reliable and associated with a greater proba-
bility of achieving desired fertility. One of the most important contributions of family 
planning services, whether provided publicly or through the market, is to help fami-
lies reach their desired fertility levels. As levels of desired fertility fall, modern forms 
of contraception provide the means for achieving these goals.
FIGURE 7–5 Total Fertility Rates by Mother’s Education
Source: Demographic and Health Surveys, available at www.measuredhs.com.
6.1
5.1
4.5
4.3
None
Primary
Secondary
3.5
3.4
3.1
3
2.6
2.9
1.4
2
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
Ethiopia 2005
Colombia 2005
Cambodia 2005
Egypt 2008

P O P U L AT I O N  P O L I C Y   247
Some population specialists also draw attention to the significant proportion of 
births in the developing world that are unwanted. Information on unwanted births is 
obtained from household survey data in which women report the number of births they 
have had as well as the number of children they would like to have. Using data from the 
1970s and 1980s, demographer John Bongaarts estimated that approximately one out 
of every four children born in the developing world (excluding China) was unwanted.22 
Estimates for the past decade suggest much smaller numbers; for a sample of develop-
ing nations representing about two-thirds of the developing world excluding China, the 
total “not wanted” was only 8 percent, with another 9 percent “wanted later.”23 Reducing 
the number of unwanted births is another way of reducing population growth.
Whether family planning programs are effective at reducing unwanted births is a 
matter of some debate. This may sound surprising: Isn’t the lack of contraception the 
reason women have births they do not want? Some further explanation is needed. 
When women reduce their desired level of fertility, contraception plays an important 
role in achieving these lower levels. Desired levels of fertility and contraceptive prev-
alence are well correlated, with causality most likely running from the former to the 
latter. When women desire small families, contraceptive prevalence is high. However, 
contraceptive use is less well correlated with reported differences between actual 
and desired fertility—that is, with the number of unwanted births. Using data from 
the 1970s and 1980s, development economist Lant Pritchett found that after control-
ling for desired fertility there was little correlation between contraceptive prevalence 
and excess births.24 Women may have more births than they want but the availability 
of contraception may not explain why.
Family planning programs may influence individual preferences about how 
many children to have. This dimension of family planning efforts involves provid-
ing information, counseling, and various forms of “persuasion” concerning the 
number and spacing of children. Public campaigns to discourage high fertility 
are employed by many countries. In the 1980s, the slogan of India’s national fam-
ily planning program was “Hum Do, Hamaray Do,” which when translated means 
“Us Two, Our Two,” or for two parents, two kids—a model family. The slogan was 
displayed widely on the sides of buses, billboards, and in TV advertisements and 
came with a logo, a silhouette of two parents holding the hands of two children, a 
boy in shorts and a pigtailed girl in skirts. The slogan on India’s Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare website recently flashed, “Control Population! Have fun with 
one!” In Indonesia, the “Dua cukup” program recommended “two is enough”; in 
the Philippines, public ads showed two happy children and advised, “If you love 
them, plan for them;” and in Zimbabwe, a family planning poster suggested, 
22Bongaarts, “Population Policy Options,” p. 771–76.
23Population Reference Bureau, Family Planning Worldwide: 2008 Data Sheet, www.prb.org/Publications
/Datasheets/2008/familyplanningworldwide.aspx.
24Lant Pritchett, “Desired Fertility and the Impact of Population Policies,” Population and Development 
Review 20, no. 1 (March 1994), 1–55.

248   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
“A small family brings a better life.” These campaigns can affect social norms and 
the desire to have many children.
Family planning information also can be more personalized. One widely studied 
program of this type began in the late 1970s in the Matlab region of Bangladesh. It 
included fortnightly visits to each married woman in half the villages in the region. 
The visit was from a project employee, who discussed family planning needs and 
provided contraceptives. As a result of these visits, fertility rates fell dramatically by 
1.6 births relative to the half of villages in the region that did not receive such vis-
its. One evaluation of the program in Matlab considered its long-term consequences. 
After roughly 20 years, families who lived in the program villages not only had fewer 
children with greater spacing between them but were healthier and more prosper-
ous than residents of similar villages that had not been served.25 An important lesson 
of the Matlab experiment is that family planning can be effective at reducing fertility 
and providing other benefits, but it can entail substantial costs. Fortnightly field visits, 
free contraceptives, and administrative expenses per woman amounted to 10 percent 
of per capita income, sums that could not be sustained at a national level.26
Family planning programs need not be as expensive as in the Matlab program to be 
effective, but the general point remains. If the goal is to reduce fertility levels, is it better to 
devote scarce resources to expand family planning programs, or might it be more effec-
tive to devote these same resources to general improvements in socioeconomic status, 
which, in turn, could result in an equal or greater decline in fertility? In their evaluations 
of Indonesia’s rapid decline in fertility rates, economists Paul Gertler and John Moly-
neaux determined that heavy subsidization of contraceptives, representing about half of 
the family planning program’s expenditures, had a marginal impact on reducing fertility. 
Expansion of the distribution network into rural areas had a more significant effect. But 
most of the increased use of contraceptives was induced through economic development 
and the improved education and opportunities facing Indonesian women.27
Family planning may not play a large independent role in reducing fertility but 
this does not suggest that governments should abandon these programs or limit the 
availability of contraceptives. Modern forms of contraception enable families to bet-
ter control their fertility. In this sense, family planning and development are com-
plements, not substitutes. Family planning services also help people lead healthier 
and more satisfying lives. By being better able to time pregnancies, women can better 
space their children. Children born three to five years apart have higher rates of sur-
vival than children born within two years of one another. Avoiding unintended preg-
nancies can also reduce the need for abortions. In many low- and middle-income 
25James Gribble and Maj-Lis Voss, “Family Planning and Economic Well-Being: New Evidence from 
Bangladesh,” Policy Brief (Population Reference Bureau, May 2008).
26Pritchett, “Desired Fertility and the Impact of Population Policies,” p. 37.
27Paul Gertler and John Molyneaux, “How Economic Development and Family Planning Programs 
Combined to Reduce Indonesian Fertility,” Demography 31, no. 1 (February 1994), 33–63; John Molyneaux 
and Paul Gertler, “The Impact of Targeted Family Planning Programs in Indonesia,” Population and Devel-
opment Review 26 (2000; Suppl.), 61–85.

P O P U L AT I O N  P O L I C Y   249
nations, abortions are illegal and take place under unsafe circumstances, contrib-
uting to maternal mortality. Increased use of contraceptives can help reduce the 
amount of premature deaths of both women and children in poor nations.
The 1994 Cairo International Conference on Population and Development 
endorsed the idea that family planning be replaced by a broader program of reproduc-
tive health. The World Health Organization defines the goals of this new approach as 
follows:
Reproductive health implies that people are able to have a responsible, satisfying, 
and safe sex life and that they have the capability to reproduce and the freedom 
to decide if, when, and how often they do so. Implicit in this last condition are the 
right of men and women to have access to safe, affordable, and acceptable methods 
of fertility regulation of their choice, and the right of access to appropriate health 
care services that will enable women to go safely through pregnancy and childbirth 
and provide couples with the best chance of having a healthy infant.28
In the same spirit, the United Nations in 2007 added achieving universal access 
to reproductive health as a target to the MDG to Improve Maternal Health.29
AUTHORITARIAN APPROACHES
Some countries, concerned over the growth of their populations, have resorted to 
relatively authoritarian approaches to reduce their birth rates. In India, during the 
1970s, the government added male sterilization to its list of promoted family planning 
methods. It did so because the government felt unable to control population growth 
by conventional means. Incentives were offered to men who agreed to be sterilized, 
and quotas were assigned to officials charged with carrying out the program. Prob-
lems arose when force allegedly was used against low-status individuals by officials 
anxious to fill their quotas. The sterilization campaign provoked an adverse politi-
cal reaction because the methods of population control were regarded as excessively 
zealous and callous in their disregard of individual rights. Indira Gandhi’s surprising 
defeat in India’s 1977 general election was attributed in part to the population policy 
of her emergency government.
China’s experience has been different. Chinese leaders have expressed con-
cern about the size of the nation’s population since the census of 1953 revealed a
population of almost 600 million. Modest attempts to influence fertility outcomes 
followed, but not until 1971 was a more aggressive stance adopted. In that year the 
“planned births” campaign was initiated and established three reproductive norms, 
wan, xi, shao (“later, longer, fewer”): later marriage, longer spacing between births, 
28Cited in World Bank, Population and Development (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1994), p. 81.
29Specific goals and strategies for improving reproductive health are presented in, World Bank, “The 
World Bank’s Reproductive Health Action Plan, 2010–2015” (April 2010), http://siteresources.worldbank
.org/INTPRH/Resources/376374-1261312056980/RHActionPlanFinalMay112010.pdf.

250   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
and fewer children. To implement these norms, birth targets were set for administra-
tive units at all levels throughout China. The responsibility for achieving these tar-
gets was placed in the hands of officials heading units ranging from provinces of 2 to 
90 million  people down to production brigades of 250 to 800. The national government 
held information and motivation campaigns to persuade people to have fewer chil-
dren, but it was left to local officials to fill out many details of the program and finance 
much of its cost. In China’s villages, where much of the population lived, IUD inser-
tions, abortions, and, later, sterilizations were offered. A wider range of contraceptives 
was provided in the cities. National spokespeople maintained that participation in the 
program was voluntary, but local officials with targets to fulfill often applied pressure. 
At the production brigade level, birth planning became intensely personal, as couples 
were required to seek approval to have a child in a particular year. (The application 
might be accepted or they might be asked to wait a year or two.)
The wan xi shao campaign began by discouraging couples from having more 
than two children; by the end of the 1970s, couples were encouraged to have only 
one. During the 1970s, total fertility rates in China plummeted from around six 
children per woman to less than three, a rate of fertility decline without precedent 
in world history. But, despite lowered fertility, population projections continued to 
cause concern, and in 1979, the one child campaign was promulgated. Couples, ini-
tially, were required to apply for official approval before conceiving the one allowed 
child. Those who complied could receive income supplements, extra maternity 
leave, and preferential treatment when applying for public housing. Couples bearing 
more than one child might be fined or lose access to education or other privileges. 
Early in the campaign, the government employed harsh methods to enforce its popu-
lation goals. A system of incentives and penalties, plus other forms of social pressure, 
moved women to undergo sterilization after two births. China’s one child approach 
has gone through various phases since its inception, with periods of stricter and 
looser interpretations. Since the late 1980s, rural couples in most provinces were 
allowed to have two children if their first was a daughter. Chinese couples still are 
obliged strictly to limit the number of children they have but elements of the earlier 
coercion to force such outcomes have waned.30
Several lessons can be learned from China’s experience. First, the dramatic 
decline in fertility that took place in China is the result of more than the govern-
ment’s population policies. At the same time that these programs were implemented, 
economic reforms ushered in a period of rapid economic growth and urbanization, 
which decreased desired fertility. Even without the one child campaign, Chinese fer-
30For a survey of demographic trends and policies in the People’s Republic of China, see Nancy Riley, 
“China’s Population: New Trends and Challenges,” Population Reference Bureau Population Bulletin 59, 
no. 2 (June 2004). The human face of China’s policy is captured in the multimedia presentation by Ameri-
can Public Media, Marketplace, “China’s One Child Policy” (June 2010), available at http://marketplace
.publicradio.org/projects/project_display.php?proj_identifier=2010/06/21/china-one-child-policy; 
accessed February 2012.

P O P U L AT I O N  P O L I C Y   251
tility levels would have fallen but probably not as far. Today, many Chinese couples 
would likely choose on their own to have only one child or even none. Second, the 
sharp fall in births may have longer-term adverse consequences. China will face a 
rapidly aging population in the decades ahead, which may stress both private and 
public systems of old-age support. China also faces a growing imbalance between the 
number of males and females (Box 7–4). This is the result of a traditional  preference 
BOX 7–4 MISSING GIRLS, MISSING WOMEN
Most parents believe that the chances of having a daughter or a son are fifty–
fifty. But this is not true. For most human populations, the expected ratio of boys
to girls at birth is closer to 105:100. Scientists are not entirely sure why this is
the case, but believe it compensates for biological weaknesses in males result-
ing in higher mortality rates for boy versus girl infants. Because more than biol-
ogy determines survival, social scientists draw attention to sex ratios, at birth and
throughout the life cycle, when they deviate from what is expected in a gender-
neutral environment.
The chart on the next page compares the sex ratio of children 0 to 4 years
old in various regions. Europe and North America have ratios close to 105:100.
The lower ratios in some regions may be due to a tendency for populations of
 African descent to record male to female ratios at birth closer to 102:100 or
to the higher rates of male infant and child mortality. The most striking result is
the pattern in East Asia, where in 2005 there were close to 121 boys for every
100 girls. This is neither a recent outcome nor is it biologically driven. The short-
age of girls 0 to 4 years old is the result of long-standing son preference in
the region. In previous periods, the shortage of young females was the result of
deliberate female infanticide and neglect. Today, sex-selective abortion is another
mechanism causing male children to outnumber female children, one facilitated
by the increasing availability of ultrasound and other prenatal screening devices.
Sex-selective abortions, abandonment of female infants, and differential
neglect of girls, especially in medical care, are all means of realizing son prefer-
ence. They have been common in many parts of East Asia but none more so than
in China. Although son preference has a long history in China, the one-child cam-
paign and the overall move to low fertility rates among Chinese households have
contributed to these outcomes. In 1982, at the beginning of the one-child pol-
icy, the sex ratio of first births was 107; second births, 105; and all subsequent
births, 110. The change by 2000 was dramatic. The sex ratio of first births in
China was still 107, but for second births it rose to 152 and for any  subsequent

252   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
births it was almost 160. Second and higher-order births represented only one-
third of all births in 2000, but sex selection for these births resulted in the high
and grossly imbalanced sex ratio for all Chinese births.
China is not alone in this extreme form of discrimination against females,
which has been referred to as gendercide. Amartya Sen examined the issue of
e
differential mortality of males versus females and found that survival chances
vary across countries and over the life cycle. In India, the differential used to 
show up less at birth and more during childhood and the late teen years. Today, 
sex-selective abortions are on the rise in India. Sen and other researchers con-
cluded in 1990 that more than 100 million women were missing worldwide, 80
g
million from China and India combined, as a result of sex-selective abortions and 
the relative neglect of girls and women. Today the numbers may well be higher.
Sources: Nancy E. Riley, “China’s Population: New Trends and Challenges,” Population Reference
Bureau, Population Bulletin 59, no. 2 (June 2004); Amartya Sen, “More Than 100 Million Women
n
Are Missing,” New York Review of Books (December 20, 1990); Stephan Klasen and Claudia Wink,
s
“ ‘Missing Women’: Revisiting the Debate,” Feminist Economics 9, nos. 2–3 (November 2003). The
s
cover story of the March 6, 2010, issue of The Economist was on gendercide.
t
102.0
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
104.1
104.6
105.1
105.5
107.3
Europe
East Asia
South Asia
North America
Middle East and North Africa
Southeast Asia
Latin America and the
Caribbean
Sub-Saharan Africa
Male/female ratio of children 0 to 4 years old (2005)
120.6
104.1
Source: Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United 
Nations Secretariat, World Population Prospects: The 2008 Revision, available at www.un.org/esa
/population/publications/wpp2008/wpp2008_highlights.pdf.

P O P U L AT I O N  I S S U E S  F O R  T H E  T W E NT Y- F I R S T  C E NT U R Y   253
for sons combined with policies that limited the number of children a couple could 
have. This most severe form of discrimination against females has human rights 
implications and may result in a host of social problems for future generations of 
Chinese women and men.
Finally, nations that today are worried about the growth in their populations 
are unlikely to be able to follow the Chinese approach. Few states can exercise as 
much social control as Chinese governments have in the recent past. India’s expe-
rience in the 1970s suggests that a democracy is unlikely to accept the authoritar-
ian approaches employed in China. But, even if a nation could do so, should they? 
Amartya Sen argues that, if freedom is valued at all, depriving people of the freedom 
to regulate their own fertility, one of life’s most personal decisions, must represent a 
significant social loss.31 Such a loss can be justified only if the social cost of not inter-
vening is high. As this chapter has shown, it is hard to make the case that individuals 
systematically make poor decisions when it comes to childbearing or that the nega-
tive externalities of these decisions are large. If this is true, what justification is there 
for coercion to regulate fertility? Noncoercive approaches, including broad-based 
socioeconomic improvements, can achieve similar ends and should be pursued 
instead.
 POPULATION ISSUES FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST 
CENTURY
In retrospect, the fears of Robert McNamara and many others about a population 
explosion no longer seem warranted. Population growth has slowed dramatically, 
and the expectation is no longer that world population will increase indefinitely. 
By mid-century, the world’s population is expected to peak, admittedly with billions 
more people then when McNamara first expressed his fears.
But the drop in population growth rates does not mean that demographic con-
cerns are a thing of the past. The world economy, if the United Nation’s medium term 
projection comes to pass, still must accommodate another 2 billion more people 
over the next 40 years, almost all of whom will be born in today’s developing nations. 
A second major demographic development will be the change in the age distribu-
tion of the world’s population. There will be fewer children and many more elderly; 
not only are the developed nations aging but so are many of the developing ones. 
According to United Nations’ projections, those 65 and older made up 6.7 percent of 
Asia’s population in 2010; in 2050 they will make up 17.3 percent. In China alone, in 
part due to the one child policy, the  percentage of seniors is projected to rise from 
31Amartya Sen, “Population: Delusion and Reality,” The New York Review of Books 41, no. 15 (Septem-
ber 22, 1994).

254   [CH. 7] P O P U L AT I O N
8.2 to 23.3 percent of the population. In Latin America the change will be similar to 
that in Asia. Only in sub- Saharan Africa, where fertility rates remain high, will the 
share of the elderly remain in single digits.
How will the needs of the elderly be met? As households grow smaller in size, 
traditional systems of family support are likely to breakdown. Financing old-age 
pensions, a huge problem now in developed nations, will increasingly confront 
emerging economies. Chile’s pension system is often cited as a model for dealing 
with old age security. It no longer relies on a traditional pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) 
system similar to Social Security in the United States, where workers pay taxes 
each year that finance the pensions of those who already are retired. Starting 
in 1981, Chile developed a national system of mandatory personal retirement 
accounts, similar to 401K plans in the United States. This system of prefunded 
retirement savings relieves some of the burden of publicly financed old-age sup-
port. But it is not a complete solution, as many Chilean workers are self-employed 
or work in the informal sector and do not participate. About half of Chilean 
women were not covered because they did not work outside of their homes. Low-
income workers may not earn enough for their accounts to lift them above poverty 
after their working years. Recent reforms, which include more public funding of 
old-age security, address some of these limitations but continue to build on the 
personal retirement account system.32
A changing age structure will challenge some economies; others will continue to 
face high fertility and the burdens (and opportunities) of a young population. This 
will be the case for many nations in sub-Saharan Africa. If this region follows what has 
happened elsewhere, economic growth and development will reduce the demand for 
children and accelerate a demographic transition to lower birth and death rates, and 
a slower rate of population growth.
SUMMARY
• The twentieth century will be remembered for populating the planet. In 1900, 
the world population stood at about 1.5 billion. By 2000, there were over 6 
billion people; 5 billion living in developing nations. In no prior century did 
the world population increase by even 1 billion. World population growth 
has slowed since the 1960s, and current projections do not envision that the 
twenty-first century will see increases as large as those of the last century.
• The driving force behind the population increases of the last 100 years is the 
demographic transition, especially in the developing world. Improvements 
32Estelle James, Alejandra Cox Edwards, and Augusto Iglesias, “Chile’s New Pension Reforms,” Policy 
Report No. 326, National Center for Policy Analysis, Dallas, TX, March 2010.
SUMMARY

S U M M A R Y   255
in nutrition, medical knowledge, and public health led to a rapid decline 
in death rates. Birth rates took longer to fall, and in the interim, the rate of 
natural increase in the populations of low- and middle-income nations 
soared to unprecedented levels. Today, most regions of the world are 
experiencing a decline in fertility and are approaching replacement levels. 
Sub-Saharan Africa is the one exception, where total fertility remains high, 
but even in this region, some decline is evident.
• There is considerable debate over the consequences of population 
growth on economic development. This is because of the multitude of 
ways population growth affects the determinants of growth; population 
growth, for example, may inhibit capital deepening, but it also may 
encourage institutional and technological innovations that increase factor 
productivity.
• In trying to understand the impact of population growth on economic 
development it is important to reconcile micro behavior with macro 
outcomes. If individual couples are making rational choices over the 
number of children they have, then at a macro level, why might a problem 
arise? The answer is market failures—for example, if the social costs of 
raising children exceed the private costs. In practice, it has proven difficult 
to identify the precise circumstances in which this happens and how large 
the resulting costs are.
• The debate over whether population growth is an obstacle to economic 
development is reflected in the choice of population policies governments 
pursue. If household behavior is rational and market failures are small, 
then development may be the best contraceptive. With better education, 
especially for girls; better employment opportunities, especially for women; 
and improved healthcare, especially for the young; couples desire fewer 
children. Family planning programs also may influence social norms about 
family size and assist individuals in attaining desired fertility levels in a safe 
and reliable manner.
• Some governments, especially in China, decided that the macro 
consequences of population growth are so negative that authoritarian 
steps must be taken to limit fertility. Such approaches have proven effective 
at reducing fertility levels and rates of population growth. But their 
development benefits are less obvious. Coercive population policies entail 
high social costs and loss of individual freedom. It is difficult to justify these 
actions with such limited evidence that reduced fertility contributes to 
faster economic growth and development.
• Despite the slowing of world population growth, the twenty-first century 
will face demographic challenges of its own, including a rising share of the 
elderly. With fewer workers per nonworking senior, nations will need to 
craft fiscally sustainable systems of old age support.


257
Education
8
B
elief in the importance of education for economic development is not a new 
idea. The Chinese philosopher Guan Zhong, writing in the seventh century 
b.c.e., advised, “If you plan for a year, plant a seed. If for ten years, plant a 
tree. If for a hundred years, teach the people. When you sow a seed once, 
you will reap a single harvest. When you teach the people, you will reap a hundred 
harvests.”
Contemporary scholars voice similar perspectives. Nobel laureate Theodore 
Schultz, in his 1960 presidential address to the American Economic Association, high-
lighted the importance of investing in people. Schultz referred to the acquisition of 
skills and knowledge as investments in human capital. Economists consider resources 
spent on physical capital as an investment that yields a future return rather than as 
consumption. Schultz argued that expenditures on people should be viewed in a simi-
lar way. He believed that most of the “impressive rise” in the earnings of workers in the 
industrialized countries was due to the growth in human capital, and a limiting factor 
in the advance of poor countries was insufficient investment in people.1
Among the major categories of human capital investments, Schultz included 
formal education at the elementary, secondary, and higher levels; health services; 
on-the-job training; and private and government sponsored training programs. In 
this chapter, we focus on formal education, specifically on schooling, and its impli-
cations for economic growth and development. In the next chapter, we consider 
health. On-the-job training includes everything from a parent teaching a child to 
1Theodore W. Schultz, “Investment in Human Capital,” American Economic Review 51, 1 (March 1961), 
1–17.

258   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
farm to an apprentice learning a craft from a master tradesman to a multinational 
corporation offering courses to newly hired or experienced workers. All these forms 
of on- the-job training are important sources of human capital investment, but 
they ordinarily take place with limited amounts of policy intervention and public 
spending, especially when compared to education and healthcare. Schooling also 
provides general human capital, which is a prerequisite to the specific human capi-
tal more often associated with different forms of training. For these reasons, we 
restrict our attention in this chapter to schooling.
Over the past 40 years, there has been tremendous growth in schooling in all 
regions of the world. It is estimated that in 1960, 55 percent of the population age 15 
and over in the developing world had never attended school. By 2010, this percentage 
had fallen to only 17 percent. It will fall even further in the decades ahead. In many 
countries expansion in schooling has contributed significantly to the human capital 
of the labor force and subsequent economic growth and development. But in other 
 settings, schooling has not yet delivered what Guan Zhong and Theodore Schultz pre-
dicted in terms of growth and development. It is not that the Chinese philosopher and 
the American Nobel laureate were wrong. Instead, education, like so many other pre-
scriptions for economic development, is not a panacea. It is not the sole determinant 
of economic success. If economic conditions do not encourage productive economic 
activity, the demand for educated workers will be weak, and even those with schooling 
may struggle to generate income for themselves and their families.
After considering recent trends in schooling and learning, this chapter examines 
the evidence on schooling as an investment. Schooling generally displays attractive 
rates of return, but even when this is the case, spending on schooling often deliv-
ers less than it might. Countries often underinvest in schooling overall, misallocate 
resources across the different levels of schooling, and inefficiently use resources 
within schools themselves. In some cases, the problem is insufficient or misallocated 
resources; in others, it is a lack of accountability among teachers, principals, and oth-
ers responsible for the education of the young. The seventh-century Chinese philoso-
pher Guan Zhong may have been right in his overall view of education but he did not 
spell out the details: How does one induce parents to send and keep their children 
in school; how does one combat rampant absenteeism among teachers; and, even 
more fundamental, how does one increase the amount of learning students achieve 
by attending school?
TRENDS AND PATTERNS
If you are reading this book for a course in development economics, you are among 
a privileged group in the world who has the opportunity to attend university. You 
may not feel part of an especially select group as you make your way through the 
TRENDS AND PATTERNS

T R E N D S  A N D  PAT T E R N S   259
crowded hallways of your college or university, but you are part of one.  Worldwide, 
gross enrollment rates in any type of tertiary education (schooling beyond high 
school) amount to about one out of every four members of your age group. In the 
high-income countries, the rate exceeded 67 percent in 2008; in the  middle-income 
nations, it reached 25 percent; and in the low-income countries, it was only 
7.5  percent. Just as striking is a comparison with the generations that came before 
you. In the United States today, about one out of every three adults over the age of 
25 received schooling beyond the secondary level. In France, the ratio is closer to 
one in five. In the developing nations it is often much lower: around 6 percent for 
both China and India; 7 percent in Brazil; and between 2 and 3 percent in Ghana and 
Kenya.2 The experience of your age cohort, as compared to the schooling  experience 
of earlier generations, tells us a lot about the stocks and flows of education in the 
world today. Stocks refer to the amount of schooling embodied in a population; 
flows, to the net change in those stocks as the result of school enrollment patterns.
STOCKS AND FLOWS
The scarcity of education in the developing nations is evident in the data on the 
levels of schooling completed among today’s adult population (Figure 8–1). In the 
United States, an advanced economy, only 3 percent of adults did not complete six 
2Estimates from the Barro-Lee Educational Attainment Dataset (2010), available at www.barrolee.com, 
accessed February 2012.
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
Thailand
Tertiary
Secondary
Primary
None or < Primary
Peru
Brazil
Indonesia
USA
FIGURE 8–1 Educational Attainment of the Adult Population (ages 25 to 64)
Sources: Data for Thailand, Peru, Brazil, and Indonesia are from United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Data for the United States are available from the 
U.S. Census Bureau.

260   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
years of schooling (that is, did not complete primary school). The situation in low- 
and middle-income nations could not be more different. In Brazil about one out of 
every four adults did not attend or complete primary school; in Thailand almost one 
out of every two adults. Household data from the two Indian states of Uttar Pradesh 
and Bihar tell a similar story. By the late 1990s these two states had a combined pop-
ulation of 250 million people and were among the poorest states in India and hence 
among the poorest people in the world. Over two-thirds of their adult population did 
not complete primary school, most of them having never attended school.
Minimal levels of education characterize today’s labor force in many low- and 
 middle-income countries, but the situation is changing. Throughout the world, 
 parents and governments, as well as bilateral donors and international agencies, are 
 advocating that current and future generations receive more schooling. This trend 
is evident in a comparison of school enrollment rates by region over the past three 
decades (Table 8–1). At the primary school level, gross enrollment rates either have 
been high for decades (East Asia, Europe and central Asia, Latin America) or have 
expanded  rapidly (Middle East and North Africa, South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa). 
 Consistent with the millennium development goal (MDG) on achieving universal 
 primary  education, regional trends indicate real progress in increasing the amount 
of schooling children receive. But there is more progress to be made; in 2008, close to 
70 million children were not in school.
Gross enrollment rates refer to the total number of children enrolled in a given 
school category divided by the number of children of the age group that officially cor-
responds to that level of schooling. In the case of primary school, the relevant age 
group usually is 6 to 11 years old. If older children (or younger ones) enroll in primary 
school, the gross enrollment ratio can exceed 100, as it does in several regions. Gross 
TABLE 8–1  Changes in Schooling, Gross Enrollment Rates by Region, 
    1975–2005
 
PRIMARY 
SECONDARY 
TERTIARY
REGION* 
1975 
2005 
1975 
2005 
1980 
2005
East Asia and the Pacific 
112.8 
111.4 
36.5 
72.5 
2.5 
20.1
Europe and central Asia 
96.9 
96.9 
84.7 
87.9 
32.9 
54.7
Latin America and the Caribbean 
109.1 
117.7 
38.3 
89.7 
13.1 
29.6
Middle East and North Africa 
81.5 
106.3 
31.2 
75.6 
10.5 
26.1
South Asia 
76.7 
109.7 
26.5 
49.5 
4.5 
10.4
Sub-Saharan Africa 
58.8 
92.0 
11.3 
31.8 
1.2 
5.3
High-income economies 
98.4 
99.8 
78.6 
97.7 
34.3 
62.3
*Data for each region are aggregated from country-level data. Countries in the region were not included if 
data were unavailable.
PRIMARY 
SECONDARY 
TERTIARY
REGION* 
1975 
2005 
1975 
2005 
1980 
2005
Source: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), Institute of 
Statistics, available at http://stats.uis.unesco.org/unesco/tableviewer/document.aspx?ReportId=143.

T R E N D S  A N D  PAT T E R N S   261
enrollment ratios that exceed 100 often are a mixed blessing. The good news is that 
they indicate lots of children are enrolled in school; the bad news is that they usu-
ally imply that many children are repeating grades. If repetition rates are high, as they 
often are in poor countries, gross enrollment rates can be high even though a sub-
stantial number of children never attend school.3
Alternative measures of school attendance take account of this problem. Net 
enrollment rates refer to enrollments of only those of the relevant age group. 
Grade survival rates estimate how many children actually complete a certain 
grade level. Estimates of these measures confirm the substantial progress nations 
have made in expanding primary education but also highlight that universal com-
pletion of primary school remains a challenge. In 2008, net enrollment ratios in 
low- and middle-income countries were 81 and 88 percent, respectively; in sub-
Saharan Africa they were 75 percent. Estimates of grade survival rates suggest that 
1 out of 5 children in some of the poorest nations did not complete five years of 
schooling; in some middle-income nations, more than 1 in 10 failed to do so. These 
failures are most pronounced among the poorest children, those with families in 
the bottom quintile of the income distribution. Because of these tendencies, the 
MDG of achieving universal primary education for all children by 2015 is unlikely 
to be met.
Achieving universal primary education remains an important goal. Another 
challenge is to expand secondary and tertiary enrollments. Huge enrollment gains 
in secondary education have been realized in virtually all regions (Table 8–1). Latin 
America’s gains are the greatest, with gross secondary school enrollment expanding 
from approximately 38 to 90 percent between 1975 and 2005. The poorest regions, 
sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, still lag the other regions, but much progress has 
been made in 30 years. It is not surprising that both the absolute level and expansion 
of tertiary enrollments remain low in almost all developing regions relative to the 
high income group. Even the current star performers in terms of economic growth, 
East and South Asia, do not stand out in terms of the level of tertiary enrollment rates 
achieved to date. Faced with limited resources, governments must decide whether to 
allocate additional resources to achieving universal primary education or to expand-
ing opportunities at either the secondary or tertiary levels. We return to this contro-
versial issue later in the chapter.
Trends in school enrollment rates across regions, combined with the age struc-
ture of today’s developing world, tell us how human capital endowments will change 
in the decades ahead. Subsequent generations will be more numerous and have 
3Paul Glewwe and Michael Kremer offer the following hypothetical example, “In a school system with 
6 years of primary education, a 100 percent gross enrollment rate is consistent with 75 percent of children 
taking 8 years to complete primary school (because each child repeats two grades) and 25 percent of chil-
dren never attending school.” From “Schools, Teachers, and Education Outcomes in Developing Coun-
tries,” in E. Hanushek and F. Welch, eds., Handbook on the Economics of Education (Boston: Elsevier, 2006).

262   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
more schooling than their parents. This trend already is evident. Figure 8–2  provides 
estimates of the increase in the average years of schooling completed by adults 
25 and over for all regions between 1980 and 2010.4 As expected, average years of 
schooling have gone up everywhere. What is striking about these numbers is the extent 
of this increase. The educational attainment of the potential workforce in East Asia has 
gone from a predicted mean of 4.4 years to 7.4 years of schooling; in South Asia from 
2.5 to 4.5 years, and in the Middle East and North Africa from 2.5 years to 6.5 years. 
The average level of educational attainment may still seem low, especially relative 
to the high-income economies (11 years in 2010), but remember these estimates 
are population means. In the developing nations, people in their 50s and 60s with 
no or little schooling are averaged together with people in their 20s and 30s whose 
 educational attainment exceeds the mean. The trend is unmistakable; younger work-
ers are entering the labor force with more years of schooling and are enriching the 
4Calculating average years of schooling for a nation would seem a straightforward task. It is not, in part, 
because census and survey data in many developing nations are not conducted on a regular basis. Econ-
omists estimate educational attainment using a perpetual inventory method, which combines available 
census and survey data reflecting the stock of human capital with information on enrollment and repeti-
tion rates, which reflects the flow of schooling. Economists Robert Barro and Jong-Wha Lee provide the 
most-often-cited estimates and projections of educational attainment. Their most recent estimates are 
reported in Robert Barro and Jong-Wha Lee, “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World, 
1950–2010,” NBER Working Paper No. 15902, (Cambridge, MA: NBER, April 2010). 
South Africa
Middle East
and North Africa
East Asia and
Pacific
Latin America and
Caribbean
Europe and
Central Asia
High-income
economies
Sub-Saharan
Africa
Average years of total schooling
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
1980
2000
2010
FIGURE 8–2 Education Attainment, Adult Population 25 and over
Source: Robert Barro and Jong-Wha Lee, “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World, 
1950–2010.” NBER Working Paper No. 15902, (Cambridge, MA: NBER, April 2010). Data available at 
www.barrolee.com/data/dataexp.htm.

T R E N D S  A N D  PAT T E R N S   263
human capital of the developing countries. It is fair to say that since 1980 there has 
been a global revolution in the provision of schooling.
BOYS VERSUS GIRLS
Progress has been achieved not only in the number of years of schooling received 
but also in the distribution of who receives this schooling. There has been consider-
able progress in spreading the opportunity to attend school to girls as well as boys, 
although girls’ education still lags. Favoring the education of boys over girls is a long-
standing and pervasive practice throughout much of the world, but this practice is 
changing. The MDGs called for eliminating gender disparity in primary and second-
ary education by 2005 and at all levels by 2015.
Estimates of average years of schooling for men and women over the age of 
15 reveal a gender gap that has declined significantly over time. For all developing 
nations, the mean number of years of schooling for men in 1960 was only 3.1 years 
and for women even less, 2.0 years. Taking the ratio of the two, women completed 
only 62 percent the schooling of men. By 1980, this gap had narrowed a bit with the 
gender ratio at 74 percent. Much more progress has been made since 1980. For the 
developing world as a whole in 2010, women were estimated to have completed an 
average of 6.5 years of schooling as compared to 7.6 years for adult men, meaning a 
gender ratio of 86 percent.
Regional patterns show considerable variation (Table 8–2) around these trends. 
All regions have narrowed the gender gap in schooling, with Europe and central Asia 
and Latin America having almost achieved gender parity. South Asia, by comparison, 
has a long way to go. Estimates for 1980 show that adult women had received  virtually 
TABLE 8–2  Estimates of School Attainment for Adults 25 and over by Gender 
     and Region, 1980 and 2010
 
1980 
2010
 
WOMEN 
MEN 
RATIO  
WOMEN 
MEN 
RATIO 
REGION 
(YEARS) 
(YEARS) 
(%) 
(YEARS) 
(YEARS) 
(%)
East Asia and Pacific 
3.0 
4.7 
65 
6.8 
8.0 
85
Europe and central Asia 
6.9 
8.2 
84 
10.2 
10.4 
98
Latin America and the Caribbean 
3.9 
4.3 
89 
7.7 
7.9 
97
Middle East and North Africa 
1.4 
3.2 
43 
5.5 
7.5 
74
South Asia 
0.9 
2.8 
33 
3.4 
5.6 
60
Sub-Saharan Africa 
1.5 
2.9 
53 
4.0 
5.7 
70
High-income economies 
8.1 
8.9 
91 
10.9 
11.2 
97
 
1980 
2010
 
WOMEN 
MEN 
RATIO  
WOMEN 
MEN 
RATIO
REGION 
(YEARS) 
(YEARS) 
(%) 
(YEARS) 
(YEARS) 
(%)
Source: Robert Barro and Jong-Wha Lee, “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World,
1950–2010.” NBER Working Paper No. 15902, (Cambridge, MA: NBER, April 2010). Data available at 
www.barrolee.com/data/dataexp.htm.

264   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
no schooling (0.9 years), only one third of what adult men received (2.8 years). By 
2010, outcomes had improved. Women averaged 3.4 years of schooling, now about 
60 percent of what men completed. South Asia’s gender gap is expected to continue 
to narrow. Today in South Asia, gross primary school enrollment rates for boys and 
girls both exceed 100 percent, with the rate for girls equal to 95 percent those of boys; 
the secondary school enrollment rate is 56 percent for boys and 48 percent for girls. 
When these young people move on to replace their parents and grandparents in the 
labor force, the region’s stock of human capital will be larger and its distribution 
between men and women relatively more equal.
SCHOOLING VERSUS EDUCATION
Years of schooling and the gender distribution of that schooling are two ways of 
charting the accumulation of human capital. But schooling is only a means to an 
end; the real goal is education—that is, the skills individuals acquire from time spent 
studying and learning. Students can sit through many years of schooling and learn 
very little. Measuring learning outcomes is notoriously difficult within one nation 
let alone across many. But there have been attempts to apply basic tests of core 
 competencies in reading and mathematics across nations. The results are sobering 
because of both the gap between rich and poor nations and the implications for the 
quality of schooling available in many low- and middle-income nations.
One source of cross-country information on learning outcomes is the Pro-
gramme for International Student Assessment (PISA). Initially, PISA administered 
examinations only among Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Develop-
ment (OECD) members—that is, mostly high-income economies. But interest in 
their work led to an expansion of testing to some non-OECD and mostly middle-
income settings. PISA’s goal is to assess how well 15-year-olds, approaching the end 
of their compulsory schooling years, are prepared “to meet the challenges of today’s 
societies.” Representative samples of 15-year-olds attending school are selected from 
participating nations, with the total number of students tested ranging from 4,500 to 
10,000 per country. Average scores on the 2009 reading test for a subset of the more 
than 60 participating nations are presented in Figure 8–3. Korea had the highest mean 
score, with Korean students performing better than many nations with considerably 
higher incomes. Finland was 2nd; the United States ranked 16th (tied with Poland).
The middle-income nations in the table have scores that are almost always lower 
than the high-income nations. This is not surprising. We expect these scores to be 
income elastic. At higher incomes, economies have more to spend on schooling and 
we believe there is some association between school expenditures and student learn-
ing. At higher incomes, children may be healthier and more able to learn. They also 
are more likely to have parents who attended school, another predictor of student 
performance. Of course, income is not all that matters. Korea and Poland’s superior 
performance relative to much richer nations cannot be due to income.

T R E N D S  A N D  PAT T E R N S   265
Korea
Finland
Hong Kong/China
Singapore
Canada
Japan
Australia
Netherlands
Norway
Estonia
Switzerland
Poland
United States
Germany
Sweden
France
Taiwan
Hungary
United Kindom
Portugal
Italy
Latvia
Greece
Slovenia
Spain
Israel
Austria
Turkey
Russian Federation
China
Mexico
Thailand
Brazil
Jordan
Tunisia
Indonesia
Argentina
Qatar
Panama
Peru
Azerbaijan
Kyrgyzstan
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
High income
Mean reading score
FIGURE 8–3 Learning Outcomes: Reading Achievement of 15-Year-Olds, 2009
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD), PISA: 2009 
Results: Executive Summary, available at www.pisa.oecd.org/dataoecd/34/60/46619703.pdf, 
accessed February 2012.
What is alarming about the findings is not that middle-income nations have 
lower scores, that was expected, but how much lower these scores are relative to 
high-income economies. On the reading achievement test, 19 percent of all OECD 
students failed to achieve proficiency Level 2: a level low enough that  students “lack 

266   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
the essential skills needed to participate effectively and productively in society.”5 
Raising the percentage of 15-year-olds in OECD countries to Level 2  proficiency 
is a formidable challenge. But the challenge is so much greater in the middle-
income nations. Among the 26 middle-income nations in the PISA data set, the 
median percentage of 15-year-old boys who did not achieve Level 2 proficiency 
in reading was 50 percent; for girls it was 33 percent. For boys in Indonesia it was 
65 percent; in Peru, 70 percent. In the only low-income nation in the sample, the 
 Kyrgyz Republic, it was 88 percent. Clearly, the education a 15-year-old boy received 
in the Kyrgyz Republic had little in common with a 15-year-old boy in Korea.
Results on mathematical skills show an even larger gap in learning between 
students in OECD countries and those outside of the OECD group. Because most 
 middle-income nations have not achieved universal secondary school enrollments, 
PISA results overestimate the measured abilities of all their 15-year-olds. Those who 
are not in school are unlikely to know as much as those attending school; and the 
PISA exam was given to only those in school! If PISA surveyed more low-income 
economies, the difference in learning outcomes with the advanced economies would 
likely be even starker.
It is possible that the disparity in results is due to cultural bias, because any test 
is likely to suffer to some degree from this problem, but the results on student per-
formance across countries reported by the PISA study are similar to those from other 
evaluations. One study from Bangladesh found that 58 percent of a sample of rural 
children age 11 and older failed to identify seven out of eight letters; a similar per-
centage had difficulty identifying numbers and geometric shapes. A 2007 nationally 
representative survey of third-graders in India found that half could not read a simple 
first-grade paragraph. One of the questions from the Third International Mathemat-
ics and Science Study asks the following:
Three-fifths of the students in a class are girls. If 5 girls and 5 boys are added, 
which statement is true? (a) There are more girls than boys; (b) There are the same 
number of girls as boys; (c) There are more boys than girls; (d) You cannot tell whether 
there are more girls or boys from the information provided.
Approximatley 82 percent of Japanese and 62 percent of U.S. eighth-graders pro-
vided the correct answer (a). But only 31 percent of Colombian and South African 
eighth-graders identified the correct answer. With four choices available, random 
guessing would result in the correct score 25 percent of the time; the schoolchildren 
in Colombia and South Africa performed only marginally better.6
5OECD, PISA at a Glance (Paris: OECD, 2010), p. 12.
6The Bangladesh results are from Vincent Greaney, Shahidur Khandker, and Mahmudul Alam, 
 Bangladesh: Assessing Basic Learning Skills (Dhaka: University Press, 1999) as reported by Glewwe and 
Kremer, Handbook on the Economics of Education. The Trends in International Mathematics and Science 
Study results are cited in Lant Pritchett, “Access to Education,” in Bjorn Lomborg, ed., Global Crises, Global 
Solutions (London: Cambridge University Press, 2004).

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   267
That learning outcomes in developing nations, on average, are below the levels 
prevailing in developed nations is not a surprising finding. Rich nations have many 
advantages over poorer ones. Given the rapid expansion in school enrollments 
over the past few decades, many developing nations had no choice but to focus on 
expanding quantity, not on improving quality. There simply could not have been, 
for example, enough experienced teachers and principals to handle the primary and 
secondary schooling needs resulting from the increase in school enrollments. Any-
one with firsthand experience of schools in poor countries, especially in rural areas, 
is familiar with the problems: too many unqualified teachers, endemic absenteeism 
among students and teachers, and too few books and other teaching materials. In 
such environments, it is no wonder that learning outcomes are so poor.
EDUCATION AS AN INVESTMENT
Despite problems of low quality, the demand for education remains high in most 
countries. Parents want their children to have better lives and often see getting an 
education as a way to achieve them. In terms of material well-being, what parents 
perceive is borne out by the data. On average, people with more schooling earn more 
than people with less schooling. Few economic outcomes are as robust as the rela-
tionship between earnings and schooling. Primary school graduates tend to earn 
more than those with no schooling, secondary school graduates earn more than their 
counterparts who completed only primary school, and those with tertiary educa-
tion tend to earn the most. Of course, these are average tendencies. A professor with 
many years of schooling may earn less than a plumber who went to school for fewer 
years, but on average, the relationship holds. It holds for both men and women, it 
holds in fast growing economies and stagnant ones, and it holds across income levels 
and regions.
Figure 8–4 illustrates the relationship between schooling and earnings for one 
country, Nicaragua. Using household data, Figure 8–4 charts age-earnings pro-
files for men and women separately, by level of education attained. Workers at all 
schooling levels tend to see their earnings rise quickly in their early years, reach a 
plateau, and sometimes fall off in later years. The more educated the worker, the 
higher the age-earnings profile tends to be. In Nicaragua, the earnings premiums 
for more educated men are unambiguous. As level of schooling rises, each age-
earnings profile lies above the one that preceded it. For Nicaraguan women, the 
trends are not as definitive due, in part, to the relatively small number of observa-
tions on working women in this data set. A larger sample would most likely pro-
duce the same non-overlapping earnings profiles that characterize Nicaraguan 
men. Comparison of the earnings of Nicaraguan men and women reveals one other 
relationship. At every education level women tend to earn less than their male 
EDUCATION AS AN INVESTMENT

268   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
counterparts, a worldwide result almost as common as the tendency for earnings to 
rise with education levels.
If Figure 8–4 were reproduced for any country the results would be similar: 
People with more years of schooling tend to earn more than people with fewer 
years. This suggests thinking about education as an investment. Economists define 
investment as the flow of resources into the production of new capital. In the case of 
schooling, resources by both governments and households are spent in the expecta-
tion that schooling produces human capital. The expectation is also that these invest-
ments will yield a positive return. By attending school, an individual hopes to acquire 
15—25
25—35
Men
35—45
45—55
None
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary
55—65
1000
800
600
400
200
100
50
Monthly earnings 1998 NIO, log scale
Age group
(a)
Women
None
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary
15—25
25—35
35—45
45—55
55—65
300
250
200
150
100
50
Monthly earnings 1998 NIO, log scale
Age group
(b)
FIGURE 8–4 Earnings by Age, Education, and Gender, Nicaragua, 1998
Source: World Bank, Nicaragua Living Standards Measurement Study Survey, Encuesta Nacional 
de Hogares sobre Medición de Niveles de Vida (ENMV), 1998, available via www.worldbank.org/
lsms/country/ni98/ni98docs.html#English.

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   269
human capital, which makes that individual more productive and, therefore, better 
compensated. This relationship holds whether the individual becomes a farmer or 
trader, laborer or artisan, professional or government official.
There are several benefits to thinking of education as an investment. School-
ing competes with many other activities on which governments and households 
spend their scarce resources. How does a government decide how much to devote 
to schooling? Should more resources be spent on schools as opposed to health clin-
ics, tube wells for clean water, or rural roads? Even within the education sector, how 
should a government allocate its spending: Is achieving universal primary education 
a better use of resources than expanding colleges and universities? Governments 
must make these decisions and thinking about education as an investment can help. 
Households make similar decisions. When education is viewed as an investment it 
becomes easier to understand why some families send their children to work and 
not to school, while other families do everything in their power to make sure a child 
receives an education.
THE RATE OF RETURN TO SCHOOLING
Figure 8–5 illustrates the factors that determine the private return on schooling. 
The figure presents two stylized streams of future earnings, one if the individuals 
complete only primary school and the other if they complete a secondary edu-
cation. All individuals are assumed to complete primary school at age 11. If they 
Direct costs
Earnings
Primary education
Private benefits
Foregone earnings
Books, fees, etc.
Secondary education
Age
18
11
0
65
FIGURE 8–5 Determinants of the Private Returns to Schooling

270   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
do not continue with their education, they begin to work and follow the earnings 
profile marked as primary education. Alternatively, individuals might complete 
secondary education and remain in school until age 18. For ease of exposition, 
we assume that individuals do not work while in school and, therefore, have zero 
earnings while in school. Once secondary school is completed, these individu-
als follow the higher of the two earnings profiles. The private pecuniary benefits 
of a secondary education, as we saw in Figure 8–4, are the earnings the individual 
expects to receive beyond what they would have earned with only a primary school 
education.
But costs also are associated with the decision to remain in school. These costs 
include any foregone earnings, sacrificed because an individual is in school and 
not working. These costs may seem low for a young person considering attending 
primary or secondary school. But for the majority of households in the developing 
nations, the opportunity costs of sending a child to school are real. In rural house-
holds, for example, children work in the fields, take care of animals, or watch siblings, 
permitting others, including adults, to be engaged in farming or other productive 
activities. In addition to foregone earnings, households face direct costs in sending a 
child to school. These costs may include school or uniform fees, payments for books 
and other materials, transportation costs, or other “unofficial” fees to ensure a child 
gets the attention of a teacher. Although the sums may seem small, to a poor family 
they may be overwhelming.
To think of education as an investment, we need a systematic way to compare 
the costs and benefits of schooling depicted in Figure 8–5. Economists argue that one 
cannot simply add up the costs and compare them to the benefits because money 
received in the future is worth less than money that can be spent today. Such positive 
time preference is the result of both uncertainty about the future and the opportunity 
cost of resources—namely, the returns an alternative investment might yield. Future 
benefits need to be discounted to compare them to current costs. One way of doing 
so is to compute the present value (PV) of all costs and benefits.7
Completing secondary school results in earnings whose PV can be computed as
 
PVB = a
n
t=1
Bt>(1 + i)t 
[8–1]
7The need to discount future benefits can be motivated by the following example. If you are asked to 
trade $100 today in return for $100 one year from now, you likely will not accept the offer. Beyond any 
uncertainty you may have about being paid back in 12 months, you could do better by depositing your 
$100 in a relatively safe alternative, like a bank account. If that account offers you a 5 percent return, your 
$100 today is worth $105 one year from now, $110.25 in two years, and so forth. This is the familiar process 
of compounding. Discounting future benefits employs the same logic but working in reverse. The present 
value of some future benefit is the amount of money that, if available today, by virtue of compounding, 
would equal that amount. If the opportunity cost of your capital is 5 percent, the present value of $105 
received one year from now equals [$105,(1 + 0.05)] = $100; similarly, the present value of $110.25 
received in two years also is $100 since [$110.25,(1 + 0.05)2] = $100.

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   271
where PVB equals the sum of the present value of all future private benefits (the 
earnings differential received with more schooling) over an individual’s n years of 
working; Bt equals the benefits in year t; and i is the interest rate (the household’s 
opportunity cost of capital), which discounts future benefits. A similar calculation 
can be made for the private costs of schooling (or for any other investment option):
 
PVC = a
n
t=1
Ct>(1 + i)t 
[8–2]
where PVC now refers to the sum of the present value of all anticipated private costs 
and Ct equals the costs, including foregone earnings while attending school plus any 
direct costs paid by the household, incurred in each of the t years.
There are several ways one can then determine whether a particular investment 
is worthwhile. In the analysis of education, a common way is to estimate an internal 
rate of return for the investment. The internal rate of return is a derived interest rate, 
r, which equates PVB to PVC. In other words, the level of r such that
 
a
n
t=1
(Bt - Ct)>(1 + r)t = 0 
[8–3]
Even though the dollar value of the private benefits of an education is likely to far 
exceed the dollar value of the private costs, a value for r can be found because future 
benefits, occurring many years from now, are much more heavily discounted than 
are costs incurred more immediately. Once the private rate of return to schooling 
is estimated, it can be compared to the rates of return available to other household 
investments. This helps rank the economic benefits of education as compared to 
alternative uses of household resources.
Schooling represents not only a private investment; it also is a social one. We, 
therefore, can define a social return to schooling. Figure 8–6 presents a schematic 
representation. On the cost side, schooling entails more than the foregone earn-
ings of the individual and the payments of households. Primary school is “free” in 
most parts of the world, yet someone pays for teachers, the construction of schools, 
and the like. When evaluating education as an investment from society’s perspec-
tive, these costs must be taken into consideration. The social return includes all the 
costs entailed in the provision of schooling. On the benefit side, schooling benefits 
the individual through higher earnings but schooling may also produce a positive 
externality: benefits that accrue to members of society above and beyond the ben-
efits to the individual who receives the education. Potential positive externalities 
from school include health spillovers (the children of educated mothers tend to be 
healthier, which benefits children in other families because it reduces the transmis-
sion rate of certain diseases), reductions in crime, and more-informed political par-
ticipation and decisions. More schooling, especially higher education, may also lead 
to technological progress that is not fully captured by private returns. To calculate a 
social rate of return to education use equation 8–3, but all the benefits of schooling, 
not just private earnings, and all the costs, private and public, should be included.

272   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
ESTIMATED RATES OF RETURN
Moving from the conceptual to the empirical, a large number of rate-of-return esti-
mates for schooling are available for both developed and developing nations. To 
interpret these estimates it is important to be familiar with many of their implicit 
assumptions. First, there is no way of knowing what anyone’s future earnings will be. 
Economists use the current earnings of individuals at various ages as an estimate of 
the expected age-earnings profile of someone with a particular level of education. 
Substituting such cross-sectional findings (comparing wages for different ages at 
one point in time) for what may happen over time to the wages of individuals as they 
grow older is a common empirical technique in economics; however, especially in a 
rapidly changing economy, estimates based on cross-sectional findings may not be a 
good proxy for events that will occur in the future.
Second, estimates of the return on education require some measure of individual 
earnings. In low-income nations and in many middle-income nations, the vast major-
ity of workers do not work for wages. They are self-employed, often subsistence farm-
ers or unpaid family workers engaged in petty trading or other informal sector activity. 
Such workers do not report the kind of earnings data included in  standard rate of 
return on schooling estimations. By relying only on those who receive  earnings, most 
rate-of-return estimates are based on a fraction of a nation’s labor force.
Direct costs
Earnings
Primary education
Private benefits
Foregone earnings
Books, fees, etc.
Government expenditures
Externalities
Secondary education
65
Age
18
11
0
FIGURE 8–6 Determinants of the Social Returns to Schooling
Note: For ease of exposition, the figure is drawn without any positive externalities arising from 
primary education.

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   273
Third, problems of identification confront most empirical studies. Returns to 
schooling are no exception. If individuals who have more years of schooling earn 
more than those with fewer, how do we know schooling caused the higher  earnings? 
Perhaps people who are innately more talented both earn more and receive more 
schooling. Is the increase in earnings a result of their schooling or their innate 
 abilities? If we do not control for innate ability—something that is not easy to 
 measure—and for many other variables that might influence future earnings, how 
can we be certain that our estimates of the rate of return to schooling are correct?
FIRST-GENERATION ESTIMATES
Economists have developed different techniques for estimating rates of return to 
education, and it is instructive to see how methodological advances have replaced 
earlier approaches and dealt with problems of identification. Some of the first studies 
have been compiled in meta-analyses by World Bank economists George Psacharo-
poulos and Harry Patrinos. Table 8–3 is from their work and includes calculations of 
internal rates-of-return for over 75 nations. Some of these studies refer to outcomes 
as far back as the late 1950s, whereas others refer to the 1990s.8 Rates of return esti-
mated for individual countries are averaged together and presented as a mean value 
for different income categories and regions. These are simple cross-country averages 
and are not weighted by population size. They are real not nominal rates of return 
because they are based on cross-sectional estimates that measure earnings in the 
same current dollars.
A number of patterns can be observed in these data. Returns on all levels of 
schooling and in all income categories are almost always in double digits. Returns 
8George Psacharopoulos and Harry Patrinos, “Returns to Investment in Education: A Further Update,” 
Education Economics 12, no. 2 (August 2004).
TABLE 8–3 Returns to Schooling by Level and Country Income Group
INCOME 
PRIVATE RATE OF RETURN 
“SOCIAL” RATE OF RETURN*
CATEGORY 
PRIMARY 
SECONDARY 
TERTIARY 
PRIMARY 
SECONDARY 
TERTIARY
Low 
25.8 
19.9 
26.0 
21.3 
15.7 
11.2
Middle 
27.4 
18.0 
19.3 
18.8 
12.9 
11.3
High 
25.6 
12.2 
12.4 
13.4 
10.3 
9.5
*The estimates of social rates of return account for only government expenditures on schooling and do 
not include estimates of any positive externalities resulting from schooling.
INCOME 
PRIVATE RATE OF RETURN 
“SOCIAL” RATE OF RETURN*
CATEGORY 
PRIMARY 
SECONDARY 
TERTIARY 
PRIMARY 
SECONDARY 
TERTIARY
Source: G. Psacharopoulus and H. Patrinos, “Returns to Investment in Education: A Further Update,”
Education Economics 12, no. 2 (August 2004).

274   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
to schooling also tend to be greater for developing versus developed economies. 
This may seem surprising given the much higher wages and salaries workers earn 
in high-income nations. But, remember, rates of return measure something dif-
ferent from the level of earnings. Take the case of graduates of tertiary education. 
Given the relative scarcity of students with a tertiary education in poorer nations, 
the pay premium to having such an education may be greater than the relative pay 
gap between university and high school graduates in richer nations. It is the rela-
tive scarcity of labor skills, a combination of the strength of labor demand and the 
extent of labor supply, that contributes to the attractiveness of schooling as an 
investment. In poorer nations, educated workers are relatively scarce, often mak-
ing schooling (at the primary, secondary, and tertiary levels) an investment with a 
higher rate of return than in advanced economies, where educated workers are far 
more abundant.
Looking across levels of schooling, returns are highest for primary schooling. 
This is probably because the opportunity cost of attending school in terms of fore-
gone earnings is lowest when attending primary school and rises thereafter. Returns 
to secondary school are below or close to those of a tertiary education. This may be 
due to much larger pay differentials between tertiary and secondary school gradu-
ates versus between secondary and primary school graduates. Or it may reflect 
opportunities tertiary school students have to earn some income while studying (so 
there is less cost from foregone earnings), including receipt of government stipends 
for attending a school, a common practice in many developing nations, especially 
during the time period of the studies represented in the table.
Estimated “social” returns in Table 8–3 are lower than private ones at every level 
of schooling. Theoretically this need not be the case (see Figure 8–6). If positive exter-
nalities are sufficiently large, social returns could exceed the private rate of return 
even if social costs are greater than private costs. However, no direct means are avail-
able for estimating the positive externalities of schooling; the average “social” rates 
of return to schooling reported in Table 8–3 account for only social costs, using pri-
vate not social benefits; hence our use of quotation marks around the word social. 
By incorporating the full cost of schooling but not any positive externalities, “social” 
returns for a given level of schooling must be less than the corresponding private 
return. Note also that the relative gap between private and “social” returns is espe-
cially large for tertiary schooling in low- and middle-income nations. This reflects 
the relatively high per pupil cost and high degree of state subsidy for tertiary educa-
tion, often including free tuition. Even though the “social” returns are below private 
returns, the rates are sufficiently high to make schooling an attractive public invest-
ment compared to many alternatives, including investments in physical capital.
Another approach to estimating the rate of return to education is to estimate 
wage equations by which regressions are run to determine the impact on earnings 
of schooling adjusting for age and other demographic characteristics. The coefficient 
on schooling can be interpreted as an estimate of the private return to an additional 

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   275
year of schooling (Box 8–1). The return is based on all years of schooling rather than 
distinguishing between primary, secondary, and tertiary. Psacharopoulos and Patri-
nos report on these estimates as well and find the range for low- and middle-income 
nations by region is 7 to 12 percent per additional year of schooling. The attractive-
ness of such returns can be illustrated by comparing them to estimates of the return 
on other investment opportunities. For example, U.S. government securities, one 
of the world’s safest investments, have yielded an average real (inflation-adjusted) 
return of about 1 percent per year over the last 50 years; an index of the U.S. stock 
market, a riskier investment, over the same period yields an annual real return of 
2 to 3 percent. Of course, most families do not choose between investing in U.S. 
stocks or government securities versus sending a child to primary school; a compari-
son of these rates of return is intended only to put into perspective the relative mag-
nitudes and to highlight the attractiveness of human capital as an investment.
BOX 8–1  ESTIMATING RATES OF RETURN FROM WAGE EQUATIONS
Conceptually, the notion of rates of return to schooling is relatively straight-
forward. Estimating such returns is more complex. One of the most common
approaches is to estimate the impact on earnings of schooling, age, and other
demographic characteristics. Data on these variables can be obtained from either
household or firm surveys and used to estimate a human capital earnings func-
tion or wage equation like the following:
In Ei = a + b1Si + b2expi + b3expi
2 + ei
where EiE refers to the earnings or wages of each individual;
i
Si, the years of
schooling completed; and expi and exp
i
i
2, the years of work experience of the indi-
vidual and its square, often approximated by the individual’s age and its square.
The reason for including the squared term is to capture the expected nonlinearity
in age-earnings profiles because earnings tend to rise at a decreasing rate over a
worker’s lifetime. The regression equation also includes an error term, ei.
In this specification of the wage equation, the coefficient on schooling (b1),
where b1 = (0E/
E E)/0S, provides an estimate of the average percent increase in
S
earnings received by workers per additional year of schooling. It is an estimate of
how wages in an economy vary by education for the year in which the data are
obtained.
The term b1 is also interpreted as the average annual private rate of return
to one additional year of schooling, regardless of the level of schooling already
attained. This interpretation requires a number of assumptions, including the

276   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
Estimates of wage equations tend to find a higher return to schooling for women 
than men.9 This does not mean that women earn more than men; we already noted 
that for a given level of education men, on average, always earn more than women. 
Once again, the higher return indicates that the relative benefit, in terms of earnings, 
of an extra year of schooling is higher for women than men. There is further evidence 
to believe that the social return to educating women may exceed that of men because 
of the positive health and fertility externalities that are generated. This is because 
educating women reduces child mortality more than educating men does; educating 
women reduces fertility and, in so doing, reduces maternal mortality; and educating 
women is more effective than educating men in reducing the spread of HIV/AIDS. 
A 1992 study concluded that providing 1,000 girls in India with an extra year of pri-
mary school would avert 2 maternal deaths, 43 infant deaths, and 300 births. The cost 
of providing this education was about 60 percent of the estimated discounted social 
benefit, suggesting a huge social rate of return on sending girls to school.10 This is 
powerful evidence in support of the MDG of reducing gender disparities in schooling.
SECOND-GENERATION ESTIMATES
The estimates of internal rates of return to education presented in Table 8–3 are 
 subject to some debate. We already pointed out the limitations of using cross- section 
results to approximate a time series event, especially in environments in which labor 
market outcomes are changing rapidly. Another concern is the quality of studies 
included in the Psacharopoulos and Patrinos compilations. One critical review of 
rate-of-return estimates for Africa found many of the original studies were based on 
9In the survey by Psacharopoulos and Patrinos, the average return to a year of schooling for women was 
9.8 percent for women and 8.7 for men. In a different study, Peter Orazem and Elizabeth King use harmo-
nized household data sets from 48 developing countries to estimate wage equations separately for women 
and men. The average return for women was 9.7 percent, for men 6.7 percent. Even more telling than the 
average, out of 71 cases the return was higher for women 59 times and for men only 5 times. “Schooling in 
Developing Countries: The Roles of Supply, Demand and Government Policy,” in T. Paul Schultz and John 
Strauss, eds., Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 4 (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2008).
10Lawrence Summers, “Investing in All the People: Educating Women in Developing Countries,” EDI 
Seminar Paper No. 45 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1994).
same assumption used in the internal rate-of-return calculation: that earnings
differentials by education in a cross-section are a good approximation of what
n
will happen to pay differentials over time as workers age. Another assumption
e
(one not required by the internal rate-of-return approach) requires that foregone
earnings represent the only private cost of schooling. In some instances these
are reasonable assumptions, in others not.

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   277
guesstimates of prevailing wages by consultants rather than on data from surveys. 
Another problem was limiting observations to those workers earning wages—that is, 
to those employed in the formal sector.11 This is especially tricky when many formal 
sector jobs are in the public sector where wage setting may not reflect productivity 
criteria as is more likely in the private sector. Private rates of return to primary educa-
tion for Africa in the Psacharopoulos and Patrinos sample range from 7.9 percent in 
Tanzania in 1991 to 99 percent in Botswana and Liberia in 1983. This large a range 
in estimates strains the creditability of the reported findings. Better data and more 
careful analysis might result in smaller estimates of the average returns to schooling, 
especially for low-income nations.
Another criticism of studies that form the basis of the results reported in 
Table 8–3 is the failure to account for all the school costs facing families. In  Honduras, 
for example, the private return to primary school is estimated at 21 percent, if 
it is assumed that there are no direct costs to the family of attending school and if 
the child is considered to have foregone earnings only during the last two years 
of  primary school, at ages 11 and 12. If the actual direct costs for uniforms, school 
 supplies, transportation, and other parental contributions are included, the private 
returns drop to 16 percent; if foregone earnings are added for age 10, the returns 
drop to below 15 percent.12 These criticisms challenge the magnitude of some of the 
reported rates of return to schooling but generally do not reverse the conclusion that 
schooling has a sufficiently high rate of return to make it a good investment for both 
the individual and society.
An additional criticism concerns the identification problems mentioned earlier 
that plague many of the studies that contributed to the first-generation estimates con-
tained in Table 8–3 and to many of the estimates derived from the wage equations dis-
cussed in Box 8–1. One solution to these identification problems is to identify a natural 
experiment in which a set of circumstances permits the researcher to better isolate the 
effect of an intervention on one group (the treatment group) versus another (the con-
trol group). In a seminal paper, MIT economist Esther Duflo identifies a natural experi-
ment in Indonesia that permits estimation of the return on schooling. Following the 
oil boom of 1973, the Indonesian government undertook a massive construction pro-
gram, resulting in over 60,000 new primary schools. It stands as one of the world’s fast-
est school-building programs ever undertaken. The natural experiment involves the 
subsequent educational attainment and adult wages of those who were 12 to 17 years 
old in 1974 and finished school just before the program began and were therefore not 
impacted by it versus those who were 2 to 6 years old in 1974 and immediately ben-
efited from the new schools. Because the location of the new schools was not random, 
there is another dimension to the natural experiment involving the region where the 
11Paul Bennell, “Rates of Return to Education: Does the Conventional Pattern Prevail in sub-Saharan 
Africa?” World Development 24, no. 1 (January 1996).
12Patrick McEwan, “Private Costs and the Rate-of-Return to Education,” Applied Economic Letters 
6 (1999).

278   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
child lived. Using state-of-the-art econometrics, Duflo is able to identify the expansion 
in the supply of schools as responsible for an increase in the number of years of school-
ing received by the treatment group and the impact of this increase on their earnings 
some 20 years later relative to the control group. She estimates a return on schooling 
ranging from 6.8 to 10.6 percent, results consistent with many earlier estimates.13
Results of other studies that grapple with identification problems reach some-
what different conclusions. In a recent review article, University of Pennsylvania 
economist Jere Behrman draws attention to problems stemming from omitted vari-
ables, including measures of innate cognitive skills, early-life nutrition and school 
quality. Studies that attempt to account for these determinants find that in addition 
to years of schooling, the quality of the school and the ability of the student have a 
significant effect on future earnings. When these variables are included in the regres-
sions, the estimated return on years of schooling declines, sometimes by a significant 
amount.14 Better data and improved econometric techniques are generating refined 
estimates of the return not only to years spent in school but also to other dimen-
sions of schools and attributes of students. While differences in magnitudes remain, 
these newer estimates continue to support the notion that education is a worthwhile 
investment.
PUZZLES
Beyond disagreements about how high the rate of return to schooling is for different 
levels of schooling and for different countries and regions, several puzzles emerge 
about the relationship between these returns and both microeconomic and mac-
roeconomic outcomes. One of the microeconomic puzzles concerns schooling and 
learning. The key issue is why does education have an economic return? The usual 
answer is that education provides the individual with cognitive skills, skills learned 
as distinct from innate ability, which makes him or her more productive in the mar-
ketplace. Higher productivity, in turn, is associated with higher compensation, a 
result that holds if one is discussing farm labor or professionals (Box 8–2). If schools 
produce cognitive skills, then we expect to observe a positive correlation between 
years of schooling and earnings and a positive rate of return on attending school. The 
puzzle involves results reported earlier in the chapter that reveal schooling in many 
developing countries often produces little in the way of learning. If true, why in these 
settings is there a continued association between schooling and earnings and signifi-
cant rates of return to education? One possibility is that schools may have been better 
in the past, accounting for the higher earnings of older workers today. If school qual-
ity is more of a recent problem, it is less likely to show up in the cross-section studies 
13Esther Duflo, “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in Indonesia: 
 Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment,” American Economic Review 91, 4 (September 2001).
14Jere Behrman, “Investment in Education: Inputs and Incentives,” in Dani Rodrik and Mark 
 Rosenzweig, eds., Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 5 (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2010).

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   279
relating schooling to earnings that combine younger and older workers. And if school 
quality is a more contemporary problem, as younger workers age they may not real-
ize as much of a return on their education as did today’s older workers.
BOX 8–2 RETURNS TO SCHOOLING AND INCOME OPPORTUNITIES
In a series of studies, Andrew Foster and Mark Rosenzweig, economists at Brown
and Yale Universities, respectively, examine the interaction between returns to
schooling and technological change in agriculture. Their core argument is that
schooling has a return primarily when new income-generating opportunities arise.
In one study of worker productivity, data were assembled on workers engaged
primarily in harvesting in Bukidnon, the Philippines. Controlling for a worker’s
physical ability, proxied by gender and height, there was no impact of the work-
er’s education on the wage received. In this situation, workers performed a rou-
tine task and little was gained from additional schooling.
A different outcome was observed in India. In a study of over 4,000 rural
households between the years 1968 and 1981, the authors assessed the
impact schooling had on farm profitability. The time period studied covered the
introduction of the green revolution to India, when imported high-yield variety
(HYV) seeds were introduced that could dramatically increase farm output (usu-
ally because it permitted double and even triple cropping during a calendar year).
HYV seeds are particularly sensitive to the use of complementary inputs, includ-
ing irrigation and fertilizer, and it was especially important for farmers to be able
to learn how to use these seeds because the required farming techniques were
different from traditional methods.
In areas where conditions were suitable for the introduction of the HYV,
farmers with primary schooling had higher profits than those without schooling,
holding all other inputs constant. Investments in education had a high return to
these farmers because of increased returns to learning and new information. In
other areas of the country, including the Indian state of Kerala, where farmers
had above average years of schooling, conditions were not suitable for the new
seeds. These farmers got little return because there were no new opportunities
that required education.
Rosenzweig concludes that “schooling returns are high when the returns to
learning are also high.” This can be because of a new technology, like the green
revolution or new opportunities created by changes in market or political regimes.
Not only do those with more schooling reap a return in these situations but
they also tend to invest more heavily in the schooling of their children. School

280   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
One of the macroeconomic puzzles results from trying to reconcile another 
set of empirical observations. Earlier in this chapter, we reported on trends in 
schooling by region. The evidence is clear. There has been rapid growth in school-
ing throughout the world over the past decades, resulting in some convergence in 
years of  schooling per worker across countries. Given the rates of return to educa-
tion reported by  Psacharopoulos and Patrinos and others, such an expansion of 
schooling should have produced more rapid aggregate economic growth in many 
regions and some convergence in incomes. This is expected because schooling has 
grown much more rapidly in developing than developed nations and the returns 
to schooling are higher in low- and middle-income nations than in high-income 
settings. But this is not what the aggregate data show. Instead, there has been con-
siderable divergence in per  capita incomes at the same time there has been some 
convergence in schooling.
Schooling, of course, is not the only determinant of aggregate growth, and other 
factors may be more important in determining growth rates of gross domestic prod-
uct (GDP) per capita. But there remains something disconcerting about the micro 
evidence on the accumulation of schooling and on the attractive rates of return to 
these investments and the subsequent lack of evidence that increased school-
ing results in significantly higher economic growth rates. Exploration of this puzzle 
led one researcher to ask, “Where has all the education gone?” and then to specu-
late that, in environments not conducive to growth, those with more education may 
engage in rent seeking and other unproductive activities that are privately remuner-
ative but “socially dysfunctional.”15 This may be part of the explanation, but a fuller 
reconciliation of micro and macro evidence on schooling outcomes remains a chal-
lenge for future research.
15Excellent discussion of the macroeconomic puzzles involving schooling and economic growth can 
be found in Lant Pritchett, “Where Has All the Education Gone?” World Bank Economic Review 15, no. 3 
(2001) and “Does Learning to Add Up Add Up? The Returns to Schooling in Aggregate Data,” Handbook on 
the Economics of Education (Boston: Elsevier, 2006). A less-technical review of some of these points can 
be found in William Easterly, “Educated for What?” in The Elusive Quest for Growth (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2001).
enrollment rates increased more rapidly in those Indian communities that ben-
efited from the technological change than in those that did not.
Sources: Andrew Foster and Mark Rosenzweig, “Technical Change and Human-Capital Returns
and Investments: Evidence from the Green Revolution,” American Economic Review 86, no. 4 (Sep-
w
tember 1996); Mark Rosenzweig, “Why Are There Returns to Schooling?” American Economic 
Review 85, no. 2 (May 1995).
w

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   281
MAKING SCHOOLING MORE PRODUCTIVE
Despite debate and puzzles over the rate of return to schooling, no one would con-
clude that parents or governments in developing nations should invest less in school-
ing. Schooling has benefits that go well beyond narrow economic returns. It often 
is considered a merit good, a good that a society determines all members should 
have access to regardless of ability or willingness to pay. There is also evidence that 
schooling improves health, with educated mothers having fewer and healthier chil-
dren. The challenge facing policy makers and all those concerned with promoting 
economic development is to understand how to make schooling a better investment: 
better for students and their families who devote so much of their time to education, 
and better for governments and donors who finance much of the direct costs.
Rates of return on schooling depend on what happens both in schools and in the 
labor market after students graduate. Much of this textbook is devoted to the latter, 
to understanding how to increase the rate of economic growth in an economy and 
with it an increase in the demand for labor. We will not go over these elements again 
here. But it is worth noting that low returns to education often have a lot to do with 
failures to increase the demand for labor. High unemployment among school leav-
ers, including graduates of universities, often reflects failures in promoting economic 
growth rather than failures in schools. This has been true in transition economies but 
also is apparent in countries such as Argentina and Egypt, which have not made good 
use of the human capital they accumulated. High dropout rates, as well as low and 
even declining school enrollment rates (the latter occurred throughout sub-Saharan 
Africa during the 1990s), may have as much to do with low returns in the labor mar-
ket as with a family’s resource constraints or problems with the schools themselves. 
Students and their families may decide that the benefits of schooling do not justify 
the costs. And in many instances they may be right. The provision of schooling is 
no guarantee that getting an education will yield a high return. Problems with labor 
demand highlight that schooling is not a panacea; it is not the one solution to prob-
lems of poverty and economic backwardness.
But problems on the demand side do not imply that the supply of education is 
without flaws. The remainder of this chapter focuses on the supply of education in an 
attempt to understand how investments in schooling can be made more productive. 
In many countries schooling is not doing as much as it can to promote development. 
Some of the reasons for this are that there is underinvestment in schooling overall, 
that governments misallocate resources across different levels of schooling, and that 
there are systematic inefficiencies in the use of resources within schools.16
16Two early reviews of resource use and schooling are World Bank, Financing Education in Developing 
Countries (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1986) and Priorities and Strategies for Education (Washington, 
DC: World Bank, 1995). Recent surveys of improving school outcomes in developing nations are Glewwe 
and Kremer, “Schools, Teachers, and Education Outcomes” and Pritchett, “Access to Education.”

282   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
UNDERINVESTMENT
Despite attractive economic returns and other benefits to schooling, many devel-
oping countries spend too little on educating their children. Determining the right 
amount that should be spent is no simple matter. First, estimates of rates of return are 
imprecise at best; second, spending more money on schooling is no guarantee that 
the money will be well spent and produce better education outcomes. But money 
does matter, and cross-country data reveal considerable variance in public spending 
on schooling (comparable data on private spending are not available). In Figure 8–7, 
among low- and lower-middle-income nations, the range in public expenditures on 
education as a share of GDP is from about 1.5 to over 12 percent. We cannot be sure 
that the average spending share within these income groups is the “right” amount, 
especially because we do not know the corresponding amount of private spending. 
But nations such as Cambodia, Chad, and Zambia, where public spending on school-
ing is under 2 percent of GDP (well below the 3.6 percent median of the low-income 
group) stand as candidates for increasing the amount their governments spend on 
education. Similarly, Angola, Georgia, and Peru devote well below the lower-middle-
income median of 4.3 percent of GDP to schooling and may be seriously underin-
vesting in education. To the extent that any of these and other countries also have 
a high dependency burden of young people, they especially need to devote a larger 
share of GDP to schooling because those expenditures must be spread among a large 
number of students.
There are many explanations for why nations may underinvest in schooling. 
One is as a response to fiscal crises. Education and the social sectors in general, as 
opposed to the military or debt service, often are victims of budget cuts. Economic 
downturns and negative growth rates have impacts on education spending and can 
result in an entire cohort of children getting less schooling than would have been the 
case in a more stable economy. Protecting schooling and the other social sectors is a 
major challenge nations face whenever government revenues start to fall.
MISALLOCATION
Misallocation of resources between different levels of schooling refers to government 
decisions on how much to spend on primary, secondary, and tertiary levels. The esti-
mates of rates of return to schooling in Table 8–3 indicate that the social returns are 
highest for primary school followed by secondary then tertiary schooling. Given the 
construction of these estimates, the results are not surprising. The direct costs of ter-
tiary schooling (everything from junior colleges through doctoral programs) per stu-
dent, including expenditures on computers, laboratories, libraries, professors, and 
the like, are much higher than the per student costs of either primary or secondary 
education. Because the government often pays for all or most of these costs, social 
returns to higher education are going to be significantly less than are private returns. 

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   283
Median level
of spending
3.6%
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Public spending on education (percent of GDP)
Public spending on education (percent of GDP)
Median level
of spending
4.3%
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Congo
Georgia
Dominican Republic
Peru
Azerbaijan
Philippines
Angola
Armenia
El Salvador
India
Guatemala
Indonesia
Egypt
Colombia
Cameroon
Thailand
Ukraine
Mongolia
Iran
Cape Verde
Morocco
Bhutan
Guyana
Tunisia
Swaziland
Maldives
Moldova
Djibouti
Lesotho
(a)
(b)
CAR
Cambodia
Zambia
Chad
Eritrea
Pakistan
Mauritania
Madagascar
Niger
Tajikistan
Sierra Leone
Burkina Faso
Benin
Senegal
Mali
Rwanda
Burundi
Mozambique
Kyrgyzstan
Ghana
Ethiopia
Kenya
Bangaladesh
Guniea
Lao
Togo
FIGURE 8–7 Public Spending on Education, 2005–07
(a) Lower-income economies. (b) Lower-middle-income economies.
GDP, gross domestic product.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators Online,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

284   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
This, in turn, suggests that governments should initially allocate more resources to 
primary schools. Once universal primary education is achieved, more resources 
should be devoted to secondary schools. According to this logic, tertiary education 
should have the lowest priority.17
Such conclusions encounter much opposition. First, the estimates in Table 8–3 
do not take account of any (difficult to measure) positive externalities associated with 
different levels of education. If a nation has a chronic shortage of trained profession-
als in agronomy, engineering, finance, medicine, and other fields, developing such 
skills may yield a large social return.18 Second, the argument that more resources 
should be devoted to lower rather than higher levels of schooling is reminiscent of 
the colonial era, when education of native populations was suppressed, leaving many 
nations with a minuscule number of educated citizens at the time of independence. 
Rich nations did not wait to achieve universal primary education before expanding 
their universities; why should poor nations?
While there is a legitimate debate over whether scarce resources should be 
allocated to one level of schooling versus another, evidence on the potential mis-
allocation of public resources among different levels of schooling is suggested 
by comparing enrollment rates and expenditure patterns on tertiary education. 
Among sub-Saharan African countries for which the relevant data are available, 
the gross enrollment rate for tertiary education is 5.3 percent, while the median 
share of total government education expenditures devoted to the tertiary sector is 
16 percent. In Latin America, tertiary enrollment rates are almost six times  bigger, 
but the expenditure share is the same as in sub-Saharan Africa. In the high-income 
economies, the gross enrollment rate is over 60 percent, but the median public 
expenditure share is only 24 percent. United Nations Educational, Scientific, and 
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) computes a related and telling statistic: public 
expenditures per tertiary student as a percentage of gross national income (GNI) 
per capita. In 2007 this ratio was 206 percent in Senegal, 39 percent in Mexico, and 
30 percent in France.
Gaps between enrollments and expenditures suggest that a closer look needs 
to be given to how the money is being spent. Much higher expenditures per stu-
dent enrolled in tertiary institutions in some countries stem from generous allow-
ances given to those enrolled in university; in essence, paying students to obtain 
17The theoretical rule that governments should follow is really more subtle. Governments should allo-
cate resources to equate the marginal rate of return on its investment. Internal rates of return refer to aver-
age returns (the average for all graduates of primary, secondary, or tertiary schooling) not the marginal 
return, which refers to the economic rate of return for the last student educated. When a particular level of 
schooling gets close to universal enrollment and completion, it is likely that the marginal social return will 
be below the average return, perhaps, well below it.
18Arguments in favor of for devoting more resources to higher education in developing nations is pre-
sented in World Bank, Higher Education in Developing Countries: Perils and Promise (Washington, DC: 
World Bank, 2000).

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   285
an education that is likely to yield them considerably higher earnings in the future. 
 Noneducational expenditures in the form of student allowances and  scholarships as 
well as subsidized housing, healthcare, loans, and so on, accounted for 50  percent 
of public expenditures on tertiary education among Francophone African  countries, 
20 percent in Latin America, and only 14 percent in OECD countries. Such allow-
ances are often given in addition to free tuition.19 With growing numbers of tertiary 
school students, such expenditures add further stress to tight education budgets. 
Given the tendency for those of higher socioeconomic status to have the  opportunity 
to attend tertiary school, allowances and free tuition are also regressive uses of 
 public money. A review of enrollment in public and private tertiary schools in Latin 
America found that 75 percent of the students in Colombia were from the top two 
quintiles of the income distribution; in Mexico, it was 83 percent, and in Brazil, 
92 percent.20 Many of these families have resources that could be devoted to higher 
education. When the state finances so much of the education of their sons and 
daughters, the outcome is a regressive one.
One approach to correcting the misallocation of resources across schooling lev-
els is to have university students pay for some of their education. This can be justified 
because higher education is likely to have a high private rate of return, even if the 
student pays (including by taking out loans) for some of his or her education. The use 
of tuition reduces public contributions and permits some shifting of state spending 
from tertiary to primary and secondary schooling. The economic logic of charging 
students, especially those with the ability to pay, for some of the cost of their tertiary 
schooling may be clear, but instituting such fees may be far from straightforward. In 
Mexico, the constitution calls for free public education at all levels. Confronted with 
rising numbers of university students and the rising costs of providing that educa-
tion, the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) in 1999 decided to 
raise student fees from the level last set in 1948. By 1999, these fees, adjusted for price 
inflation, amounted to only 2 cents ($US) per year. The administration of UNAM 
proposed new fees of about $150 for those with the economic means to cover these 
costs. Such fees would have offset less than 10 percent of the government’s expendi-
tures on the university. In response to the proposal, many of the school’s 270,000 stu-
dents went on strike and the school remained closed for almost a full year. In the end, 
the school modified its proposal, making the $150 fee voluntary, and the university’s 
president resigned. Despite the economic logic behind the user fees on the grounds 
of both economic efficiency and social equity, the politics surrounding the proposal 
made it unworkable.
19World Bank, Constructing Knowledge Societies: New Challenges for Tertiary Education (Washington, 
DC: World Bank, 2002), pp. 51–52.
20World Bank, Constructing Knowledge Societies, p. 195.

286   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
IMPROVING SCHOOLS
In addition to spending more on schooling overall and reallocating some expendi-
tures between levels, the use of resources within schools needs to be improved. Par-
ents complain about schools in almost every community in the world, from suburban 
Boston to rural India. Some of these complaints are the same, “My child is not getting 
enough attention” or “My child is not learning enough.” But some are quite differ-
ent, “Why are teachers absent so much of the time?” or “Why are there no books for 
students to read?” In some instances the solutions to these problems require more 
financial resources; in others, they require spending available resources better; and 
in still others, the problems are less about resources than about holding teachers and 
principals more accountable for their actions.
Inefficient use of resources and lack of accountability within schools are not 
new issues. But recent research has given new insight into these long-standing 
concerns. Especially important have been the use of randomized controlled 
 trials (RCTs), also referred to as randomized evaluations. Research organiza-
tions like the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) at MIT are pioneering 
the use of experiments in the field to learn more about what works in schooling, 
health, microcredit, and other areas. Unlike the natural experiments discussed 
earlier, RCTs are actual experiments that researchers design to determine if a par-
ticular intervention shows promise. Similar to natural experiments and to stud-
ies in medicine, one group receives a treatment and outcomes are compared to a 
control group that does not receive a treatment. Experimental design focuses on 
making sure the treatment and control groups, whether individuals, households, 
or entire villages, are the same in order to isolate the impact of the treatment on 
later outcomes.
A well-designed RCT can help resolve problems of causality that confront 
other types of analysis. In a conventional cross-section regression analysis of 
reading and mathematic achievement in Ghanaian middle schools, one of the 
most statistically significant variables in raising student test scores was repair-
ing leaking roofs. Maybe this was because by repairing the leaks, school remained 
open and students attended school more often, which led to greater learning. 
Or maybe the underlying relationship was that more motivated teachers, princi-
pals, and parents were more likely to keep the building in good order. If the latter 
explains the statistical finding, then a nationwide initiative to repair leaky school 
roofs would not yield the hoped-for improvement in children’s learning.21 An RCT 
that experimented, for example, with building maintenance might resolve this 
question. Insights obtained from RCTs and other types of research offer sugges-
tions on how to improve the participation and retention of students as well as 
how to enhance student learning.
21Glewwe and Kremer, “Schools, Teachers, and Education Outcomes.”

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   287
REDUCING THE COSTS OF GOING TO SCHOOL
Earlier we noted that the MDG of achieving universal primary education by 2015 is 
not likely to be met. Data on grade survival rates suggest that 20 percent of children 
in low-income nations do not complete even four years of schooling. One reason why 
children may not be in school is because there is no conveniently located school to 
attend. This certainly can be a problem in remote regions, and many children con-
tinue to travel long distances to get to school. However, research findings suggest lack 
of attendance is much more often a problem of household demand than of school 
supply.22
On the demand side, households may not send their children to school, includ-
ing primary school, because poor families cannot afford the fees required for school 
attendance. These can be user charges to attend school or fees to pay for textbooks or 
mandatory school uniforms. A school uniform in Kenya costs $6, a nontrivial amount 
in a nation where one fifth of the population lives below the $1.25-a-day poverty line. 
Starting in the late 1990s, governments in several East African nations (including 
Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia) eliminated all user fees for primary schools; 
in some cases, school uniforms were no longer compulsory. Governments subse-
quently reported substantial increases in enrollment.
It is not surprising that eliminating school fees would lead to an increase in 
enrollment, but it comes at a cost. Many families previously had paid the fees and 
sent their children to school. By eliminating fees, the government lost much-
needed revenue to pay for teachers and other school needs. Financing schooling 
now requires new revenues or reallocating funds from some other use. The critical 
economic question is whether reducing school fees represents an efficient use of 
resources. Michael Kremer, a development economist at Harvard University and a 
leading proponent of the use of RCTs and other experimental approaches, evaluated 
one program in Kenya where 7 out of 14 poorly performing schools were randomly 
selected. The treatment schools provided free uniforms and textbooks to their stu-
dents, paid for by a Dutch NGO, and also received improved classrooms. Dropout 
rates fell considerably, and many students from nearby schools transferred into the 
treatment group, raising class size by 50 percent. Kremer and his co-authors con-
cluded that the financial benefit of free uniforms was a significant factor in improving 
school attendance. (By keeping girls in school longer, free uniforms were also associ-
ated with a more than 10 percent reduction in teen childbearing.) The researchers 
concluded that, because parents accepted larger class sizes in return for these ben-
efits, the government could have reallocated education spending, trading off larger 
classes for lower fees, and thereby increasing school completion rates.23
Another approach to increasing enrollments and school retention is to design 
means-tested and targeted programs in which families are paid to send their children 
22Pritchett, “Access to Education.”
23Glewwe and Kremer, “Schools, Teachers, and Education Outcomes.”

288   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
to school. Several countries have adopted this approach, referred to as conditional 
cash transfers (CCTs). Bolsa Familia (family allowance) in Brazil and Oportuni-
dades in Mexico provide modest stipends to millions of poor families as long as 
their children remain in school. Both have been associated with gains in enroll-
ment and retention (Box 8–3). So has a program in Cambodia financed by the Japan 
Fund for Poverty Reduction. The 45 neediest girls in each of 93 participating schools 
were awarded a $45 scholarship, a large sum in this low-income nation, as long as 
the student enrolled in school, maintained a passing grade, and had a good record 
of attendance. Evaluation of the program reports large increases in desired outcome 
measures. The Food for Schooling program in Bangladesh provides a free monthly 
ration of wheat or other grains to eligible families, where eligibility is means tested. 
To qualify, households must own less than half an acre of land and the household 
head must be a woman, a day laborer, or work in a very low-wage activity. The fam-
ily can consume the grain or sell it and use the cash for other expenses. To maintain 
eligibility, children must attend 85 percent of classes each month. The program has 
been successful in increasing primary school enrollment, promoting school atten-
dance, and reducing dropout rates, especially among girls.
BOX 8–3  MEXICO’S PROGRAMA DE EDUCACIÓN, SALUD Y
ALIMENTACIÓN (PROGRESA)/OPORTUNIDADES
When Ernesto Zedillo became Mexico’s president in 1995, a fifth of the popula-
tion could not afford the minimum daily nutritional requirements, 10 million Mexi-
cans lacked access to basic health services, more than 1.5 million children were
out of school, and student absenteeism and school desertions were three times 
higher in poor and remote areas than in the rest of the country. His administra-
tion decided that a new approach to poverty alleviation was needed. The Educa-
tion, Health, and Nutrition Programs of Mexico, called PROGRESA, introduced a 
set of conditional cash transfers to poor families—the families would receive cash
s
if their children were enrolled in school and if family members visited health clin-
ics for checkups and nutritional and hygiene information.
The program was intended to remedy several shortcomings of earlier pro-
grams. First, it would counter the bias in poor families toward consumption by
bolstering investment in human capital. Second, it would recognize the inter-
dependencies among education, health, and nutrition. Third, it would link cash
transfers to household behavior, aiming at changing attitudes. Fourth, to reduce
political interference, the program’s goals, rules, requirements, and evaluation
methods would be widely publicized.

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   289
CCTs like the ones just described all have multiple aims and can be seen as 
part of a package to alleviate poverty. If such transfers of cash or grain were going 
to be made on poverty grounds alone, then making them conditional on sending 
children to school makes the education component highly cost-effective. If they 
are intended primarily as interventions to expand enrollment and school retention, 
Children over the age of seven were eligible for education transfers.  Benefits 
increased by grade (because the opportunity costs of being in school increase
with age) and were higher for girls in middle school, to  encourage their enrollment. 
To retain the benefits, children needed to maintain an 85 percent attendance
record and could not repeat a grade more than once.  Transfers went to mothers, 
who were thought to be more responsible for caring for children. In 1999, the
average monthly transfer was around $24 per family, nearly 20 percent of mean
household consumption before the program, with benefits available for up to three
years.
By the end of 2002, the program had about 21 million beneficiaries, roughly
a fifth of the Mexican population. Almost 60 percent of program transfers went
to households in the poorest 20 percent of the national income distribution and
more than 80 percent went to the poorest 40 percent.
School enrollment of participating households rose, especially in middle school
and more so for girls than boys. Much of the increase came from increases in
the transition from primary to middle school. The program worked principally by
keeping children in school, not by encouraging those who had dropped out to
return. Grade repetition decreased among participating families even for children
in grades one and two who were not eligible for program benefits. Perhaps, this 
was because household income was higher or because older siblings were now
spending more time in school. The impact of the program on learning is less 
clear. Teachers reported improvements, attributing them to better attendance, 
student interest, and nutrition. But a study conducted one year after the pro-
gram started found no difference in test scores. Follow-up studies on longer-
term effects are planned.
In 2001 and under a new Mexican president, PROGRESA was renamed,
Oportunidades. The success of the program is reflected not only in schooling and
s
health outcome measures but in its ability to survive changes in political leader-
ship. It also has become a model for similar programs throughout Latin America
and the rest of the world.
Source: Adapted from World Bank, “Spotlight on PROGRESA,” 2004 World Development Report, 
“Making Services Work for Poor People” (Washington, DC: World Bank and Oxford University Press,
2004), 30–31. (World Bank, 2009).

290   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
cost- effectiveness depends, in part, on how carefully the targeting is done. If eligibility 
is too broad, recipients will include families that already were sending their children 
to school and the cash or food expenditures will yield no marginal improvements 
in schooling for these households. Despite such concerns over cost-effectiveness, 
the success of CCTs such as Bolsa Familia and Oportunidades in raising school 
enrollments has resulted in their adoption in dozens of nations.
INEFFICIENT USE OF RESOURCES
Improving the efficient use of resources within schools also involves making deci-
sions about spending. Should scarce resources be allocated to buildings or teach-
ers, to teachers or school supplies (blackboards, desks, textbooks, etc.), or to any of 
a number of other alternatives? The problems that schools in poor nations face can 
be overwhelming. There usually are shortages of everything. There are too few text-
books and sometimes there are none. Roofs leak, and many students are crammed 
around simple desks if there are desks at all. Teachers often are untrained and chil-
dren often too sick to learn effectively. Deciding on how to allocate resources in such 
environments is not easy.
In the 1980s, some of the debate over resource allocation within schools con-
cerned building schools versus expenditures on recurrent costs to run schools. 
These recurrent costs included teacher and administrative salaries as well as non-
wage expenditures on school supplies and equipment. Donors, who often financed 
much of the spending on schools, especially in low-income nations, had a preference 
for constructing new school buildings. The donors could point to the tangible prod-
uct of their aid, something constituents back home might want to see. Donors also 
expected a partnership with those governments who received aid and assumed that 
governments would cover the recurrent costs. The result of these arrangements often 
was the construction of schools, often at higher standards than necessary and some-
times requiring imported building materials, met by an underfunding of recurrent 
costs. Schools without teachers or classrooms without chalk or writing paper often 
resulted.
By the 1990s, the approach had changed. Concern over the quantity and avail-
ability of schools diminished, and increasing attention was paid to improving the 
quality of schools. Resources were redirected toward recurrent expenditures, espe-
cially nonwage items. But this approach also proved wanting; improvements in 
learning outcomes remained elusive.
One cost-effective intervention for increasing school attendance (in addition to 
lowering fees) is not an educational input; it is biannual dosages of albendazole or 
praziquantel, two medications used to reduce intestinal worms such as hookworms 
or schistosomes. Such intestinal worms affect a quarter of the world’s population 
and are especially common among children. Severe infections can cause anemia, 

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   291
protein-energy malnutrition and other health problems. On the basis of an RCT, 
students in some schools in rural Kenya, where worm infestation was particularly 
severe, received treatments and others did not. Researchers found that school absen-
teeism decreased by 25 percent in treatment versus control schools. Some children 
who previously were weak or listless were able to attend school because of the drugs; 
in other cases, deworming improved concentration and may have made attend-
ing more worthwhile. Beyond their effect on school attendance, these drugs also 
improved health outcomes.
Deworming proved highly cost-effective because the treatment cost is low, about 
$0.50 per child per year. Deworming increased school attendance by an average of 
0.15 year per pupil or $3.50 per an additional full year of school participation. By 
comparison, school uniforms cost $6 per child. Because provision of school uniforms 
increased school attendance at a somewhat lower rate than deworming, the school 
uniform program was less cost-effective at $99 per additional year of school partici-
pation. Even though deworming was associated with improved school attendance 
and was cost-effective in doing so, there was no discernible improvement in learning 
as measured by student test scores at the time of treatment.24
New findings from the original deworming RCT reveal its long-term benefits. 
A follow-up study conducted in 2007–09 located a large percentage of the origi-
nal Kenyan school children, some 6 to 11 years after the experiment began. By then 
their median age was 22 years. Comparing those who attended schools where the 
treatment was provided with those where it was not reveals significant differences. 
Deworming is associated with more subsequent years enrolled in school, better 
self-reported adult health, more hours spent working, higher earnings among those 
employed in wage-paying jobs, and improvements in adult food consumption.25 Con-
sistent with a growing literature, these investments in the childhood years had signif-
icant pay-offs when these children reach adulthood because of improved childhood 
health and schooling.
More traditional school input issues involve reducing class size, increasing the 
availability of textbooks and other instructional materials, and improving teacher 
training. Appropriate class size is a matter of debate in school systems throughout 
the world, in rich and poor nations alike. The basic argument is straightforward. In 
smaller classes, teachers can provide more attention, even individualized work, 
for each student. Running a 25-pupil class of 7-year-olds (let alone 13-year-olds) is 
daunting enough, but what must it be like to teach a class two, three, or more times 
as large?
24Edward Miguel and Michael Kremer, “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in the 
Presence of Treatment Externalities,” Econometrica 72, no. 1 (2004).
25Michael Kremer, Sarah Baird, Joan Hamory Hicks, and Edward Miguel, “Worms at Work: Long-Run 
Impacts of Child Health Gains” (May 2011), www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/kremer/files/KLPS-
Labor_2011-05-13-Circulate-B-No-IRR.pdf.

292   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
Eric Hanushek, a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution and a leading expert on 
the economics of education in the United States, surveyed almost 100 studies on the 
determinants of student test scores in developing countries. Of the 30 studies that 
looked at class size, 8 found a statistically significant positive effect (the fewer stu-
dents per teacher, the better students performed); 8 found a statistically significant 
negative effect (the fewer students per teacher, the worse students performed); and 
14 found no significant effect at all.26 We need to be careful interpreting these find-
ings. They do not suggest that class size never matters; the results say only that there 
is no evidence of a robust and significant correlation (let alone causation) between 
class size and student performance.27 In some instances, reducing class sizes is war-
ranted; in others, the extra expenditure on teachers and additional classrooms yields 
no return. Without being able even to identify a simple correlation between reduced 
class size and student achievement, it is that much harder to move to the question of 
cost-effectiveness or economic efficiency of allocating scarce resources so that out-
comes per dollar are equalized across alternative inputs.
The failure to easily identify strategies to improve student outcomes is not 
restricted to studies of student–teacher ratios. Studies of teacher training or text-
book use yield a similar range of outcomes. According to the survey by economists 
Paul Glewwe and Michael Kremer, the introduction of textbooks in Jamaican pri-
mary schools improved reading scores, while in the Philippines the impact of text-
books was “unstable,” including positive and negative effects on the mathematics 
and reading scores of first graders. An RCT in rural Kenya found no evidence that 
provision of textbooks improved scores for the average student. However, Kenyan 
students who were above average before textbooks were provided realized improve-
ments. This may be because textbooks provided by the government were in English, 
often the second or even third language of many local children, and only the most 
able students had sufficient English language skills to benefit from the textbooks they 
received. What the textbook studies suggest is that the central problem may not be an 
absence of learning materials but systemic problems in the education system. Text-
books that help only the best students highlight problems with a centralized national 
26Eric Hanushek, “Interpreting Recent Research on Schooling in Developing Countries,” World Bank 
Research Observer 10, no. 2 (1995). In an earlier study, Hanushek reached the same conclusion about the 
impact of class size on student performance in the United States (“The Economics of Schooling: Produc-
tion and Efficiency in Public Schools,” Journal of Economic Literature 24 [1986]).
27One of the difficulties of identifying the impact of class size on student learning is the problem of 
endogeneity. Class size may not be determined independently of other determinants of student perfor-
mance. For example, if school administrators decide to keep class sizes small for students who are dis-
ruptive or have difficulty learning in the hope that teachers can manage such classes better if they have 
fewer students, then class size will be inversely correlated with student performance but not a cause of 
low performance. Similarly, if better-educated and higher-income communities effectively lobby for more 
teachers and smaller classes, class size will be positively correlated with better student performance even 
though better performance may mostly be due to having students with better-educated parents enrolled in 
smaller classes. Once again the causal effect of class size on performance would be hard to identify.

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   293
curriculum oriented to educating the children of the politically influential elite and 
failing to recognize the heterogeneity among students.
Most schools in developing nations can do better, and RCTs are providing useful 
insights, including the benefits of some technology-assisted approaches and linking 
teacher pay to student test scores.28 One single intervention, however, will not work 
all the time. Local conditions make a difference, such as the accountability of teach-
ers, principals, and other school officials.
IT IS ABOUT MORE THAN THE MONEY
If there has been a trend in thinking about education and development, it has gone 
from concern primarily over increasing the quantity of schooling, achieved by build-
ing more schools, hiring more teachers, and most recently, reducing the cost of 
attending to improving the quality of schools by improving the amounts and mix of 
inputs within schools themselves. Both these approaches have had some measure 
of success, with the huge increases in enrollments (discussed earlier) and success in 
learning outcomes, at least in some settings, due to different or better use of school 
inputs. But widespread and persistently low student achievement has resulted in a 
call not only for more money but also for reform of school systems. School reform 
and more resources need not be substitutes. Both may be required to realize better 
outcomes, but more money without school reforms will be insufficient to achieve 
these ends. Calls for school reforms echo those for institutional reforms in other 
areas of government. Improvements in governance are needed not only to improve 
the climate for private enterprises and encourage investment in physical capital but 
to improve investment in human capital.
One critical area of school reforms is to better motivate teachers, many of whom 
fail to show up for work and to engage in teaching when they do. With weak incen-
tives, teacher motivation often is low. The need for improved accountability among 
teachers is starkly demonstrated by a nationwide study of teacher absence in India.29 
Researchers made three unannounced visits to 3,700 Indian primary schools. The 
presence or absence of teachers assigned to each school was determined by direct 
physical verification—that is, by a member of the research project looking for the 
teacher in the school building and not by checking logbooks or other records. On 
average, one in four primary school teachers was absent on the day of a visit. And 
only 45 percent (less than half) of primary school teachers were actively engaged in 
teaching their students at the time of the visit. Some percentage of these absences 
28The use of RCTs has increased dramatically in recent years. J-PAL records many of the latest findings 
on its website at www.povertyactionlab.org/. Also, see Michael Kremer and Alaka Holla, “Improving Edu-
cation in the Developing World: What Have We Learned from Randomized Evaluations?” Annual Review 
of Economics 1 (September 2009).
29Michael Kremer et al., “Teacher Absence in India: A Snapshot,” Journal of the European Economic 
Association 3, nos. 2–3 (April–May 2005).

294   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
and involvement in nonteaching matters was due to excused absences for health or 
other reasons or performing required administrative or other duties. But even after 
correcting for these factors the degree of absence remains high.
The authors of the India study looked at the correlates of teacher absence and 
did not find that relatively higher pay or more education among teachers reduces 
absences. Stronger ties to the local community do not seem to play much of a role 
either. Schools with better infrastructure (for example, with electricity or staff toi-
lets), more frequent inspections, and closer proximity to roads have somewhat low-
ered absenteeism, but the overwhelming conclusion is that getting more teachers to 
do their jobs is a significant challenge. The research includes similar investigations 
in other countries. While India’s teacher absence rate is on the high end (Uganda is 
higher at 27 percent), rates of 14 percent in Peru, 15 percent in Papua New Guinea, and 
19  percent in Indonesia are not encouraging. Discussions of appropriate curriculums, 
better teaching methods, or more school resources almost seem secondary if so many 
teachers are not minimally engaged in the daily routines of educating their pupils. In 
explaining why teacher absence is so high, Michael Kremer and his co-authors note 
that teachers face little risk of being fired. They found that only one head teacher 
(school principal) in nearly 3,000 primary schools in India had ever dismissed a 
teacher for repeated absences. (An innovative solution to reducing teacher absence 
in some schools in India is discussed in Box 8–4.) The absence of repercussions is one 
explanation for high absence rates but the problem of accountability runs far deeper.
BOX 8–4 COMBATING TEACHER ABSENCE
When a student misses a class his or her learning suffers; when the teacher is absent 
the whole class suffers. Or does it? In an attempt to reduce teacher absence and
assess its impact, Esther Duflo and colleagues collaborated with an Indian nongover-
ment organization (NGO), Seva Mandir, on an innovative policy experiment.
Seva Mandir runs single-teacher primary schools in tribal villages in a sparsely
populated and remote rural area. Tens of millions of Indian children attend 
schools like these. Their goal is to teach basic skills to prepare students for the 
regular government-run school system. Teachers are employed by the NGO on 
flexible contracts and are not civil servants, as are most Indian schoolteachers. 
This made it easier to implement a program that provided monetary incentives to 
reduce teacher absences. Because of their remote location, it is difficult to moni-
tor such schools. Teacher absence was at the alarming rate of 44 percent. This
was despite Seva Mandir’s threat to dismiss teachers with too many absences,
although that threat rarely was carried out.

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   295
Seva Mandir selected 120 of its schools to participate in a randomized con-
trol trial (RCT). These one-room schools usually have about 20 students and
run a six-hour school day. The teacher is drawn from the local community
and has about 10 years of education. There is only one teacher per school,
and when the teacher is absent the school is closed. Half of the schools,
the treatment group, were given a camera with a tamper-proof date and time
function. Each day, teachers were instructed to have a child in the school take
a picture of the teacher and the other children at the beginning and end of
the school day. A valid school day was defined as one in which at least five hours
y
elapsed between the two pictures and when at least eight students were pres-
ent in each picture. Teacher pay was a function of the number of valid days they
worked based on the photographs submitted. The nontreatment group was paid
their regular monthly salary. They continued to be told that they could be dis-
missed for poor performance, including too many unexcused absences. There
was one unannounced visit to control schools each month. Average salaries
ended up almost identical in the two groups.
Over an 18-month period, the absence rate in the treatment schools fell
by half, to 22 percent. The use of cameras to monitor teacher presence
completely eliminated extremely delinquent behavior—absences of over 50
percent. It also increased the number of teachers with perfect or very high
attendance from under 1 percent in the control group to 36 percent in the
treatment group.
Did students learn more? The incentives built into the program encour-
aged teachers only to be present. It did not reward spending more time
teaching or improving student performance, the true goal of the intervention.
Based on observations during the unannounced visits, teachers in treatment
and control groups were equally likely to be engaged in teaching. Because
the treatment group was present far more often, more teaching was taking
place, equivalent to almost 3 days per month. After one year, this resulted
in a 0.17 standard deviation increase in children’s test scores in basic Hindi
and math skills, and a significantly higher matriculation rate of children in
the treatment group to government schools. These benefits were highly cost-
effective. Outside of salaries, which were the same in the two groups, all
other costs, including cameras, film, and administrative expenses, amounted
to roughly $6 per child or to $3.58 per 0.10 increase in the standard devia-
tion in test scores.
Seva Mandir continued to monitor attendance with cameras long after the
RCT ended and improved attendance has been maintained. The effects appear
to be long lasting. The success of this monitoring system, however, may not be
applicable to government schools in India, in part, because of resistance from

296   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
Teacher absence or, for that matter, the absence of health workers or any number 
of other government workers is not the only example of the breakdown in account-
ability that compromises the delivery of public services in low- and middle-income- 
nations.30 In another often-cited study, researchers followed the money allocated by 
Uganda’s national government for local primary schools.31 Despite the government 
authorizing 20 percent of public expenditures to education, most of it to primary edu-
cation, a program to finance nonwage expenditures rarely resulted in money reaching 
the schools it was intended for. Over the period 1991–95, an average of only 13 percent 
of such grants actually reached the schools; almost three-quarters of the 250 primary 
schools surveyed in the study received less than 5 percent of what had been autho-
rized. Local officials and politicians captured much of the money along the way.
The identification of the massive leakage of funds in Uganda led to a number of 
institutional improvements. The central government responded by launching an infor-
mation campaign, where the amounts of centrally disbursed grants were reported in 
newspapers. Primary schools were also required to post notices of grants actually 
received. Local parent teacher associations (PTAs), which are very powerful in the 
Ugandan school system, thus were made aware of grants due their schools and could 
monitor outcomes. By reducing information asymmetries, it was possible to hold local 
officials more accountable. The information campaign, coupled with more attention 
from central government officials (including stiff penalties against offenders), increased 
the receipt of funds by schools from 20 percent in 1995 to 80 percent in 2001.32
The Ugandan example ultimately relied on local or community control as a 
means of increasing accountability, this time of local officials who received funds 
teacher unions. But the potential of incentive schemes that reward teacher per-
formance remains.
Source: Esther Duo, Rema Hanna, and Stephen P. Ryan, “Incentives Work: Getting Teachers to
Come to School,” American Economic Review (forthcoming).
w
30The problem of improving service delivery by the public sector is the focus of the 2004 World Develop-
ment Report, Making Services Work for Poor People (Washington, DC: World Bank and Oxford University 
Press, 2004). Specific chapters are devoted to basic education, health and nutrition, and drinking water, 
sanitation, and electricity.
31Ritva Reinikka and Jakob Svensson, “Local Capture: Evidence from a Central Government Transfer 
Program in Uganda,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, no. 2 (May 2004).
32Ritva Reinikka and Jakob Svensson, “The Power of Information: Evidence from a Newspaper Cam-
paign to Reduce Capture,” Policy Research Paper 3239 (Washington, DC, World Bank, March 2004). See also 
Paul Hubbard, “Putting the Power of Transparency in Context: Information’s Role in Reducing Corruption 
in Uganda’s Education Sector,” Working Paper Number 136 (Washington, DC, Center for Global Develop-
ment, December 2007), which argues that the improved flow of resources to intended beneficiaries was 
the product of many reforms in government practice, including but not solely the result of more transpar-
ent information.

E D U C AT I O N  A S  A N  I N V E S T M E NT   297
from the central government. Expanding local control, often through decentral-
ization of authority over schools, is one of several reform strategies to hold all 
providers—officials who control funds as well teachers and principals—more 
accountable. The Educo program (Educación con Participación de la Comunidad) 
in El Salvador provides another example of this approach.
A prolonged civil war in the 1980s left the Salvadorian school system in a woe-
ful state. One-third of the country’s primary schools were closed, and in many 
regions, traditional government schools, and their teachers, were viewed with dis-
trust by local people who may have been fighting against the government. During 
the war, some communities had recruited local teachers and established commu-
nity schools in place of government-run ones. Seizing on this model, the govern-
ment decided to incorporate community schools into the national system and 
encourage new ones to open. These popular schools enter into one-year renew-
able agreements with the ministry of education. The local schools are run by par-
ent groups, which receive grants from the government, hire teachers on renewable 
contracts, and determine the salaries and other terms of these contracts. Turn-
over rates are high; teachers who are frequently absent or perform poorly are dis-
missed. Parents visit schools more often and are more involved than in traditional 
schools. The results of these arrangements are encouraging. Educo reached far into 
the countryside. Rural primary school enrollments grew rapidly with most new 
students enrolled in the popular schools. Student performance in Educo and tra-
ditional schools was comparable. This was an impressive outcome because Educo 
students tended to come from poorer and less-educated families than students 
who attended the traditional government schools.33
The relative success of Educo does not mean that all school systems should adopt 
a similar model or that greater parental involvement and control always improves 
school outcomes. Results from some RCTs in Kenya and India suggest otherwise.34 
But all these cases speak to the need for nations to experiment with alternative 
modes of service delivery. School reforms are part of a larger agenda of institutional 
reforms that many nations, whether low, middle, or high income, are pursuing to 
improve schooling, health, and other outcomes. Evidence from such reforms indi-
cates that one size does not fit all and continued experimentation and evaluation is 
needed to identify what works in different settings. School systems need to enroll 
and retain more students and improve learning outcomes at all levels of education. 
Teachers must be adequately trained and motivated. Schools need clear objectives, 
adequate financing, and some autonomy on how to operate and achieve stated goals. 
They also must be held accountable to the taxpayers (at home and abroad) who 
finance school systems and, most important, to the students and their parents who 
count on schools to provide an education.
33World Bank, 2004 World Development Report, pp. 131–32.
34Kremer and Holla, “Improving Education in the Developing World.”

298   [CH. 8] E D U C AT I O N
SUMMARY
• By historical standards, the last three decades have witnessed a revolutionary 
change in the number of men and women who have attended school and 
received a basic education. By 2010, 80 percent of the developing world’s 
adults had attended school as children. These investments in human 
capital have profound implications for improving the well-being of much of 
humanity in the twenty-first century.
• Despite these achievements, much remains to be done. More than four out 
of every five children in the world live in low- and middle-income nations, 
and far too many of them have never attended school or failed to complete 
even four years of primary school. And those who attend school often learn 
far too little, with their education lagging well behind what comparably 
aged children master in high-income nations.
• Attending school remains a worthwhile private and social investment. In 
every nation, if you have more years of schooling, on average, you earn 
more than those with less schooling. Estimated rates of return, which take 
account of both the benefits and costs of schooling, indicate that schooling 
at all levels yields attractive returns when compared to other investments.
• But schooling is not a panacea. Many nations have expanded enrollments 
and sent their young people through years of schooling and still have not 
grown. In a bad economic environment, schooling, like other investments, 
can be wasted. Increasing the demand for all workers, educated and not 
educated, raises the private and social return on education and remains a 
key challenge to achieve economic development.
• Much also needs to be done to make schools more productive. Some develop-
ing nations underinvest in education overall; many misallocate resources 
by spending too much on the tertiary sector at the expense of primary and 
secondary levels; and most could improve the use of resources within schools 
themselves, including reducing the frequency of absent teachers.
• Decreasing user fees and other costs, offering households cash transfers 
conditional on school attendance, and improving child health and 
nutrition have all proven effective in getting the children of poor families to 
enroll in and more regularly attend school.
• Prescriptions for how to improve learning outcomes have proven harder 
to identify, although use of randomized controlled trials are offering 
many new insights. Changing the mix of school inputs has shown limited 
promise; making teachers, administrators, and government officials 
accountable for school outcomes may be the most important factor of all.
SUMMARY

299
Health
9
G
rab a pencil, here comes a pop quiz. Denmark, a high-income nation, had 
a population of 5.4 million people. With a death rate of 10 per 1,000, about 
54,000 Danes died that year. Here is your first question: What was the median 
age of those who died? In other words, pick the age at which half of those who 
died were older and half were younger than that age. Now turn to Sierra Leone, one 
of the poorest nations in the world, which has a population about the same size as 
Denmark’s. But Sierra Leone’s death rate was much higher, estimated at 24 per 1,000, 
resulting in roughly 130,000 deaths. Here is your second question: What was the 
median age of those who died in Sierra Leone? Write down your predictions; we will 
provide the answers in a moment.
The difference in the age distribution of deaths between a very poor nation like 
Sierra Leone and a wealthy developed country like Denmark is that most deaths 
occur before age 5 in Sierra Leone, whereas most deaths occur among the elderly in 
Denmark. This is graphically illustrated by the age pyramids in Figure 9–1. We exam-
ined age pyramids in Chapter 7, contrasting those of rapidly versus slowly growing 
populations (Box 7–3). The age pyramids of Figure 9–1 look entirely different. They 
refer only to those who died in a given year. In Sierra Leone, more deaths occur in the 
first 4 years of life than in all other age brackets combined; in Denmark, child deaths 
rarely occur. Here are the answers to the quiz: The median age of death in Denmark 
is 77; in Sierra Leone, it is under 4. The striking difference between these numbers 
tells us a lot about life and death in the richest and poorest nations of the world.
One of the best indicators of a county’s overall health status is the under-five 
mortality rate. This measure is the probability (expressed as per 1,000 live births) 

300   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
that a child born in a specific year dies before reaching five years of age, if subjected 
to current age-specific mortality rates. In Sierra Leone, there were 194 deaths of chil-
dren under-five per 1,000 live births compared to only 4 in Denmark (Table 9–1). 
About a quarter of all under-five mortality occurs in the first month of life in Sierra 
Leone. Early childhood is an especially risky period for Sierra Leone’s children.
There are many explanations for the massive disparity in the chances that a 
child born in Sierra Leone versus one born in Denmark will survive and for the lower 
health status these numbers suggest for the rest of the population. At birth, less 
Female
60
95—99
90—94
85—89
80—84
75—79
70—74
65—69
60—64
55—59
50—54
45—49
40—44
35—39
30—34
25—29
20—24
15—19
10—14
5—9
0—4
40
20
0
20
40
60
Male
Percent of total deaths
(a)
Age group
Female
60
95—99
90—94
85—89
80—84
75—79
70—74
65—69
60—64
55—59
50—54
45—49
40—44
35—39
30—34
25—29
20—24
15—19
10—14
5—9
0—4
40
20
0
20
40
60
Male
Percent of total deaths
(b)
Age group
FIGURE 9–1 Distribution of Age at Death, 2005 
(a) Denmark. (b) Sierra Leone. Values are projections.
Source: World Bank, Health Financing Revisited, processed (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2005).

than half of all mothers in Sierra Leone are tended to by a skilled health worker; in 
Denmark, such services are available to all mothers. In Sierra Leone, malnutrition 
is common, especially among children. One out of every three children under age 
five is stunted and one out of five is underweight. Stunting refers to the percentage 
of children under five years that have a height to age ratio more than two standard 
deviations below the World Health Organization (WHO) global reference median. 
Being underweight refers to the percentage of children under five years that have a 
weight to age ratio more than two standard deviations below the WHO global refer-
ence median. Both outcomes are rare in Denmark.
TABLE 9–1  Selected Health-Related Measures for Sierra Leone and Denmark,  
    Mid-2000s
 
SIERRA LEONE 
DENMARK
Mortality statistics
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Both sexes 
40 
79
Males 
39 
76
Females 
42 
81
Mortality rates (per 1,000)
Neonatal (first 28 days) 
56 
3
Under 5 years 
269 
4
Adult (15–60 years) men 
556 
111
Adult (15–60 years) women 
460 
65
Healthy life expectancy at birth (HALE, years)
Males 
27 
69
Females 
30 
71
Morbidity statistics
Children under 5 years, stunted for age (%) 
38 
—
Children under 5 years, underweight for age (%) 
25 
—
Environmental risk factors
Access to improved water sources, urban (%) 
83 
100
Access to improved water sources, rural (%) 
32 
100
Access to improved sanitation, urban (%) 
20 
100
Access to improved sanitation, rural (%) 
5 
100
Health services coverage
Immunization coverage among 1-year-olds (%)
Measles 
67 
89
Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, three doses 
64 
75
Births attended by skilled health personnel (%) 
43 
—
Health system statistics
Number of physicians per 10,000 
< 1 
36
Number of nurses and midwives per 10,000 
5 
101
Hospital beds per 10,000 
4 
38
Per capita total expenditures on health (US$, PPP) 
41 
3,349
HALE, health-adjusted life expectancy; PPP, purchasing power parity.
Source: World Health Organization, Statistical Information System, World Health Statistics 2009, available at 
www.who.int/whosis/en, accessed February 2012.
 
SIERRA LEONE 
DENMARK
H E A LT H  301

302   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
Sierra Leone and Denmark also differ significantly in terms of health services 
received and resources available to the health system. The majority of rural inhabitants 
in Sierra Leone have no access to clean water or improved sanitation, and many in the 
urban areas lack those services as well. Everyone in Denmark has access to safe drinking 
water and modern sanitation. Almost all 1-year-olds (89 percent) are immunized in Den-
mark for measles and receive three doses of the diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis (DTP) 
or whooping cough vaccine, designated DTP3. About 60 percent of 1-year-olds in Sierra 
Leone are immunized for measles and for DTP3; thus 40 percent are not immunized 
and at risk of infection. A person who gets sick in Denmark has many more resources 
to turn to for medical care. Denmark has almost 50 times as many nurses and midwives 
per 10,000 persons as Sierra Leone (98 versus 2). There are 32 trained physicians per 
10,000 people in Denmark; in Sierra Leone, there is less than 1. Denmark also spends 
almost 100 times as much per person per year on healthcare ($3,513 versus $32 in pur-
chasing power parity [PPP]). Poor access to health services from childhood through 
adulthood increases adult mortality. In Sierra Leone, adult men (ages 15–60) are four 
times more likely to die than in Denmark; adult women are five times more likely.
The data for Denmark and Sierra Leone reflect the experience of their geographi-
cal regions, Europe and Africa. Africa has the highest rate of under-five mortality with 
142 deaths per 1,000 compared to 14 per 1,000 for Europe, the region with the low-
est rate1 (Table 9–2). The eastern Mediterranean region, which includes 21 nations 
in North Africa and the Middle East, has the next highest regional under-five mortal-
ity rate at 78; and Southeast Asia, encompassing 11 nations (including Bangladesh, 
India, and Indonesia), is the third highest at 63. Poor health outcomes are correlated 
with low incomes, which in turn are associated with low levels of education and envi-
ronmental risk factors, such as lack of access to safe drinking water and the absence 
of improved sanitation, especially in rural areas. Absence of medical personnel and 
low levels of health spending are other characteristics of high mortality among both 
children and adults. As we shall see, low incomes explain much, but certainly not all, 
of the disparity in health outcomes across countries and regions.
WHAT IS HEALTH?
The WHO defines health as a state of complete mental, physical, and social well-
being and not merely the absence of disease.2 However, such a complex construct 
would be difficult to measure and would likely vary between cultures and over time. 
1WHO is the primary United Nations agency responsible for global health issues. WHO data rely on 
a regional breakdown that is different from the one used by the World Bank and frequently referred to 
throughout this textbook.
2Preamble to the Constitution of the World Health Organization as adopted by the International Health 
Conference, New York, June 19–22, 1946. The definition has not been amended since 1948.
WHAT IS HEALTH?

W H AT  I S  H E A LT H?   303
TABLE 9–2  Selected Health-Related Measures for World Health Organization 
    Regions, 2009
AFRICA
AMERICAS
SOUTHEAST 
ASIA
EUROPE
EASTERN
MEDITERRA-
NEAN
WESTERN
PACIFIC
Mortality statistics
Life expectancy at birth, 
   males (years)
51
73
63
70
63
72
Life expectancy at birth, 
   females (years)
54
78
66
78
66
77
Mortality rates (per 1,000)
   Neonatal (first 28 days)
40
11
35
10
38
17
   Under 5 years
145
19
65
15
82
22
   Adult (15–60 years) men
429
163
252
221
229
144
   Adult (15–60 years)
      women
374
91
187
94
175
85
Healthy life expectancy at 
    birth, males (HALE 
years)
45
65
56
64
55
65
Healthy life expectancy at 
    birth, females (HALE 
years)
46
69
57
70
57
69
Morbidity statistics
Prevalence of HIV among
4,735
448
295
336
202
89
   adults aged > 15 (per 100,000)
Environmental risk factors
Access to improved water 
   sources, urban (%)
82
98
94
100
93
98
Access to improved water 
   sources, rural (%)
46
81
84
92
75
82
Access to improved 
   sanitation, urban (%)
46
92
58
97
85
79
Access to improved 
   sanitation, rural (%)
26
68
27
85
43
61
Health services coverage
Immunization coverage among 1-year-olds (%)
   Measles
74
93
73
94
84
92
   Diphtheria, tetanus, 
      pertussis, three doses
74
93
69
96
87
92
Births attended by skilled 
   health personnel (%)
46
92
48
96
59
92
Health system statistics
Number of physicians
   per 10,000
2
19
5
32
10
14
Number of nurses and
   midwives per 10,000
11
49
12
79
15
20
Hospital beds per 10,000
10
24
9
63
14
33
Per capita total 
   expenditures on 
   health (US$, PPP)
111
2,788
85
1,719
259
461
HALE, health-adjusted life expectancy; PPP, purchasing power parity.
Source: World Health Statistics 2009 (Geneva: World Health Organization, 2009).

304   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
The measures most often used to express health are those that describe the absence 
of health: mortality and morbidity statistics. Mortality measures deaths in a popula-
tion; morbidity measures rates of disease and illness.
Because death is an unambiguous event indicating a complete failure of health, 
mortality statistics offer a summary of a population’s health status and reveal much 
about a population’s standard of living and healthcare. Most countries record and 
publish death rates with various levels of coverage and accuracy. In a very poor coun-
try, such as Sierra Leone, less than 25 percent of deaths were covered by the country’s 
own vital registration system. In such cases, mortality rates are estimated from sam-
ple surveys or other existing data.
Perhaps the most common summary statistic used to provide a snapshot of a 
country’s health status is life expectancy, which is derived from data on mortality. 
Because death rates are affected by factors such as age, sex, and race, life expectancy 
is often calculated for specific demographic subgroups. The life expectancy for a 
male born in 2008 in Sierra Leone was 48 years and 50 years for a female. A Danish 
baby boy born in 2008 had a life expectancy of 77 and a girl had a life expectancy 
of 81. To put these numbers in some historical perspective, life expectancy in Sierra 
Leone today is about what it was in the United States in 1900.
One might think that in a country where life expectancy is 49 (or 79) years, most 
people die by that age. That is clearly not the case, as Figure 9–1 demonstrates. Many 
people have shorter lives whereas others live well past the average life expectancy. 
Confusion arises because life expectancy is an average with variance around the mean; 
it is a “synthetic” statistic. It is based on the probability of surviving from one year to the 
next assuming that today’s age-specific death rates remain unchanged into the future. 
But this is unlikely. Rising incomes and advances in medicine suggest that age-specific 
death rates are likely to fall in coming decades, expanding lifetimes beyond the predic-
tions of current life expectancy estimates. However, new diseases, like HIV/AIDS, can 
cause the opposite, leading to shorter lifetimes and declining life expectancy.
Box 9–1 describes in detail how life expectancy is computed using data from 
Malaysia. Even though life expectancy in Malaysia was 69 years, people in the 70–75 
age group had a life expectancy of 10 more years, a sort of “bonus” for surviving. In 
countries with high infant mortality, like Sierra Leone, life expectancy for children 
who survive the early years can be higher than at birth. For example, life expectancy 
at birth for Sierra Leone was 49 years in 2008. For the 5- to 9-year-old age group, 
life expectancy was 55 additional years for a total of 60 years for a 5-year-old—a 
full 11 years more than a newborn.3 A 5-year-old child in Sierra Leone today will prob-
ably live even longer than 60 years. Now that years of civil war finally have ended, it 
is hoped that economic growth and development can begin. If this happens, age- 
specific death rates should start to fall, and Sierra Leone’s children should tend to live 
beyond current estimates of life expectancy.
3WHO Global Health Observatory Repository, available at http://apps.who.int/ghodata; World Health 
Statistics 2010, World Health Organization, Geneva, 2010.

W H AT  I S  H E A LT H?   305
 BOX 9–1  LIFE EXPECTANCY
 Life expectancy is an estimate of the average number of additional years a per-
son could expect to live if the age-specific death rates for a given year prevail for 
the rest of the person’s life. Life expectancy is a hypothetical measure because it 
is based on current death rates, and actual death rates change (they usually fall)
over the course of an individual’s lifetime.
Life tables are used to calculate life expectancy; with life expectancy at birth
the most commonly cited life expectancy measure. The table in this box contains 
selected portions of a life table for men in Malaysia in 1995. Age-specific death rates 
are applied to a hypothetical population of 100,000 people born in the same year. 
Column 1 shows the proportion of each age group dying in each age interval. These 
data are based on the observed mortality experience of the Malaysian population.
Column 2 shows the number of people alive at the beginning of each age interval,
starting with 100,000 at birth. Each age group contains the population that survived
from the immediately preceding group. Column 3 shows the number who would die 
within each age interval (Column 1  Column 2 = Column 3). Column 4 shows the 
total number of person-years that would be lived within each age interval, including
estimates of those who remain alive for only part of the interval. Column 5 shows 
the total number of years of life to be shared by the population in the age interval in 
all subsequent intervals. This measure takes into account the frequency of deaths 
that will occur in this and subsequent intervals. As age increases and the population 
shrinks, the total person-years that the survivors have to live necessarily diminish.
 Abridged Lif e Table for Males in Malaysia, 1995
 < 1 
0.01190 
100,000 
1,190 
98,901 
6,938,406 
69.38
 1–5 
0.00341 
98,810 
337 
394,437 
6,839,505 
69.22
 5–10 
0.00237 
98,473 
233 
491,782 
6,445,067 
65.45
10–15 
0.00270 
98,240 
265 
490,536 
5,953,285 
60.60
 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
—
65–70 
0.16050 
70,833 
11,368 
325,743 
928,004 
13.10
70–75 
0.25762 
59,464 
15,319 
259,024 
602,260 
10.13
75–80 
0.34357 
44,145 
15,167 
182,808 
343,237 
7.78
80+ 
1.00000 
28,978 
28,978 
160,428 
160,428 
5.54
Source:  Department of Statistics, Malaysia, 1997.
 1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6
AGE 
PROPORTION 
NUMBER 
NUMBER 
PERSONS-YEARS LIVED 
YEARS OF LIFE
 
DYING IN 
LIVING  
DYING  
IN THE  
IN THIS AND 
REMAINING
 
THE AGE 
AT THE  
DURING 
AGE 
SUBSEQUENT 
(LIFE 
 
INTERVAL 
BEGINNING 
THE AGE 
INTERVAL 
INTERVALS 
EXPECTANCY)
 
OF THE AGE INTERVAL 
 
 
 
INTERVAL 
 
 
 

306   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
Cause-specific death rates provide information on why people die and can be 
a useful policy tool. Morbidity statistics provide information on how people live, 
whether they live in full health or experience disabilities that may limit their par-
ticipation in work or family life. Researchers have developed several innovative 
approaches to measuring health status that address the limitations of morbidity and 
mortality statistics by combining the information from both into a single unit. The 
WHO uses a single measure of death and disability that recognizes that years lived 
with a disability are not the same as healthy years. Health-adjusted life expectancy
(HALE) reduces life expectancy by years spent with disabilities, and disabilities are 
weighted according to their level of severity and duration. The balance remaining is 
the expected number of years of healthy life.4
Using the HALE measure, healthy life expectancy in Sierra Leone for males is cut 
by 14 years from 48 to 34 and for females it is reduced from 50 to 37. This is the lowest 
healthy life expectancy of all 192 WHO member countries. In Denmark, disabilities 
reduce healthy life expectancy from 77 to 70 for males; females live 73 healthy years 
compared to an average life expectancy of 81. The percentage of life lost to disabil-
ity tends to be higher in poorer countries because some limitations strike children 
and young adults, such as injury, blindness, paralysis, and the debilitating effects of 
several tropical diseases such as malaria. People in the healthiest regions (Europe) 
lose about 11 percent of their lives to disability, versus 15 percent in the least healthy 
region (Africa; Table 9–2).
 Life expectancy is shown in Column 6. The total person-years lived in a given
interval plus subsequent intervals, when divided by the number of persons living
at the beginning of that interval, equals life expectancy  the average number of
years remaining for a person at a given age interval (Column 5  Column 2 =
Column 6). For example, dividing the number of person-years associated with
Malaysian men who survive to age 70 (602,260) by the number of these men
(59,464) shows they have an additional life expectancy of 10.1 years. With age,
life expectancy actually rises, a kind of “bonus” for surviving. The 59,464 Malay-
sian men who survive to age 70 can expect to live more than 10 additional years,
well past their life expectancy at birth of 69 years.
Source: Adapted from, Arthur Haupt and Thomas T. Kane, Population Handbook, 5th ed.
k
(Washington, DC: Population Reference Bureau, 2004), p. 29–30.
4World Health Report 2002: Reducing Risks, Promoting Healthy Life (Geneva: World Health Organiza-
tion, 2002), statistical annex.

W H AT  I S  H E A LT H?   307
TRANSITIONS IN GLOBAL HEALTH
The past two centuries have seen a remarkable improvement in health and life expec-
tancy. Until 1800, life expectancy at birth averaged around 30 years, but it could be 
lower. In France between 1740 and 1790, life expectancy of males fluctuated between 
24 and 28 years. In England between the 1500s and the 1870s, life expectancy ranged 
from 28 to 42 with an average of only 35 years.5 Many people died in infancy or early 
childhood while a few lived on to old age. Life expectancy has steadily increased since 
the late nineteenth century, making dramatic gains in the twentieth century. From 1960 
to 2008, life expectancy around the world increased from 50 to 69 years (Table 9–3).
Among the low- and middle-income countries, the increase is especially dramatic. 
Life expectancy was only 44 years in 1960; in 2008, it was 67 years, more than a 50 
percent increase. By comparison, the increase in the high-income countries over this 
time period was 11 years, from 69 to 80. This smaller increase is because the high-
income countries had achieved significant gains in life expectancy earlier in their 
history.
All regions of the world experienced gains in life expectancy since 1960, whether 
or not they also experienced economic growth. In East Asia, where economic growth 
has been rapid (and China dominates the regional average), life expectancy has 
risen from only 39 years in 1960 to 72 years in 2008. In 2008, per capita income in 
East Asia was only 15 percent that of high-income countries, but its life expectancy 
was already 90 percent the level achieved by high-income nations. Despite its slow 
growth between 1960 and 1990, South Asia added more than five years of increased 
life expectancy per decade. Latin America, even with its lost decades, by 2008, had 
achieved the world’s second-highest regional life expectancy, at 73 years.
5James C. Rile, Rising Life Expectancy: A Global History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
TABLE 9–3 Increased Life Expectancy, 1960–2007
LIFE EXPECTANCY, YEARS 
CHANGE IN YEARS PER DECADE
REGION 
1960 
1990 
2007 
1960–1990 
1990–2007
Low and middle income 
44 
63 
67 
6.3 
2.4
East Asia and Pacific 
39 
67 
72 
9.3 
2.9
Europe and Central Asia 
n.a. 
69 
70 
n.a. 
0.6
Latin America and Caribbean 
56 
68 
73 
4.0 
2.9
Middle East and North Africa 
47 
64 
70 
5.7 
3.5
South Asia 
43 
59 
64 
5.3 
2.9
Sub-Saharan Africa 
41 
50 
51 
3.0 
0.6
High Income 
69 
76 
79 
2.3 
1.8
World 
50 
65 
69 
5.0 
2.4
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
LIFE EXPECTANCY, YEARS 
CHANGE IN YEARS PER DECADE
REGION 
1960 
1990 
2007 
1960–1990 
1990–2007

308   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
But not all the news is this positive. Sub-Saharan Africa experienced an increase 
in life expectancy between 1960 and the early 1990s, but many African nations have 
recorded declines since then, as young adults and children died prematurely due to 
HIV/AIDS. Tragically, life expectancy in parts of southern Africa has been reduced by 
a decade or more. Life expectancy declined in some other countries as well. In Russia, 
life expectancy fell sharply in the 1990s. Between 1990 and 1994, life expectancy for 
Russian men fell from 64 years to 58 years and for Russian women from 74 to 71 years.6 
Increases in cardiovascular disease (heart disease and stroke) and injuries accounted 
for two-thirds of the decline in life expectancy. Causes for this decline include high 
rates of tobacco and alcohol consumption, poor nutrition, depression, and a dete-
riorating health system. The underlying causes of these determinants of increased 
morbidity and mortality have been traced to both the cumulative effects of often poor 
living standards under communist rule of the Soviet Union and to the upheaval and 
stresses associated with Russia’s transition. It took two decades, but today life expec-
tancy in Russia is back to the levels of 1990, the start of its economic transition.
The examples from Africa and Russia demonstrate that declines in health and life 
expectancy can take place rapidly. But these outcomes remain exceptions to the gen-
eral trend of improving health and increasing life expectancy. The gaps in health out-
comes between the richest and the poorest regions of the world have become markedly 
smaller since 1960. The difference in life expectancy between low- and  middle-income 
compared to high-income nations was 25 years in 1960 but fell to only 13 years by 
1990—the level it is also at today. Despite a lack of income convergence across nations 
(see Chapter 4), there is strong evidence of a convergence in life expectancy.7
THE EPIDEMIOLOGIC TRANSITION
Dramatic improvements in life expectancy and reductions in infant and child mortality 
during the past century resulted in equally dramatic demographic and socioeconomic 
changes. These changes led to the lower fertility rates and slower rates of population 
growth discussed in Chapter 7. Worldwide, youth dependency declined while elderly 
dependency rose. In 1970, 40 percent of the populations of all low- and middle-income 
nations were children 14 years and under. In 2009, the percentage had fallen to 29 per-
cent. The elderly, those 65 and older, were only 4 percent of the population of devel-
oping nations in 1970 and today are still only 6 percent; they are 15 percent of the 
population in high-income countries. In coming decades, demographic change will 
6Francis Notzon et al., “Causes of Declining Life Expectancy in Russia,” JAMA 279, no. 10 (1998), 
793–800.
7In the second half of the twentieth century, world life expectancy (computed as life expectancy by 
country weighted by each country’s population) rose by about 18 years, while the weighted standard devi-
ation fell from 13 to 7 years. See Charles Kenny, “Why Are We Worried About Income? Nearly Everything 
That Matters Is Converging,” World Development 33, no. 1 (January 2005). See also Gary S. Becker, Tomas J. 
Philipson, and Rodrigo R. Soares, “The Quantity and Quality of Life and the Evolution of World Inequality,” 
American Economic Review 95, no. 1 (2005), 277–91.

W H AT  I S  H E A LT H?   309
accelerate as the consequences of the developing world’s transition from high to low 
population growth rates combine with falling child mortality and rising life expectancy.
As societies age and health improves, the pattern of disease and causes of death 
also shift in a generally predictable pattern. This shift in disease pattern is referred 
to as the epidemiologic transition. One early characterization of the epidemiologic 
transition identified three main stages: the age of pestilence and famine, the age of 
receding pandemics, and the age of degenerative and human-made diseases.8 The 
age of pestilence and famine, which covered most of human history, was a time of 
frequent epidemics and famines. Chronic malnutrition existed, as did severe mater-
nal and child health problems. Health outcomes were affected by environmental 
problems such as unsafe water, inadequate sanitation, and poor housing. During 
the age of receding pandemics, death rates fell as infectious disease and famines 
declined. As people lived longer, they began to experience heart disease and cancer 
in greater numbers. In the age of degenerative and human-made diseases, mortality 
rates are low and chronic degenerative diseases, such as heart disease, diabetes, and 
hypertension; lifestyle diseases, the result of smoking and excessive use of alcohol, 
for example; and environmental diseases, such as those caused by pollution, take the 
place of infectious diseases as the primary causes of death. Changes have been made 
to this initial theory, but it remains a useful framework.
Some researchers add other stages of epidemiologic transition, such as emerg-
ing and reemerging infectious disease.9 Old infectious diseases may cause increased 
morbidity and mortality due to resistance to antimicrobial therapies, as is the case 
for drug-resistant tuberculosis, and new pathogens continue to emerge. HIV/AIDS is 
the best known of these new infections, although other new infectious diseases have 
emerged over the past 30 years, including the Ebola virus, severe acute respiratory 
syndrome (SARS), and recent strains of avian and H1N1 swine flu.
The twentieth century has seen a major shift in causes of death and disability 
from infectious diseases to noncommunicable disease. However, not all countries 
made this transition fully. Many of the poorest countries and poor subpopulations 
in middle-income countries still suffer from high rates of infectious diseases, mater-
nal and perinatal conditions, and nutritional deficiencies that ceased to be problems 
in high-income nations. Table 9–4 demonstrates the extent of these disparities for 
2004, the most recent update assembled by WHO. Globally, 60 percent of mortality 
is due to noncommunicable conditions such as cardiovascular disease and cancer, 
30 percent of mortality is due to communicable conditions, and 10 percent is due to 
injuries. High-income countries have reduced mortality from communicable dis-
ease to only 7 percent, with 87 percent due to noncommunicable conditions. In stark 
8A. R. Omran, “The Epidemiologic Transition: A Theory of the Epidemiology of Population Change,” 
Millbank Memorial Fund Quarterly 49, no. 4 (1971), 509–37.
9Ronald Barrett, Christopher W. Kuzawa, Thomas McDade, and George J. Armelagos, “Emerging and 
Re-Emerging Infectious Diseases: The Third Epidemiologic Transition,” Annual Review of Anthropology 27 
(1998), 247–71.

310   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
contrast, 68 percent of mortality in sub-Saharan Africa remains due to communi-
cable diseases and only 25 percent to noncommunicable conditions. The situation 
in India (characteristic of all of South Asia) and Latin America lies in between sub-
Saharan Africa and the high-income countries. The differences in causes of death are 
also seen in Table 9–5. In high-income countries, such as Denmark, all but one of the 
10 leading causes of death are from noncommunicable disease. In sub-Saharan Africa, 
the top four leading causes of mortality are infectious conditions.
China, a country that experienced rapid economic growth, also experienced a 
substantial epidemiologic transition. The distribution of the causes of death in China 
is rapidly approaching those of the high-income nations (Table 9–4). Heart diseases, 
cancers, and strokes are now the leading causes of death, accounting for approxi-
mately two-thirds of total deaths among adults 40 years and older. As recently as the 
early 1960s, famines in China accounted for tens of millions of deaths. China no lon-
ger faces the threat of famine but must instead contend with the more modern health 
risks of smoking; obesity; and the various causes of cancers, heart disease, and other 
noncommunicable conditions.
THE DETERMINANTS OF IMPROVED HEALTH
Improved health and increases in life expectancy are due to several factors. Major 
advances in agriculture and food distribution in Europe led to the disappearance 
of famine and starvation, a concern up to the nineteenth century in some parts of 
THE DETERMINANTS OF IMPROVED HEALTH
TABLE 9–4 Mortality by Cause, 2002
CAUSE  
 
 
 
SOUTHEAST 
 
EASTERN 
WESTERN
OF DEATH* 
WORLD 
AFRICA 
AMERICAS 
ASIA 
EUROPE 
MEDITERRANEAN PACIFIC
I. Communicable 
32.1 
71.9 
14.7 
39.3 
5.9 
41.7 
14.2
diseases,
maternal 
and perinatal
conditions,
and nutritional
deficiencies (%) 
II. Non-  
58.8 
21.1 
76.3 
50.6 
85.8 
48.9 
75.5
communicable 
conditions (%)
III. Injuries (%) 
9.1 
7.0 
9.1 
10.0 
8.3 
9.4 
10.3
*Total mortality.
Source: World Health Report 2004: Changing History (Geneva, World Health Organization 2004), 
annex table 2.
CAUSE  
 
SOUTHEAST 
 
EASTERN 
WESTERN
OF DEATH* 
WORLD 
AFRICA 
AMERICAS 
ASIA 
EUROPE 
MEDITERRANEAN PACIFIC

T H E D E T E R M I N A NT S  O F  I M P R O V E D  H E A LT H  311
the region. Famines were common and devastating in East and South Asia through-
out much of the twentieth century. With few exceptions, North Korea being one, 
famine no longer appears as a threat in most of Asia. The same cannot be said for 
sub- Saharan Africa, where famines still occur regularly. Even without famine, malnu-
trition continues to plague billions of people in Africa and elsewhere and contributes 
to lower life expectancy. Malnutrition makes individuals more susceptible to infec-
tions and less able to fight them off.
TABLE 9–5 Leading Causes of Mortality, 2002
RANK 
CAUSE* 
PERCENT OF TOTAL
World
1 
(II) Ischemic heart disease 
12.6
2 
(II) Cerebrovascular disease 
9.7
3 
(I) Lower respiratory infections 
6.8
4 
(I) HIV/AIDS 
4.9
5 
(II) Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
4.8
6 
(I) Diarrheal diseases 
3.2
7 
(I) Tuberculosis 
2.7
8 
(I) Malaria 
2.2
9 
(II) Trachea/bronchus/lung cancers 
2.2
10 
(III) Road traffic accidents 
2.1
Total for 10 causes 
 
51.2
Africa
1 
(I) HIV/AIDS 
19.6
2 
(I) Malaria 
10.7
3 
(I) Lower respiratory infections 
10.4
4 
(I) Diarrheal diseases 
6.6
5 
(I) Childhood diseases 
4.9
6 
(II) Cerebrovascular disease 
3.4
7 
(I) Tuberculosis 
3.3
8 
(II) Ischemic heart disease 
3.1
9 
(III) Road traffic accidents 
1.8
10 
(III) Violence 
1.3
Total for 10 causes 
 
65.1
Europe
1 
(II) Ischemic heart disease 
24.8
2 
(II) Cerebrovascular disease 
15.1
3 
(II) Trachea/bronchus/lung cancers 
3.8
4 
(II) Lower respiratory infections 
2.9
5 
(II) Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
2.7
6 
(II) Colon/rectum cancer 
2.4
7 
(II) Hypertensive heart disease 
1.9
8 
(II) Cirrhosis of the liver 
1.8
9 
(III) Self-inflicted 
1.7
10 
(II) Stomach cancer 
1.6
Total for 10 causes 
 
58.7
*(I), communicable diseases; (II), noncommunicable diseases; (III) injuries.
Source: World Health Report 2004: Changing History (Geneva, World Health Organization 2004), annex table 2.
RANK 
CAUSE* 
PERCENT OF TOTAL

312   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
Rising incomes generally allow for better nutrition and housing and improved sur-
vival rates. Throughout the twentieth century, life expectancy has been strongly associ-
ated with per capita income. Life expectancy rises rapidly with income, especially at low 
levels of income. Increased income allows people, particularly the poor, to buy more 
food, better housing, and more health care. However, since 1900, on an almost decade 
by decade basis, life expectancy has shifted upward, so that more health is realized for a 
given income. This upward shift indicates that health depends on more than income.10
Public health measures such as clean water, sanitation, and food regulation con-
tributed to the decline in child mortality in the late nineteenth century and continue 
to do so today. In the late nineteenth century, Robert Koch showed that the bacte-
rium Mycobacterium tuberculosis causes tuberculosis and people began to under-
stand germs. Many other pioneers of science and medicine, such as Louis Pasteur 
and Joseph Lister, made equally important discoveries. Simple precautions such as 
preparing food and disposing of waste hygienically, eliminating flies and rodents, 
and quarantining the sick had far-reaching benefits. The discovery that cholera and 
typhoid were transmitted through impure water dates to the 1850s, but access to safe 
drinking water is still far from universal. Medical technology became important to 
controlling infectious diseases in the 1930s, when antibacterial drugs and new vac-
cines were introduced. All these developments coupled with the rise of public health 
institutions that provide for improved sanitation, distribute vaccines, control disease 
vectors such as mosquitoes, and offer surveillance of disease outbreaks protect soci-
eties against the major infectious causes of death.
The critical role of science and institutions as determinants of health, indepen-
dent of income, is reflected in the historical record. In 1900, life expectancy in the 
United States was 47 years and per capita income US$5,500 (2005). Compare this to 
the situation in low- and middle-income countries in 2009. Life expectancy was sub-
stantially higher at 67 years, even though per capita income, at about US$5,000 (2005, 
PPP) was about 10 percent lower. The explanation is straightforward. Penicillin and 
other antibiotics were unknown in 1900. Urban living conditions were overcrowded, 
and few vaccines were available. Infectious diseases took their toll on the U.S. popu-
lation just as they do in many low-income nations today.
Finally, education plays an important role in improving health. This was not always 
the case. Child mortality differed little by education or income in the United States in 
the last decade of the nineteenth century, but these factors made a big difference by the 
early twentieth century. The implication is that affluence and education did not matter 
much until the underlying scientific knowledge was present. Better-educated individu-
als acquire and use new information more quickly. This helps explain the large differ-
ences in child mortality by mother’s education observed in developing countries.11
10World Bank, “Health in Developing Countries: Successes and Challenges,” in World Development 
Report 1993: Investing in Health (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993), pp. 17–36.
11World Bank, “Health in Developing Countries.”

H E A LT H,  I N C O M E ,  A N D G R O W T H   313
HEALTH, INCOME, AND GROWTH
As indicated before, in both rich and poor countries, there is a strong positive rela-
tionship between better health and economic growth. In Chapter 3, we saw that 
countries with higher life expectancy have faster economic growth. Figure 9–2 takes 
a different perspective, showing the relationship between under-five mortality and 
the level of income. Mortality rates are highest in the poorest countries, and they drop 
off sharply in conjunction with higher incomes. In countries with per capita income 
below US$2,000 (PPP), on average, 129 out of every 1,000 children do not live to their 
5th birthday. Whereas in rich nations people reaching their 100th birthday is no lon-
ger that unusual, in poor nations 1 out of every 8 children still does not live to see his 
or her 5th birthday. For incomes between $4,000 and $6,000, the child mortality rate 
is much lower, falling to just 44 per 1,000. For countries with incomes above $10,000, 
only 12 out of 1,000 die early in life.
Because key measures of health are strongly related to both income levels and 
growth rates, it should be no surprise that they are also strongly related to poverty. Fig-
ure 9–3 makes the link with poverty, showing that countries with higher life expectan-
cies have much lower rates of poverty. In countries with life expectancy below 45 years, 
GDP per capita, PPP (current international $)
Mortality rate < 5 years (per 1,000)
0
10,000
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
80,000
FIGURE 9–2 Child Mortality and Income, 2007
Based on data for 2007 from 168 countries of all income levels around the world.
GDP, gross domestic product; PPP, purchasing power parity.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

314   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
81 percent of the population lives below the $2-a-day poverty line; in countries with life 
expectancy greater than 70 years, only 17 percent live below the poverty line.
The strength of these relationships is not in doubt. The question is this, What is 
causing what? Higher income and reductions in poverty could lead to better health. 
But the causality could run in the opposite direction; improved health could lead 
to faster economic growth, higher incomes, and less poverty. In fact, both channels 
probably are at work. Better health and higher incomes work together in a mutually 
reinforcing and virtuous cycle, in which improvements in health support faster eco-
nomic growth leading to higher incomes, and higher incomes facilitate even better 
health. Unfortunately, the cycle can also work in reverse, as declines in income can 
weaken health (as in Russia and other transition economies), and the onset of new 
diseases, such as HIV/AIDS, can lead to a fall in income.
INCOME AND HEALTH
As incomes increase, individuals, households, and societies at large are able to 
increase spending on a range of goods and services that directly or indirectly improve 
health. Individuals and households can buy more and better food, so there is a strong 
causal link from higher income to improved nutrition to better health.12 Research 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
< 45
45—60
60—70
> 70
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Poverty head-count index at $2 a day
(% of population)
FIGURE 9–3 Poverty and Life Expectancy, 2000–2007 (Average)
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
12John Strauss and Duncan Thomas, “Health, Nutrition and Economic Development,” Journal of Eco-
nomic Literature 36 (June 1998).

H E A LT H,  I N C O M E ,  A N D G R O W T H   315
shows that, as incomes rise, child height (an indicator of long-term nutrition) tends to 
increase in many low-income countries. With higher incomes, poor households can 
more easily afford clean water and basic sanitation facilities, either as an outhouse 
or through indoor plumbing, which can help control disease. Also, as incomes rise, 
poor households can afford better shelter, which in turn should keep them health-
ier. They are also more likely to be able and willing to seek medical care when it is 
needed, either because they can afford the transportation costs to the clinic or pay 
for medicines or other out-of-pocket expenses. For individuals living on subsistence 
incomes, paying for even the most basic medicines and healthcare can sometimes be 
a struggle. As incomes rise, such expenditures become more routine.
For society as a whole, as incomes rise, there is greater ability to build public health 
clinics and hospitals, train more doctors and nurses, and pay for public health services 
such as immunization campaigns or insect-spraying programs. Poor countries cannot 
afford to build the same kinds of public and private health systems that richer coun-
tries can, and they may not be able to afford to pay their doctors and nurses the kinds 
of salaries needed to keep them home rather than taking positions in richer countries. 
Interruptions in the supply of electricity can reduce the efficacy of medications—for 
example, many vaccines need to be kept refrigerated before inoculation, and when the 
electricity grid fails, the stock of vaccines is damaged. It is not uncommon in developing 
countries to find hospitals and clinics without medicines or clean water. Often, because 
operating budgets are so small and patients cannot afford to pay much, the patient’s 
family must supply basic food and care to a family member in the hospital. As a soci-
ety’s income rises, it is much better able to pay for a reasonable healthcare system. Both 
sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America devote about 7 percent of GDP to health, includ-
ing both private and public expenditures. In sub-Saharan Africa with 2009 GDP per 
capita of US$2,138 (PPP), spending 7 percent of national income on health translates 
to about $150 per person per year. In Latin America, where per capita incomes average 
a much higher US$10,555 (PPP), a similar 7 percent allocation to health expenditures 
provides $740 per person per year, which can buy far more hospital beds and medicine.
Economists Lant Pritchett and Lawrence Summers provide one estimate of the 
potential impact of rising incomes on health. They find that the long-run income 
elasticity of under-five mortality is between 0.2 and 0.4, meaning that each 
10 percent increase in income is associated with a 2 to 4 percent decline in child 
mortality rates. According to this result, if income growth in low- and middle-income 
nations during the 1980s had been 1 percent higher, as many as half a million child 
deaths would have been averted in 1990 alone.13 Pritchett and Summers’ article is 
titled, “Wealthier Is Healthier,” suggesting that improvements in income, holding 
other factors constant, lead to lower child mortality and increased life expectancy. 
The relationship between income levels and life expectancy is captured in Figure 9–4, 
13Lant Pritchett and Lawrence H. Summers, “Wealthier Is Healthier,” Journal of Human Resources 31, no. 
4 (1996), 841–68.

316   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
sometimes referred to as the Preston curve, after the work of demographer Samuel 
Preston. In this “bubble” graph, in which each bubble is proportional to the popula-
tion of the country represented, life expectancy climbs rapidly at lower levels of per 
capita income and then levels off at higher incomes.
But as we have observed before, correlation does not imply causation. Income is 
not the only barrier to the use of even life-saving treatments and the significance of 
rising incomes in explaining health trends is, perhaps surprisingly, a matter of some 
debate. Preston makes this point in his 1975 article, arguing that most of the gains in 
life expectancy result from upward shifts in curves like the one depicted in Figure 9–4 
rather than from movements along them.14 A similar conclusion is reached by econo-
mists David Cutler, Angus Deaton, and Adrianna Lleras-Muney, who write,
We tend to downplay the role of income. Over the broad sweep of history, 
improvements in health and income are both the consequence of new ideas 
and new technology, and one might or might not cause the other. Between 
rich and poor countries, health comes from institutional ability and political 
willingness to  implement known technologies, neither of which is an automatic 
consequence of rising incomes.15
40
$0
$10,000
$20,000
$30,000
$40,000
$50,000
50
60
70
80
90
China
Portugal
Poland
South Korea
Japan
Saudi Arabia
USA
Trinidad and Tobago
= 6.2In(x) + 13.8
2 = 0.63
Russia
Equatorial Guinea
South Africa
India
Nigeria
Life expectency, 2009
GDP per capita, 2009 (US$, PPP)
y
R
FIGURE 9–4 The Preston Curve: Life Expectancy Versus GDP Per Capita
GDP, gross domestic product; PPP, purchasing power parity.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
14Samuel Preston, “The Changing Relation between Mortality and Level of Economic Development,” 
Population Studies 29, no. 2 (1975).
15David Cutler, Angus Deaton, and Adrianna Lleras-Muney, “The Determinants of Mortality,” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 20, no. 3 (2006), 116.

H E A LT H,  I N C O M E ,  A N D G R O W T H   317
They cite historical improvements in life expectancy in countries across Europe 
in the nineteenth century, which happened at more or less the same time despite 
quite different rates of economic growth. They note that in the twentieth century 
both China and India made substantial gains in reducing child and infant mortality 
before the reforms that resulted in rapid economic growth. And once reforms were in 
place, further progress in infant mortality slowed down. Neither the historical record 
nor the cross-country evidence suggests “that economic growth will improve health 
without deliberate public action.”
The creation and dissemination of medical knowledge and public health 
practices was central to the historical rise in life expectancy in the now-developed 
nations (Box 9–2). The diffusion of this knowledge to poor nations today remains 
a key determinant of health outcomes in developing countries. It is also a deter-
minant somewhat independent of the per capita income levels of the poorer 
nations. This is another example of economic historian Alexander Gerschenk-
ron’s hypothesis about the advantages of backwardness. Poor countries can learn 
from the scientific knowledge, most of it generated in the developed nations, 
about disease transmission and interventions to promote health and extend peo-
ple’s lives.
While these cross-country associations between income levels and various 
measures of health indicate broad trends, the decisions of individual households 
are important as well. This is a theme of the widely acclaimed book Poor Eco-
nomics, by Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo. The MIT economists provide many 
examples of poor households making decisions that run counter to the health of 
their children and families that cannot be explained by low incomes alone. Take 
the case of oral rehydration therapy (ORT), a simple mixture of water, salts, and 
sugar that is an effective treatment for common, and often fatal, diarrheal diseases 
in children. It is extremely inexpensive, at under 50 cents per treatment, espe-
cially when viewed relative to its life-saving benefits. Poverty alone is an unlikely 
explanation for the failure to use ORT. Instead, in western India, mothers may not 
believe that ORT works and prefer that health workers give their children an antibi-
otic. Despite being prescribed oral rehydration salts for their children, these moth-
ers may simply not use them. Banerjee and Duflo also discuss insecticide-treated 
bed nets that have proven effective at reducing exposure to mosquitoes that trans-
mit malaria. They also are inexpensive—at less than $10 for a net that provides 
protection for up to five years. But even when bed nets (or childhood immuniza-
tions) are provided for free, the take-up rates are far from universal. More than low 
incomes must be involved.
Banerjee and Duflo conclude, “The poor seem to be trapped by the same kinds 
of problems that afflict the rest of us—lack of information, weak beliefs, and procras-
tination among them.” People living in developed nations do not have to worry about 
chlorinating their water because it comes that way automatically. Poor households 

318   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
BOX 9–2 “HOW BENEFICENT IS THE MARKET? A LOOK AT
THE MODERN HISTORY OF MORTALITY”
 Richard Easterlin, a distinguished economic historian and demographer, 
 investigated the reasons behind the decline in mortality rates that began in 
Europe in the nineteenth century. While rising levels of income improved nutrition
and generally contributed to increased resistance to disease, economic growth 
in this period also increased exposure to disease as industrialization gave rise to 
urbanization and the concentration of people in closer quarters.
In explaining the great improvement in life expectancy that occurred in parts
of Europe in the nineteenth century, Easterlin identifies the centrality of scientific
discoveries and the role of public health initiatives. Easterlin also reflects on the 
role of markets versus the state in achieving these outcomes:
Only with the growth, first, of epidemiological and, then, bacterial knowledge did 
effective techniques emerge for controlling infectious disease. These techniques
focused primarily on the prevention of the spread of disease—first via controlling 
the mode of transmission, and subsequently via immunization. It is these methods 
of prevention that have been chiefly responsible for the great improvement in life 
expectancy. In the last half century the advance of knowledge has added methods
of curing disease to the arsenal available to fight infectious disease, particularly
with the development of antibiotics, but the great bulk of the reduction in infectious
disease has been accomplished largely by preventive methods.
The control of infectious disease involves serious issues of market failure—
information failures, externalities, public goods, principal-agent problems, and 
so forth. The market cannot be counted on for such things as the provision of 
pure water and milk, the proper disposal of sewage, control of pests such as
mosquitoes and rats, the supply of uncontaminated food and other manufactured 
products, immunization of children and adults against major infectious diseases, 
and the dissemination of new knowledge regarding personal hygiene, infant and
child care, food handling and preparation, care of the sick, and the like. There 
is also a serious market failure problem with regard to the distribution of  anti-
microbials because of externalities associated with the development of disease-
resistant bacteria.
The title of this article posed the question, how beneficent is the market? 
The ubiquity of market failure in the control of major infectious disease supplies 
the answer: if improvement of life expectancy is one’s concern, the market
cannot do the job . . . [T]he assumption that the market, in solving the problem of 
economic growth, will solve that of human development is belied by the lessons
of experience. Rather than a story of the success of free market institutions, the
history of mortality is testimony to the critical need for collective action.
Source: Excerpt from “How Beneficent is the Market? A Look at the Modern History of Morality,”
by Richard A. Easterlin. European Review of Economic History 3, December 1999. Copyright © 1999
3
Cambridge University Press. Reprinted by permission.

H E A LT H,  I N C O M E ,  A N D G R O W T H   319
need to take active steps each day to ensure their water is safe, a far more difficult 
process even without the tough constraints the poor face. We trust the advice of our 
health professionals based on experience; given the low quality of medical care in 
many poor nations such trust is understandably absent. To overcome some of these 
constraints Banerjee and Duflo recommend nudges, whether providing small mon-
etary incentives for childhood vaccines (2 pounds of dal per vaccination and a set 
of stainless-steel plates for completing the course) or just making it easier to do the 
right thing (a “one turn” chlorine dispenser next to a village well that makes chlori-
nating water as easy as possible).16 Understanding the behavior of households and 
individuals is critical to improving health outcomes.
HEALTH AND PRODUCTIVITY
There is increasingly strong evidence of the causality also running in the opposite 
direction, in which improved health leads to faster economic growth, higher incomes, 
and reduced poverty. Several studies have shown that higher life expectancy in an 
early period (say, 1960) leads to faster subsequent economic growth (say, from 
1960 to 2000). The relationship is usually found to have diminishing returns, mean-
ing that an extra year of life expectancy at birth has a big effect on growth when life 
expectancy is 45 years but a smaller effect when life expectancy reaches 70 years. 
A typical estimate suggests that, after controlling for other factors that influence 
growth, each 10 percent improvement in life expectancy at birth translates into an 
increase of 0.3 to 0.4 percentage points per year in economic growth.
Better health affects both fundamental causes of economic growth: productiv-
ity gains and increased investment. Healthier people tend to be more economically 
productive because they are more energetic and mentally alert. A healthier worker is 
able to harvest more crops, build more furniture, assemble more computers, or make 
more service calls than a worker who is ill or lethargic. A study of sugarcane workers 
in Tanzania showed that workers with schistosomiasis, a disease caused by a para-
sitic worm that causes fever, aches, and fatigue, were able to cut much less cane and 
therefore earn much less in wages (because they were paid by the amount they cut) 
than workers in the same estate that did not have the disease.17 Healthier workers not 
only are more productive while they work but also lose fewer workdays because of ill-
ness. The types of work available to many low-income, low-skilled workers put a pre-
mium on physical health because they typically rely more on strength and endurance 
than higher-skilled desk jobs. Moreover, aside from their own health, if a worker’s 
16Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo, Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global 
Poverty (New York: Public Affairs, 2011), chap. 3.
17A. Fenwick and B. M. Figenschou, “The Effect of Schistosoma mansoni on the Productivity of Cane 
Workers in a Sugar Estate in Tanzania,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 47, no. 5 (September 
1972), 567–72.

320   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
family is healthier, the worker loses fewer workdays in caring for family members that 
are ill. A dramatic example of the latter point involves HIV/AIDS. Firms in southern 
Africa, where HIV prevalence rates are the highest in the world, lose workdays due 
not only to the illnesses of employees but also in time lost to attending the high num-
ber of funerals of coworkers and family members.
A family member’s health can also have an impact on children’s education, 
which in turn has implications for future income. Families that cope with long-term 
illnesses, such as HIV/AIDS or tuberculosis of an adult, may rely on children to work 
the fields, find other ways to bring in income, or care for the sick family member, thus 
preventing the child from attending school and investing in his or her own human 
capital. The child’s health also directly affects his or her schooling. Poor health can 
reduce cognitive ability in students and undermines schooling through absenteeism 
and shorter attention spans. As noted earlier, experimental evidence from Kenya finds 
that students in schools that received a simple treatment for hookworms had higher 
school enrollment rates and, in cases of wage employment, higher earnings as young 
adults. When child mortality declines, parents tend to have fewer children, allowing 
them to invest more in each child’s health and education, as discussed in Chapter 7.
Childhood health can affect labor productivity years later when children grow 
older and join the workforce. The early effects of health on physical strength and cog-
nitive ability can have lasting impacts. Nobel laureate Robert Fogel found a strong 
relationship among nutrition, body size, and labor productivity.18 Research on Brazil 
inspired by Fogel’s earlier work identifies a relationship between a worker’s height 
and wages. Taller workers, who, after controlling for other factors, are likely to have 
had better nutrition during childhood, earn much higher wages, reflecting higher lev-
els of productivity. The relationship in Brazil is strong: A 1 percent increase in height 
is associated with a nearly 8 percent increase in wages. When workers are healthier 
and more productive, firms are willing to pay them higher wages.
HEALTH AND INVESTMENT
Beyond its impact on labor productivity, improved health can influence the other key 
channel for achieving economic growth, increased saving and investment.
As people expect to live longer, they have greater incentives to make long-term 
investments in their farm or other business and their human capital. By contrast, 
people with poor health have to divert more of their income into medical expenses, 
reducing their capacity to save. Poor people facing catastrophic illness sometimes 
must sell some of their assets, such as livestock or farm tools, thus depleting their 
capital stock, to pay for medicines or simply to feed their family if they no longer can 
18See, for example, Robert Fogel, “New Findings on Secular Nutrition and Mortality: Some Implica-
tions for Population Theory,” in M. R. Rosensweig and O. Stark, eds., Handbook of Population and Family 
 Economics, vol. 1a (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1997) pp. 433–81.

T H R E E  C R IT I C A L  D I S E A S E S   321
work. Health can also affect public saving and investment. Governments fighting 
endemic diseases must allocate more of their spending to these purposes, reducing 
the amount available for building roads or other capital investment.
In South Africa, the high prevalence of HIV/AIDS is viewed as both a public 
health challenge and as a macroeconomic problem that reduces economic growth. 
The disease reduced the size of the workforce and its productivity at the same time 
as it has decreased the ability of households, firms, and the government to invest 
in the future. Households face lost labor income and increased expenditures on 
health; firms confront increased expenditures on health benefits and insurance, 
higher absenteeism and job turnover, and greater training costs due to premature 
deaths; and government finds that health expenditures crowd out other high-priority 
expenditures. Some studies suggest that HIV/AIDS may have cost South Africa a full 
percentage point of annual economic growth—a huge amount for an economy aver-
aging GDP per capita growth of only 1.5 percent.19
Reduction or elimination of diseases can help substantially increase the 
amount of usable productive assets, including land. The classic example of dis-
ease impeding a critical investment is the construction of the Panama Canal in the 
late nineteenth century (Box 9–3). Contemporary examples include large tracts of 
land rendered uninhabitable by endemic disease. The dramatic reduction of river 
blindness in west Africa allowed increased farming in the fertile lands near riv-
erbanks that previously were breeding grounds for the disease (see Box 14–4 for 
a discussion of the fight against river blindness in the context of foreign aid pro-
grams). Schistosomiasis makes it unsafe for people to enter lakes and streams in 
sections of Africa, and trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness) restricts the range of 
the livestock industry. The reduction of malaria allowed farmers to work new lands 
in Malaysia, Sri Lanka, and the Terrai area of northern India. Singapore’s economic 
prosperity was made possible partly because rampant malaria was brought under 
control on the island. Similarly, disease can undermine foreign investment, as 
investors shun environments where HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, and other 
diseases are more prevalent.
THREE CRITICAL DISEASES
Dramatic changes are taking place in global health. The reduction of infectious disease 
allows the survival of many individuals to old age. Reductions in fertility rates contrib-
ute to a change in population structure so that the elderly represent a larger portion of 
19Jeffrey D. Lewis, “Assessing the Demographic and Economic Impact of HIV/AIDS,” in Kyle Kauffman 
and David Lindauer, eds., AIDS and South Africa: The Social Expression of a Pandemic (Hampshire, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2004).
THREE CRITICAL DISEASES

322   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
BOX 9–3 MALARIA, YELLOW FEVER, AND THE PANAMA CANAL
On February 1, 1881, capitalized by over 100,000 mostly small investors, the
French Compagnie Universelle du Canal Interocéanique began work on a canal
that would cross the Isthmus of Panama and unite the Atlantic and Pacific
Oceans. Ferdinand de Lesseps, builder of the Suez Canal, led the project. In the
first months, the digging progressed slowly but steadily. Then, the rains began,
and the crew soon discovered what they were up against: mile upon mile of
impassable jungle, day upon day of torrential rain, insects, snakes, swamps, heat,
and endemic disease—smallpox, malaria, and yellow fever.
In 1881, the company recorded about 60 deaths from disease. In 1882, the
number doubled, and the following year, 420 died. The most common killers were
malaria and yellow fever. Because the company often fired sick men to reduce
medical costs, the numbers probably reflect low estimates. By the time the com-
pany halted the project and went out of business in December 1888, about
$300 million had been spent, and 20,000 men had died.
In 1904 President Theodore Roosevelt instigated a treaty with Panama that
gave the United States the right to build the canal and create the 10-mile-wide
Canal Zone, which amounted to sovereign American territory surrounding the
waterway. The U.S. Army dispatched surgeon Colonel William Gorgas to Panama
to tackle malaria and yellow fever. Gorgas was fresh from Havana where he had
helped eradicate yellow fever, following discoveries by his colleague Major Walter
Reed and others that the disease was carried by a mosquito. The fight against
yellow fever also substantially reduced malaria, building on discoveries by British
bacteriologist Ronald Ross that the parasite that causes malaria was transmitted
by the Anopheles mosquito.
s
The efforts to control the two diseases were successful. Yellow fever was 
totally eradicated. Deaths due to malaria in employees dropped from 11.6 per
1,000 in November 1906 to 1.2 per 1,000 in December 1909. But the impact
spread well beyond the canal workers. Deaths from malaria in the Panamanian
population fell from 16.2 per 1,000 in July 1906 to 2.6 per 1,000 in Decem-
ber 1909. The canal was completed in 1914, one of the greatest construction
miracles of the early twentieth century. The project powerfully demonstrated that
malaria and yellow fever could be controlled over a wide geographical area, pav-
ing the way for investment and increased economic activity.
Sources: Adapted from the Public Broadcasting Service’s film series The American Experi-
ence: The Story of Theodore Roosevelt,t  “TR’s Legacy—The Panama Canal,” www.pbs.org/wgbh/
amex/tr/panama.html; and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Malaria: The Panama Canal,
www.cdc.gov/malaria/history/panama_canal.htm.

T H R E E  C R IT I C A L  D I S E A S E S   323
the population, imposing new demands on healthcare systems. The  process of indus-
trialization, urbanization, and modernization creates its own set of health problems. 
Pollution damages the environment and affects health. Increased tobacco use adds to 
the burden of diseases such as lung cancer and heart disease. Alcohol abuse, injuries, 
and stress create their own set of health problems. A shift in diet from vegetables and 
cereals to highly processed foodstuffs coupled with a decline in activity levels leads to 
rising obesity in both rich and poor nations and contributes to chronic illnesses.
While the burden of noncommunicable disease grows, the unfinished agenda of 
infectious diseases remains. There is a great disparity in what has been achieved in 
healthcare between the developed and developing nations and even between groups 
within nations. The rest of this chapter focuses on a handful of diseases that are pre-
ventable, treatable, or curable, yet pose significant problems in developing countries. 
This is followed by examples of how countries and the international community have 
addressed some of these and other diseases. A disease-based approach offers a snap-
shot of some of the health issues facing developing countries and some of the ways 
these challenges have been met.
Three of the developing world’s most prominent and deadly infectious diseases 
are HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis (Box 9–4). They were the first, fourth, and 
sixth leading causes of death in sub-Saharan Africa (Table 9–5). These three diseases 
have spread steadily in recent decades and together kill nearly 4.5 million people 
every year. Relative to high-income countries, the burden of these diseases (in terms 
of deaths per capita) was 23 times greater in developing countries, resulting in tre-
mendous economic loss and social disintegration. One of the many tragedies of each 
of these diseases is that they are preventable and, with adequate resources and insti-
tutions, can be treated effectively.
HIV/AIDS
Although HIV/AIDS20 has affected humans since at least the 1930s, it was virtually 
unknown until it was first recognized in 1981. Since then, the pandemic21 has spread 
inexorably around the globe, exacting a terrible toll on the health and welfare of the 
world’s poorest communities. More than 33 million people were living with HIV/
AIDS in 2009, about 1 of every 200 people in the world, and almost 2 million people 
died that year of AIDS-related causes. HIV/AIDS is the leading cause of death among 
adults aged 15 to 59 worldwide and has killed an estimated 25 million people.
20This section draws on information from UNAIDS, 2010 Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic (Geneva: 
UNAIDS, 2010); Global Fund, 2004 Disease Report (Geneva: Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and 
Malaria, 2004); and information from WHO (www.who.int) and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC; www.cdc.gov).
21HIV/AIDS is usually referred to as a pandemic rather than an epidemic. Both terms often refer to the 
spread of an infectious disease. Epidemics refer to an illness that shows up in a larger number of cases than 
is normally expected. Pandemics refer to an even higher number of cases spread over a larger geographic 
area.

324   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
BOX 9–4 HIV/AIDS, MALARIA, AND TUBERCULOSIS: SOME BASICS
HIV stands for human immunodeficiency virus. Once infected with HIV, a person
will always carry the virus. The disease primarily is a sexually transmitted disease, 
but it can also be transmitted through needles or contaminated blood. Over time,
HIV infects and kills white blood cells called CD4 lymphocytes (or T cells), leav-
ing the body unable to fight off infections and cancers. AIDS stands for acquired
immune deficiency syndrome and is caused by HIV. A person with AIDS has an
immune system so weakened by HIV that he or she usually becomes sick from
one of several opportunistic infections or cancers, such as pneumonia, Kaposi
 sarcoma (KS), diarrhea, or tuberculosis. AIDS usually takes several years to
develop from the time a person acquires HIV, usually between 2 and 10 years.
AIDS can be treated but not cured. With successful antiretroviral (ARV) therapy,
which requires medication for life, the body can remain healthy and fight off most
viruses and bacteria, and people living with HIV can resume a relatively normal life.
Malaria is a serious and sometimes fatal disease caused by a plasmodium
parasite transmitted by the female Anopheles mosquito. The mosquito transmits
s
malaria by taking blood from an infected individual and passing it to another.
Malaria can also be transmitted by blood transfusion and contaminated needles 
and syringes. Patients with malaria typically are very sick with high fevers, shak-
ing chills, and flulike illness. Four species of plasmodium infect humans, but the
most dangerous is Plasmodium falciparum, which causes the most severe dis-
ease and deaths and is most prevalent in sub-Saharan Africa and some parts of
Southeast Asia. Although malaria can be a fatal disease, illness and death from
malaria are largely preventable.
Tuberculosis (TB) is a bacterium that infects the lungs and is spread through
the air when someone with active TB coughs, sneezes, talks, or otherwise
releases microscopic droplets containing Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which
then enter the respiratory system of another person. Because proximity and poor
ventilation speed transmission, TB is a particular problem in densely populated
or enclosed settings, such as urban slums or prisons. Each person with active
TB infects an average of 10 to 15 people each year. Only about 10 percent
of people infected with the bacterium develop active TB and the accompanying
symptoms: fever, weight loss, chronic cough, chest pain, bloody sputum, loss of
appetite, and night sweats. A third of those with active TB die within a few weeks
or months if they are not treated. The remainder struggle with recurrent infec-
tions or the disease goes into remission, but it reemerges from time to time to
cause pain, fever, and possibly death. The HIV epidemic fueled the resurgence of
TB. HIV weakens the immune system, and people who are infected with HIV are

T H R E E  C R IT I C A L  D I S E A S E S   325
Sub-Saharan Africa bears the largest burden, with two-thirds the world’s infec-
tion, even though it is home to only one-tenth the world’s population. Across sub-
Saharan Africa nearly 1 in 20 adults carries the virus, but huge variations exist 
across the region. Some west African countries, such as Senegal, have maintained 
adult prevalence rates of less than 1 percent for more than a decade. In these low-
prevalence countries, the disease is confined primarily within groups that practice 
high-risk behavior, such as sex workers and their clients. In southern Africa, HIV/
AIDS has taken hold within the general population. In Swaziland, prevalence rates 
among pregnant women are a mind-boggling 42 percent. In three countries in south-
ern Africa, more than one-fifth of all adults are HIV positive: Botswana, Lesotho, and 
Swaziland. Nearly 1.3 million people died of HIV/AIDS-related causes in 2009 in sub-
Saharan Africa, more than two-thirds the global total.
The good news is that HIV epidemics in the region are either stable or declin-
ing. Among the five countries in sub-Saharan African with the largest HIV epidemics, 
four (Ethiopia, South Africa, Zambia, and Zimbabwe) reduced new HIV infections by 
more than a quarter between 2001 and 2009. Prevalence rates are falling in several Afri-
can countries, including Kenya, Uganda, and Zimbabwe, representing an important 
achievement in turning the tide on the pandemic. However, even these trends convey a 
mixed message. Some claim that declines in prevalence rates in Uganda can be attrib-
uted at least partially to behavioral changes linked to the government’s ABC program: 
promoting abstinence, being faithful to one partner, and using condoms. But studies 
demonstrated that, in some regions of the country, falling prevalence rates are less the 
result of behavioral change than of high mortality. Because of AIDS-related deaths, 
there were simply fewer HIV-positive adults in 2003 than there were a decade earlier.22
The pandemic is less severe in other regions but still a major threat that continues 
to spread. Adult prevalence rates stabilized around 1 percent in the Caribbean, where 
there is wide variation between and within countries. In 2009 adult HIV prevalence 
particularly vulnerable to TB. Antibiotics to treat and cure TB patients have been
available for over 50 years. Successful treatment requires strict patient compli-
ance. Antibiotics must be taken regularly for six months or more. Failure to do so
has contributed to the spread of multidrug-resistant TB, which is much harder to
cure.
Sources: “HIV InSite,” University of California at San Francisco; WHO; Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention; and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria.
22In the Rakai region in Uganda, researchers attribute approximately 5 percentage points of the 6.2 per-
cent decline in HIV prevalence between 1994 and 2003 to increased mortality. UNAIDS, AIDS Epidemic 
Update (Geneva, UNAIDS, 2005), p. 26.

326   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
was 0.1 percent in Cuba but 3.1 percent in the Bahamas. In Asia, Thailand has imple-
mented a successful campaign to limit the spread of the disease, and the rate of new 
infections fell more than 25 percent between 2001 and 2009 in India and Nepal; in 
other countries, however, the number of infected people is growing. With 2.4 million 
people living with HIV, India has the third largest number of infected people in the 
world behind South Africa and Nigeria. The epidemic is evolving in China, where 
unsafe blood transfusion and drug abuse traditionally accounted for the majority 
of HIV cases. Of the 740,000 HIV-positive people in China in 2009, 59 percent were 
infected through sexual transmission. The epidemic is worsening in eastern Europe 
and central Asia (the number of people living with HIV in this region has almost tri-
pled since 2000), fueled by a surge in infections among people who inject drugs.
Women are increasingly vulnerable to HIV, and globally, girls and women account 
for more than half of those living with HIV. In Africa, the picture is especially grim for 
young women; those aged 15 to 24 are as much as eight times more likely than men to 
be HIV-positive. Socioeconomic factors contribute significantly to women’s vulnerability 
to HIV infection. Most are infected by partners who practice high-risk behavior. Com-
pounding this problem is that as many as 9 out of 10 HIV-positive people in sub-Saharan 
Africa do not know that they are infected. Social disempowerment and lack of access to 
HIV education or services further contribute to the soaring pandemic among women. In 
24 sub-Saharan countries, two-thirds or more of young women aged 15 to 24 years lacked 
comprehensive knowledge of HIV transmission.23 Children are also vulnerable. More 
than 2.5 million children are HIV-positive, and there were more than 0.25 million AIDS-
related deaths among children in 2009. The vast majority of infected children acquire HIV 
through transmission from their mother during pregnancy, labor and delivery, or breast-
feeding. Antiretroviral (ARVs) drugs, such as nevirapine, significantly reduce mother to 
child transmission but still are not always available in sub-Saharan Africa.
The HIV/AIDS pandemic has had a crippling effect on many countries that were 
making significant progress in health. Whereas most countries in sub-Saharan Africa 
had achieved steady increases in life expectancy in the 1960s, 1970s, and early 1980s, 
in several countries this progress stopped in the late 1980s and has since reversed. 
Figure 9–5 shows changes in life expectancy for six of the most severely infected coun-
tries. Tragically, life expectancy dropped from an average of 61 years in 1992 to just 
47 years in 2007. But as Figure 9–5 suggests, some countries (Botswana, Namibia, Zim-
babwe) seem to have reached a turning point, with life expectancy rising once again.
The effects on communities and families are devastating as parents, children, and 
community leaders become sick and die. Unlike most diseases, HIV/AIDS attacks pri-
marily young adults and the economically active segment of the population. Other dis-
eases tend to incapacitate the very young, the old, or those already weakened by other 
23UNAIDS and World Health Organization, “HIV Infection Rates Decreasing in Several Countries but 
Global Number of People Living with HIV Continues to Rise,” press release, November 21, 2005, available 
at www.who.int/hiv/epiupdate2005/en/index.html.

T H R E E  C R IT I C A L  D I S E A S E S   327
conditions. HIV/AIDS is different. In Africa, HIV disproportionately destroys the lives 
of society’s most productive members. Households face catastrophe as income earn-
ers fall ill and eventually succumb to the disease. The long duration of AIDS illness 
makes it particularly costly. In addition to these losses, others in the family must stop 
work to care for those that are ill. Small farms and gardens go untended, and children 
may be taken out of school to tend to sick family members or to go to work to earn 
extra income. Families become further impoverished as they face increasing medical 
costs and have less income to pay for food, clothing, or other expenses. In some cases, 
funeral costs may be higher than healthcare costs and add to a family’s burden. Stud-
ies in Tanzania and Thailand estimate that the cost of medical care and funerals can 
be greater than the household’s annual income, triggering borrowing, asset sales, or 
other coping strategies that can have long-term financial welfare implications.24 Many 
of the effects of HIV/AIDS are intergenerational: Worldwide there are now 16.6 million 
AIDS orphans who have had one or both parents die from the disease.
24Steven Russell, “The Economic Burden of Illness for Households: A Review of Cost of Illness and Cop-
ing Strategy Studies Focusing on Malaria, Tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS.” Disease Control Priorities Project 
(DCPP) Working Paper 15, August 2003, available at http://www.dcp2.org/file/30/wp15.pdf. Funeral costs 
have become a significant expense to both households and firms. They have become so common that 
firms are beginning to limit the number of days that employees can take for funeral leave each month. This 
is an issue, in part, because family members often are buried in their traditional villages, requiring days of 
travel for mourners.
1960
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
Year
Life expectency at birth (years)
Swaziland
Zimbabwe
Botswana
Namibia
South Africa
FIGURE 9–5 Life Expectancy at Birth in Selected Most HIV-Affected Countries
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

328   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
Combating the epidemic requires strong national and international commit-
ment. Until scientists develop other interventions, such as a cure or preventive 
vaccine, the key to halting the spread of the disease is strong prevention programs 
coupled with adequate care and treatment. In richer countries, where people can 
afford treatment, the development of ARVs has made AIDS a chronic disease that 
can be managed, rather than a fatal disease, allowing those infected to resume a rela-
tively normal lifestyle. Death rates for HIV/AIDS in Europe and North America fell 
by 80 percent in the four years after the introduction of antiretroviral therapy. Pro-
phylactic treatment with ARVs in combination with other interventions has almost 
entirely eliminated HIV infection in infants in industrialized countries.25 But for most 
people in the poorest countries, ARVs remain out of reach. At the end of 2009, about 
one in three Africans who needed treatment had access to these drugs. Beginning in 
2003, access to ARVs in developing countries began to improve, and in a few coun-
tries, treatment coverage is now widespread. In Botswana, Cambodia, Croatia, Cuba, 
Guyana, Namibia, Romania, and Rwanda, more than 80 percent of those that need 
ARVs are now receiving them, but these are exceptions rather than the norm.
Delivering antiretroviral therapy on a global level requires not only good science 
and health policy but also political and economic initiatives. The most cost-effective 
way to provide the massive quantities of drugs required at hugely discounted prices 
is to encourage the manufacture of generic versions of these antiretroviral agents. 
Issues of trade-related intellectual property rights and patents must be considered 
here. One challenge is to encourage such manufacture while providing incentives for 
major pharmaceutical companies to develop newer medicines as patients develop 
resistance to the current stock.26
The international community was slow to respond to the growing crisis during 
the 1990s, but that has begun to change. In 1996, only about US$300 million was avail-
able to fight the disease globally. By 2009, an estimated US$15.9 billion was available, 
a figure that includes not just donor funds but the steadily increasing funding that 
comes from country governments and out-of-pocket spending by directly affected 
individuals and families. Yet this amount is still $10 billion short of what the Joint 
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) has estimated was required in 
2010. Due to fiscal constraints in response to the global financial crisis, 2009 was the 
first time that international assistance did not increase from the previous year. Find-
ing the needed funds will be a continuing challenge, and even when they are found, 
they will have significant opportunity costs because funding is diverted from other 
key challenges to fight HIV/AIDS.
25World Health Organization, World Health Report 2004: Changing History (Geneva: World Health 
Organization, 2004).
26Diane V. Havlir and Scott M. Hammer, “Patents Versus Patients? Antiretroviral Therapy in India,” New 
England Journal of Medicine 353, no. 8 (August 25, 2005), 749–51.

T H R E E  C R IT I C A L  D I S E A S E S   329
MALARIA
Malaria27 is estimated to claim the lives of 2,000 children every day and is a major 
contributor to illness in the developing world. WHO estimates that approximately 
half of the world’s population is at risk of malaria in over 106 countries, primarily 
poor countries located in the tropics. Malaria contributes to almost 800,000 deaths 
and 225 million cases of severe illness each year. Africa, again, bears the heaviest 
burden, with about 78 percent of the cases of clinical malaria and 91 percent of the 
world’s malaria deaths. Almost one-fifth of the deaths in children under five in Africa 
are caused by malaria. Malaria also continues to be a problem in Southeast Asia, 
India, Latin America, and some parts of Oceania.
Most diseases in developing countries have a disproportionate impact on the 
poor, but this is especially the case with malaria. Poor families are more likely to live 
in slum areas or in the countryside where malaria is common, less likely to be able to 
afford simple prevention steps (like insecticide-treated bed nets), and less likely to 
receive treatment once fever strikes. In the 1990s, more than half of malaria deaths 
occurred in the poorest 20 percent of the world’s population, a higher percentage 
than for any other disease of major public health importance. This percentage is 
0
Poorest
Second
Middle
Fourth
Richest
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Wealth quintile
Percent of children < 5 years old with parasites
FIGURE 9–6 Parasite Prevalence Is Higher in Poor Children
Source: Government of the Republic of Zambia Ministry of Health, Zambia National Malaria Indicator Survey 
2008, available at www.nmcc.org.zm/files/ZambiaMIS2008Final.pdf, accessed February 2012.
27This section draws on information from UNICEF and WHO, 2010 World Malaria Report, (Geneva: 
World Health Organization, 2010); the Global Fund, 2004 Disease Report; and Tina Rosenberg, “What the 
World Needs Now Is DDT,” New York Times (April 11, 2004).

330   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
probably higher today. Figure 9–6 shows that in Zambia 13 percent of children from 
the poorest quintiles had malaria, whereas less than 3 percent of children from the 
richest quintile were infected.
Many countries have begun to make progress in reducing malaria. Prevention 
strategies include the use of insecticide-treated bed nets for those at highest risk of 
malaria, intermittent preventive drug treatment of pregnant women, and spraying 
with insecticides and other forms of vector control. For those who become sick with 
malaria, the disease can be controlled with early treatment. As of yet, there is no vac-
cine against the disease, although research is under way to find one. Unfortunately, 
because this is a disease of the poor, commercial opportunities are limited for selling 
a vaccine and recouping expensive research and development costs, and research on 
this vaccine has been underfunded. Box 9–5 describes one idea aimed at overcoming 
this market failure.
BOX 9–5 MAKING MARKETS FOR VACCINES
Vaccines save 3 million lives a year, prevent long-term disability and illness in mil-
lions more, and are one of the most cost-effective ways of enhancing health and
reducing poverty in developing countries. Yet, there are no vaccines for some of
today’s biggest killers, such as malaria, HIV, and tuberculosis; and new vaccines
developed for hepatitis B, pneumococcus, rotavirus, and cervical cancer, which
kill millions of people a year, are not affordable in developing countries. If vac-
cines are so cost-effective and save so many lives, why are vaccines not being
developed and used for these killer diseases?
In some cases, the science is highly uncertain, such as for HIV. But in other
cases, private firms that conduct much of the research and development (R&D)
for vaccines have no financial incentive to do so for diseases that affect mainly
poor countries. The costs of developing these vaccines are high, and incomes in
many poor countries are too low to afford them. Private markets fail to develop
vaccines because a price that is low enough for developing countries to afford
is too low to create incentives for private companies to invest in developing new
vaccines or production facilities for existing ones.
Many of the most widely used vaccines are aimed at diseases that affect chil-
dren in both rich and poor countries, such as diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, and
polio. Because these vaccines are used around the world, the market is large
enough to cover a pharmaceutical company’s costs for both R&D and produc-
tion. In some cases, vaccines could be sold at a higher price in richer countries,
to recover R&D costs, and a lower price in poorer countries. But some of the

T H R E E  C R IT I C A L  D I S E A S E S   331
highest-priority diseases for developing countries lack the high priority for rich
countries. AIDS, diarrheal diseases, malaria, and other diseases, which are some
of the biggest killers in developing countries, are not nearly as high on the list
for rich countries, so the total potential market for vaccines for these diseases is
much more limited. The pharmaceutical industry tends to respond to where the
financial pay-off is the greatest, serving the health needs of the richer countries
while neglecting diseases concentrated in low-income countries.
The costs of development and the risks of failure for vaccines are high. Vac-
cine development can take 7 to 20 years for basic research, clinical testing, regu-
latory approval, production, and distribution, and even the most promising vaccine
candidates can fail at any stage. Estimates of the total costs of developing a new
vaccine vary but range from several hundred million dollars to $1.5 billion. It is
not realistic to hope that private companies will spend the money necessary to
develop urgently needed vaccines then just give them away or sell them at a low
price to poor countries.
One way to overcome this market failure is for donors to provide an advance
market commitment (AMC) to provide private firms the financial returns they
need to develop new vaccines while keeping the cost low for consumers in
low-income countries. Sponsors and donors, such as governments, international
agencies, and foundations, make binding commitments to pay for a desired vac-
cine if and when it is developed. Developing countries could buy the vaccine at a
low and affordable price, and sponsors would commit to providing the balance up
to a guaranteed price, thus guaranteeing market returns for the vaccine devel-
oper that are comparable to other products. Once a specified number of vaccines
was purchased at the guaranteed price (enough to cover R&D costs), the sup-
plier would be committed to selling further treatments at a lower, affordable price
without the sponsor’s top-up. This step would ensure that developing countries
could afford to continue purchasing the vaccine once payments under the com-
mitment had been made.
A commitment creating a market comparable to the sales revenue of an aver-
age new medicine would cost about $3 billion. As an example, sponsors could
make a legally binding commitment to purchase 200 million treatments of a
malaria vaccine for $15 each. Poorer nations would decide to buy the vaccine at
a low price (say, $1 per treatment) and the sponsors would provide the additional
$14. After the first 200 million treatments, the company would be committed to
sell additional treatments at $1, enough to cover ongoing production costs. These
purchases, along with sales to the military, travelers, and some middle-income
countries that can afford a higher price, would create the $3 billion market.
This approach complements rather than substitutes for other approaches for
developing vaccines, such as support for public research facilities and universities.

332   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
R&D in public health often involves government-funded research into the “public 
good” of knowledge about diseases, which can then be appropriated by the private
sector for commercial development. AMC provides clear incentives for private firms
to invest in the development of critical vaccines. It also respects intellectual property 
rights for vaccines and removes pressures on firms to sell new products at a loss.
For donors, there would be no cost unless a vaccine is actually developed, minimiz-
ing their risks. AMC would use public funds to make markets work more effectively 
to solve some of the developing countries’ most pressing health problems.
In 2009 the first AMC was launched by the Global Alliance for Vaccines and
Immunisations (now GAVI Alliance), a public–private partnership including major 
donors, pharmaceutical companies, and foundations. This pilot AMC is designed 
to accelerate access to existing vaccines against pneumococcal diseases. Such 
diseases include pneumonia, which is estimated to kill 1.6 million people per year, 
most of them children and about 90 percent occurring in developing nations. 
A pneumococcal vaccine has existed since 2000 and is part of regular immuniza-
tion programs in developed countries. But the existing pneumococcal vaccine sells 
at over $70 per dose, far too expensive for widespread adoption in low-income 
countries. Funding from GAVI Alliance will permit the long-term price of the vac-
cine to fall to $3.50 and prevent an estimated 7 million childhood deaths by 2030.
Sources: The idea for the AMC was developed by a working group hosted by the Center for Global 
Development and is based on an earlier idea by Harvard University economist Michael Kremer. See 
Owen Barder, Michael Kremer, and Ruth Levine, Making Markets for Vaccines: Ideas to Action (Wash-
n
ington, DC: Center for Global Development, 2005). Much of the text in this box is drawn from this 
report. Also see Michael Kremer and Rachel Glennerster, Strong Medicine: Creating Incentives for
Pharmaceutical Research on Neglected Diseases (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004).
s
Malaria can have substantial economic costs on top of its public health impact. 
Research by economists John Gallup and Jeffrey Sachs concluded that the pres-
ence of a high malaria burden reduces economic growth by 1.3 percent per year.28
Although that figure probably incorporates the impact of other diseases that occur 
in tandem with malaria (such as HIV/AIDS), there is little doubt that malaria creates 
a heavy burden in countries with high prevalence rates. Malaria programs can be 
very cost-effective. One study, based on data from sub-Saharan Africa, estimated that 
the net benefits of a complete package of malaria interventions were about 18 times 
higher than the costs.29
28John Gallup and Jeffrey Sachs, “The Economic Burden of Malaria,” American Journal of Tropical Med-
icine and Hygiene Special Supplement (June 2001).
29Global Fund, 2001 Disease Report, p. 37.

T H R E E  C R IT I C A L  D I S E A S E S   333
But even cost-effective programs can prove controversial. The insecticide of 
choice for combating malaria is dichlorodiphenyl-trichloroethane (DDT), but 
donors rarely pay for its use. The irony is that DDT was once used extensively and 
successfully in the United States, southern Europe, and many developing countries 
as a means of malaria control and eradication. But overuse of DDT in the United 
States, especially to control agricultural pests, was linked to environmental dam-
age affecting wildlife. Author and social activist Rachel Carson brought attention to 
the problem in her seminal book Silent Spring, published in 1962. (The title refers 
to the impact of DDT on bird populations.) DDT use eventually was banned in the 
United States and other countries, but remains a highly effective and inexpensive (its 
patent expired long ago) means of eradicating the mosquito that transmits malaria. 
When sprayed on the interior walls of dwellings (the preferred mode for preventing 
the spread of malaria), DDT has minimal environmental consequences and has not 
been found harmful to humans. But given its pariah status in the West and the fear 
of maintaining a double-standard (selling an insecticide to poor countries that is 
banned in rich ones), DDT has not played a significant role in saving lives in Africa 
and other malaria-endemic regions for many years.
The level of international attention to and spending on malaria control in poor 
regions has been dismal. Funds by the major external financers of malaria control 
(the Global Fund, the World Bank, and the U.S. President’s Malaria Initiative) stag-
nated at US$1.8 billion in 2010. Estimates by the WHO find that effective malaria con-
trol requires more than US$5 billion annually.
TUBERCULOSIS
Until 20 years ago, tuberculosis (TB)30 was uncommon in the industrialized world and 
many assumed that the disease had been largely conquered. But, in recent years, TB 
has reemerged as a virulent killer. More than 2 billion people, one-third of the world’s 
population, are infected with the TB bacterium. Most people who are infected carry 
the bacterium in their body without symptoms, but each year 9.4 million people 
develop active TB and exhibit fever and other symptoms. TB causes or contributes 
to 1.7 million deaths each year, with 90 percent of the deaths occurring in developing 
countries. About a quarter of those who die also are infected with HIV, which weak-
ens the immune system and makes people more vulnerable to developing active TB.
As with other diseases, the poor are particularly vulnerable to TB. Studies in 
India have shown that the prevalence of TB is two to four times higher among groups 
with low income and no schooling. The poor are more likely to live in overcrowded 
conditions where the airborne bacterium can spread easily. Poor nutrition and 
30This section draws on information from WHO, Global Tuberculosis Control 2010 (Geneva: World 
Health Organization, 2010).

334   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
 inadequate sanitation also add to the risk. And as with other diseases, once the poor 
are infected, they are less likely to be diagnosed and treated. The economic costs of 
TB can be significant, stemming from lost work for the patient and caregivers, extra 
nutritional needs, treatment costs, transportation to and from clinics, and withdrawal 
of children from schools. In the developing world, an adult with TB can lose an aver-
age of three to four months of work.31 Every year in India alone, more than 300,000 
children leave school because of their parent’s TB. By some estimates, TB depletes 
the incomes of the world’s poorest communities by up to $12 billion every year, and 
lost productivity can cost an economy on the order of 4 to 7 percent of GDP.32
The internationally recommended strategy to control TB is directly observed 
treatment, short course (DOTS), which combines a regular TB drug dosage with 
clinical observation visits. Full treatment takes many months, but unfortunately 
some patients stop taking their medicines during that period because they start 
to feel better or the drug supply is unreliable. This may lead to the emergence of 
drug-resistant TB. A particularly dangerous form of drug-resistant TB is multidrug-
resistant TB (MDR-TB). Rates of MDR-TB are high in some countries, including 
 Russia, and threaten TB-control efforts. From a public health perspective, poorly 
supervised or incomplete treatment of TB is worse than no treatment at all. When 
people fail to complete the treatment regime, they may remain infectious and 
develop a resistance to treatment. People they infect have the same drug-resistant 
strain. While drug-resistant TB generally is treatable, it requires extensive chemo-
therapy (up to two years of treatment), which is often prohibitively expensive (often 
more than 100 times more expensive than treatment of drug-susceptible TB) and 
more toxic to patients. Direct observation of treatment helps TB patients adhere to 
treatment. According to WHO, the DOTS strategy produces cure rates of up to 95 per-
cent, even in the poorest countries. A six-month supply of drugs for treatment under 
the DOTS strategy costs as little as $10 per patient. The World Bank has identified the 
DOTS strategy as one of the most cost-effective of all health interventions.33
For DOTS to be effective, there must be access to TB sputum microscopy for 
TB detection; standardized short-course treatment of six to eight months, includ-
ing direct observation of treatment; an uninterrupted supply of high-quality drugs; 
a reporting system to monitor patient outcome and program performance; and a 
political commitment to sustained TB control. Since its inception in 1995, more than 
41 million TB patients have been treated under DOTS and 184 countries have 
adopted the DOTS strategy. However, 1.8 million people fail to get access to TB treat-
ment each year.
31World Health Organization, Treatment of Tuberculosis: Guidelines for National Programmes, 3rd ed. 
(Geneva: World Health Organization, 2003).
32Global Fund, 2004 Disease Report, p. 26.
33World Health Organization, “Tuberculosis,” Fact Sheet No. 104 (Geneva: World Health Organization, 
2005).

W H AT  W O R K S ?  S O M E  S U C C E S S E S  I N  G L O B A L  H E A LT H  335
WHAT WORKS? SOME SUCCESSES IN GLOBAL HEALTH
Despite many challenges to health in the developing world, there are also many suc-
cesses. The examples that follow recount specific actions by the health sector that 
saved millions of lives and improved millions more. These cases are excerpted from 
Millions Saved: Proven Successes in Global Health, by Ruth Levine and the What 
Works Working Group.34 (The What Works Working Group is a group of 15 develop-
ment specialists convened by the Center for Global Development.) Millions Saved
describes 17 successful public health interventions in the developing world. The 
programs highlighted were implemented on national, regional, or global scales, 
addressed problems of substantial public health significance, demonstrated a clear 
and measurable impact on a population’s health, lasted at least five consecutive 
years, and were cost-effective.
The cases presented in Millions Saved demonstrate what the health sector can 
do, even in the poorest countries. Innovative interventions that involve the com-
munity can reach the most remote regions. These cases also demonstrate that gov-
ernments in poor countries can get the job done, including being the chief sources 
of funds for the interventions. In almost all the cases, the public sector, so often 
maligned for its corruption and inefficiency, was responsible for delivering care to 
the affected populations. The interventions included technological developments 
as well as basic changes in behavior that had a great impact on health. In the control 
of guinea worm in Africa, for example, families learned to filter their water consci-
entiously; and in the fight against deaths from dehydration due to diarrheal disease 
in Bangladesh, mothers learned how to mix a simple salt and sugar solution and 
taught the technique to their daughters. Interventions can also benefit from inter-
national coalitions or partnerships. Such cooperative ventures can break through 
bureaucracies, provide funding, bring technical capabilities, and generate the polit-
ical will to sustain an effort in the face of competing priorities. It is also possible to 
determine whether improvements in health outcomes are due to specific interven-
tions; in most cases, because special efforts were made to collect data that look at 
outcomes. Finally, these cases illustrate that success comes in all shapes: disease-
specific programs, initiatives that improve access and quality, traditional public 
health interventions, and legal and regulatory reforms all can work, individually or 
in combination.
34Ruth Levine and the What Works Working Group with Molly Kinder, Millions Saved: Proven Successes 
in Global Health (Washington, DC: Center for Global Development, 2004). We summarize 5 of the 17 cases 
presented. Interested students should consult Millions Saved for more complete coverage of these five 
cases and to learn about the other cases.

336   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
PREVENTING HIV/AIDS IN THAILAND
Well-documented stories of large-scale success in HIV prevention are few, although 
many small programs have been shown to be effective. But in Thailand, a large-scale 
program was successful in changing behaviors associated with increased risk of HIV 
among sex workers and those who use their services. Thai authorities initially rec-
ognized the severity of the situation in 1988, when the first wave of HIV infections 
spread among injecting-drug users. Between 1989 and 1990, they found that brothel-
based sex workers infected with HIV tripled from 3.1 percent to 9.3 percent, and a 
year later it reached 15 percent. Over the same period, the proportion of male con-
scripts who were HIV positive when tested on entry to the army rose from 0.5 percent 
to 3 percent, a sixfold increase in only two years.
Although prostitution is illegal in Thailand, and there was fear that the govern-
ment’s intervention could imply that it tolerated or even condoned it, officials agreed 
that the higher priority was preventing HIV from spreading further. To do this the gov-
ernment launched the “100 percent condom program,” in which all sex workers in 
brothels were required to use condoms with clients. There was one straightforward 
rule: no condom, no sex. By creating a monopoly environment, clients, most of whom 
preferred unprotected sex, could not go elsewhere to find it. Health officials provided 
free boxes of condoms and local police held meetings with brothel owners and sex 
workers. Men seeking treatment for sexually transmitted diseases were asked to name 
the brothel they had used, and health officials would then visit the establishment to 
provide more information. In principle, the police could shut down any brothel that 
failed to adopt the policy. Such sanctions were used a few times early on but authori-
ties generally preferred to work with the brothels rather than alienate them.
The campaign was successful: Nationwide condom use in brothels increased 
from 14 percent in 1989 to more than 90 percent in 1992. The rate of new HIV infec-
tions fell fivefold between 1991 and 1993–95. The program may have prevented 
200,000 HIV infections during the 1990s. While the program was successful among 
sex workers, the program did little to encourage men and women, especially among 
teens and young adults, to use condoms in casual but noncommercial sex. A substan-
tial risk remains that HIV will spread through unprotected sex in Thailand. In addi-
tion, HIV continues to spread among injecting-drug users, where the rate is as high 
as 39 percent. The cost of treating AIDS with antiretroviral drugs, as well as the cost 
of treating opportunistic infections, is a major challenge facing the Thai government 
and its citizens. The expense of the government’s ARV program, in part, was responsi-
ble for a two-thirds decline between 1997 and 2004 in the budget for HIV prevention.
CONTROLLING TUBERCULOSIS IN CHINA
In 1991, China revitalized its TB program and launched the 10-year Infectious and 
Endemic Disease Control Project to curb its TB epidemic in 13 of its 31 mainland 
provinces. The program adopted the DOTS strategy. Trained health workers watched 

W H AT  W O R K S ?  S O M E  S U C C E S S E S  I N  G L O B A L  H E A LT H  337
patients at local TB dispensaries every other day for six months as they swallowed 
their antibiotic treatment. Information on each treatment was sent to the county TB 
dispensary, and treatment outcomes were sent quarterly to the National Tuberculo-
sis Project Office.
China achieved a 95 percent cure rate for new cases within two years of adopt-
ing DOTS, and a cure rate of 90 percent for those who had previously undergone 
unsuccessful treatment. The number of people with TB declined by over 37 percent 
between 1990 and 2000, and an estimated 30,000 TB deaths were prevented each 
year. The program cost $130 million in total. The World Bank and WHO estimate that 
successful treatment was achieved at less than $100 per person. One life year was 
saved for an estimated $15 to $20.
Despite China’s success in curing TB, the program achieved lower-than-hoped-
for rates of case detection. China is not alone in this shortcoming and had an experi-
ence similar to other high-burden countries. One of the main contributing factors to 
the low case detection rate was inadequate referral of suspected TB cases from hospi-
tals to the TB dispensaries. Because hospitals can charge for TB diagnosis and treat-
ment, they have little economic incentive to direct patients to the dispensaries. As 
a result, despite regulations requiring referrals to dispensaries, most TB patients are 
diagnosed in hospitals, where treatment is often abandoned prematurely.
TB remains a deadly threat in China. Hundreds of millions of people are infected 
and 10 percent of these are predicted to develop active TB. The government of China 
faces the challenge of maintaining high cure rates in the provinces covered by the 
project while scaling up the DOTS program to the remaining half of the population. 
In response to the 2004 SARS epidemic, the government established a web-based 
reporting system throughout the country, making it mandatory to report 37 infec-
tious diseases, including TB, within 24 hours. From 2004 to 2007 the proportion of 
TB cases referred from hospitals to dispensaries increased from 59 percent to 78 per-
cent, and in 2009 China had one of the highest case detection rates for high burden 
countries.
ERADICATING SMALLPOX
Smallpox, which had affected 10 to 15 million people globally in 1966 and resulted 
in 1.5 to 2 million deaths, has been completely eradicated. The last recorded case of 
smallpox occurred in Somalia in 1977. Its eradication has been heralded as one of the 
greatest achievements of public health in world history. In addition to the direct impact 
on smallpox, the campaign brought important benefits to other health issues, such as 
improvements in routine immunization. During the smallpox eradication campaign it 
was discovered that more than one vaccine could be given at a time, an idea now taken 
for granted. In 1970, the Expanded Program on Immunization was proposed, which 
sought to add several vaccines to routine smallpox inoculation. By 1990, 80 percent 
of the children throughout the developing world were receiving vaccines against six 
childhood killers, compared to only 5 percent when the program started.

338   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
The cost of smallpox eradication can be compared to its benefits, captured by 
the costs of the disease that have been averted. In developing countries, the costs 
averted include expenditures for caring for patients as well as lost economic pro-
ductivity due to illness. In 1976, it was estimated that the cost of caring for someone 
with smallpox in India was about $3 per patient, which translated to an annual cost 
of $12 million for the country due to the widespread nature of the disease. Although 
$3 per patient may seem small, bear in mind that, in many developing countries, 
public health spending in total is typically only $7 to $8 per person. In addition to the 
costs of care, by one estimate, India lost about $700 million each year due to dimin-
ished economic performance. Assuming 1.5 million deaths due to smallpox world-
wide in 1967, smallpox cost developing countries at least $1 billion each year at the 
start of the eradication campaign.
In the industrialized countries, eradication allowed governments to save the 
cost of vaccination programs that had been in place to prevent the reintroduction 
of the disease. In the United States, the bill for 5.6 million primary vaccinations and 
8.6 million revaccinations in 1968 alone was $92.8 million, or about $6.50 per vac-
cination. With other indirect costs of the vaccination program, expenditures in all 
developed countries were around $350 million per year. Therefore, combining devel-
oping and industrialized countries, the estimated global costs, both direct and indi-
rect, of smallpox in the late 1960s was more than $1.35 billion per year. This figure 
represents the economic benefits of eradication.
The ultimate expenditures of the intensified eradication program were around 
$23 million per year from 1967 to 1979, financed with $98 million from international 
contributions and $200 million from the endemic countries. Thus the benefits of 
eradication far outweighed the costs. It has since been calculated that the largest 
donor, the United States, saved, in terms of costs averted, the total of all its contri-
butions every 26 days, making smallpox prevention through vaccination one of the 
most cost-beneficial health interventions of our time.
ELIMINATING POLIO IN LATIN AMERICA
The world’s largest public health campaign, the Global Polio Eradication Initiative, 
follows in the footsteps of smallpox eradication. In 1988, 125 countries were endemic 
for polio with an estimated 350,000 cases. By 2006, the number of cases had dropped 
to below 1,400 and only 6 countries and territories remained polio endemic: Afghani-
stan, Egypt, India, Niger, Nigeria, and the Palestinian Territories. However, poliovirus 
continues to spread to previously polio-free regions. In late 2004 and 2005, 10 pre-
viously polio-free countries were reinfected. Worldwide success is due to the coor-
dinated efforts of regional and international polio eradication campaigns that have 
immunized hundreds of millions of children. The regional polio campaign in the 
Americas eliminated polio in just six years.

W H AT  W O R K S ?  S O M E  S U C C E S S E S  I N  G L O B A L  H E A LT H  339
Polio, short for poliomyelitis, is caused by the intestinal poliovirus. Its most 
feared effect, paralysis, develops in less than 1 percent of all victims, when the virus 
affects the central nervous system. The most serious form of the disease causes paral-
ysis that leaves a person unable to swallow or breath. Respiratory support is needed 
to keep patients alive and mortality runs as high as 40 percent.
In the 1930s and 1940, after a series of polio outbreaks, the American public 
called for a vaccine. The mobilization effort was led by the disease’s most famous 
victim, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt. In 1938, President Roosevelt created 
the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, later renamed the March of Dimes, 
to raise funds “a dime at a time” to support the quest for a vaccine. In 1952, the cam-
paign paid off with Dr. Jonas Salk’s discovery of an inactivated polio vaccine (IPV). 
Between 1955 and 1961, more than 300 million doses were administered in the 
United States, resulting in a 90 percent drop in the incidence of polio. In 1961, a sec-
ond scientific breakthrough resulted in a new form of the vaccine. Dr. Albert Sabin’s 
oral polio vaccine (OPV) had several advantages over the previous vaccine. The 
vaccine prevented paralysis, as did the IPV, but OPV went further by helping to halt 
 person-to-person transmission. At approximately $0.05 per dose, OPV was cheaper 
than its predecessor, and because it is an oral vaccine that requires no needles, it is 
easier to administer on a wide scale by volunteers.
Successful vaccination programs in Latin America eventually led the Pan American 
Health Organization in 1985 to launch a program to eradicate polio from the Ameri-
cas. The immunization strategy of the campaign centered around three primary 
components: achieving and maintaining high immunization coverage, prompt 
identification of new cases, and aggressive control of outbreaks. In countries where 
polio was endemic, national vaccine days (NVDs) were held twice a year, one to 
two months apart, reaching nearly all children younger than five. The NVDs were 
designed to vaccinate as many children as possible. While aggressive vaccination 
strategies helped slow polio’s transmission in most of the region, the disease still 
lingered.
Operation Mop-Up was launched in 1989 to aggressively tackle the virus in its 
final bastions. The initiative targeted the communities where polio cases had been 
reported, where coverage was low, or where overcrowding, poor sanitation, weak 
healthcare infrastructure or heavy migration pervaded. In these communities, 
house-to-house vaccination campaigns were held to finally wipe out the disease. The 
last reported case in Latin America was in Peru in 1991. Polio was declared eradi-
cated from the Americas a few years later when no further cases emerged.
Administration of an oral polio vaccine proved both inexpensive and cost-effective. 
The cost of immunizing a child with three doses of the polio vaccine (along with 
diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis vaccine) is just $21. Even without taking into con-
sideration such benefits as increased productivity, strengthened capacity to fight 
other diseases, and reduced pain and suffering, the polio eradication campaign was 

340   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
economically justified based on the savings of medical costs for treatment and reha-
bilitation alone. The first five years of the polio campaign cost $120 million: $74 from 
national sources and $46 million from international donors. Taking into consider-
ation the savings from treatment avoided, donor contributions paid for themselves 
in 15 years. Today, war and politics, not money, are the primary barriers to the total 
eradication of polio.
PREVENTING DEATHS FROM DIARRHEAL DISEASE
Diarrheal disease is one of the leading causes of death among children, causing 
nearly 20 percent of all child deaths. Worldwide, dehydration from diarrhea kills 
between 1.4 and 2.5 million babies each year, mostly in developing countries where 
children suffer an average of three episodes a year. Nearly 20 out of 1,000 children die 
of diarrheal disease before the age of two. This is a great public health failure because 
such deaths easily can be prevented at very low cost. Nevertheless, there has been 
some progress. Many countries, including Egypt, as documented later, have suc-
ceeded in disseminating knowledge about a life-saving treatment that resulted in 
dramatic declines in mortality associated with diarrhea and a large improvement in 
infant and child survival.
Diarrhea is an intestinal disorder characterized by abnormally frequent and 
watery stools. It is caused by a number of agents, including bacteria, protozoa, and 
viruses. Unclean water, dirty hands during eating, and spoiled food are the primary 
sources of transmission. The most effective modes of prevention include improved 
water supply and sanitation, improved hygiene, and immunization against mea-
sles (which can cause diarrhea). Dehydration is the most serious effect of diar-
rhea. When fluid loss reaches 10 percent of body weight, dehydration becomes 
fatal. In cases that are not fatal, dehydration can leave a child susceptible to future 
infections.
Avoiding death from dehydration requires the swift restoration of lost fluids and 
electrolytes. Until the development of oral rehydration therapy in the 1960s, the only 
effective treatment was through intravenous (IV) infusions in a hospital or clinic. 
IV therapy is not a treatment of choice in the developing world because of its high 
cost, the hardship of traveling to clinics, and shortage of both trained personnel and 
supplies. Many people turn to drugs, including antibiotics, which can stop diarrhea. 
However, the majority of these drugs have no proven health benefit and some can 
cause dangerous side effects.
Oral rehydration therapy has been called the most important medical discovery 
of the twentieth century. Developed in the 1960s in Bangladesh and India, it consists 
of a simple solution of water, salt, and sugar that is as effective in halting dehydra-
tion as intravenous therapy. It is immensely cheaper at just a few cents per dose, 
safer and easier to administer, and more practical for mass treatment. The effective-
ness of ORT was proven during cholera outbreaks in refugee camps on the border of 

W H AT  W O R K S ?  S O M E  S U C C E S S E S  I N  G L O B A L  H E A LT H  341
India and Bangladesh in the 1970s. In 1971, the war for independence in what is now 
Bangladesh created 10 million refugees. The unsanitary conditions in overcrowded 
refugee camps resulted in outbreaks of cholera with fatality rates approaching 30 per-
cent. Resources were not available for mass treatment with IV fluids. Oral treatment 
was proposed as an alternative. The results were extraordinary. Cholera fatalities in 
the camp using ORT dropped to less than 4 percent, compared to 20 to 30 percent in 
camps treated with intravenous therapy.
Egypt was one of the pioneers of national-level administration of oral rehydra-
tion therapy. In 1977, 1 in 20 children died of diarrhea before his or her first birth-
day. That year packets of oral rehydration salts were introduced at public clinics and 
for sale at pharmacies, but few mothers were aware of the treatment and even fewer 
used it. In 1982, only 10 to 20 percent of diarrhea cases used the packets of oral rehy-
dration salts. Physicians also did not recommend them.
In 1980, the government launched the Strengthening of Rural Health Delivery 
Project to test how mothers and physicians could be persuaded to use ORT. Initially, 
in 29 rural villages, nurses taught mothers in their homes how to use ORT and physi-
cians were educated about the therapy. ORT use rose dramatically, and as a result, 
child mortality was 38 percent lower than in control villages, and diarrhea-associated 
mortality during the peak season was 45 percent lower. Based on the success of 
these community trials, in 1981 Egypt began a massive program to promote ORT use 
among the country’s 41 million residents. Financial and technical support came from 
the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) and the public health orga-
nization John Snow, Inc. The program involved the entire Ministry of Health, other 
branches of government, WHO, and UNICEF. The program worked through the exist-
ing health infrastructure in order to strengthen the capacity of the health services to 
deliver care.35
The program used several innovative approaches to increase the use of ORT. 
Packets were redesigned in smaller quantities and the project logo became the most 
recognized product label in Egypt. Production and distribution channels were devel-
oped. Health workers, nurses, and physicians were trained. A mass media campaign 
was launched in 1984 that took advantage of the 90 percent of households that had 
televisions. The campaign was very successful. By 1986, nearly 99 percent of moth-
ers were aware of ORT. Infant mortality dropped by 36 percent and child (under-five) 
mortality by 43 percent between 1982 and 1987. Mortality due to diarrhea dropped 
82 percent among infants and 62 percent among children during this same period. 
The program achieved success with an extremely cost-effective intervention. The 
average cost per child treated with ORT was less than $6, and the cost per death 
averted was between $100 and $200.
35M. el-Rafie et al., “The Effect of Diarrheal Disease Control on Infant and Childhood Mortality in 
Egypt: Report from the National Control of Diarrheal Diseases Project,” The Lancet 335, no. 8690 (March 
17, 1990).

342   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
ORT continues to be the most cost-effective means of treating dehydration, and 
its use has been adapted to the unique challenges found in different countries. In 
Bangladesh, where 90 percent of the over 100 million residents lives in rural areas 
with poor transportation in a country 10 times the size of Egypt, distribution of ORT 
packets was not feasible. In 1980, a program to promote ORT in rural Bangladesh 
began by training workers to go door to door and teach mothers about dehydration 
and ORT. Mothers were also taught how to make a homemade solution by mixing 
a three-finger pinch of salt, a fistful of sugar, and a liter of water. (Today, packaged 
oral rehydration salts are available in most of the country.) Between 1980 and 1990, 
13 million mothers were taught to make oral rehydration mixtures. An evaluation of 
more than 7,000 households found that between 25 and 52 percent of cases of severe 
diarrhea used the mixture. Today, the usage rate of ORT in Bangladesh is 80 percent, 
and ORT is part of Bangladeshi culture. An increase in the use of ORT across the 
globe has slashed diarrhea mortality rates in children by at least half. ORT saves the 
lives of an estimated 1 million children each year.
LESSONS LEARNED
There is no simple prescription for success that comes out of comparing the cases 
presented in Millions Saved. Nor can one easily place blame for the dismal failures 
that let HIV/AIDS ravage southern Africa or prolong malaria’s devastating toll on so 
many. Poverty is one of the explanations for the failures but it is not sufficient. Even 
poor nations have had success in combating diseases. The health sector is one with 
pervasive market failures: There are all the common problems of negative externali-
ties, principal-agent problems, information failures, and public goods. An inability 
to resolve these issues reflects equally pervasive government failures at the local, 
national, and international levels.
Successful health initiatives are characterized by strong leadership. Former 
World Bank president Robert McNamara was personally committed to controlling 
river blindness in West Africa, the Thai government had charismatic leaders with 
the vision to launch a program to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS, and Egyptian offi-
cials stood firmly behind plans to expand ORT from community trials to a national 
program. In contrast, South African presidents Nelson Mandela and Thabo Mbeki 
generally ignored HIV/AIDS as an issue until the disease had already turned into a 
pandemic and national tragedy. Malaria, after having been resolved in the developed 
nations, has been neglected elsewhere.
In addition to strong leadership and program champions, one needs a combi-
nation of a technological solution and an affordable delivery system. Affordability 
can require concessions from patent holders, as has happened with generic ARVs 
mass produced by pharmaceutical companies in Brazil and India. Public–private 
partnerships also have worked, in which drugs are provided at cost and distribu-
tion is handled by government authorities. Donors, whether public or private, can 

H E A LT H C H A L L E N G E S   343
play important roles. The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; 
USAID; the World Bank; and others have provided critical finance as has the private 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Local commitment is equally essential. Deliver-
ing improved health requires the actions of millions of individuals, whether those 
trained as doctors, nurses, or engineers or relatively unskilled workers and volun-
teers who watch patients take their medications as part of DOTS programs or help 
administer oral vaccines in remote villages.
HEALTH CHALLENGES
The challenge for the twenty-first century is to continue the battle against commu-
nicable disease while developing strategies to combat emerging epidemics of non-
communicable conditions. The developing world continues to face the illnesses of 
poverty. Over 8 million children and 300,000 mothers die each year, even though 
most of these deaths can be avoided through cost-effective vaccine programs, rehy-
dration therapy for diarrheal diseases, improved nutrition status, and better birthing 
practices. Many people believe that infectious diseases in low- and middle-income 
countries should be a high priority because the technical means exist to control them 
and they disproportionately affect the young. The Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) placed maternal and child health as a high priority and an integral part of 
poverty reduction. Over the past decade, the MDGs have moved maternal and child 
health from a primarily technical concern to one that is increasingly seen as a “moral 
and political imperative.”36
The battle against infectious disease will be ongoing this century. New diseases 
will emerge and, in a more globalized world, move quickly across borders. Drug resis-
tance will make disease eradication much harder, as the discovery of new drugs races 
against the ability of microbes to adapt and mutate into even more virulent strains. 
But infectious diseases are not the only challenge the low- and middle-income 
nations face. The 2002 World Health Report: Reducing Risks, Promoting Healthy Life
highlighted other factors that have adverse effects on health. The report identified 10 
major global risk factors in terms of the burden of disease. Listed in order of their 
expected health risks, they are underweight children; unsafe sex; high blood pres-
sure; tobacco consumption; alcohol consumption; unsafe water, sanitation, and 
hygiene; iron deficiency; indoor smoke from solid fuels; high cholesterol; and obesity 
and physical inactivity. These 10 risk factors already account for more than one-third 
of deaths worldwide.
HEALTH CHALLENGES
36World Health Report 2005: Make Every Mother and Child Count (Geneva: World Health Organization, 
2005), p. 3.

344   [CH. 9] H E A LT H
Underweight children are strongly related to poverty as are unsafe water, inade-
quate sanitation, and indoor air pollution. Unsafe sex is the main factor in the spread 
of HIV/AIDS, with a major impact in the poor countries of Africa and Asia. Some of 
these risk factors, such as high blood pressure and high cholesterol, tobacco and 
excessive alcohol consumption, obesity and physical inactivity, are more commonly 
associated with wealthy societies. However, with epidemiologic transitions, poor and 
middle-income countries increasingly face these risks as well. For improvements in 
health and life expectancy to continue, it will be necessary to address this double bur-
den of disease in the decades ahead.
SUMMARY
• Life expectancy is among the most common measures for assessing health 
outcomes. In 2008, the high-income nations had life expectancy at birth 
of 80 years; in Latin America, 73 years; in South Asia, 64 years; and in sub-
Saharan Africa, only 52 years. Most of the differences can be explained by 
the much higher rates of mortality during the first 5 years of life in poorer 
regions.
• Since the 1960s, the gap in life expectancy between nations, unlike the gap 
in per capita incomes, has fallen rapidly. Many low- and middle-income 
nations have made substantial and historically unprecedented progress 
in increasing life expectancy. This stands as one of the great successes of 
human development in the past half century although there are exceptions, 
including several nations in sub-Saharan Africa.
• In many developing nations, where life expectancy has risen and fertility 
fallen, the age structure of the population has changed and so has the 
pattern of disease. This has resulted in an epidemiologic transition. Heart 
disease, a noncommunicable disease, is now the leading cause of death 
worldwide. Diseases common in high-income nations, including heart 
disease and cancers, are becoming more prevalent in low- and middle-
income nations. But infectious diseases, which take a relatively small toll 
in high-income nations, remain a major threat to children and adults in 
developing countries.
• Improving health and rising levels of per capita income are well correlated. 
But significant improvements in health can occur even at low incomes. 
Preventative measures long practiced in developed countries are vital. They 
include access to clean water and proper sanitation, control of insects and 
other disease vectors, and widespread vaccination programs. In addition 
to these public health measures, education, especially of females, is 
correlated with better health outcomes.
SUMMARY

S U M M A R Y   345
• Better health helps children remain at school and makes workers more 
productive in their fields and at their jobs. Better health increases the 
opportunity nations and individuals face to save and invest in their futures. 
Higher incomes, in turn, permit governments and families to devote more 
resources, whether for water, sanitation, vaccines, drugs, or health workers, 
to improving health.
• Infectious disease continues to plague poor nations. HIV/AIDS, malaria, 
and tuberculosis are three of the best known. Together they kill 4.5 million 
people a year, accounting for about 8 percent of all deaths worldwide. 
Other infectious diseases kill millions more, especially children, and 
debilitate those who are sick but do not die. Many of these infectious 
diseases, including HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis, are preventable 
and with adequate resources and institutions can be treated effectively. 
That this is not happening is both an economic failure and a human 
tragedy.
• The spread of HIV/AIDS, the failure to attack malaria, and the reemergence 
of TB, including new drug-resistant strains, provide evidence of what 
has gone wrong in addressing world health. But there are also abundant 
examples of health successes, ranging from the eradication of smallpox to 
the near eradication of polio to the diffusion of oral rehydration therapies 
as a means of saving children from diarrheal diseases.
• The challenge of the twenty-first century will be for low- and middle-
income countries to win the battle against both old and new infectious 
diseases, while addressing the increasing prevalence of chronic 
noncommunicable diseases long associated with higher incomes.


PART THREE
Macroeconomic Policies 
for Development


349
Investment and Savings
10
I
n Chapter 4 we learned that economic growth occurs because of increases in a 
country’s capital stock and in its employed labor force together with increases in 
the productivity of those two factors of production. In this section of the book we 
go in depth into the mechanisms that lead to increases in the capital stock and to 
the increases in productivity that are embodied in capital. Capital increases because 
individuals and companies decide to invest their funds in the purchase of machinery, 
buildings, and other capital equipment. If they invest wisely, their production and 
profits increase. If they invest poorly the capital stock and profits may not increase at 
all. A farmer in Kenya will plant coffee trees and expect to reap a return when the cof-
fee beans are ripe several years in the future. A large corporation in China will invest 
in furnaces and rolling mills to produce finished steel products.
To invest, however, the farmer or corporation must first obtain the funds and 
other resources that make their investments possible. The Kenyan farmer must 
have money to buy coffee seedlings and to hire labor to help in the preparation of 
the land. The Chinese steel corporation must find the funds to pay workers to build 
the furnaces and rolling mills and to purchase the best steel-rolling technology from 
abroad or from another corporation in China. The funds required may come from 
savings from the farmer’s own income, may be borrowed from members of his or her 
extended family, or may be a loan from a microcredit institution. The large corpo-
ration may sell ownership shares in the company, use its own retained earnings, or 
borrow from a major bank. All of these sources of funds require that some person or 
business first save at least part of their income. If all income is consumed for food by 
the farmer or spent on an expensive limousine for the steel plant manager, there will 

350   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
be nothing left over to invest. Both the farmer and the steel corporation, however, can 
borrow from someone else who has saved and use the money to invest, paying it back 
at some future time.
In this chapter, we start first with the fundamentals of what constitutes good 
investments—what leads to investments that promote growth either of the individ-
ual farmer, the large corporation, or the country as a whole? The principles of good 
investments from a country’s point of view apply equally to investments made by indi-
viduals, by private companies, or by governments. However, differences in ownership, 
in who is making the investment decisions, have a powerful  influence on whether the 
investor applies the principles of good investment correctly.  Government officials do 
not have the same objectives as private companies, and large corporations can pur-
sue goals quite different from a small farmer or proprietor of a five person factory. 
Foreign investors may have different incentives and goals from domestic investors. 
As already noted, no one can invest either well or poorly unless someone or some 
company or government agency first saves. We will briefly explore why households, 
corporations, and governments save. Of particular interest is that some of the saving 
done for many developing countries is done by foreigners, not just by citizens of the 
country itself.
In some cases investors save and invest their own money, but more commonly 
those who invest are different from those who save. The gap between the savers and 
investors is filled by a wide variety of financial institutions ranging from banks and 
the stock market to the government itself. This separation of investors and savers 
makes possible much higher rates of investment than would otherwise be the case, 
but it also depends on institutions and government policies that can behave in ways 
that lead to economic crises, as occurred throughout much of the world in 2008–09. 
There is, of course, much more to the role of the government in managing the econ-
omy than just what it can accomplish through a central bank. Government is both an 
investor itself and a spender of funds in a wide variety of areas, ranging from income 
transfers to the poor to paying the salaries of civil servants and the military, that have 
little to do with investment. In Chapter 11 we explore how the government raises the 
revenue it needs to make these expenditures and how it uses these resources to help 
cope with economic crises as they occur.
Chapter 12 deals with the role of the financial sector first in its role as the interme-
diary that mobilizes savings from individuals and then allocates savings to investors. 
Efficient management of the financial sector, however, can be undermined by inflation 
and thus control of inflation is a critical component of any effective growth strategy. 
The chapter reviews how developing countries have tried to control inflation and avoid 
financial crises and how their success or failure in these efforts has fostered or under-
mined the development of the intermediation role of the sector. Chapter 13 explores 
in greater depth the central role of developing country debt in triggering many finan-
cial crises. Developing country debt that leads to crises also involves foreign savings, 
both private and government, that is then lent to developing countries by international 

U S I N G I N V E S TM E NT P R O D U CTI V E LY :  C O S T – B E N E F IT  A N A LY S I S   351
banks and other financial institutions including multilateral agencies, such as the Inter-
national Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank. Chapter 14 focuses on the role of for-
eign aid to developing countries (a major form of foreign savings made by aid-giving 
governments that is transferred to developing countries).
 USING INVESTMENT PRODUCTIVELY: COST–BENEFIT 
ANALYSIS
In many low-income countries, there appear to be abundant opportunities for 
increased investment that could have significant economic and social benefits, but 
these investments do not happen. Roads are absent or of poor quality, electricity and 
telecommunications facilities are in short supply and unreliable, and there seem 
to be many workers with few factories to employ them. Sometimes, this is because 
investment funds are not always available, but it is also because the investments that 
do take place are not always particularly productive. But this in itself is a puzzle: The 
Solow growth model discussed in Chapter 4 suggests that, in low-income countries 
where capital is scarce, new investment has the potential to be highly productive but 
that potential is not always realized. Questions about the quantity and productivity 
of investment become more complicated when foreigners make the investments. 
Although foreign capital appears to be a ready source of additional investment funds, 
foreign investment does not always have a good reputation, and in some cases, even 
where it is productive, it is not always welcomed.
How does one judge whether an investment is likely to be productive or not? 
One of the most powerful tools for answering this question is cost–benefit analysis, 
which is also referred to as project appraisal. This tool is applicable to both private 
and public investment and to investment made by foreign firms as well. Public or 
government investors, however, should use the tool somewhat differently from pri-
vate investors because their objectives are different.
PRESENT VALUE
The investor’s calculation normally involves four steps. First, the firm will forecast the 
net cash flow of an investment, measuring the difference between the cash revenues 
from the sale of the product and the cash outlays on investment, material inputs, sal-
aries and wages, purchased services, and other items.
Second, investors have to adjust their valuation of costs and benefits, depend-
ing on whether they happen soon or far into the future. Investors recognize that cash 
received in the future is less valuable than cash received immediately because in 
the interim they could earn interest (or profits) on these funds by investing them in 
USING INVESTMENT PRODUCTIVELY: COST–BENEFIT
ANALYSIS

352   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
bonds or savings accounts (or in additional, revenue-earning production facilities). 
Any firm or individual asked to choose between $1,000 today or $1,000 next year 
would take the money now and place it in a savings account earning, say, 2 percent 
a year. Then, after one year, the interest payment would boost the savings account 
balance to $1,020. Equivalently, the prospect of $1,000 a year from now should be 
evaluated as equivalent today to only $1,000/1.02 = $980. This process of reducing 
the value of future flows is called discounting. Because the interest rate provides a 
first approximation of the rate at which future cash flows must be discounted, it is 
usually called the discount rate. Discounting takes place over several years, so the 
discount rate must be compounded over time. In the second year another 2 percent 
would be earned on the balance of $1,020, and increase it to $1,040.40. The payment 
of $1,000 two years from now then would be discounted to yield a present value of 
only $1,000/1.040 = $961. A general expression for the present value, P, is
 
P = F/(1 + i)t 
[10–1]
where F is the value in the future, i is the discount rate, and t is time, usually repre-
sented by the number of years. As the interest rate or the number of years increases, 
the present value of the future cash flow decreases. Note that because project 
appraisals are most conveniently done at constant prices, netting out inflation, the 
discount rate is a real rate of interest, net of inflation.
Investment projects usually have negative cash flows in the early years, when 
there are large expenditures, then generate positive cash flows in later years, as the 
new facilities begin to earn revenues. Tree crops such as palm oil and rubber take 
several years before they become productive and must be cut down and replanted 
when production falls off because of aging. Such a time profile of net cash flow is 
depicted in Figure 10–1; it is the most common of several possible profiles. To sum-
marize the value of this net cash flow in a single number, each year’s net cash flow is 
divided by the respective discount factor, and the resulting present values are added 
to give the net present value (NPV):
 
NPV =  a (Bt - Ct)/(1 + i)t 
[10–2]
where Bt and Ct are the benefits (revenue) and costs in each year t, and i is the dis-
count rate. For a firm, the correct discount rate is the average cost at which additional 
funds may be obtained from all sources (that is, the firm’s cost of capital).
If the NPV of a project happens to equal 0, the project will yield a net cash flow 
just large enough to cover all the projects costs. In that case, when NPV = 0, the dis-
count rate has a special name, the internal rate of return (IRR), a term we introduced 
in the discussion of education as an investment in Chapter 8. If the net present value 
is positive, then the project can cover all its financial costs with some profit left over 
for the firm. If negative, the project cannot cover its financial costs and should not 
be undertaken. The higher the net present value, the better the project’s financial 

U S I N G I N V E S TM E NT P R O D U CTI V E LY :  C O S T – B E N E F IT  A N A LY S I S   353
profile. If the cash flow of Figure 10–1 is discounted at a rate of 8 percent,1 the net 
present value is a positive $1,358 (Table 10–1). This calculation indicates that the 
investment will earn enough to repay the total costs ($2,500 over years 0 and 1) with a 
(discounted) surplus of $1,358.
Third, investors must consider the risks to both the costs and the benefits of 
their investments. Simple NPV analysis such as that in Table 10–1 can be misleading 
because it generates a single summary number for the answer, giving a false sense of 
precision. In reality, investors cannot be sure in advance of all the costs or the cash 
flows their investment might generate. Fuel prices might skyrocket or electricity sup-
plies might be cut off, forcing the investor either to buy a new generator or to curtail 
production. The prices for their products might be either much higher or much lower 
than the original projections. Political instability might increase costs and disrupt 
1The return on investment in developing countries can be much higher and much lower than 8 per-
cent, depending on circumstances. We have used 8 percent in our example because it is a common rate of 
return for such investments.
FIGURE 10–1 Time Profile for Investment: Net Cash Flow
The cash flow of a project can be represented by a bar diagram. Cash 
outflows are shown by bars below the horizontal axis; inflows, by bars 
above the axis. Year 0 and 1 show investment in construction and 
equipment, hence the negative cash flows. Year 2 is the startup period, 
years 3 and 4 show gradually increasing output and cash inflows, and 
years 5 through 10 show steady output and cash inflows. The project is 
assumed to end in year 11, when the salvage value of equipment swells 
the cash inflow.
500
400
–300
–1,500
–1,000
800
800
800
800
800
800
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
1,400
Year
0
1
2
3
4
Positive net cash flow
Negative net cash flow

354   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
the firm’s ability to purchase supplies or sell its products. Therefore, prudent inves-
tors calculate a range of NPVs for their investment based on best case and worse case
scenarios, testing the sensitivity of the outcome to changes in specific costs or ben-
efits. An investor may decide not to make an investment even if it generates a positive
NPV under baseline calculations if the risks around actually achieving that outcome
are too great.
Fourth, investors must compare across projects. Just because a project gener-
ates a positive NPV does not mean it is the best possible use of investment funds,
especially if the firm has a set of alternative projects to consider and a budget that
can accommodate several but not all of them. Under these circumstances, investors
should select the set of projects that will yield the highest total net present value for
the entire investment budget.
Up to this point the methodology is the same for both private and public  investors.
The next steps calculate the costs and benefits from an economywide  perspective.
Private investors are typically only interested in whether a project provides an  adequate
rate of return or profit to themselves. Governments, in contrast, should be concerned
with whether a project contributes to the growth of the economy as a whole or to social
welfare more broadly. This concern of governments applies both to public  investment
undertaken by the government itself and to the impact of private investments.
Governments are often called on to support private investments in various ways, and
their decisions in this regard need to be based on the economy-wide impact of the
project, not just on whether the private investors will make a profit or not.
 TABLE 10–1 Net Present Value
CASH FLOW FROM
DISCOUNT
PRESENT
FIGURE 10–1
FACTOR
VALUE†
YEAR
(DOLLARS)
AT 8%*
(DOLLARS)
0
–1,000
1
–1,000
1
–1,500
0.926
–1,389
2
–300
0.857
–257
3
400
0.794
318
4
500
0.735
368
5
800
0.681
544
6
800
0.63
504
7
800
0.583
467
8
800
0.54
432
9
800
0.5
400
10
800
0.463
371
11
1,400
0.429
600
Net Present Value‡
1,358
*Calculated as 1/(1 + i )t from equation 10–2.
t
†Calculated as the cash flow times the discount factor.
‡Sum of the present value of each year.

U S I N G I N V E S TM E NT P R O D U CTI V E LY :  C O S T – B E N E F IT  A N A LY S I S   355
OPPORTUNITY COSTS
Every investment uses goods and services that could otherwise be used for other pur-
poses. In evaluating the investment from an economywide perspective, these goods 
and services should be valued in terms of the net benefits they would have provided if 
used in some alternative project—that is, they have opportunity costs. An investment 
in a dam requires saving that otherwise could be invested in a rural road or in elemen-
tary schools. Cotton used in a textile factory otherwise could have been exported and 
sold abroad. The labor used to build a road might have otherwise been used to sink 
water wells or grow millet. For a private firm, the cost is the market value that it pays for 
wages, goods, and services. For society at large, the cost is the value of the resources in 
terms of their next best use. Public sector investments, in particular, should be evalu-
ated using opportunity costs rather than market costs where the two differ.
The opportunity cost to society might differ from the market wage rate if the gov-
ernment pays wages higher than the market clearing value. If 10 farm workers take 
jobs building a new highway, their opportunity cost is the value of the lost agricul-
tural output due to their leaving the farm, net of the nonlabor recurrent costs of pro-
ducing that output. This reduction in net output is the value of the marginal revenue 
product and, in this situation, is equal to the opportunity cost of labor.2 Similarly, if 
the highway project means that savings will be drawn away from other projects that 
on average would have earned a return of 5 percent, then the opportunity cost of cap-
ital is 5 percent, and this should be used as the discount rate in evaluating the proj-
ect, even if the government borrows money at 2 percent.
In some countries, the market price of foreign exchange might differ from the 
opportunity cost, especially in countries where governments manipulate or control 
the exchange rate. Cotton used in a textile mill otherwise might have been exported; 
if so, its opportunity cost would be the foreign currency it would have earned as an 
export. If the cloth produced by the mill would have been imported in the absence of 
the project, its opportunity cost (a benefit in this case) would be the foreign exchange 
that otherwise would have been spent on cloth imports.
SHADOW PRICES
The opportunity costs of goods and services for the economy as a whole are called 
shadow prices or economic opportunity costs. The first approximation of a shadow 
price (for land, labor, capital, and foreign exchange) is the price paid by private 
participants in the market. Interference in the market distorts market prices from 
their economic opportunity cost: taxes and subsidies of all kinds, monopoly power, 
 minimum wages, interest rate controls, tariffs and import quotas, price controls, and 
2The value of the marginal product of a factor of production can be calculated as the price of a com-
modity multiplied by the additional physical output that results when one unit of the factor is added to the 
production process with all other factors held constant (e.g., that factor’s marginal product).

356   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
so forth. When a private firm undertakes investment analysis, it conducts a commer-
cial project appraisal based on market prices and focusing on profitability. When 
governments consider public investments, they want to measure the full economic 
impact of the investment on the country. To do so, they must use shadow prices 
when market prices do not fully reflect true scarcity values. This kind of evaluation is 
called economic project appraisal. To estimate shadow prices, market prices must 
be adjusted to reflect full opportunity costs.
Estimating shadow prices is not easy and requires intimate knowledge of the 
workings of an economy, both its macroeconomic relationships and the microeco-
nomic behavior of its factor markets. But such adjustment can be important. In many 
countries, the shadow foreign exchange rate is higher than the official rate in terms of 
local currency per dollar. In most cases, this reflects the impact of import duties and 
quotas or intervention by central banks in establishing or modifying the exchange 
rate. As a consequence, any export project that earns more foreign exchange than it 
uses or any import-substituting project that saves more than it uses gets a boost from 
the shadow exchange rate. Although the salaries and wages of skilled employees usu-
ally require no adjustment from market to shadow prices, frequently the opportu-
nity cost of unskilled workers is lower than the wage in formal urban labor markets. 
Therefore, any project using unskilled labor, especially if it is located in a rural area, 
gets a boost because the shadow wage reduces costs without changing benefits.
Discount rates might also be adjusted from market interest rates to shadow discount 
rates if a government treats capital as a very scarce factor of production or if it has a strong 
preference for projects that realize their benefits relatively quickly. This approach would 
tend to discourage any public investment project with high initial investment costs, long 
gestation periods, and low net cash flows. A higher shadow discount rate would favor 
projects that generate their net benefits early because these can be reinvested in other 
productive projects for continued growth and projects that use relatively abundant fac-
tors of production, especially labor, instead of scarce ones, like capital.
An illustration of the power of shadow pricing is contained in Table 10–2, which 
depicts two projects with identical cash flows. One project (the textile mill) earns 
more foreign exchange but uses more labor. Because the shadow wage rate is below 
the market rate, the economic NPV of both projects is raised, but the more labor-
intensive textile project benefits more (shown in Part 2 of the table). When the 
shadow exchange rate is applied, the NPV of the textile mill is raised considerably, 
and that of the telecommunications system becomes negative (Part 3).
WELFARE WEIGHTS
Under some circumstances, governments want to incorporate broader social goals 
into the evaluation of public sector projects, such as the impact on income distribu-
tion, poverty alleviation, or environmental degradation. To do so, governments can 
use welfare weights to further adjust shadow prices in a project analysis. This process 

B A R R I E R S  TO  P R O D U CT I V E  P U B L I C  A N D  P R I V AT E  I N V E S T M E NT   357
might place a higher value on net additional income to certain target groups, such as 
the very poor. Then projects generating more income for these groups have higher 
NPVs than otherwise and tend to be selected more frequently. Similarly, it might 
adjust benefits to capture environmental goals or further reduce the shadow wage 
rate if it was particularly interested in creating new jobs. When welfare weights are 
introduced or shadow prices are further adjusted to reflect social goals, the process is 
called social project appraisal.
The method is potentially powerful but has its dangers. Welfare weights are arbi-
trary, subject to policy makers’ or politicians’ judgment. This, in itself, is not bad, 
but these weights can so overwhelm economically based shadow prices that project 
selection comes down to a choice based almost entirely on arbitrary weights. This 
gives a false sense of precision and sometimes can be misused. In most cases, it is 
best to do the calculations without these weights and then look separately at the wel-
fare implications of the project.
 BARRIERS TO PRODUCTIVE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE 
INVESTMENT
In Chapter 3 we explored at a macro level many of the variables that influence the rate 
of growth of gross domestic product (GDP) in a country. Many of these same vari-
ables have an influence on the productivity of investment, both public and  private. 
BARRIERS TO PRODUCTIVE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE 
INVESTMENT
TABLE 10–2 Effects of Shadow Pricing on Cost–Benefit Analysis
 NET ANNUAL
NET PRESENT
INVESTMENT
CASH FLOW
VALUE
PROJECT
(FIRST YEAR)
(NEXT 5 YEARS)
(10%)
 1.  Take two projects with identical cash flows. Project A earns more net foreign exchange and 
uses more labor than project B:
  A. Textile mill, of which
–1,000
+300
 +137
Net foreign exchanged earned
–500
+400
Wages paid
–350
 –100
  B. Telecommunications system, of which
 –1,000
+300
 +137
Net foreign exchange earned
–800
0
Wages paid
–100
–50
2.  The shadow wage is 75% of market wage, so all wage costs are reduced by 25%. This 
results in the following net cash flows:
  A. Textile mill
–913
+325
 +319
  B. Telecommunications system
–975
+313
 +212
3.  The shadow exchange rate is 20% above official rate, so the net foreign exchange flow is 
raised by 20%. This results in the following net cash flows:
  A. Textile mill
 –1,100
+380
+340
  B. Telecommunication system
 –1,160
+300
–23

358   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
 Political instability can lower the rate of return and increase the risk, particularly to 
private investors but to government investors as well. Macroeconomic instability can 
distort investment decisions away from investments that promote long-term growth 
and toward investments that protect the investor from inflation. Excessive invest-
ment in high-income housing and office buildings often characterized the high infla-
tion period that characterized some South American countries in the 1950s through 
the 1980s. Investment by governments and the private sector in education and health 
increase the quality of the labor force and that in turn raises the rate of return on 
investment in projects other than the investments in education and health them-
selves. More open economies provide opportunities for high return investments not 
only for exporters but also for any investment that needs to use imported inputs. In 
closed economies imported inputs are often very expensive if they are available at all.
Our focus here, however, is on what in the macroeconomic analysis in Chapter 3 
is referred to as effective governance and institutions. There are a wide range of ele-
ments that are included under the rubric of good governance and effective institutions. 
We focus here at the micro level on two: the extent and nature of government inter-
vention in the economy and on corruption. The two are closely related. As we have 
indicated in many chapters in this book, government regulation is often necessary to 
correct for market failures that could do damage to the environment, to health, or to 
growth. In all countries, however, government intervention can create opportunities 
for private investors and public officials alike to seek what economists call rents. Rent-
seeking behavior refers to activities by private and public officials to extract value from 
a project without providing any compensation in return or contributing any increased 
productivity to the project. An example would be for an investor in a cement plant to 
negotiate with the government to provide high tariffs on imported cement so that the 
investor could raise the domestic price on cement, thus earning a higher level of profit. 
The cement producer in this case has done nothing to raise the quality of the cement 
or to increase the efficiency with which the cement is produced. The increase in profits 
is due solely to this investor’s ability to persuade the government to raise the cement 
tariff and hence the domestic cement price. Purchasers of the cement then must pay 
more money to the producer without getting any increased value for themselves. Not 
only can rent-seeking behavior lead to poor policy choices, but the rent-seeking behav-
ior itself entails the diversion of potentially substantial resources from productive uses.
The relevance of these concepts to this chapter is that excessive or inappropriate 
kinds of regulation together with high levels of corruption are a major reason pub-
lic investment projects in low- and middle-income countries often have a low rate 
of economywide return. They can also explain why many private investors also face 
a low rate of return on their investments despite trying to provide a badly needed 
product or service that under more normal circumstances would provide the inves-
tor with a substantial profit. The World Bank has compiled quantitative indicators 
of how government interventions affect the ease of doing business in individual 
 countries. Transparency International, a nongovernmental organization (NGO), also 

B A R R I E R S  TO D O I N G  B U S I N E S S   359
has carried out and collected surveys of perceptions of the level of corruption in most 
of these same countries. We take up each of these two efforts in turn.
BARRIERS TO DOING BUSINESS
Starting and running a business is often described as an individual coming up with a 
good idea (a new or better product, an old product in a new location, or a new way to 
produce a good), building a factory, hiring workers to produce the good, and creating 
a marketing office to sell it to customers. In most countries that individual must first 
get a license to open that business and in many countries it takes a large number of 
such licenses. In Malaysia, for example, in the early years of the twenty-first  century, 
it took 70 licenses or permits to open a new hotel. The business must then hire labor, 
and typically there are many regulations governing the hiring of labor. Many of these 
 regulations make good sense in the right context. Employers in many countries, 
 including the United States, are not allowed to discriminate in hiring based on gender, 
race, or religion. More problematic are the rules in countries that make it extremely 
difficult to dismiss employees even if their performance is subpar or an economic 
downturn limits the work that is available. This new business, early on and throughout 
its existence, must enter into numerous contracts with suppliers, with clients, and with 
its own employees. The question then becomes who if anyone will enforce these con-
tracts. In a high-income country it is typically the legal system and the judiciary that 
is responsible for deciding whether a contract should be enforced or not, and these 
decisions are made according to rules typically written into law by the legislature. In 
many low- and middle-income countries, however, the judiciary is poorly trained, has 
little power, and is often corrupt. Enforcement of contracts tends to depend more on 
the power and influence of the company seeking (or trying to avoid) enforcement.
The World Bank has measured the degree to which these many government 
interventions affect the ability to open a new business or carry on an existing one. 
They report on a number of government interventions that are widely believed to 
affect the ease of doing business in a country. For each of these indicators, they mea-
sure the time it took to get the necessary permits, the number of permits or proce-
dures required, the cost of getting these permits, and a variety of other indicators in 
areas such as the employment of labor or obtaining credit. The full list of categories is 
as follows: Starting a Business, Dealing with Construction Permits, Employing Work-
ers, Registering Property, Getting Credit, Protecting Investors, Paying Taxes, Trading 
across Borders, Enforcing Contracts, and Closing a Business.3 Table 10–3 presents 
data for a number of economies on their overall ranking as a place where it is easy or 
difficult to do business.
BARRIERS TO DOING BUSINESS
3World Bank, Doing Business 2010: Reforming through Difficult Times (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2010).

360   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
Virtually all the high-income countries are ranked among the top 30 (out of 183)
in the overall ease of doing business, with Singapore occupying the top spot. Six 
middle-income nations also made it into the top 30 in 2010: Georgia, Thailand,  Mauritius,
Malaysia, Lithuania, and Latvia. We find some poor performers among the high-
income nations: Taiwan, Spain, Italy, Brunei, and Greece. Most middle-income coun-
tries rank in the top half of this index but there are notable exceptions, such as  Russia,
Brazil, India, and Iran. The bottom 20 countries are 17 sub-Saharan African countries,
some of them plagued by war (Chad, Congo), plus Timor-Leste, Laos, and Venezuela.
TABLE 10–3 The Business Environment
Bold, high-income economies; italics, low-income economies.
Sources: The World Bank, Doing Business 2011,4 (Washington, DC: The World Bank) available at 
www.doingbusiness.org/Rankings. Transparency International, Corruption Perception Index 2011 
(Berlin: Transparency International) available at www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_ indices/
cpi/2011.
COUNTRY
DOING BUSINESS RANK, 2011
CORRUPTION PERCEPTION RANK, 2011
Singapore
1
5
United States
4
24
Georgia
16
64
Thailand
17
80
Japan
20
14
Mauritius
23
46
Latvia
21
61
South Africa
35
64
Taiwan
25
32
Chile
39
22
Spain
44
31
Turkey
71
61
Jamaica
88
86
Pakistan
105
134
China
91
75
Vietnam
98
112
Kenya
109
154
Egypt
110
112
Greece
100
80
Bangladesh
122
120
Russia
120
143
Nigeria
133
143
Brazil
126
73
India
132
95
Iran
144
120
Philippines
136
129
Haiti
174
175
Afghanistan
160
180
Bolivia
153
118
Venezuela
177
172
Chad
183
168
Central African Republic
182
154

B A R R I E R S  TO D O I N G  B U S I N E S S   361
Most of these countries are among the poorest in the world, although  Venezuela is a 
major oil exporter. The Central African Republic ranked as the most difficult nation in the 
world with which to do business in 2010, according to this index.
The reasons for the differences in these rankings between the highly and lowly 
ranked can be best understood by looking at the specific categories measured. In 
Singapore, only 3 procedures were required to start a business, and it took only 
3 days to complete those procedures, there were no restrictions on firing unwanted 
employees (rated 0 out of 100, with 0 indicating no difficulty), and the fired employee 
was entitled to only 4 weeks of severance pay. Registering property involved 3 pro-
cedures and took a mere 5 days. In Kenya, a country ranked close to the middle 
on ease of doing business, 12 procedures were required to start a business and it 
took 34 days to complete them; the difficulty of firing workers was rated 30 out of 
100 and 47 weeks of severance pay was required. In addition, there were 8 proce-
dures to register property, which took 64 days to complete. In the bottom quarter 
was Bolivia, where the 15 procedures involved in starting a business took 50 days; 
the difficulty of firing an employee was rated 100 out of 100, meaning you could not 
fire an employee so severance pay was not relevant. Registering property in Bolivia 
involved 8 procedures that took 2 months to complete. For these and other coun-
tries, the money cost of completing all the necessary procedures was a relatively low 
share of per capita income in high-ranked countries and a much larger share of per 
capita income in low ranked countries.
Time is also money for an investor, thus the more procedures that exist and the 
longer they take, the less likely the investor will go ahead with the investment. The 
result is that in countries with an unfriendly business climate, investments are lower, 
the costs of doing business are higher, and the rate of return on investments is lower. All 
of this translates at the macro level into a lower rate of growth.
Excessive regulation that creates any number of obstacles to doing business is 
not just a matter of lost time or the direct legal costs of the procedures. Large num-
bers of procedures involving licenses and permits also create broad opportunities for 
rent seeking and outright corruption. The difference between corruption and rent 
seeking is that corruption involves rent seeking that is illegal, whereas many forms 
of rent seeking are perfectly legal even though they damage the productivity of the 
economy. Large numbers of regulatory procedures are not the only cause of wide-
spread corruption. Construction, especially public construction, often involves large 
elements of rent seeking and corruption. Road construction and the building of gov-
ernment offices involve costs that are difficult to measure for someone not involved 
directly in the business, making it easier for a construction contract to include hidden 
costs needed to bribe politicians to provide the necessary project funding and to pay 
off those in charge of granting construction permits.
Data on perceptions of corruption in countries around the world estimated by 
Transparency International, a non-profit organization based in Berlin but with a 
global network, are presented in Table 10–3. Even a casual comparison of the two 

362   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
 columns in the table reveals the rough correlation between the ease of doing busi-
ness and the perception of corruption. Countries with friendly business procedures 
typically have low levels of corruption, and the reverse is equally true.
Complete elimination of corruption from public construction and from govern-
ment business relations is virtually impossible. Even the wealthiest countries regu-
larly discover that an official has taken a bribe to issue a permit and a politician has 
received illegal payments so that a vote to fund a public investment project would 
go forward. It is often assumed that the solution to the problem of corruption is to 
increase the number of police investigating corruption and raising the penalties for 
being caught. Certainly law enforcement has a role in curbing corruption, but law 
enforcement alone cannot accomplish much if the opportunities for corruption are 
pervasive (or if law enforcement is itself corrupt). In China, the death penalty has fre-
quently been applied to cases of corruption, but there is little evidence that corrup-
tion has declined as a result.
Key elements in the fight against corruption are similar to what it takes to 
improve the climate for doing business. The number of regulations should be kept to 
the minimum necessary to control fundamental violations of public health, the envi-
ronment, or other important social goals. The officials administering those regula-
tions should have as little discretion as possible on whether to grant a permit. The 
more discretion they have, the more opportunity they have to delay and obfuscate 
the procedures until they receive illegal payments to do what they should be doing 
without payment. The process should be fully transparent with clear deadlines for 
the officials making the decisions. Putting the whole process online where all appli-
cants can go to find out the status of their application has proved to be a powerful 
tool in countries where computer literacy is the norm. For public construction con-
tracts the key is to have competitive bidding with controls to ensure that the com-
panies bidding do not collude with each other or with the official contract awarding 
agency. If all of these steps are taken, the amount of corruption that remains will be 
less, and the anticorruption law enforcement agencies will not be overwhelmed and 
will be able to root out much of the corruption that remains. That, in essence, is the 
Singapore story, and Singapore is ranked 3 on Transparency International’s 2009 Cor-
ruption Perception Index. Central African Republic is ranked 158.
Overcoming corruption becomes almost impossible if the corruption starts not 
at lower levels of government, such as in the customs office where those issuing 
import permits work, but instead at the highest levels of government, including those 
closest to the president or prime minister of the country. The motive for high-level 
corruption is partly personal greed, as the family of Ferdinand Marcos in the Philip-
pines demonstrated, but it is also a result of the difficulties most countries have in 
finding legal and transparent ways of funding the political organization needed to 
win elections or hold on to power in more authoritarian situations. Raising money 
for a political organization is easy if the politician can offer favored access to govern-
ment decisions in exchange. Two presidents of the Republic of Korea and the son of 

F O R E I G N  D I R E CT  I N V E S T M E NT   363
another were convicted of receiving hundreds of millions of dollars in this way. More 
than a few low-income countries have a serious problem in this regard, and even the 
American political process has yet to find a way to fund elections in a way in which 
buying political influence is minimal.
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT
The vast majority of investment in developing countries is undertaken by local citi-
zens, either through small individual projects, larger investments by local firms, or 
by the government. But in some countries, an increasingly larger share of investment 
is made by foreign individuals or firms. Since 1990, foreign direct investment (FDI) 
has been the largest of all international capital flows to middle-income developing 
countries, larger than either cross-border bank lending or foreign aid (in low-income 
countries, FDI is smaller). FDI is defined as a long-term investment in which a non-
resident entity exerts significant management control (usually at least 10 percent of 
voting stock) over an enterprise in the host country. A second type of cross-border 
investment is portfolio equity, in which an investor takes a smaller stake in an enter-
prise, either through a direct purchase or through a stock exchange. Portfolio equity 
flows to developing countries, starting from a low base, grew rapidly in the early 
1990s, but then fell sharply following the financial crises of 1997 and 1998. A  similar 
pattern occurred in the last decade. Portfolio equity increased 10-fold between 
2000 and 2007, only to turn negative in 2008 as investors withdrew their investments. 
With the end of the most recent financial crisis such flows have resumed, and by the 
end of 2009 were approaching 2007 levels. Even at their peak, however, portfolio 
flows were still only one-quarter the size of FDI and about half the size of long-term 
international commercial bank loans.
In the 1960s and 1970s, many developing countries were suspicious of FDI and 
often took steps to actively discourage it. At the time, because of the colonial history 
in many countries and the sometimes offensive behavior of certain foreign investors 
in taking advantage of weak political and legal systems to gain monopoly rights, make 
huge profits, and influence domestic politics, this suspicion often was well founded. 
Starting in the mid-1980s, however, these attitudes began to change, and develop-
ing countries increasingly sought to attract FDI as a means of financing investment, 
creating jobs, and importing technology and ideas. FDI to developing countries grew 
rapidly from $22 billion in 1990 to $148 billion in 2000 to almost $600 billion in 2008 
(more than half of all foreign capital flows). The sharp increase was due partly to 
worldwide advances in technology in communications and transportation (and the 
accompanying reduction in costs) and was closely related to the rapid expansion in 
world trade during the period. It was also the result of much greater enthusiasm on 
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT

364   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
the part of developing countries in trying to attract FDI. The financial crisis reduced 
these flows by 2009, but they still were more than double the level of 2000.4
FDI continues to generate extensive controversy on a range of issues, includ-
ing repatriation of profits, loss of control over domestic natural resources to foreign-
owned entities, the extent of the transfer of technology, the impact on tax revenues, 
and the content of incentive packages. For some, foreign ownership of domestic com-
panies should always be discouraged, even if it brings economic benefits. For others, 
FDI is a critical avenue to integrate the domestic economy with global markets that 
brings with it new technology and skills. The evidence on the relationship between 
FDI and development suggests that it is hard to make broad generalizations, and the 
impact depends critically on the purpose and type of the investment as well as poli-
cies and institutions in the recipient country. FDI in firms producing manufactured 
products sold on competitive global markets is more likely to be positively related to 
economic growth and other development outcomes, whereas FDI in firms producing 
primary products or manufactures or services for protected domestic markets tends 
to have more mixed outcomes.
FDI PATTERNS AND PRODUCTS
The majority of direct foreign investment in developing countries is undertaken by 
multinational corporations (MNCs). A multinational corporation is a firm that con-
trols assets of enterprises located in countries other than its home country in which 
foreign operations are central to its profitability. Multinational enterprises are quite 
diverse, coming in all sizes, from all regions of the world, and are engaged in a wide 
variety of activities. The majority of MNCs are from industrialized countries, but a 
growing number are based in developing countries. Six developing countries had 
companies in Fortune magazine’s list of the world’s largest 500 firms in 2010, includ-
ing China (46 entries), India (8), and Brazil (7). Not all of these firms operate out-
side of their own nations, but most of them do. Many MNCs are private corporations, 
but not all: Fortune’s top 500 includes a number of giant, state-owned companies 
producing petroleum, such as China National Petroleum (ranked 10 in the world) 
and Mexico’s PEMEX (64).5 But multinationals are not always large; small compa-
nies, especially in East and Southeast Asia, have been investing overseas for many 
years, particularly producing labor-intensive manufactured products such as textiles, 
shoes, toys, and electronics.
It is no surprise that the vast majority of FDI comes from rich-country investors. 
Globally, most multinational investment is also directed toward other wealthy coun-
tries, but the share aimed at developing countries has been rising. In the late 1980s, 
less than one-fourth of global FDI flows were directed toward developing countries. 
4World Bank, Global Development Finance, 2011, 36 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2010).
5Walmart Stores, Inc. is the largest corporation in the world.

F O R E I G N  D I R E CT  I N V E S T M E NT   365
The developing country share of global FDI flows increased rapidly during the early 
1990s, peaking at 40 percent in 1994 and averaging 31 percent over that decade. 
By 2000, the developing country share had fallen below 20 percent; yet, that share 
grew throughout the first decade of the 21st century, reaching 46 percent by 2010.6 
Then, in the wake of the financial crisis of 2008–09, total FDI flows fell steeply, but 
the amounts going to low- and middle-income economies stayed relatively stable. 
However, FDI (as well as portfolio equity) is highly concentrated in a few developing 
countries. By 2010, half of all FDI in developing countries went to just 10 countries. 
China (including Hong Kong), received one-quarter of the total at the same time as 
China was becoming a major investor in Africa and elsewhere. Russia is another large 
recipient of FDI, followed by Brazil and India. By contrast, the UN’s category of least-
developed nations, making up much of sub-Saharan Africa, received just 5 percent of 
the total.7
FDI is aimed at a very wide range of activities that are sometimes difficult to clas-
sify, but three broad categories stand out:
• Natural resource-based activities, such as petroleum, minerals, and 
agricultural production. Firms engaged in these activities tend to be quite 
large and the investments capital intensive. These investments are usually 
negotiated directly with the host government, and the government is often 
a partner in the investment.
• Manufacturing and services aimed at the domestic market in the host 
country, including consumer goods (such as processed food or apparel); 
capital-intensive products such as steel or chemicals; and a range of 
services such as transportation, communication, finance, electricity, 
business services, and retail trade. In many cases, these activities are 
protected at least partially against competition from imports through tariffs 
or other restrictions.
• Labor-intensive manufacturing aimed for export on world markets, 
including apparel, electronics, food processing, footwear, textiles, and toys. 
Firms in these activities tend to be efficient and competitive, but they also 
can move quickly from one country to another in response to changes in 
production costs or macroeconomic or political instability.
BENEFITS AND DRAWBACKS OF FDI
Viewed most narrowly, FDI is a source of capital that adds to total investment. FDI 
is relatively small compared to domestic investment, but its share has grown rapidly 
in the last three decades. It accounted for between 2.2 and 3.6 percent of GDP in all 
6United National Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) on-line data, UNCTADSTAT 
http://unctadstat.unctad.org/ReportFolders/reportFolders.aspx, accessed March 23, 2012.
7United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, World Investment Report 2010, annex table A-1.

366   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
developing countries throughout the first decade of the twenty-first century com-
pared to close to 1 percent in the early 1990s and less than 1 percent in the 1980s. In 
terms of investment, FDI amounted to about 12 percent of gross capital formation 
during the past decade,8 but its importance varies widely. In some countries, FDI can 
be equivalent to well over 10 percent of GDP in some years, especially in countries 
with oil or other natural resources (for example, Kazakhstan). In other countries, 
FDI is less than 1 percent. By the end of 2010, Vietnam was averaging foreign direct 
investments equal to 9 percent of its GDP; Bangladesh attracted barely 1 percent.
Foreign capital in general tends to be more volatile than domestic capital, but 
FDI is usually more stable than other forms of private foreign capital. One key reason 
is that FDI is often attracted by either resource endowments or long-term fundamen-
tal economic strengths, factors that generally do not change as quickly as interest 
rates and exchange rates, which are stronger determinants of short-term bank loans 
and portfolio capital. Moreover, because FDI is characterized by significant man-
agement control in large, fixed-production facilities such as factories and mines, 
investors are less likely (and less able) to flee during economic downturns. During 
the 1997–98 Asian financial crises, FDI fell somewhat but much less than bank loans 
and portfolio capital, which dropped sharply. FDI in emerging market countries fell 
between 2008 and 2009.
Along with providing new capital, recipient countries hope that FDI will add to 
the demand for labor and generate employment. It is not surprising that because 
FDI is a relatively small source of investment in most developing countries, its con-
tribution to employment also tends to be small, accounting for less than 5  percent 
of total employment in most developing countries. However, the impact on employ-
ment varies greatly depending on the activity. FDI focused on resource-based 
 capital-intensive industries, such as mining or petroleum, creates relatively few jobs, 
whereas investments in labor-intensive manufacturing create more jobs. The impact 
of FDI on wages and working conditions is controversial, with some people charging 
that MNCs pay low wages and impose harsh working conditions. While conditions 
vary, and this may be true in some instances, on the whole, evidence suggests that 
MNCs pay higher average wages and have better average working conditions than do 
domestic firms.9
Another benefit of at least some kinds of FDI, especially FDI in manufactured 
exports, is that it can help increase specialization in production. When firms in 
developing countries are part of a global production process, they can focus on the 
particular activity in which they have a comparative advantage and produce most 
efficiently. Although domestically financed investment can also engage in very spe-
cialized production, FDI has the advantage of stronger links to other parts of a global 
supply chain. Firms in the automobile business need not make the entire car (and 
8Calculated from World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
9Edward Graham, Fighting the Wrong Enemy: Antiglobal Activists and Multinational Enterprises (Wash-
ington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 2000), chap. 4.

F O R E I G N  D I R E CT  I N V E S T M E NT   367
if they did, they might not be able to compete on world markets). Instead, they can 
specialize in assembly, production of basic components (such as door parts or wir-
ing), manufacturing of more sophisticated parts (for example, engines or transmis-
sions), design, or other aspects of the production process. In today’s production 
environment, it is difficult to classify an automobile as American, German, Japanese, 
or Korean because the parts are made all over the world. Moreover, the particular 
activity that makes sense in an economy can change over time as resource endow-
ments, skills, and economic policies change. When Intel made its first investments in 
the electronics industry in Malaysia in the early 1970s, it focused on low-skill activi-
ties such as simple assembly. Over the years, as the Malaysian workforce gained new 
skills and more Malaysians became experienced managers, activity shifted toward 
production of basic parts (such as keyboards), then to more-advanced components 
(such as microprocessors), and later to testing and research. More recently, electron-
ics production in the Philippines has followed a similar progression.
FDI can also bring with it access to world markets. Developing countries 
capable of producing at competitive costs often find it difficult to penetrate for-
eign markets. Many multinationals, particularly in natural resources, chemicals, 
and other heavy industries, are vertically integrated, oligopolistic firms, for which 
many transactions take place within the firm. Multinationals develop preferential 
access to customers by fashioning and adhering to long-term contracts in stan-
dardized products, such as petroleum, or by acquiring a reputation for delivering a 
specialized product of satisfactory quality on a reliable schedule, as in electronics 
and engineering. On their own, firms from a developing country often require years 
to overcome such marketing advantages, and an affiliation with an MNC can help 
accelerate the process.
Among the most important potential benefits from foreign investment is the 
transfer of technology, skills, and ideas. Because much of the world’s research 
and development activity takes place within North America, Europe, and East Asia, 
firms from these areas are a potentially rich source of innovative products, machin-
ery, manufacturing processes, marketing methods, quality control, and manage-
rial approaches. MNCs potentially can bring these new ideas and technologies with 
them, helping reduce costs and increase productivity in the host country. FDI is most 
valuable when these kinds of benefits spread beyond the local affiliate of the MNC 
itself and help other local firms and enterprises, generating positive externalities 
called spillovers. For example, local firms competing against the MNC may observe 
and adopt the technology brought from abroad to try to improve their own produc-
tivity. A domestic furniture maker might learn about new machinery, a special tech-
nique to finish wood products, or a different way to organize production that could 
lower its costs and increase its competitiveness. Competition from the MNC can 
push rival firms to reduce their costs through more-efficient use of all inputs and by 
introducing new technologies and techniques, generating an indirect benefit to all 
firms that buy from the MNC and its competitors.

368   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
While this kind of “horizontal” spillover to competitors can be important, MNCs 
clearly have the incentive to limit technology transfer to their rivals. They have stron-
ger incentives to encourage “vertical” spillovers to firms operating up and down the 
supply chain that either sell to or buy from the MNC. MNCs want their local suppliers 
to produce at the lowest possible cost, so it is in their interest to work with suppliers 
to increase the suppliers’ productivity by introducing new methods to improve qual-
ity and reliability and reduce costs. These changes provide indirect benefits to other 
firms that buy from these suppliers.10
One important way these kinds of spillovers can occur is through the training of 
workers and managers. Most developing countries do not have many well-trained 
managers with experience in organizing and operating large industrial projects, such 
as those undertaken by multinational firms. MNCs have the incentive to train local 
managers and workers (both their own employees and their supplier’s) and, in some 
circumstances, will send employees abroad to the parent company for training in 
production methods or management techniques. It is not uncommon for local man-
agers to spend six months or more working in the parent company and then return 
to senior positions in the local affiliate. The immediate impact is to help increase 
productivity and profitability of the MNC. However, over time, these managers and 
workers may move to other firms or even start their own companies, bringing this 
new knowledge with them. When textile companies began to move from Korea and 
Taiwan to Indonesia in the 1980s, initially most senior managers were expatriates. 
Over time, more Indonesians were trained to fill those positions, and eventually 
some started their own companies, competing against the MNCs. When Mauritius 
first began to produce textiles and footwear in the early 1980s, virtually 100 percent of 
the export firms were foreign owned, but within 15 years, foreign firms controlled just 
50 percent of total equity capital.11
However, just as FDI can create positive spillovers, it can create negative ones. 
MNCs might create air or water pollution or cause other environmental damage, 
generating a negative externality for the host country. (Of course, local investors 
also cause environmental damage, in some cases even worse damage.) While some 
MNCs have been guilty of causing extreme environmental damage, others bring with 
them cleaner and more efficient production techniques that help reduce environ-
mental damage.
FDI in protected or inefficient activities can lead to net economic losses rather 
than gains by misallocating capital, labor, and other resources. If a government 
encourages an MNC to invest in a petrochemicals company that can be profitable 
10See Howard Pack and Kamal Saggi, “Vertical Technology Transfer via International Outsourcing,” 
Journal of Development Economics 65, no. 2 (2001), 389–415; Garrick Blalock and Paul Gertler, “Foreign 
Direct Investment and Externalities: The Case for Public Intervention,” in Theodore Moran, Edward 
 Graham, and Magnus Blomstrom, eds., Does Foreign Direct Investment Promote Development? (Washing-
ton, DC: Institute for International Economics and Center for Global Development, 2004).
11See Blalock and Gertler, “Foreign Direct Investment and Externalities.”

F O R E I G N  D I R E CT  I N V E S T M E NT   369
only with government subsidies or regulations that limit competition (like high 
import tariffs on competing products), the costs to the country are likely to be higher 
than the benefits. Firms operating under protection tend to use more outdated tech-
nologies and are less likely to be able to compete eventually on world markets. The 
firm might boast large profits and appear to be thriving, but the costs to taxpayers 
and to downstream customers forced to pay higher prices might be even larger.
Perhaps the biggest concern about FDI is the loss of local control over busi-
ness. MNCs can drive out local businesses, and even where this might be econom-
ically efficient it can be politically very unpopular. A large efficient MNC can drive 
out small local business that operate at higher costs, particularly in countries with 
high trade barriers and other regulations where local firms may be relatively weak. 
Also, MNCs are more likely to repatriate their profits abroad, although some reinvest 
locally (and many local businesses also send their profits abroad). Concerns are most 
acute for the largest MNCs, whose size and control over resources often match and 
sometimes outstrip that of the recipient country governments. Investment by a mul-
tinational corporation raises the specter of interference by, and dependence on, for-
eign economic powers beyond the control of the host country. In some cases valid 
social preferences over the control and distribution of income might outweigh eco-
nomic efficiency arguments.
FDI AND GROWTH
Ultimately, broad statements about whether FDI is beneficial or harmful are diffi-
cult to make and can be misleading. Because FDI is so varied, much depends on the 
specific activity, the actions taken by the MNC and the government, and the reac-
tion by local suppliers, competitors, and customers. Debate continues as to the exis-
tence and magnitude of spillovers, both positive and negative. Research examining 
the relationships between FDI and growth has reached mixed conclusions. Some 
research has found a positive relationship, particularly when the workforce in the 
recipient country has achieved a minimum level of education, whereas other studies 
have found no relationship or even a negative one.12
Clearer patterns begin to emerge when researchers take into account the pur-
pose and context of the FDI. Foreign investment that produces for the domestic 
12The research on FDI, spillovers, and growth is extensive. For an example of a study finding a positive 
relationship in the presence of a minimum level of education in the recipient country, see E. Borensztein, 
J. DeGregorio, and Jong-Wha Lee, “How Does Foreign Investment Affect Growth?” Journal of  International 
Economics 45, no. 1 (1998), 115–72. For an influential study finding negative spillovers in Venezuela, see 
Brian Aitken and Ann E. Harrison, “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign Investment?  Evidence 
from Venezuela,” American Economic Review 89, no. 3 (June 1999), 605–18. For a recent survey, see 
 Robert Lipsey and Fredrick Sjöholm, “The Impact of Inward FDI on Host Countries: Why Such  Different 
Answers?” in Theodore Moran, Edward Graham, and Magnus Blomstrom, eds., Does Foreign Direct 
 Investment Promote Development? (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics and Center for 
Global Development, 2004).

370   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
 market and relies heavily on subsidies or protection from competition is much less 
likely to be beneficial and may even generate economic losses for the host country. 
FDI in natural resource-based industries depends heavily on the impact of the indus-
tries themselves. As described in Chapter 18, while primary product exports have at 
times helped spur development in some countries (such as diamonds in Botswana 
and petroleum in Indonesia and Malaysia), in other countries, natural resource 
abundance has been as much as curse as a blessing, such as oil in Nigeria and Ven-
ezuela, copper in Zambia, and diamonds in the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
and Sierra Leone.
FDI aimed at firms producing manufactured exports and operating in competi-
tive global markets most often is found to have a positive relationship with growth 
and development. This type of activity tends to be economically efficient and con-
ducive to importation of new technologies, training new workers and managers, 
and positive spillovers to suppliers and even competitors. Georgetown University 
economist Theodore Moran finds significant differences in operating characteristics 
between subsidiaries that are integrated into the international sourcing networks of 
their parent multinationals and those that serve protected domestic markets. Where 
parent firms use local affiliates as a part of a strategy to remain competitive in inter-
national markets, they maintain those affiliates at the cutting edge of technology, 
management, and quality control. But Moran finds that FDI in protected industries 
can hinder an economy, as these firms typically use older technologies and operate 
under restrictions that raise costs, hinder exports, and reduce productivity gains.13
POLICIES TOWARD FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT
Developing countries interested in attracting FDI and ensuring maximum benefit 
generally use some combination of three broad strategies:
• Improve the general environment for all kinds of investment (foreign 
or domestic) by strengthening infrastructure, reducing red tape, and 
improving the quality of labor.
• Introduce specific policies and incentives to attract FDI, such as export 
processing zones, worker training, import protection, or tax holidays.
• Impose requirements on MNCs (such as limits on equity holdings or 
repatriation of profits) in an attempt to capture more benefits locally.
IMPROVE THE GENERAL INVESTMENT ENVIRONMENT The least-controversial approach, 
and one that can bring benefits beyond those associated with FDI, is to take steps 
to improve the general environment for investment and business operations. As 
13Theodore Moran, “How Does FDI Affect Host Country Development? Using Industry Case Studies to 
Make Reliable Generalizations,” in Theodore Moran, Edward Graham, and Magnus Blomstrom, eds., Does 
Foreign Direct Investment Promote Development? (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics 
and Center for Global Development, 2004).

F O R E I G N  D I R E CT  I N V E S T M E NT   371
discussed earlier, businesses in poor countries usually face much larger regulatory 
burdens and higher costs than those in rich countries. To try to improve the general 
investment environment, governments can improve road and ports infrastructure, 
invest in utilities to make them more reliable and less expensive, reduce trade tariffs, 
strengthen the judicial process and the rule of law, and reduce unnecessary regula-
tions and red tape that add to the cost of doing business. These steps should help 
attract new investment, both domestic and foreign, and help make existing invest-
ments more productive and profitable.
INTRODUCE POLICIES AIMED SPECIFICALLY AT ATTRACTING FDI The question of 
whether governments should take specific measures to encourage FDI even more 
than domestic investment turns on views on the existence and size of spillovers: If 
FDI brings with it positive spillovers that generate benefits to firms other than the 
MNC, then policies and incentives aimed specifically at attracting FDI may be appro-
priate. Where there are few if any positive spillovers and possibly negative ones, the 
argument for government action and special treatment is much weaker.
Three kinds of specific policies are common. First, host governments can pro-
vide effective and timely information to potential investors that markets might not 
provide on their own. Investors might not come to a particular country if they sim-
ply do not know much about it. Many governments in developing countries have 
established investment promotion agencies to market their countries and provide 
information on business costs, port facilities, natural resources, levels of education, 
climate, and other factors that might make their country attractive to investors. In 
some countries, this kind of promotion can help, but in others it seems to make little 
difference.
Second, governments can undertake specific expenditures aimed at mak-
ing their country more attractive for FDI. Many governments have established 
industrial parks or export-processing zones (EPZs) to increase investment and 
manufactured exports. The basic idea is that building infrastructure and improv-
ing the investment climate for an entire economy are likely to take a long time, so 
as an interim measure, the government could establish an enclave located near 
port facilities in which infrastructure is of high quality, utilities are reliable and 
of relatively low cost, and there are fewer regulations and less red tape. Typically, 
countries welcome both domestic and foreign investment in EPZs, but FDI tends 
to account for a greater share of the investment. Most of the countries that have 
been highly successful in producing manufactured exports have established EPZs 
or similar facilities, including EPZs in Malaysia, Korea, Mauritius, the Dominican 
Republic, and Indonesia; special economic zones in China; and maquiladoras in 
Mexico and similar stand-alone facilities in Tunisia and other countries. But EPZs 
and related facilities are not always successful and have failed when they have been 
poorly located, badly managed, or in other ways added to rather than reduced the 
producer’s costs (see Chapter 19).

372   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
Third and more controversial, governments can provide specific incentives to 
MNCs to increase their profitability, including protection from import competition, sub-
sidies, or tax breaks. Governments provide protection by introducing tariffs and quotas 
to reduce imports of competing goods or provide outright monopoly control over local 
markets. These steps are most relevant for FDI aimed at producing for the domestic 
market, rather than for exports. Because import protection and monopoly control cre-
ate higher domestic prices and profits, in effect local consumers pay higher prices as a 
transfer to the multinationals’ foreign stockholders. Because evidence suggests that FDI 
aimed for protected domestic markets brings with it the least benefits (and sometimes 
net economic losses), it is often difficult to justify this kind of intervention.
Perhaps the most controversial of all steps taken to encourage FDI is income tax 
incentives. While these incentives can take a wide variety of forms, the most com-
mon is income tax holidays, which exempt firms from paying taxes on corporate 
income, usually for three to six years. Most countries otherwise would tax profits 
at rates anywhere from 20 percent to as high as 50 percent. For tax holidays to help 
the multinationals, they must be creditable against income taxes due to their home 
country governments. Otherwise, if home countries tax firms on worldwide income, 
as all industrial countries except France do, then the MNC would pay less tax to 
the develop ing country but more to its home country. In effect, taxes foregone by the 
developing country would simply be transferred to tax revenues of the multination-
al’s home country. Most industrial countries now permit their firms to take credit 
for tax holidays granted abroad through tax treaties negotiated between host- and 
home-country governments.
There is substantial debate about the circumstances, if any, under which tax holi-
days are justified. Most studies conclude that, for many kinds of FDI, income tax holi-
days have only marginal effects on multinational investment decisions and reward 
the multinationals for doing what they would have done in any case. This is especially 
true for firms attracted by natural resources or those intending to produce in pro-
tected domestic markets of the host countries. Under these circumstances, MNCs are 
attracted by specific characteristics of the host country, such as the presence of gold 
or petroleum deposits or a large domestic consumer market. These MNCs may have 
few other serious location options, so tax treatment may not be a critical factor in their 
investment decision. Moreover, tax holidays cannot turn an unprofitable investment 
into a profitable one: Taxes become relevant only once a firm is earning profits.
Evidence suggests that export-oriented, labor-intensive, “footloose” industries 
may be more sensitive to tax holidays and other incentives because they have a 
much wider set of location options. Firms producing electronics products, shoes, tex-
tiles, clothing, games, and toys can choose among dozens of countries that offer the 
basics of political and economic stability, relatively low transport costs, and a pool of 
unskilled and semiskilled workers. Under these circumstances, tax holidays may be 
an important factor for the MNC in choosing its location. Because research suggests 
that these kinds of investments are more likely to provide positive spillovers to the 

F O R E I G N  D I R E CT  I N V E S T M E NT   373
host country, limited tax holidays may be justified. These steps always are controver-
sial, however, because local firms and other MNCs quickly demand similar tax treat-
ment, and it may be difficult for governments to resist this pressure.
REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS ON FDI Many governments impose restric-
tions and requirements on MNCs in an attempt to capture as much as possible of the 
expected benefits from foreign direct investment, including performance require-
ments, local ownership requirements, labor requirements, and restrictions on profit 
repatriation. It is possible that these policies can increase the benefits to the host 
country; however, under most circumstances, they discourage FDI.
Many host countries have made it mandatory for foreign investors to sell a spec-
ified share of equity, usually at least 51 percent, to local partners to form joint ven-
tures. Through local ownership requirements, host governments hope to ensure 
the transfer of technology and managerial skills, limit the repatriation of profits, and 
maintain local control. However, parent multinationals often are more reluctant to 
allow diffusion of technology to joint ventures than to wholly owned subsidiaries. 
Moreover, many local joint-venture partnerships are pro forma arrangements involv-
ing local elites close to the centers of political power with little knowledge or exper-
tise in business that simply receive occasional payment from the MNC as a figurehead 
partner. This is not always the case, however. In some cases, skilled local partners 
eventually can take greater control and possibly buy out the MNC.
Many countries impose domestic content requirements on MNCs, requir-
ing them to purchase a certain share of their inputs locally (as opposed to through 
imports), often with the share increasing over time. The idea is to encourage local 
suppliers and ensure stronger links between the MNC and local firms. Ideally, MNCs 
would choose to purchase locally in any case, but when they are forced to do so it usu-
ally indicates that the local suppliers are not producing at low enough prices and high 
enough quality to compete with imports. These requirements add directly to the costs 
of the MNC and can discourage investment. Domestic content requirements today, 
however, typically violate the rules of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and thus 
cannot be used by developing countries subject to those rules. Similar production 
requirements can be aimed at labor or technology transfer. Policies that make for-
eign firms use local personnel are aimed not only at job creation but also at increas-
ing absorptive capacity for the transfer of technology from multinationals. Developing 
countries have tried to promote technology transfer by imposing standards requiring 
multinational firms to import only the most-advanced capital equipment rather than 
used machinery. Other common restrictions include ceilings on repatriation of profits 
to the parent corporation and stiff taxes on profit remittances. As with domestic con-
tent requirements, if not carefully designed, these restrictions can deter investment 
and may do little in the long run to help transfer benefits to local entities.
Overall, the accumulated evidence indicates that some types of FDI bring large 
benefits and others bring small or even negative benefits. This suggests that the 

374   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
best general policy is to get the basics right to make the investment climate more 
 attractive for both domestic and foreign investment: reliable transportation, power, 
and communications facilities; freedom from unnecessary or onerous government 
regulations; capable institutions; adherence to the rule of law; macroeconomic and 
political stability; and labor markets in which wages are matched by productivity.
SAVINGS
As pointed out at the beginning of this chapter investment is not possible without 
first some person, company, or government saving part of their income. The saver 
can then invest the funds saved directly or deposit them in an intermediary (a bank 
or other financial institution) that specializes in identifying promising investments 
and lending it the money needed to make those investments a reality.
In the early years after the end of World War II it was commonly assumed that 
a lack of savings was at the heart of why so many of the countries in the world were 
poor. Because people in those countries were so poor, it was argued, they had to 
use all of their income to maintain a subsistence level of income and had nothing 
left over to save and invest. This problem was seen as the most fundamental of 
the various vicious circles of poverty that plagued low-income countries. To break 
the circle and get these countries on the path out of poverty, an outside source 
of savings (and hence investment) had to be found. The answer for many was to 
increase foreign aid provided by high-income countries to those mired in this rut. 
Arguments for foreign aid of this sort are still heard today but the rationale for 
most analysts has moved away from this view. (Foreign aid and the rationale for it 
are the subject of Chapter 14.)
Foreign aid is a form of foreign savings that is transferred to low-income coun-
tries and either invested or consumed. Other forms of foreign savings include FDI 
(discussed earlier in this chapter); portfolio equity by foreigners in developing 
country stock markets; and loans to developing countries by private (usually high-
income-country) financial institutions, high-income governments, and international 
financial institutions (such as the World Bank, the IMF, and the regional international 
development banks).
Domestic sources of savings, however, are far larger in most developing countries 
than all of the sources of foreign savings combined. Domestic savings is made up of 
household, domestic corporation, and government savings. Domestic savings tend on 
average to be higher in high- and middle-income countries than in low-income coun-
tries but there is enormous variation within each group, and the savings rate among 
low-and middle-income countries has risen from two or three decades ago. China had 
a savings rate in 2005–09 of roughly 50 percent of GDP, an extraordinarily high rate. 
India, a country with lower income than China’s, had a savings rate of over 30 percent 
SAVINGS

S A V I N G S   375
in the same period, also a high amount. But some nations save very little; Nepal saved 
about 10 percent of its GDP, whereas Ghana and Guatemala had domestic savings 
rates of 5 percent or less. High-income countries such as the United States and the 
United Kingdom had savings rates below 15 percent of GDP. Savings and investment 
data for a selection of countries are presented in Table 10–4.
How does a low-income country with a low savings rate increase that rate to con-
tribute to a higher rate of growth in income? Can government policy have a major 
influence on a country’s savings rate? Since the nineteenth century it has been 
assumed that higher incomes would raise the savings rate. In all countries the high-
est income earners in the population typically save far more than the lowest income 
earners. It would seem to follow that if a country’s income increased, the average rate 
of savings of the country as a whole would rise along with income. But when econo-
mists set out to measure the change in savings rate over time, they quickly discovered 
TABLE 10–4 Domestic Capital Formation (Investment) and Savings
GROSS CAPITAL FORMATION 
(% OF GDP)
GROSS DOMESTIC SAVINGS 
(% OF GDP)
1975–1979
2005–2009
1975–1979
2005–2009
Economy
Low income
14
23
7
10
Middle income
26
28
25
30
High income
24
20
24
20
Region
East Asia and Pacific
30
38
30
44
Europe and Central Asia
n.a.
23
n.a.
24
Latin America and Caribbean
25
21
23
23
Middle East and North Africa
30
26*
24
32*
Sub-Saharan Africa
25
21
23
16
South Asia
18
33
16
28
Country
Brazil
24
18
21
19
China
32
44
32
51
Egypt
31
20
16
16
Ghana
9
22
9
5
Guatemala
20
18
16
3
India
20
36
19
32
Indonesia
24
27
29
30
Mexico
24
25
23
23
Nepal
16
29
12
10
Russian Federation
n.a.
22
n.a.
32
South Africa
27
20
31
18
United Kingdom
20
17
20
14
United States
20
18
20
13
*Data from 2005–2007 only.
GDP, gross domestic product.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

376   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
that as average per capita income rose, the national average domestic savings rate 
did not change much if at all.14 It turns out that we do not really even know whether it 
is a rise in savings that leads to a rise in investment that in turn leads to higher growth 
or whether the causation goes in reverse. Is it instead the rise in the rate of growth 
brought about by various reforms in government policy that leads to a higher rate of 
domestic savings? In the economies of South Korea and Taiwan, for example, reforms 
in economic policy in the early 1960s jump-started growth at a time when the savings 
rate, particularly the savings rate in South Korea, was very low. Rapid growth during 
the 1960s and into the 1970s then led to a rising rate of domestic savings and domes-
tic investment that sustained the high growth sparked by the earlier reforms.
Although there is much not known about what determines a country’s overall 
rate of domestic savings, we do know something about what drives household sav-
ings, typically the most important part of the overall level of domestic savings. We 
also can say something about government savings but much less about savings by 
domestic corporations. We will look at each of these sources of domestic savings in 
turn. The chapter ends with a return to the issue of foreign savings and what drives 
whether a country is a net lender (that transfers savings abroad) or a net borrower 
(which receives other countries’ savings, as in the case of FDI).
HOUSEHOLD SAVING AND CONSUMPTION
Individuals and households save for two main reasons. First, they want to generate 
higher future income by saving and investing some of their current income. Second, 
they want to save some current income to protect themselves from the risk of unex-
pected falls in income in the future, often from a serious illness on the part of the 
major income earner; the loss of employment for some other reason; a drought that 
undermines next year’s food crop; the loss of productive assets from fire, flood, theft, 
or disease (that kills crops or livestock); or other loss of income. This precautionary 
motive can be particularly important for poor people living on subsistence levels, for 
whom a sudden loss of income can be catastrophic, or where insurance markets are 
not well developed and individuals, families, and businesses must self-insure against 
the risks of a sudden loss of income or assets. In most low-income countries insur-
ance markets are weak, especially in poor rural areas.
Given these motivations, a key decision is how much to save and how much to 
consume. The more a person saves, the more he or she can invest to increase future 
income and the more he or she can safeguard against future shocks. But saving 
comes at a cost: The only way to save is to reduce current consumption. Households 
HOUSEHOLD SAVING AND CONSUMPTION
14This discovery led to the works of Milton Friedman on the permanent income hypothesis and James 
Duesenberry on the relative income hypothesis, which, in different ways, attempted to explain this 
paradox.

H O U S E H O L D  S A V I N G  A N D  C O N S U M P T I O N   377
will sacrifice current consumption to save only if they believe either that the ensu-
ing investment will increase their income and consumption in the future or they will 
need to draw on that saving to finance basic consumption in the event of a severe 
income shock. A wide variety of factors might influence saving: the current level of 
income, anticipated future levels of income, the number of dependents that must be 
supported, the opportunities for productive investment, and the quality of the finan-
cial institutions through which some saving might be channeled.
The life-cycle model of household savings captures an important element of 
why some household savings in developing countries is high whereas with other 
kinds of households it is low. The life-cycle model, associated most closely with 
Nobel Prize–winning economist Franco Modigliani, is specific about how saving and 
consumption would be expected to vary systematically during a person’s lifetime.15 
In this model, young adults tend to have lower saving rates because they have lower 
incomes (and expect higher incomes in the future) and are raising children. Indeed, 
many people would be expected actually to dissave (go into debt) during this stage 
of life. Saving rates tend to rise and peak toward the middle and end of a person’s 
working years, when incomes are higher and there are fewer consumption-related 
expenses for children. During this stage of life, people accumulate the bulk of their 
saving to be used during retirement. Once workers retire, their income falls and they 
again dissave by drawing down on their previous saving. Thus saving rates tend to be 
low or even negative during the younger years, high during middle age, and negative 
again after retirement.
The life-cycle hypothesis suggests that the demographic structure of a society 
may have a strong effect on overall saving rates. As discussed in Chapter 7, all societ-
ies tend to pass through a demographic transition with three basic stages: (1) high 
birth and death rates, with low population growth, (2) falling death rates with contin-
ued high birth rates and consequently high population growth rates, and (3) falling 
birth rates with continued low death rates and lower population growth. As countries 
pass through these stages, the share of the population too young to work, of work-
ing age, or retired tends to change dramatically, and saving rates may change with 
them. A society in stage 2 of the demographic transition is likely to have a relatively 
large number of surviving children because of falling death rates and continued high 
birth rates. Children, of course, earn very little or no income, so their consumption 
effectively is negative saving. At this stage of the demographic transition, each worker 
in the society has more young dependents to care for, so saving rates are expected to 
be relatively low. Later on, as a country enters stage 3 of the transition, the number of 
15See Franco Modigliani and Richard Brumberg, “Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: An 
Interpretation of Cross-Section Data,” in K. Kurihara, ed., Post Keynesian Economics (New Brunswick, NJ: 
Rutgers University Press, 1954); Alberto Aldo and Franco Modigliani, “The Life-Cycle Hypothesis of Sav-
ing: Aggregate Implications and Tests,” American Economic Review 53, no. 1, (March 1963), 55–84. For a 
classic early work on the subject, see Ansley J. Coale and Edgar M. Hoover, Population Growth and Eco-
nomic Development in Low-Income Countries (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1958).

378   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
children tends to fall and the large number of children from the previous generation 
enters the workforce. As a result, society as a whole tends to have a far larger share 
of workers and fewer dependents. Because each worker has fewer children to care 
for, saving rates are expected to rise. Later still, these workers retire and saving rates 
tend to decline. This hypothesis is consistent with an income-saving relationship in 
which saving rates are high for middle-income countries and lower for high-income 
countries. Higher-income countries tend to have longer life expectancies and more 
people living in retirement, which would suggest lower average saving rates for these 
countries.
Figure 10–2 shows the relationship in 100 low- and middle-income  economies 
between saving rates and the dependency ratio, which compares the size of the 
dependent population (children and retirees, the population aged 0 to 15 years 
and those over 60) to the working-age population. The figure shows a tendency for 
 saving rates to be lower in countries with a larger number of dependents relative to 
the workforce. Note that there is significant variation around the line. Gabon and 
Tajikistan, for example, both have similar levels of dependency, but Gabon had a 
gross domestic savings rate of almost 50 percent while Tajikistan had one of negative 
21 percent. Clearly, more than the dependency burden determines the rate of 
national savings. Some studies that controlled for more variables found little 
 connection between dependency ratios and saving rates, while others detected 
a relationship.16 The relationship seems to be more robust with respect to the 
 young-age dependency ratio (the ratio of the population between 0 and 15 years 
of age to the working-age population). The evidence is weaker with respect to the 
 old-age  dependency ratio, which compares the size of the population aged over 60 to 
the working-age population, suggesting that this cohort may not reduce its saving as 
much as the life-cycle theory suggests.
The life-cycle hypothesis may capture a reason for the high savings rates in East 
Asia. When the East Asian economies such as South Korea and Taiwan began to grow 
rapidly, their societies also went through a rapid demographic transition as birth 
rates came down soon after the decline in death rates, leading to a population largely 
concentrated in the working ages of 15 to 65 and a declining young population. As 
time passed, those of working age gradually retired and with increasing life expec-
16Studies that find no relationship between demographic structure and saving include Angus Deaton, 
Understanding Consumption (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992); M. Gersovitz, “Savings and Development,” 
in Hollis Chenery and T. N. Srinivasan, eds., Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 1 (Amsterdam: 
North-Holland, 1988). Studies that reach the opposite conclusion include Sebastian Edwards, “Why Are 
Saving Rates So Different across Countries? An International Comparative Analysis,” NBER Working Paper 
5097 (Cambridge, MA: NBER, 1996); Paul R. Masson et al., “International Evidence on the Determinants of 
Private Saving” The World Bank Economic Review 12, no. 3 (September 1998), 483–501; Norman Loayza, 
Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, and Luis Serven, “What Drives Private Saving across the World?” Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics 82, no. 2 (May 2000), 165–81; Steven Radelet, Jeffrey Sachs, and Jong-Wha Lee, “Eco-
nomic Growth in Asia” (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Institute for International Development, May 1997).

C O R P O R AT E  S A V I N G   379
tancy, elderly dependents made up a rapidly rising share of the population, but this 
did not occur until after these economies had experienced three or more decades of 
high savings, high investment, and rapid economic growth. China’s one child policy 
has produced a similar phenomenon. The one child policy was instituted in the first 
part of the 1970s and had taken full effect by the time the economic reform began 
in 1978 that jump-started economic growth. Rapid growth thus benefited from and 
was sustained to an important degree by the dwindling share of dependent young 
people, which in turn made high rates of household savings possible. A rising share 
of elderly dependents in China is only now beginning to occur and will not have a 
major impact on the overall dependency ratio for another decade.
CORPORATE SAVING
Corporate saving is relatively small in most developing countries primarily because 
the corporate sector generally is small. For a variety of reasons, there are fewer pres-
sures and incentives in developing countries for doing business in the corporate form 
(as opposed to operating as an unincorporated business). The principal reasons for 
CORPORATE SAVING
FIGURE 10–2 Gross Domestic Saving and the Age Dependency Ratio, 2009
GDP, gross domestic product.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
Ecuador
Cote d’Ivoire
Guatemala
Tajikistan
Moldova
-40
-20
030
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
20
40
60
80
Gabon
  = —0.27 +30.79
2 = 0.07
China
Age dependency ratio (% of working-age population)
Gross domestic saving (% of GDP)
R
y
x

380   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
organizing as a corporation in the private sector are to limit the liability of enterprise 
owners to amounts invested in a business and to facilitate enterprise finance through 
the issue of equity shares (stocks). Although these advantages are substantial in 
higher-income countries with well-developed commercial codes, civil court systems, 
and capital markets, they are smaller in most developing countries, where the collec-
tion of commercial claims (for example, company debts) through the courts is rela-
tively difficult and where capital markets are poorly developed, when they exist at all.
As usual, however, there are important exceptions to these generalizations. In 
some developing countries, corporations are both numerous and quite large. As 
noted earlier, Fortune magazine’s annual list of the 500 largest corporations in the 
world (in 2010) includes MNCs from developing nations such as China’s Sinopec 
Corporation, Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation, and the Industrial and 
Commercial Bank of China. The giant firms in India included Tata Steel and in Brazil 
the financial conglomerate Banco Bradesco. But less than 15 percent of the Fortune
list was from low- and middle-income nations and two-thirds of them were located 
in China. The vast majority of developing countries had none. There are, of course, 
many good-size corporations that do not make it into the Fortune 500 largest list. 
Thus in most developing countries, even when corporations of say a billion dollars in 
sales are accounted for, such corporations do not account for a large share of private-
sector business activity and do not provide a high proportion of domestic saving.
In all but a few of the highest-income developing countries, the great bulk of 
private sector farming and commercial and manufacturing activity is conducted by 
unincorporated, typically family-owned enterprises. Some of these businesses fall 
into the category of medium-scale establishments (from 20 to 99 workers). The great 
majority are small-scale operations with fewer than 20 employees. The noncorpo-
rate sector, including most small family farms and urban informal sector enterprises, 
manages to generate more than half of all domestic saving in most developing coun-
tries, and this sector is the only consistent source of surplus in the sense that the 
sector’s saving exceeds its investment. For those closely held, largely family-owned 
and -managed firms, enterprise profits become an important part not only of cor-
porate saving but also of gross household income. The available evidence indicates, 
and economic theory suggests, that household saving accounts for the overwhelm-
ing share of private saving in developing countries and the chief source of household 
saving is probably household income from unincorporated enterprises.
GOVERNMENT SAVING
Unlike private saving, there are no well-developed theories for government sav-
ing and consumption behavior. Government saving arises when tax revenues 
exceed public consumption expenditures (that is, government spending excluding 
GOVERNMENT SAVING

G O V E R N M E NT  S A V I N G   381
public  investment expenditures).17 Government saving in most countries tends to be 
smaller than private saving (although not always), typically averaging between 3 and 
10 percent of GDP in most developing countries. In countries where governments run 
large budget deficits, government saving is negative. Government saving also tends to 
be much smaller in low-income countries than in middle- and upper-income coun-
tries. One reason is that poorer countries generally do not generate as much tax rev-
enue as richer countries.
Even though government saving usually is smaller than private saving, historically 
it has been given strong emphasis in development policy. This is partly because pri-
vate saving is often seen as inherently constrained by such factors as low per capita 
income and high private consumption propensities among wealthy families with the 
greatest capacity for saving. But it is also because government saving can be controlled 
more directly by policy makers, and public sector investment financed by that saving 
(roads, bridges, ports) plays an important role in supporting economic growth.
Government saving can be changed by either increasing revenues or reducing 
consumption expenditures. Historically, most effort has focused on increasing tax 
revenues, either by strengthening tax structures and collection systems or by altering 
tax rates. In this line of thinking, tax ratios in many developing countries are too low, 
and policy changes aimed at increasing tax revenues help increase domestic saving 
(and ultimately the rate of economic growth). But there are several steps in between, 
and the extent to which this occurs depends on three key questions:
 
1. To what extent can governments increase the tax ratio, if they want to do so?
 
2. Will an increase in the tax ratio lead to an increase government saving?
 
3. Will an increase in government saving increase total domestic saving?
On the first question, it is not easy to judge the appropriate level of taxation in 
developing countries. If taxes are too low, governments cannot provide essential 
services, such as basic education, public health, a well-functioning judicial system, 
basic security, and public infrastructure. Tax rates that are too high (or fall too heav-
ily on some groups) can undermine private entrepreneurs and reduce the incentives 
for new investment and economic growth. As a general matter, developing countries 
generally do not (and cannot be expected to) have tax ratios as high as is common 
in wealthier countries (except for developing countries with significant natural-
resource endowments, which are easier to tax). Moreover, it is not easy to increase tax 
collection in developing countries, if for no other reason than their much lower per 
capita income allows a much smaller margin for taxation after subsistence needs are 
met. Figure 10–3 shows that in the 1990s, whereas typical tax ratios for low-income 
countries averaged around 15 percent, the ratio of government revenue to GDP in the 
industrialized countries averaged over 30 percent.
17In some countries saving by government-owned enterprises contributes to government saving, but it 
generally plays a minor role, so our discussion of government saving is confined to budgetary saving.

382   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
Turning to the second question, a higher tax ratio does not necessarily lead to a 
higher government saving rate. It depends on what the government does with the rev-
enue. To the extent that it spends the revenue on consumption (that is, increased gov-
ernment employment or higher salaries), government saving does not increase; to the 
extent it uses the revenue to reduce a budget deficit or for investment, government sav-
ing increases. More specifically, the impact of increased tax revenue on the government 
saving rate depends on the government’s propensity to save (as opposed to consume) 
an additional peso or rupiah of tax revenue. In many countries, the government’s mar-
ginal propensity to save out of taxes has been sufficiently small that higher taxes often 
have had relatively little effect on government saving and in some cases none at all.
It is worth emphasizing that increasing government consumption (rather than 
saving) may or may not be bad policy. Some consumption expenditures may be a 
waste, such as fancy cars, luxurious government offices, or a rapid buildup of mili-
tary purchases. But other consumption expenditures may be vitally important, such 
as purchasing vaccines; making salary adjustments to keep and attract qualified civil 
servants; maintaining roads, schools, health facilities, and communication networks; 
and strengthening the judicial system or financial institutions.
FIGURE 10–3 Government Revenue, Consumption, and Saving, 1990–2002
Tax revenues as a share of income tend to be much smaller in low-income 
countries than in high-income countries. Government consumption also grows 
with income but not nearly as much. Therefore, government saving generally is 
much smaller in low-income countries than in high-income countries.
GDP, gross domestic product.
Low
income
High
income
Upper middle
income
Lower middle
income
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Percent of GDP
Recurrent revenue
Government consumption
Government saving

G O V E R N M E NT  S A V I N G   383
Government consumption tends to rise less sharply with income than does reve-
nue, as shown in Figure 10–3. There is much less difference in government consump-
tion ratios between low-income countries (14 percent) and high-income countries 
(19 percent) than there is in tax ratios. This difference leads to a substantial diver-
gence in average government saving rates. The poorest countries tend to have very 
low (and sometimes negative) government saving rates; government saving rates 
tend to rise with income as tax ratios increase.
On the third question, perhaps counter intuitively, an increase in government 
saving does not automatically increase domestic saving. How can this be when 
 government saving plus private saving equals domestic saving? It depends on how 
private saving responds to the increase in government saving. If the government 
raises taxes, government saving might increase, but private individuals might respond 
by lowering their saving to pay the higher taxes, thereby dampening the impact on 
aggregate domestic saving. Thus the effect on saving of raising taxes depends on both 
the government’s and the private sector’s propensity to save out of the marginal dol-
lar of income. As a general statement, increased tax revenue increases the domestic 
saving rate only if the government’s propensity to save is greater than the private sec-
tor’s propensity to save.
Debates about the private sector’s reaction to increased government saving date 
back at least as far as the early part of the nineteenth century to the writings of the 
great British economist David Ricardo. Ricardo postulated—and largely rejected—
the idea that, under certain circumstances, a change in taxes will have absolutely no 
effect on total domestic saving. Ricardo’s theory has come to be known as Ricard-
ian equivalence: Any increase in public saving is offset by an equivalent decline in 
private saving, with total domestic saving remaining unchanged. The basic idea is 
that when private actors receive a tax cut and see that government spending does not 
change, they anticipate a commensurate tax increase in the future and prepare for 
it by increasing their current saving. Thus, if the government reduces taxes, govern-
ment saving may fall, but households and firms increase private saving in anticipa-
tion of a future tax increase. The fall in government saving is offset exactly by a rise in 
private saving, and the tax cut has no impact on total saving. Similarly, a tax increase 
may lead to higher government saving, but private saving is expected to decline by 
the same amount with no change in total saving. Ricardo’s original idea was rejuve-
nated and formalized by economist Robert Barro in 1979.18
Ultimately, of course, this is an empirical issue that comes down to measuring the 
extent to which private agents alter their saving behavior in response to changes in gov-
ernment tax and expenditure policies. The abundance of evidence suggests partial, but 
only partial, truth to Ricardo’s hypothesis. Many studies have shown that an increase in 
government saving tends to be associated with a decline in private saving, but by less 
18Robert Barro, “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political Economy 82, no. 6
 (November–December 1974 ), 1095–117.

384   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
than the strict one-to-one relationship postulated by Ricardo. Most studies have found 
an offset of between 0.40 and 0.65, meaning that a 1 percentage point of GDP increase 
in the government saving rate is associated with a 0.40- to 0.65-percentage-point 
decline in the private saving rate. This would imply a net increase in the total domestic 
saving rate of between 0.35 and 0.60 percentage points.19
The salutory impact of higher government saving may go beyond the effect on 
domestic saving. Because higher government saving is derived largely from smaller 
budget deficits, it reduces the government’s borrowing requirements. Government 
deficits in developing countries typically are financed through domestic money 
creation (that is, borrowing from the central bank, which prints money to fund the 
 deficit) or by borrowing in either local or overseas markets. Larger budget deficits 
can lead to higher rates of inflation (from money creation), larger government debts, 
or both. Lower budget deficits (or higher public saving) tend to have the opposite 
outcomes: lower inflation and indebtedness. Thus higher public saving is likely to 
enhance general macroeconomic stability.
FOREIGN SAVING
Historically, many countries have augmented domestic saving with foreign saving 
to help finance investment and growth. The United States relied heavily on foreign 
saving, particularly during the antebellum period from 1835 to 1860 and again in the 
late nineteenth century to finance, among other things, the expansion of the railway 
system. Likewise, Russia used foreign saving to help propel its development in the 
three decades before World War I and the Communist revolution. However, not all 
countries have followed this pattern: Japan became a wealthy nation even though it 
actively discouraged inflows of foreign saving and investment throughout its history. 
Therefore, foreign saving can help development but is not necessarily essential for it.
In decades past, some developing countries actively tried to shut out private 
capital flows; today almost all developing countries actively try to encourage them. 
But controversy surrounds foreign aid, foreign investment, short-term private capital 
flows, and the debt that has accrued from foreign borrowing. The remainder of this 
chapter provides a brief overview of some basic concepts and data on foreign saving. 
Foreign saving in the form of FDI was discussed earlier in this chapter; foreign savings 
transferred through loans to developing countries and the resulting accumulation of 
foreign debt is the subject of Chapter 13, and more in-depth  analyses of foreign aid as 
a source of savings is the subject of Chapter 14. The appendix to  Chapter 15 provides 
related background on balance-of-payments accounting.
FOREIGN SAVING
19See, for example, Edwards, “Why Are Saving Rates So Different across Countries?;” Masson et al., 
“International Evidence on the Determinants of Private Saving”; Loayza et al., “What Drives Private Saving 
across the World?”; Radelet et al., “Economic Growth in Asia.”

F O R E I G N  S A V I N G   385
The relationships between investment, domestic saving, foreign saving, and the 
trade balance can best be seen from standard national accounts identities, which 
tell us that total investment (I) must equal total saving (S), which in turn consists of 
domestic saving (Sd) and foreign saving (Sf). To see this, recall from the income side 
of the national accounts that
 
Y = C + I + G + X - M 
[10–3]
where G is government consumption, X is exports of goods and services, and 
M is imports of goods and services. On the expenditure side, all income must be 
 consumed, saved, or given to the government as taxes:
 
Y = C + Sp + T 
[10–4]
Note that the saving term (Sp) in this identity refers to private saving. Because both 
equations equal Y, the right-hand sides must be equal:
 
C + I + G + X - M = C + Sp + T 
[10–5]
Subtracting C from both sides and rearranging the terms yields
 
I = (T - G) + Sp + (M - X) 
[10–6]
The first term on the right-hand side (T - G) is government saving, and the sec-
ond term (Sp) is private saving. The third term (M - X) is both the current account 
deficit of the balance of payments and foreign saving. When a country’s imports (M) 
exceed its exports (X), the difference must be financed by inflows of capital from 
abroad (foreign aid, bank loans, equity flows, etc.), which is foreign saving. The right-
hand side of the equation is the sum of domestic and foreign saving, yielding
 
I = Sd + Sf 
[10–7]
or the more traditional
 
I - Sd = M - X 
[10–8]
Thus, as the difference between investment and domestic saving grows (or shrinks), 
the trade deficit grows (or shrinks) commensurately. The two balances must move 
together in tandem. One can think of this in many ways. As investment increases 
(without an increase in domestic saving), imports tend to increase and exports 
decrease to provide the materials needed for the investment project. A firm building 
a new factory requires steel, concrete, lumber, and machinery, which can come from 
either new imports or purchasing the goods domestically, leaving less for export. 
Alternatively, an export boom without a commensurate increase in imports gener-
ates profits that can contribute to domestic saving, closing the gap between invest-
ment and domestic saving.
Foreign saving includes both a public sector component (called official foreign 
saving) and a private component. Most official foreign saving is foreign aid provided 

386   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
on concessional terms as either grants (outright gifts) or soft loans, meaning that 
they bear lower interest rates and longer repayment periods than would be available 
in private international capital markets. Industrialized-country governments and 
international agencies also provide some financing as loans on commercial terms 
(hard loans), particularly to middle-income countries.
Private foreign saving consists of four elements. Foreign direct investment (dis-
cussed at length earlier in this chapter) is made by nonresidents, typically but not 
always by multinational corporations, in enterprises located in host countries. Direct 
investment implies that funds go directly to an enterprise (as opposed to indirectly 
through a stock market), with the foreigner gaining full or partial control of the enter-
prise. Portfolio equity is the purchase by foreigners of host country bonds or stocks, 
without managerial control. Portfolio equity was a very important form of financ-
ing in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, but fell into disuse after World 
War II. It was revived in the 1990s, however, as rich-country investors showed inter-
est in emerging stock and bond markets, especially in Asia and increasingly in Latin 
America. Commercial bank lending to developing country governments and enter-
prises supplanted portfolio investment in importance for a time but waned begin-
ning in the 1980s when debt crises afflicted many developing countries. It expanded 
quickly in the early 1990s, then dropped sharply toward the end of the decade, as 
several developing countries experienced major financial crises. In some cases it 
had not fully recovered when the global financial crisis hit in the latter half of 2008. 
Finally, exporting firms from the industrialized countries, their commercial banks, 
and official banks (such as the U.S. Export-Import Bank) offer export credits (or credit 
guarantees) to firms in developing countries that import from the industrialized 
countries. These credits help the exporters promote sales by permitting delayed pay-
ment, often at commercial interest rates.
Capital flows to developing countries changed dramatically in several impor-
tant ways between 1990 and 2008, as shown in Table 10–5. First, private capital flows 
grew extremely rapidly until 1996, growing from $82 billion to $281 billion in 1996. 
All the major categories of private finance expanded rapidly: long-term loans, short-
term loans, portfolio equity, and foreign direct investment. But this trend changed 
abruptly in 1997 after the financial crises that struck Thailand, Indonesia, Korea, 
 Russia, and several other countries. Private capital flows fell sharply for several years 
and then grew rapidly between 2000 and 2008 (and declined again in 2009 after the 
financial crisis that originated in the United States).
Second, and in sharp contrast to private flows, official development flows fell 
during the 1990s. In particular, net official lending dropped significantly and turned 
negative, meaning that developing countries were repaying old loans more than 
they were receiving new loans from donor governments. Whereas official develop-
ment finance and private finance differed by a factor of two in 1990, private flows 
were 35 times larger in 2008. While these two patterns hold for developing countries 
as a whole, the patterns differ between low-income and middle-income countries. 
In particular, the large increase in private capital flows was concentrated in middle-

F O R E I G N  S A V I N G   387
income countries. Private capital flows to low-income countries were small in 1990, 
and while they were larger after the year 2000, the increase accounted for a relatively 
small share of the increase in total private capital flows. Official flows to low-income 
countries were only slightly larger in 2008 than they were in 1990, particularly if the
figures are adjusted for inflation; in middle-income countries, the picture is similar.
Third, whereas capital inflows to developing countries in aggregate grew rap-
idly, capital outflows grew even more rapidly. The aggregate current account deficit 
of developing countries (shown at the bottom of Table 10–5) moved from a deficit 
position to a surplus position in 2000. In other words, aggregate exports of all goods 
and services exceeded imports of goods and services, so developing countries as a 
whole were exporting capital to the richer countries. Correspondingly, total net capi-
tal flows (or net foreign saving, summing together all inflows and outflows) shifted 
from positive to negative. The main channel through which this occurred was a 
small number of developing countries running large balance of payments surpluses 
and accumulating foreign exchange reserves, especially China. In 2007 and 2008, 
China accumulated foreign exchange reserves at a rate of over $400 billion per year. 
Typically balance of payments surplus countries (along with other central banks 
in developing countries) hold their foreign exchange reserves in one of two ways: 
(1) as deposits in banks in the United States, Europe, or Japan, which is a form of 
saving available to finance new loans in those countries, or (2) by purchasing govern-
ment securities, such as U.S. Treasury bills. China’s central bank (the People’s Bank 
TABLE 10-5  Financial Flows from and to Developing Countries, 1990–2008
billions, US$
1990
1996
2000
2008
Inflows
81.6
281.3
172.3
727.3
Official development finance
Official loans (net)
26.4
3.8
5.8
20.4
Private finance
55.2
281.3
178.1
706.9
Long-term debt flows (net)
16.6
82.5
7.4
124.2
Short-term debt flows (net)
13.2
37.4
7.9
16.3
Portfolio investment
3.4
32.9
12.4
15.7
FDI into developing countries
22.1
128.6
166.2
583.0
Outflows
53.5
200.5
226.6
1,105.0
Accumulation of reserves
32.4
90.4
46.8
447.3
FDI from developing countries
5.0
10.0
16.5
164.0
Other items/errors and omissions
16.1
100.1
163.3
493.7
Memo item: aggregate current account 
   balance of developing countries
28.1
83.6
43.6
377.9
FDI, foreign direct investment.
Source: World Bank, Global Development Finance 2005 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2005) 
http://go.worldbank.org/581EDYH6R0; IMF, International Financial Statistic (Washington, DC: IMF); 
Annual Yearbook and World Bank, Global Development Finance 2009 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 
2009) http://go.worldbank.org/581EDYH6R0.

388   [CH. 10] I N V E S T M E N T  A N D  S A V I N G S
of China) became one of the largest purchasers of U.S. Treasury bills. In effect, the 
balance of payments surpluses generated by these countries are providing the saving 
necessary to finance the U.S. budget deficit. Historically and under normal circum-
stances, capital tends to flow from rich countries (which tend to have larger capital 
stocks) to low-income countries (where capital is scarce), but since 2000 that pattern 
has been reversed. However, this pattern is heavily concentrated in a small number 
of developing countries that are exporting a large amount of capital by accumulating 
reserves. The majority of low-income countries continue to be net importers of capi-
tal from rich countries.
SUMMARY
• Both public investment and private investment are central to economic 
growth and development. Public investment generally focuses on roads, 
ports, telecommunications facilities, schools, and health facilities. Private 
investment tends to be larger than public investment and provides the 
dynamism for the vast majority of new jobs, new technologies, and growth 
in economic output.
• Cost–benefit analysis provides a rigorous technique for evaluating both 
public and private investments and calculating the net present value over 
time of each investment. This technique can be used for commercial 
evaluation (to calculate private-sector financial benefits), economic 
evaluation (to measure the economic costs and benefits to society as a 
whole), or social evaluation (incorporating the impact of investments on 
important social goals).
• The key factors that influence investment at the macro level are similar 
to the variables discussed in Chapter 3 that promote economic growth. 
At the micro level the quality of the business environment is the main 
influence on the level and productivity of the investment. Governments 
that intervene excessively, thus delaying and raising the cost of business 
investment decisions, lead to rent seeking and corruption that further 
reduce the quantity and quality of investment.
• Foreign direct investment can generate important benefits, but not all 
FDI is alike. FDI focused on firms producing exports on competitive 
global markets appears to be most beneficial, creating jobs and bringing 
new technologies and ideas from abroad, among other spillovers. FDI for 
natural resources or for firms operating in protected domestic markets 
generally has had more mixed benefits and sometimes has been costly to 
recipient countries. Policies specifically aimed at attracting FDI, such as tax 
SUMMARY

S U M M A R Y   389
holidays, are more controversial than those aimed at improving the general 
investment environment.
• Investment requires that there first be savings. Savings can be either by 
domestic individuals and organizations (corporations, governments) or by 
foreigners who then allow their savings to be transferred abroad through 
foreign aid, foreign direct investment, portfolio equity, or commercial 
lending.
• Domestic savings tend on average to be higher in high- and middle-income 
countries than in low-income countries, but there is enormous variation 
within each group.
• A determinant of the level of savings is the demographic makeup of a 
country. A country in the early stages of a demographic transition with a 
low death rate and a high birth rate will have a high rate of growth in the 
number and share of children not yet old enough to work, which may lower 
the savings rate. Countries further along in the demographic transition have 
lower birth rates and hence a higher share of the population is of working 
age (and not of retirement age), which can lead to higher rates of saving.
• Government saving makes an important contribution to total saving in 
many developing countries, although it is usually much smaller than 
private saving. An increase in government saving generally increases total 
domestic saving but typically by less than one for one, as it can be partially 
offset by a decline in private saving.
• Foreign saving is relatively small compared to domestic saving, but is often 
more controversial. The composition of foreign capital flows has changed 
markedly since the early 1990s. The amount of official finance flowing to 
low-income countries dropped sharply. By contrast, private finance grew 
even more quickly, at least until severe financial crises affected several 
countries in the late 1990s, but recovery and growth to even higher levels 
than in the past occurred through 2008. The increase in private capital 
flows has been concentrated in middle-income countries, with much less 
flowing to low-income countries. In a change from the normal pattern, 
in recent years some developing countries, particularly China, have been 
providing financing to rich countries.


391
Fiscal Policy
11
B
eginning in late 2007, what had been a booming market for housing in the 
United States evolved instead into a depressed market with house prices fall-
ing and many homeowners forced into foreclosure. Financial instruments 
created by packaging large numbers of mortgages that were rated as safe 
investments suddenly dropped sharply in value, triggering losses not only for indi-
viduals but for major financial institutions such as Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, 
and the American International Group (AIG). The failure of these financial institu-
tions in turn threatened the viability not only of other financial institutions but of the 
entire U.S. economy. The potential failure of many American financial institutions 
and the related sharp decline in economic activity in the United States in turn led 
to similar threats to financial institutions in the rest of the world, notably in Europe, 
and initiated a global recession that was the most severe recession worldwide since 
the Great Depression of the 1930s. Developing countries had not caused the global 
recession. Many had gone through a similar financial crisis in 1997–98, which had led 
to a major recession in several large developing economies, particularly in Asia. That 
crisis in turn led many of those economies to reform their financial systems in ways 
that protected them from the kind of financial meltdown being experienced in the 
high-income European countries and the United States. Developing countries, how-
ever, did feel the impact of the global recession as they saw their exports to the United 
States and Europe fall.
The magnitude of the recession in the United States and globally was so large that 
the normal mechanisms used to reverse the downturn, mainly monetary policies that 
lowered interest rates and increased the money supply, were not sufficient to end the 

392   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
decline. Instead, first the United States, together with several major European econo-
mies, had to revert to large expenditures through the government budget to reverse 
the sharply falling demand for goods and services in the economy. Soon thereafter a 
number of developing economies also introduced their own stimulus packages in an 
effort to reverse falling export demand that threatened to drive their economies into 
recession only a decade after their last crisis. The largest of these developing country 
stimulus packages was China’s. China initiated a program of nearly US$600 billion 
to be spent mainly on infrastructure, such as a national high-speed highway system, 
eight new north–south and east–west high-speed rail lines, and new and modern-
ized ports and airports. The stimulus package kept Chinese gross domestic product 
(GDP) growth from falling despite a large drop in the demand for Chinese exports in 
2009. The average rate of GDP growth in China, thanks to a large degree to these gov-
ernment expenditures, was 9.8 percent a year in 2009 and 2010.
When a government raises its expenditures or cuts taxes on individuals and cor-
porations so that they can raise their expenditures, these actions are referred to as 
fiscal policy. When government efforts instead rely on the central bank to adjust the 
money supply and interest rates to raise or lower individual and corporate expendi-
tures, this is referred to as the exercise of monetary policy.
In this chapter we focus on fiscal policy and begin by noting that the main pur-
pose of fiscal policy is not to deal with economic crises, whether crises of inadequate 
demand leading to recessions as in 2009–10 or of excess demand leading to inflation. 
The first function of fiscal policy is to manage government expenditures used to fund 
whatever activities government policy makers and the people they represent think the 
government should support. The next closely related function of fiscal policy is to find 
a way of financing those government expenditures, either through the collection of 
taxes, issuance of government bonds, or in more desperate cases by printing money.
This chapter starts with a discussion of what expenditures are typically under-
taken by governments and follows with an analysis of the kinds of taxes commonly 
used to pay for those expenditures. With this as background, we then return to the 
question of what happens when something goes wrong either in the public or the pri-
vate sphere of the economy. What is it that a government can do to repair what has 
gone wrong?
In many respects these issues are similar in high-, middle-, and low-income 
economies, but there are significant differences. Developing countries often have to 
rely more on fiscal policy to curb inflation or recover from a recession because many 
of the instruments of monetary policy are not as effective or do not even exist. Under-
developed markets in developing countries are also often a major reason why they 
rely on government to take responsibility for investments and other expenditures 
that in a more advanced economy would be handled by the private sector.
The limitations of markets in developing countries would seem to suggest that 
government expenditures would be a higher share of GDP than in high income coun-
tries. But, as the data in Table 11–1 indicate, the opposite is the case. Governments in 

G O V E R N M E NT  E X P E N D I T U R E S   393
developing countries on average spend a smaller share of GDP than do high-income 
countries. A major reason is that high-income countries typically spend a larger share 
of GDP on social welfare measures (old-age pensions, poverty reduction, healthcare 
for all) largely because the people of these countries demand such expenditures for 
reasons of fairness and feel that at their relatively high incomes they can afford to do 
so. Developing country governments are more apt to focus on measures to increase 
investment for overall growth. There is, however, considerable variation in the share 
of government expenditures in GDP among countries at both ends of the income 
spectrum.
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES
At the most general level all countries rely on government for certain activities 
because of public goods and market failures discussed in Chapter 5. For private 
goods, such as rice, saris, or TV sets, the signals provided by unfettered competitive 
market mechanisms guide producers to satisfy consumer demand efficiently. For 
pure public goods, the market fails entirely. There are few examples of pure public 
goods; national defense and basic scientific research generally are cited as illustra-
tions. The term public good refers to a good or service that exhibits two traits: nonri-
val consumption and nonexcludability.
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES
TABLE 11–1 Central Government Expenditure as a Share of GDP, 2009
COUNTRY 
PERCENT OF GDP
Low-income economies
Bangladesh 
11.3
Cambodia 
11.0
Ghana 
17.9
Lower-middle-income economies
Indonesia 
15.8
El Salvador 
21.6
Morocco 
27.9
Upper-middle-income economies
Colombia 
19.4
Thailand 
19.7
Mauritius 
20.9
High-income economies
South Korea 
21.9
Denmark 
42.5
United Kingdom 
46.4
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
COUNTRY 
PERCENT OF GDP

394   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
In nonrival consumption, one person’s use of a good does not reduce the benefits 
available to others. That being the case, no one has any incentive to offer to pay for 
the good: If it is available to one, it is available to all. Nonexcludability means that it 
is either impossible or prohibitively expensive to exclude anyone from the benefits 
once the good is available. In either case, the private market cannot provide the good: 
Market failure is total. For most public goods, the characteristics of nonrival con-
sumption and nonexcludability are present but less pronounced, and the market can 
function only in an inefficient way. Examples include vaccination against contagious 
diseases, police protection, and mosquito abatement. Therefore, it is evident that the 
appropriate role of the public sector, to a significant degree, is a technical issue.
In practice in all countries, government expenditures designed to offset market 
failures of this sort account for only a portion of government expenditures even in the 
most laissez faire, small government–oriented societies. In democratic societies the 
people through their elected representatives generally want government to do more, 
such as provide pensions for the elderly and healthcare for the sick regardless of 
income. In authoritarian societies, the leadership often does much the same because 
failure to do so can threaten the leaderships’ ability to govern.
CATEGORIES OF GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES
The principal distinction between types of government expenditure is between capital 
or public investment expenditures also called development expenditures, on the one 
hand, and recurrent expenditures on the other. Development or public investment 
expenditures are those that, like investment in general, generate a stream of income or 
services into the future. Government typically takes on the task of building a network of 
highways, and some governments, particularly in developing countries, take responsi-
bility for providing electric power or exploitation of natural resource wealth (for exam-
ple, petroleum). Education and health expenditures can also be thought of as a form of 
investment undertaken by government although in practice government budgets often 
treat them as recurrent consumption expenditures. The quality of government devel-
opment investments in these areas should be judged by the same criteria that are used 
to judge private investments, as was discussed in Chapter 10.
Recurrent expenditures are those expenditures that a government must make 
year after year. They include the salaries of government employees, the purchase of 
office equipment, and annual payments to families living in poverty and for pensions 
for retirees. Most of these categories of recurrent expenditures are self-explanatory, 
but one category is of particular importance in developing countries largely because 
it is often ignored. Capital investments to build a highway are often given a high 
priority but the expenditures needed to maintain the highway once built are often 
neglected, and the highway is soon filled with potholes. This results not only from the 
neglect of maintenance by developing country governments but also because  foreign 
aid agencies will frequently support a capital project but will seldom support the 

G O V E R N M E NT  E X P E N D I T U R E S   395
recurrent costs needed to keep the capital project functioning. The problem, how-
ever, is not unique to developing countries. The United States has neglected bridge 
and road maintenance in many parts of the country for decades and, at the time of 
the 2008–09 economic recession, faced the need for large maintenance and replace-
ment expenditures, some of which were built into the stimulus program designed to 
get the country out of the recession.
Other common recurrent expenditures in developing (and high-income) coun-
tries are interest payments on government debt, consumer subsidies, and subsidies 
to loss-making state-owned enterprises. Government debt crises are the subject 
of Chapter 13, and here we note only that the problem with government deficits in 
developing countries on average is not that they are typically very large, although that 
is the case in some countries. The problem with chronic large deficits is that interest 
payments rise over time taking up an increasing share of the government recurrent 
cost budget either crowding out other worthwhile expenditures or leading to even 
larger government deficits. If the deficits are financed by borrowing abroad, foreign 
debt, typically in convertible currencies such as the dollar or the euro, accumulates 
and eats into the ability of the country to import and may eventually lead to a debt 
crisis. If the government borrows money domestically to cover the deficit, the interest 
cost in the budget will also rise. In developing countries, however, borrowing domes-
tically often means borrowing directly from the central bank, and that is essentially 
the same as printing money and increasing the money supply. The reason develop-
ing countries frequently have to borrow from the central bank is that capital markets 
are underdeveloped and it often is not possible to sell government bonds to the gen-
eral public or even to private companies. The net result is that deficits lead to money 
creation, and excessive money creation leads to inflation, which usually proves detri-
mental to the productive investment so central to economic growth.
Consumer subsidies are also not unique to developing countries. The political 
logic behind consumer subsidies is that certain commodities are considered essen-
tial, and government subsidizes these commodities so as to lower their price to the 
consumer and thus make them available to all regardless of income. In high-income 
countries the government typically has the ability to find out the true income of fami-
lies and then target the subsidy so that it applies only to those below a predetermined 
poverty line—food stamps in the United States is a good example. In developing 
countries, however, government usually lacks the administrative capacity to discover 
the true income of families, although some middle-income nations are gaining this 
ability (see the discussion of Mexico’s Oportunidades program in Chapters 6 and 8). 
When targeting is difficult, one option is to subsidize all sales of the commodity even 
though most of the subsidy will go to families that are not poor and could afford to 
pay the market price. General subsidies of this sort can be very expensive. When a 
country runs into debt and balance of payments problems and has to call for help to 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), one of the first measures the IMF sets as a 
condition for a loan is elimination of these subsidies. Subsidies, however, are popular 

396   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
with the public and eliminating them typically leads to demonstrations against the 
government and even to major riots that threaten the existence of the government.
Even in China, where administrative capacities at the local level are quite high 
by developing country standards, targeting subsidies to poor families is not pos-
sible; subsidies in the 1990s and in the first decade of the twenty-first century have 
instead gone to designated poor counties and are available to all those in the county, 
including many families that are not poor. An alternative approach tried in the 1980s 
in Sri Lanka was to ask families to voluntarily state whether they fell below the pov-
erty line or not. The result was that well over half the population of the country said 
that they fell below the poverty line even though objective data made it clear that the 
share below the poverty line was only a fraction of that self-reported figure. In some 
cases there is not even a pretense that the subsidy is designed to alleviate poverty. 
Countries with large oil reserves, such as Venezuela and Indonesia, have subsidized 
refined fuel costs to households even though the heaviest users of such fuel are the 
well off who can afford automobiles and motor bikes.
Subsidies to cover the losses of state owned enterprises (SOEs) grew rapidly in a 
great many developing countries when they first achieved independence. This was 
particularly so in Africa. In Tanzania alone, the number of state enterprises increased 
10-fold from 1965 to 1985. By 1980, SOEs were common, and often dominant, in 
manufacturing, construction, banking services, natural resource industries, and agri-
culture. Although SOEs typically were small-scale undertakings in most developing 
countries before 1950, many by the beginning of the twenty-first century were among 
the largest firms in their countries, and some, notably in China, are among the largest 
enterprises in their fields anywhere in the world.
Deficits in state enterprises averaged 4 percent of the GDP across all develop-
ing countries in the mid-1970s. The problem worsened in the early 1980s, particu-
larly in such countries as Brazil, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, 
the Philippines, Turkey, and Venezuela, where SOE deficits reached between 3 and 
12 percent of the GDP. In all these countries, the rest of the public sector would have 
generated a fiscal surplus, excluding the net transfers to the state enterprises.1 By the 
late 1980s and through the first decade of the twenty-first century, the drain of SOE 
subsidies on government budgets has led to efforts by many developing countries to 
eliminate these subsidies by privatizing their SOEs. International aid agencies fre-
quently have made SOE privatization a condition for further assistance. Privatization, 
however, has been a slow process, because it has been actively resisted by SOE manag-
ers and workers, not to mention politicians who use SOE employment as a patronage 
machine for their supporters. In countries where a large part of the private sector is 
controlled by minorities, as is the case with the Chinese minority in Southeast Asia or 
the South Asian minority in East Africa, the majority population often fears that priva-
tization is simply a way of turning even more of modern business over to the minority.
1World Bank, World Development Report 1988 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988), p. 171.

G O V E R N M E NT  E X P E N D I T U R E S   397
Finally transfers from central to subnational governments conventionally are 
treated as recurrent expenditures even though subnational governments (provinces, 
departments, counties, municipalities) may use the proceeds for capital formation, 
such as construction of schools and hospitals. Some countries, such as Indonesia, 
classify some transfers as capital spending and others as consumption, so interna-
tional comparisons are difficult. In a few cases, subnational governments with small 
transfers have access to rich sources of revenue. This is true for Bolivia, where oil-
producing provinces receive large oil royalties, and for Malaysia, where the state 
governments of Sabah and Sarawak have earned substantial tax revenues from the 
export of tropical timber. In most unitary states, such as Chile, government affairs 
at virtually all levels are run from the capital, and subnational units of governments 
have few responsibilities to go with their limited sources of local revenue.
There is often a compelling argument for moving decisions about expenditures 
to lower levels of government. Lower levels of government are typically closer to the 
people being served by both investment and recurrent expenditures and thus in prin-
ciple are better able to design expenditures to best meet local needs. Problems arise, 
however, when local governments lacking adequate tax revenues under their control 
finance these project and recurrent expenditures through access to bank loans. The 
problem can be particularly acute where the local banks are owned or controlled by 
local politicians. The result can be projects driven more by the political needs of local 
politicians than the needs of the local population and an increasing often unsus-
tainable local government debt. In the late 1990s local Argentinian governments 
borrowed heavily to cover local expenditures from both domestic and international 
sources running up debts neither they nor ultimately the central government had the 
capacity to repay. Argentina defaulted on this debt in 2002 and negotiated a large-
scale debt restructuring in 2005–06. Similar although less severe problems existed in 
both Brazil in the 1990s, but the government took steps to strictly limit the ability of 
local governments to invest in this way (see Box 11–1).
In many places, including many federal countries, transfer of funds from the 
central government to subnational units is essential because the center has monop-
olized the most productive sources of tax revenue. In most cases, national govern-
ments impose income taxes because subnational governments lack the resources 
and skill required to administer such a complex tax and could not do so effectively 
anyway because the income tax base easily can migrate within a country. Similarly, 
in the past the major source of tax revenue for some developing countries, import 
duties, remained a central government resource because most countries have only a 
few serviceable ports. Very few developing countries today, however, receive a sub-
stantial portion of tax revenue from import duties, in part because import duties have 
been cut sharply over the years in the various international trade negotiations that 
have lowered tariffs for all countries.
We have just seen that there are few easy ways to reduce government recur-
rent expenditure to achieve higher public savings. The scope for doing so often was 

398   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
BOX 11–1 REINING IN FISCAL DECENTRALIZATION IN
BRAZIL AND CHINA
BRAZIL
Brazil has a federal system of government, and the states have a substantial role 
in capital and recurrent expenditures. The states in the past also had banks owned
by their governments, and these banks contributed in a major way to large-scale 
profligate state spending over many decades. There were also problems involving 
borrowing by the central government from the central bank. In 1996, however, the
central government took steps to increase the independence of the central bank
and began a program to separate the banks from control by state governments.
The first phase of this effort involved an effort to privatize state-owned banks in 
what was called the Program to Reduce State Involvement with Banking Activi-
ties. The central government helped with the privatization process, and many of the 
state banks were privatized and others turned into development agencies. Then in
2000 the government passed the Law of Fiscal Responsibility that prohibited gov-
ernment borrowing from banks it owned or from the central bank. All new borrow-
ing by either the central government or state governments first had to be approved
by the central bank and by the senate. In 2002 governments were further prohib-
ited from borrowing within 180 days of the end of a government’s term in office.
This restrained the large expenditures during the final days of an administration 
often designed to pay off supporters knowing that the incumbent governor or pres-
ident would not have to find ways of repaying the loans involved. There were also 
steps taken to reduce the banks’ incentive for making such loans. These efforts 
have played an important role both in reducing wasteful government expenditures 
and in reining in the chronic inflation that had plagued Brazil for decades.
CHINA
China’s provincial governments are not formally independent of the central gov-
ernment but they have had a substantial degree of autonomy in many economic 
areas. Formally the largest state-owned commercial banks are national not provin-
cial banks, but in practice local governments and the local branches of the Com-
munist Party have had a major say in appointments to head the local branches of 
these national banks. The result in the 1990s was that local governments bor-
rowed heavily from the banking system to finance local projects and to support
investments of provincial- and city-owned state industrial enterprises, which led 
to large-scale lending partly to prop up failing state-owned enterprises that fueled
bursts of inflation. Inflation was stopped but only when the central government 
and the central bank imposed lending quotas on state-owned banks and their

G O V E R N M E NT  E X P E N D I T U R E S   399
branches. The government, however, did take steps to change the territory cov-
ered by the branches of the large commercial banks so that those territories did
not coincide with that of the provincial and local governments, making it more dif-
ficult for local politicians to influence the selection of local bank managers.
During the large-scale investment surge that began with the 1997–98 financial 
crisis in Asia and elsewhere, the Chinese government began a massive state-led
investment program that continued throughout the first decade of the twenty-first 
century, and local governments were pressured to carry out much of this invest-
ment program. Many of these investments were well thought out, but local gov-
ernments lacked the tax base to pay for them and so borrowed heavily from the 
state-owned commercial banks and local state-owned banks. The result by 2011
was a local debt accumulation of over RMB 10 trillion, which was 25 percent of
the gross domestic product (GDP). Given the weakness of the tax base of the 
local governments, there was a danger that the state-owned commercial banks 
would again be burdened by a large number of nonperforming loans requiring refi-
nancing by the central government.a
aAnwar Shah, “Fiscal Decentralization and Macroeconomic Management,” International Tax and 
Public Finance 13 (2006), 437–62.
e
greatest in the areas of military spending and subsidies to cover deficits of state-
owned enterprises. Subsidies to state-owned enterprises, however, have been cut
over the years either through privatization or by taking steps to make state enter-
prises competitive and profitable. Military expenditures in developing countries in
the twenty-first century are still 2 percent of the GDP on average, with considerable
variation across nations, which leaves some room for cutting but not a great deal. The
main argument for cutting these latter expenditures is that military forces in develop-
ing countries are sometimes a greater danger to their own people than to potential
enemies of the nation.
GOVERNMENT REVENUE AND TAXES
Government expenditures have to be funded or paid for. Most government expendi-
tures are funded by revenue from taxes, including direct taxes (taxes on corporate or
individual income and other payroll taxes such as Medicare and Social Security pay-
ments in the United States) or indirect taxes (sales taxes, import duties, and value-
added taxes that are typically levied as a percentage of the value of a good being sold
or imported), but there are other sources of funding. Mineral-rich countries often
depend on royalties paid to the government by large petroleum and mineral mining 
companies, bonds are sometimes issued to cover the costs of a capital investment,

400   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
and fees are charged for many government-provided services. Revenue can also 
come through aid grants from other countries or in the form of loans from interna-
tional lending agencies such as the World Bank.
As incomes per capita rise, the amount of taxes collected, expressed as a share of 
GDP, also tends to rise, although there is considerable variation among countries as 
the data in Table 11–2 indicate. The taxes reported in the table do not include what are 
often referred to as “social contributions”—that is, taxes paid for old-age support such 
as the Social Security and Medicare systems in the United States. Because high-income 
nations have more extensive transfer programs of this kind, they also collect more in 
taxes to finance them. If these taxes were included in the data, the share of taxes out of 
GDP would rise with country income level in an even more pronounced fashion.
The relationship between the kinds of taxes collected is also associated with per 
capita income. For countries with low incomes and in the early stages of devel-
opment, there is typically much greater reliance on international trade taxes. For 
the three low-income economies in Table 11–2, at least one quarter of tax revenues 
is obtained from taxes on international trade. As incomes rise, reliance on taxes on 
international trade falls off significantly. Taxes on income, personal and corporate, 
TABLE 11–2 Composition of Tax Systems by Type of Tax,* 2009
COMPOSITION OF TAXES (PERCENT OF GDP)
COUNTRY/ECONOMY
TOTAL TAXES
DOMESTIC 
INCOME TAXES
TAXES ON 
GOODS AND 
SERVICES
TAXES ON 
INTERNATIONAL 
TRADE
OTHER TAXES
Low-income economies
Bangladesh
8.6
2.2
3.3
2.8
0.4
Cambodia
9.6
1.7
5.4
2.5
0.0
Ghana
12.5
4.2
5.4
2.9
0.0
Lower-middle-income economies
Indonesia
11.4
5.7
4.8
0.3
0.6
El Salvador
12.5
4.7
6.8
0.9
0.0
Morocco
23.8
9.5
10.5
2.0
1.8
Upper-middle-income economies
Colombia
11.8
4.5
5.5
0.9
0.8
Thailand
15.2
7.1
7.2
0.9
0.1
Mauritius
18.6
5.4
11.0
0.5
1.7
High-income economies
South Korea
15.5
6.6
6.0
0.9
2.1
United Kingdom
26.0
13.3
10.1
0.0
2.5
Denmark
34.6
18.0
14.7
0.0
2.0
*Taxes refer to the central government only and are exclusive of social contributions—that is, to programs 
of old age support and so on.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

G O V E R N M E NT  E X P E N D I T U R E S   401
provide about half of the tax revenue of Denmark, Korea and the UK; far less in 
 Bangladesh and Cambodia.
In the sections that follow, we review the different kinds of taxes and explain why 
some taxes are favored over others at different stages of development.
TAXES ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Although reliance on the taxes of foreign trade has fallen sharply in recent decades, 
particularly in middle-income countries, tax revenue structures in developing coun-
tries historically have depended heavily on import duties. Many low-income countries 
remain markedly dependent on import duties. This is particularly so for countries like 
the Gambia, Lesotho, Côte D’Ivoire, Togo, and Bangladesh, where as much as one 
quarter to one third of the total government revenue comes from taxes on imports.
For most countries, attempts to raise revenues through higher duties are unfeasi-
ble and undesirable on economic grounds. Higher import duties intensify the incen-
tive for smuggling or evading tariffs. Various studies have shown that, for countries 
with already high duty rates, the incentive to smuggle increases disproportionately 
with further increases. Therefore, a 10 percent rise in duty rates can result in an 
increase in smuggling activity by more than 10 percent (Box 11–2). In mountainous 
countries, such as Afghanistan and Bolivia, or archipelago countries, such as Indo-
nesia and the Philippines, borders are especially porous to smuggled imports. Sin-
gapore during the first four decades after independence did not even report its trade 
with Indonesia largely because it did not want Indonesia to know how much trade 
between the two countries went through informal (smuggling) rather than official 
channels.2
2Bill Guerin, “Indonesia-Singapore Gap More Than Numbers,” Asia Times, June 27, 2003. Available 
online at www.atimes.com/atimes/Southeast_Asia/EF27Ae03.html, accessed February 29, 2012.
BOX 11-2 TAX RATES AND SMUGGLING: COLOMBIA
In the classic case from Colombia, the import duty rate on cigarettes was over
100 percent, and it was virtually impossible to purchase duty-paid cigarettes. At 
such high rates, import duty collections on cigarettes were nil and the market was
flooded with smuggled foreign brands. In 1969, the duty rate was reduced to 30
percent. Cigarette smuggling on the poorly policed Caribbean coast of that country
continued, but duty-paid packages began to appear in the mountainous interior, and
duty collections soared. Smuggling profits possible under a 30 percent duty were
no longer high enough to compensate smugglers for the risks of arrest.

402   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
Export taxes are constitutionally prohibited in the United States and extremely 
rare in other industrial countries. But export taxes are not uncommon in develop-
ing countries, particularly in tropical Africa and Southeast Asia. Taxes ordinarily are 
imposed on exports of raw materials and have been applied on timber (Ivory Coast 
and Liberia), tin (Malaysia), jute (Pakistan), and diamonds (Botswana) as well as 
on foodstuffs, such as coffee (Colombia), peanuts (the Gambia and Senegal), cocoa 
(Ghana), and tea (Sri Lanka).
Over the past few decades, export taxes have declined in importance as vari-
ous economic organizations, notably the World Trade Organization (WTO), have 
put pressure on new members and some old ones to eliminate such taxes or at least 
not use them to promote particular industries. Some economic groupings such as 
the European Union and Mercosur ban export taxes. Export taxes often are imposed 
in the belief that they are paid by foreign consumers. That is, the taxes themselves 
are thought to be exported to consumers abroad, along with the materials. But the 
conditions necessary for exporting taxes on exports to foreign consumers rarely are 
present.
Export taxes also are employed to promote nonrevenue goals, including increased 
processing of raw materials within natural resource–exporting developing countries. 
This is done by imposing high rates of export tax on unprocessed exports (cocoa beans 
or logs) and lower or no rates of tax on processed items fabricated from raw materi-
als (chocolate and plywood). In principle, this use of export taxes should increase the 
local value added on natural resource exports and thereby generate greater employ-
ment and capital income for the local economy. Unfortunately, in many cases, the 
result has been that a government gives up more in export tax revenues than its coun-
try gains in additional local value added, particularly when processed raw materials 
are exported tax free. One study documents several instances in Southeast Asia and 
Africa in which the additional value added gained in heavily protected local process-
ing of logs into plywood typically was less than half the amount of export tax revenue 
that would have been collected had timber been exported in the form of logs.3
SALES AND EXCISE TAXES
A much more promising source of government revenue is indirect taxes on domes-
tic transactions, such as sales and excise taxes. Sales taxes, including value-added 
taxes, are broad-based consumption taxes imposed on all products except those 
specifically exempted, usually food, farm inputs, and medicine. Excise taxes also are 
taxes on consumption, but these levies are imposed only on specifically enumerated 
items, typically tobacco, alcoholic beverages, gambling, and motor fuel. On average, 
developing countries depend on domestic commodity taxes for a substantial share, 
3Robert Repetto and Malcolm Gillis, eds., Public Policies and the Misuse of Forest Resources (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1988), chap. 10.

G O V E R N M E NT  E X P E N D I T U R E S   403
ranging from a bit over a quarter (the poorest countries plus the United States) to 
over half of total revenues (Table 11–2).
Virtually every developing country imposes some form of sales tax. In most, 
the tax is not applied to retail sales because of the burdensome administrative 
requirements of collecting taxes from thousands of small retailers. In the past, as 
in Chile before 1970 and in some Indian states, the tax was imposed as a gross 
turnover tax collected at all levels of production and distribution, with harmful 
implications for efficiency, income distribution, and virtually every objective of tax 
policy. In developing countries, administrative problems are more tractable when 
the sales tax is confined to the manufacturing level: A much smaller number of 
firms is involved, and the output of manufacturers is far more homogeneous than 
sales of retailers or wholesalers. For these reasons many low-income countries 
have used either the single-stage or the value-added form of manufacturers’ tax, 
usually exempting very small producers. This kind of sales tax, however, involves 
more economic distortions than either a wholesale or a retail tax, and for that rea-
son as well as for revenue motives, more and more middle-income countries have 
turned to taxes at the retail level.4
Increasingly, these taxes have taken the form of one or another variant of the 
value-added tax (VAT), widely seen as the most effective method of taxing consump-
tion yet developed. More than 60 countries, including all members of the European 
Union, have adapted the VAT since it was first adopted in its comprehensive retail 
form in Brazil in 1967.5 More than 40 developing countries had adopted the tax by 
1994, either to replace older, outdated forms of sales taxes or to allow them to reduce 
reliance on harder-to-collect income and property taxes. The typical VAT tax rate var-
ies from around 10 percent in some of the poorest countries to 15 to 20 percent in 
most of the others.
Excise taxes might appear to represent an ideal source of additional tax revenue. 
These typically are imposed on sumptuary items having relatively inelastic demand. 
When the price elasticity of demand for such products is very low (as for tobacco 
products) or relatively low (as for alcoholic beverages), an increase in excise tax rates 
will induce little reduction in consumption of the taxed good. If price elasticity is 
as low as −0.2, not uncommon for cigarettes in part because smoking tobacco has 
been shown to be addictive, then an additional 10 percent excise tax on this prod-
uct would yield an 8 percent increase in tax revenues. Moreover, it is a hallowed 
theorem in optimal tax theory that taxes levied on items with inelastic demand and 
supply involve the smallest losses in economic efficiency, or what is the same thing, 
the least excess burden. Excess burden is defined as a loss in private welfare above 
4For a full discussion of the distortions involved in different forms of sales tax, see John Due and Ray-
mond Mikesell, Sales Taxation: State and Local Structure and Administration (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
Press, 1983).
5Carl Shoup, “Choosing among Types of VAT,” in Malcolm Gillis, Carl Shoup, and Gerry Sicat, eds., 
Value-Added Taxation in Developing Countries (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1990).

404   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
the amount of government revenue collected from a tax.6 Further, many agree, with 
much justification, that consumption of both tobacco and alcohol should be discour-
aged on health grounds.
PERSONAL AND CORPORATE INCOME TAXES
Harried ministers of finance, perceiving slack in personal and corporate income 
taxes, often resort to rate increases in these taxes, with no change in the tax base. 
The results usually are disappointing, particularly for the personal income tax. Even 
in middle-income countries, only a small proportion of the population is covered 
by the personal income tax; in contrast, the vast majority of the adult population in 
the United States files income tax returns each year (although just under half of all 
U.S. households were required to pay federal income taxes as of 2011).7 Therefore, 
few developing countries can rely heavily on the personal income tax for revenues. 
Whereas the personal income tax accounts for over 40 percent of all federal taxation 
in the United States (not including Social Security and Medicare payments), rarely 
does the personal income tax account for close to that much of total central govern-
ment revenues in developing countries. In low- and middle-income nations, when 
personal income taxes are applied, they are paid largely by urban elites. Not only are 
these groups usually the most vocal politically but they have developed such a variety 
of devices for tax evasion and avoidance that rate increases stand little chance of rais-
ing additional revenues. (The same is often true in high-income economies.)
Rate increases for corporate taxes are usually not productive either. In only 16 
of 82 developing countries did the corporation income tax account for more than 20 
percent of total taxes in the 1980s. In 2006–08, corporate taxes and personal income 
taxes taken together accounted for more than 30 percent of all revenue in less than 
half of a sample of more than 60 developing countries. And, in many of those coun-
tries, corporate tax collections often originated with foreign natural-resource firms.
NEW SOURCES OF TAX REVENUES
If higher rates on existing taxes are unlikely to raise revenues much, a second option 
for increasing public savings is to tap entirely new sources of tax revenues. In many 
developing countries, whether by accident, design, or simply inertia, many sources 
of tax revenue may have been overlooked entirely. Many countries have not col-
lected taxes on motor vehicle registrations; some have not used urban property taxes 
as a significant source of revenue; many have not applied corporation income taxes 
to the income of state-owned enterprises. Kenya, for example, did not seriously tax 
6For a further discussion of optimal taxation and excess burden, see Figure 11–1 and Joseph Stiglitz, 
Economics of the Public Sector (New York: Norton, 1988).
7Rachel Johnson, Jim Nunns, Jeff Rohaly, Eric Toder, and Roberton Williams. “Why Some Tax Units Pay 
No Income Tax,” Tax Policy Center, Urban Institute, July 2011.

G O V E R N M E NT  E X P E N D I T U R E S   405
farmland, and a few countries, such as Indonesia before its 1984 tax reform, did not 
collect personal income taxes on the salaries of civil servants. China began to experi-
ment with the use of urban property taxes only in the first decade of this century.
CHANGES IN TAX ADMINISTRATION
A far more significant option for increasing tax revenues is to implement changes in 
tax administration that permit more taxes to be collected from existing tax sources, 
even at unchanged tax rates. The potential for increased revenues from such action is 
very large and seldom realized in virtually all developing countries. Shortages of well-
trained tax administrators, excessively complex tax laws, light penalties for tax evasion, 
corruption, and outdated techniques of tax administration combine to make tax eva-
sion one of the most intractable problems of economic policy in developing countries.
The case studies given in Box 11–3 discuss the magnitude of the problem in India 
and Bolivia, which is typical of many, perhaps most, other developing countries. These 
examples suggest that efforts to collect a greater share of the taxes due under the cur-
rent law can increase revenues substantially. But the kinds of administrative reforms 
required are difficult to implement and especially difficult to sustain. Even Bolivia’s 
successful reform raised its tax ratio to only 7 percent of GDP. Korea at the beginning of 
its rapid development period, a country noted for its efficient and determined admin-
istration, failed in the 1960s to reach its goal of increasing collections by 40 percent 
through more effective enforcement, although it was able to reduce underreporting of 
nonagricultural personal income from 75 percent to slightly under 50 percent. Admin-
istrative reform can help and is important at any stage of development; however, better 
tax administration tends to improve with economic development.
FUNDAMENTAL TAX REFORM
The final policy option available for increasing tax revenues is the most difficult to 
implement but the most effective when it can be done. Fundamental tax reform 
requires junking old tax systems and replacing them with completely new tax laws and 
regulations. Implementing tax reform engenders enormous technical and informa-
tional, not to mention political, difficulties in all countries. In general, governments 
resist genuine efforts to reform the tax structure until a fiscal crisis in the form of mas-
sive budgetary deficits threatens. Even during a fiscal crisis, it is difficult to mobilize a 
political consensus to allow unpopular tax measures to pass. Tax policies that protect 
favored groups and distort the allocation of resources did not just happen; more likely, 
they were enacted at the behest of someone, ordinarily the privileged and the powerful.
Probably, more has been said, to less effect, about tax reform than almost any 
topic in economic policy. This is no less true for the United States than for the scores 
of developing countries where major tax reform efforts have been mounted. That the 
process is painful and slow is evident from the experience of several countries: In the 

406   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
BOX 11–3 TAX ADMINISTRATION IN INDIA AND BOLIVIA
IN THE 1980S
INDIA
India during the 1980s provides one of the more egregious examples of poor
tax administration. During the fiscal year 1981, for example, it was found that 
taxes were avoided on at least 40 and possibly 60 percent of potentially taxable
income. Almost 70 percent of the taxpayers covered by a survey openly admit-
ted bribing tax officials, and three quarters of the tax auditors admitted accepting
bribes to reduce tax payments. The cost of a bribe was commonly known to be 
about 20 percent of the taxes avoided.
BOLIVIA
In Bolivia during the same period, the tax system was chaotic. More than 400
separate taxes were levied by the national, regional, and city governments. Tax-
payer records were out of date, and tax collections were recorded more than a 
year after they had been paid. Of 120,000 registered taxpayers, one third paid
no taxes at all, while 20,000 taxpayers who did pay were not on the register. The 
administration had all but ceased its data processing. Administration had gotten
so bad that the government was helpless to collect taxes during the hyperinfla-
tion of the mid-1980s. Tax collections fell to only 1 percent of the GDP. Faced 
with this chaos, the Bolivian government reformed its tax administration, simplify-
ing it drastically. This, together with price stabilization, enabled the government to
collect revenues equivalent to over 7 percent of the GDP by 1990, a low ratio by
world standards but a vast improvement for Bolivia.
Sources: Omkar Goswami, Amal Sanyal, and Ira N. Gang, “Taxes, Corruption and Bribes: A Model 
of Indian Public Finance” (201–13), in Michael Roemer and Christine Jones, eds., Markets in Devel-
oping Countries: Parallel, Fragmented and Black (San Francisco: ICS Press, 1991); Carlos A. Silvani
k
and Alberto H. J. Radano, “Tax Administration Reform in Bolivia and Uruguay” (19–59) in Richard 
M. Bird and Milka Casanegra de Jantscher, eds., Improving Tax Administration in Developing Coun-
tries (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 1992).
United States, the time lag between the birth of tax innovations (tax credit for child-
care expenses, inflation proofing of the tax system) and their implementation usually 
is at least 15 years. If anything, the lag may be slightly shorter in developing countries.
In spite of the difficulties involved, some countries were able to carry through
fundamental reforms in tax structure and administration before 1980. The classic
example is Japan in the 1880s, when that society began its transformation to a modern
industrial power. Korea implemented a major tax reform program in the early 1960s,
as did Colombia and Chile in the 1970s and Indonesia in the 1980s (see Box 11–4).

G O V E R N M E NT  E X P E N D I T U R E S   407
BOX 11–4 INDONESIAN TAX REFORM
In the 1970s Indonesia was a major oil exporter and received more than half
of its government revenue from royalties paid by the large oil companies. The
increase in petroleum prices caused by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC) in 1973 and 1979 increased these royalties to an unprec-
edented share of the government budget. The Indonesian minister of finance
at the time, however, knew that what goes up (in this case petroleum prices)
can also come down and he wanted to put Indonesia’s government finances on
a more stable long term basis. Non-oil sources of tax revenue, however, were
based on laws that in many cases went back to the Dutch colonial period and
produced limited revenue for the government and did so inefficiently.
In 1981 the ministry of finance began a major effort to completely reform
and modernize the Indonesian tax system. The goal of this effort was to create a
broader base for the generation of tax revenue, increase the equity of the fiscal
system, and generally bring the Indonesian system in line with international best
practice. The process involved the complete rewriting of the tax laws, but it also
involved fundamental changes in the way taxes were administrated and enforced
together with the creation of a computerized tax information system among other
major changes.
A team of 25 international experts, including economists, lawyers, accoun-
tants, and data processing experts, was put together to assist 10 Indonesian
government officials in this endeavor. The role of the team was to help deter-
mine what aspects of best tax practice would work best in the Indonesian
context. The experts then would present their findings for a full discussion of
whether the expert recommendations would in fact work in the Indonesian con-
text in meetings attended by the minister of finance and all of the ministry offi-
cials with relevant responsibilities in this area. When this process was completed
and necessary adjustments to the recommendations made, the proposal was
put first to the president of Indonesia and then to parliament, which passed the
legislation in late 1983. Although Indonesia had an authoritarian government
at that time, powerful rent-seeking individuals both inside and outside of the
government could have had a major influence on the shaping of tax reform as
happens in so many countries, but in this case the recommendations that were
passed largely reflected international best practice, not the special interests of
rent seekers.
The key reforms were the introduction of a low-rate simplified value-added
tax together with major changes in the personal and corporate income tax codes.
Nonpetroleum government revenues as a result of these reforms rose from

408   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
After 1980, the pace of tax reform quickened notably, in both developing and 
industrial countries, with many similarities in the various reform programs. Through-
out much of the postwar period, tax systems commonly were fine-tuned to achieve 
a wide variety of nonrevenue objectives. In particular, governments in developed 
and developing nations alike commonly sought substantial income redistribution 
through the use of steeply progressive tax rates. Also, complex and largely impos-
sible to administer systems of tax incentives were widely used in attempts to redi-
rect resources to high-priority economic sectors and promote foreign investment, 
regional development, and even stock exchanges.
While fine-tuning tax systems someday may yield the desired results, it requires, at 
a minimum, strong machinery for tax administration and traditions of taxpayer com-
pliance. Within developing countries, at least, there has been growing recognition that 
such conditions seldom prevail. Governments increasingly have turned away from reli-
ance on steeply progressive tax rates and complicated, costly tax incentive programs.
The 1980s through the beginning of the twenty-first century saw a worldwide 
movement toward an entirely different type of tax system, with a shift toward vastly 
simplified taxes imposed at much flatter rates and with much broader bases8 and 
increasingly greater reliance on consumption rather than income taxation. Tax 
reform programs in Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, and Malawi 
exemplify most of these trends.9
Two aspects of this worldwide movement in tax reform are especially salient. First, 
the top marginal income tax rates of 60 to 70 percent were not uncommon from 1945 
to 1979. But, since 1984, country after country has slashed the top marginal rate, often 
substantially. Table 11–3 shows this phenomenon in a selection of developing coun-
tries. During the same period, many industrial nations, ranging from Australia and 
Austria through the United Kingdom and the United States also cut the top rate sharply.
6 percent of Indonesia’s GDP just before the passage of the reforms to 10 percent of
GDP by the early 1990s. This increase in revenue had much to do with the fiscal 
stability that Indonesia enjoyed when petroleum prices and government royalties 
from petroleum fell in 1986.
Source: Michael Roemer and Joseph Stern, “Indonesia: Economic Policy Reform,” (63–64),
in Dwight H. Perkins, Richard Pagett, Michael Roemer, Donald Snodgrass, and Joseph Stern, eds.,
Assisting Development in a Changing World: The Harvard Institute for International Development, 
1980–1995 (Cambridge: Distributed by Harvard University Press, 1997).
5
8Joseph A. Pechman, ed., World Tax Reform: A Progress Report (Washington, DC: Brookings Institute, 
1988), p. 13.
9A number of these cases are discussed in Malcolm Gillis, ed., Tax Reform in Developing Countries
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1989).

G O V E R N M E NT  E X P E N D I T U R E S   409
In many of these cases, deep cutbacks in the highest tax rates were accompanied 
by reforms involving a very substantial broadening of the income tax base, through 
the reduction of special tax incentives, abolition of tax shelters, and the like. This pat-
tern was especially notable in Bolivia, Colombia, Indonesia, Jamaica, and Sri Lanka, 
so that, even with a rate reduction, higher-income groups often ended up paying a 
higher proportion of total taxes than before.
Reasons for the worldwide shift toward lower tax rates on broader income tax 
bases are not difficult to find. First, income taxes imposed at high marginal rates have 
proven difficult or impossible to administrate, even in wealthy countries such as the 
United States. With high marginal tax rates, the incentives to evade taxes (through 
concealment of income) or avoid taxes (by hiring expensive legal talent to devise tax 
shelters) are very high. Second, the growing mobility of capital across international 
boundaries has meant that the risk of capital flight from a particular country increases 
TABLE 11–3 Countries Reducing Highest Rates of Income Tax, 1984–2009
COUNTRY 
1984–85 
2009
Low-income economies
Tanzania 
75 
30
Uganda 
70 
30
India 
62 
30
Ghana 
65 
25
Lower-middle-income economies
Papua New Guinea 
50 
42
Pakistan 
60 
20
Philippines 
60 
32
Sri Lanka 
55 
35
Indonesia 
45 
35
Peru 
50 
30
Guatemala 
42 
31
Jamaica 
58 
25
Upper-middle-income economies
Botswana 
75 
25
Brazil 
60 
27.5
Costa Rica 
50 
15
Colombia 
49 
33
Thailand 
65 
37
Argentina 
45 
35
Mexico 
55 
28
Malaysia 
55 
27
Chile 
56 
40
Sources: George J. Yost III, ed., 1994 International Tax Summaries, Coopers & Lybrand International 
Tax Network (New York: Wiley, 1994); Glenn P. Jenkins, “Tax Reform: Lessons Learned,” in Dwight H. 
Perkins and Michael Roemer, eds., Reforming Economic Systems in Developing Countries (Cambridge: 
Harvard Institute for International Development, 1991); Denise Bedell, “Personal Income Tax Rates,” 
Global Finance, available at www.gfmag.com/tools/global-database/economic-data/10442-personal-
income-tax-rates.html#axzz1YDeg5nMb, accessed February 2012.

410   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
when that country’s top rates of income tax exceed those prevailing in industrial 
nations, where tax rates have been falling.10 Third, the operation of the income tax 
systems of such developed nations as the United States and Japan has placed down-
ward pressure on the tax rates everywhere. This is because of the foreign income tax 
credit, wherein a country like the United States allows foreign income taxes to be cred-
ited (subtracted) from U.S. taxes due on income repatriated from abroad. This credit 
could be used, however, up to only the amount of tax payable at U.S. rates, which was 
reduced from 50 to 28 percent in 1986. Finally, high marginal rates of income tax did 
not prove to be particularly efficacious in correcting severe inequalities in income dis-
tribution in either rich or poor countries.
The second striking feature of recent tax reforms worldwide has been the steadily 
growing number of countries adopting the value-added tax. Several factors account 
for the popularity of the VAT: The two most important are its reputation as a money 
machine and its administrative advantages, relative to other forms of sales taxes and 
income taxes.11 The record of the VAT in generating large amounts of revenue quickly 
and in a comparatively painless fashion has given it a reputation as an efficient way 
to generate money. Although this reputation stems largely from the experience in 
European countries, the record in developing countries does lend some support to 
the alleged revenue advantages of the VAT. In Indonesia, the 4 percent share of the 
value-added tax in GDP in 1987 was nearly three times the share garnered in 1983 
by the taxes it replaced. Notwithstanding the marked revenue success of the VAT in 
nations such as Brazil, Chile, and Indonesia, its reputation as a money machine for 
many other countries appears to have been at least slightly overstated.
In the 1980s, it was common to hear the claim that the VAT was largely self-
administering. This is not so, but the tax-credit type of VAT has three principal 
advantages over single-stage retail and nonretail sales taxes in limiting the scope 
for evasion. First, the VAT is self-policing to some extent because underpayment of 
the tax by a seller (except, of course, a retail firm) reduces the tax credit available 
to the buying firm. Even so, firms that also are subject to income taxes have incen-
tives to suppress information on purchases and sales to avoid both the value-added 
and income taxes. Also, this possible advantage of the VAT is diminished when eva-
sion at the final (retail) stage of distribution is endemic. Second, cross-checking of 
invoices enables the tax administration to match invoices received by purchasers 
against those retained by sellers. The cross-check feature is a valuable aid in audit 
activities but no substitute for a true, systematic audit. Third, that a large share of the 
VAT is collected before the retail level is an advantage particularly because, in most 
developing countries, an abundance of small-scale retail firms do not keep adequate 
10For discussion of the implications for taxation of growing international mobility of financial and phys-
ical capital, see Dwight R. Lee and Richard B. McKenzie, “The International Political Economy of Declin-
ing Tax Rates,” National Tax Journal 42, no. 2 (March 1989), 79–87.
11For a full discussion of these reasons, see Alan A. Tait, Value-Added Tax (Washington, DC: Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, 1988), chap. 1.

TA X E S  A N D  I N C O M E  D I S T R I B UT I O N   411
records. In sum, the administrative advantages of the VAT are very real, if sometimes 
exaggerated by enthusiastic proponents.12
TAXES AND INCOME DISTRIBUTION
For decades, developed and developing countries alike have sought to use the 
 fiscal system, particularly taxation, to redress income inequalities generated by the 
operation of the private market. Social philosophers from John Stuart Mill and emi-
nent nineteenth-century Chilean historian Francisco Encina to twentieth-century 
philosophers such as John Rawls have sought to establish a philosophical basis for 
income redistribution, primarily through progressive taxes. No scientific basis is used 
to determine the optimal degree of income redistribution in any society. And across 
developing countries different views prevail as to the ideal distribution of income. 
But, in virtually all countries, the notion of fiscal equity permeates discussions of 
budgetary operations. In the overwhelming majority of countries, fiscal equity is 
typically defined in terms of the impact of tax and expenditure policy on the distri-
bution of economic well-being. Progressive taxes, those that bear more heavily on 
better-off citizens than on poor ones, and expenditures whose benefits are concen-
trated on the least advantaged are viewed as more equitable than regressive taxes 
and expenditures.
On the tax side of the budget, the materialistic conception of equity requires 
that most taxes be based on the ability to pay. The ability to pay can be measured by 
income, consumption, wealth, or some combination of all three. Clearly, individu-
als with higher incomes over their life spans have a greater ability to pay taxes, quite 
apart from the moral question of whether they should do so. Indeed, the redistribu-
tion impact of taxation almost always is expressed in terms of its effects on income. 
However, philosophers since the time of Thomas Hobbes, a seventeenth-century Eng-
lish philosopher, have argued that consumption furnishes a better index of ability to 
pay than income; in this view, tax obligations are best geared to what people take out 
of society (consume) rather than what they put into society (as measured by income).
In practice, developing countries have relied heavily on these two measures 
of ability in fashioning tax systems. Personal and corporate income taxes employ 
income as the indicator; sales taxes and customs duties are indirect assessments 
of taxes on consumption. At a minimum, equity usually is assumed to require the 
avoidance of regressive taxes whenever possible. A number of tax instruments have 
been employed to secure greater progressivity in principle, if not in practice; all suffer 
from limitations to one degree or another.
TAXES AND INCOME DISTRIBUTION
12For a succinct summary of some of these issues, see John F. Due, “Some Unresolved Issues in Design 
and Implementation of Value-Added Taxes,” National Tax Journal 42, no. 4 (December 1990), 383–98.

412   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
PERSONAL INCOME TAXES
The most widely used device for securing greater progressivity has been steeply 
progressive rates under the personal income tax. In some countries in some peri-
ods, nominal or legal marginal income tax rates have reached very high levels, even 
for relatively low incomes. Thus, for example, tax rates applicable to any income in 
excess of $1,000 in Indonesia in 1967 reached 75 percent, largely because tax rates 
were not indexed to rapid inflation; in Algeria in the 1960s, all income in excess of 
$10,000 was subject to marginal tax rates of nearly 100 percent; Tanzania imposed 
top marginal rates of 95 percent as late as 1981. Although, in most developing coun-
tries, marginal income tax rates are considerably lower than the preceding examples 
and, as is apparent from Table 11–3, have been falling, some countries still attempt 
to impose rates in excess of 50 percent, such as Angola, Gabon, and Cuba, but most 
countries with marginal rates at this level in the twenty-first century are high-income 
European states with large social welfare programs.
If the tax administration machinery functioned well and capital were immobile 
among countries, the pattern of actual tax payments of high-income taxpayers would 
resemble the legal, or theoretical, patterns just described. In fact, in most countries, 
effective taxes (the taxes actually collected as a percent of income) fall well short of 
theoretical liabilities. Faced with high income tax rates, taxpayers everywhere tend 
to react in three ways: (1) They evade taxes by concealing income, particularly capi-
tal income not subject to withholding arrangements; (2) they avoid taxes by altering 
economic behavior to reduce tax liability, whether by supplying fewer labor services, 
shipping capital to tax havens abroad, or hiring lawyers to find loopholes in the tax 
law; and (3) they bribe tax assessors to accept false returns.
For all these reasons, the achievement of substantial income redistribution through 
progressive income taxes has proven difficult in all countries, including the United 
States and the three Scandinavian nations where tax rates were long among the world’s 
most progressive. Tax avoidance is the favored avenue for reducing tax liability in the 
United States, where use of the other methods can result in imprisonment. But, where 
tax enforcement is relatively weak, particularly where criminal penalties for evasion are 
absent and tax officials deeply underpaid, tax evasion and bribery are used more com-
monly. The scope for substantial redistribution through the income tax is, therefore, 
even more limited in developing countries than in the United States or Sweden.
Notwithstanding these problems, a significant share of the income of the wealthi-
est members of society is caught in the income tax net in many developing countries. 
Revenues from personal income tax collections in countries such as Colombia, South 
Korea, and Chile have been as high as 15 percent of total taxes and in a few others have 
run between 5 and 10 percent of the total. In virtually all developing countries, the 
entirety of such taxes is collected from the top 20 percent of the income distribution. 
This means, of course, that the very presence of an income tax, even one imposed at 
proportional rather than progressive rates, tends to reduce income inequality.

TA X E S  A N D  I N C O M E  D I S T R I B UT I O N   413
TAXES ON LUXURY CONSUMPTION
In view of the difficulties of securing a significant redistribution through income 
taxes, countries may employ heavy indirect taxes on luxury consumption as a means 
of enhancing the progressivity of the tax system. Efforts to achieve this goal usually 
center on internal indirect taxes, such as sales, and on customs duties on imports, 
but not excises on tobacco and alcohol.
Several developing countries have found that, provided tax rates are kept to 
enforceable levels, high rates of internal indirect taxes on luxury goods and services, 
coupled with lower taxes on less income-elastic items, can contribute to greater pro-
gressivity in the tax system. For revenue purposes, countries typically impose basic 
rates of sales taxes on nonluxuries at between 4 and 8 percent of manufacturers’ 
values. This is equivalent to retail taxes of between 2 and 4 percent because taxes 
imposed at this level exclude wholesale and retail margins. Food, except that con-
sumed in restaurants, almost always is exempted from any sales tax intended to pro-
mote redistributive goals. In developing countries, the exemption of food by itself 
renders most sales taxes at least faintly progressive, given the high proportion (up 
to 40 percent in many middle-income countries and over 50 percent in low income 
countries) of income of poor households spent on food. Sales taxes involving a lim-
ited number of luxury rates of between 20 and 30 percent at the manufacturers’ level 
have been found to be workable.
The redistributive potential of sales tax rates differentiated in this way, however, 
is limited by the same administrative and compliance constraints standing in the 
way of the heavier use of income taxation in developing countries. While sales taxes 
are not as difficult to administer as income taxes, they do not collect themselves. 
A manufacturer’s sales tax system employing three or even four rates may be admin-
istratively feasible in most countries, even when the highest rate approaches 40 per-
cent. Rates much higher than that or reliance on a profusion of rates in an attempt 
to fine-tune the tax lead to substantial incentives and opportunities for tax evasion. 
Jamaica had over 15 rates before 1986, and Chile had over 20 from 1960 to 1970. In 
recognition of these problems, Indonesia adopted a flat-rate manufacturers’ tax in 
1985: The tax applied at a rate of 10 percent on all manufactured items and imports. 
The tax nevertheless was slightly progressive because it did not apply to items that 
did not go through a manufacturing process, including most foodstuffs consumed by 
low-income families.
Although the use of internal indirect taxes, such as sales taxes, can contribute to 
income redistribution goals without causing serious misallocation of resources, the 
same cannot be said for the use of customs duties. Sales taxes are imposed on all 
taxable goods without regard to national origin, including goods produced domesti-
cally as well as abroad. Tariffs apply only to imported goods. Virtually all countries, 
developed and developing, use customs duties to protect existing domestic industry. 
Developing countries in particular employ customs duties as the principal means of 

414   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
encouraging domestic industry to produce goods that formerly were imported. This 
strategy, called import substitution, is examined at length in Chapter 18.
Deliberate policies to encourage import substitution through the use of high pro-
tective tariffs, under certain conditions, might lead to results sought by policy mak-
ers. But accidental import substitution arises when tariffs are used for purposes other 
than protection, and this is unlikely to have positive results. Many countries, as already 
pointed out, use high tariffs to achieve heavier taxation of luxury consumption. Often 
heavy tariffs are imposed on imported luxury items for which there is no intention of 
encouraging domestic production. Therefore, many Latin American and some Asian 
countries have levied customs tariffs of 100 to 150 percent of value on such appliances 
as electric knives, hair dryers, sporting goods, and mechanical toys. For most countries, 
these items are clearly highly income elastic and apt candidates for luxury taxation.
But efforts to tax luxuries through high customs duties lead to unintended, and 
almost irresistible, incentives for domestic production or assembly of such products. 
In virtually all countries, save the very poorest, alert domestic and foreign entrepre-
neurs have been quick to seize on such opportunities. By the time local assembly 
operations are established, they usually can make a politically convincing case that 
the duties should be retained to enable local production to continue, even when the 
value added domestically is as low as 10 percent of the value of the product. Such 
operations, if subject to any local sales taxes, usually succeed in being taxed at the 
basic tax rate, usually 5 to 10 percent. By relying on tariffs for luxury taxation, the gov-
ernment ultimately forgoes the revenues it previously collected from duties on luxury 
goods, as well as severely undermining the very aims of luxury taxation.
If, instead, higher luxury rates on imports are imposed under a sales tax collected 
on both imports and any domestic production that may develop, unintended import 
substitution can be avoided. The use of import tariffs for luxury taxation—indeed, 
for any purpose other than providing protection to domestic industry—is one illus-
tration of the general problem of using one economic policy instrument (tariffs) to 
achieve more than one purpose (protection, luxury taxation, and revenue). Reli-
ance on import duties for revenue is subject to the same pitfalls just discussed. If it is 
desired to increase government revenue from imports, a 10 percent sales tax applied 
both to imports and any future domestic production yields at least as much revenue 
as a 10 percent import duty, without leading to accidental protection.
CORPORATE INCOME AND PROPERTY 
TAXES: THE INCIDENCE PROBLEM
Income taxes on domestic corporations and property taxes often are mentioned as 
possible methods for securing income redistribution through the budget. Corporate 
income ultimately is received, through dividends and capital gains, almost exclu-
sively by the upper 5 to 10 percent of the income distribution. Also, ownership of 

TA X E S  A N D  I N C O M E  D I S T R I B UT I O N   415
wealth, which in many lower-income countries largely takes the form of land, tends 
to be even more concentrated than income. But, to a greater extent in developing 
than in developed countries, efforts to secure significant fiscal redistribution through 
heavier taxes on domestic corporations and property are limited both by administra-
tive and economic realities.
Administrative problems bedevil efforts to collect income taxes from domestic 
firms to at least as great an extent as for income taxes on individuals. Hence, in many 
countries where corporate taxes on local firms have been important, as much as two 
thirds to three quarters of nonoil corporate taxes flow from state-owned firms, not 
from private firms owned by high-income individuals. Taxes on land should be sub-
ject to less severe administrative problems because it is an asset that cannot be hidden 
easily. However, land valuation for tax purposes has proven difficult even in Canada 
and the United States. It is more difficult in developing countries. Few developing 
countries have been able to assess property at anything approaching its true value.
Economic realities hinder efforts to achieve greater progressivity in the tax sys-
tem through heavier use of corporate and land taxes because of the tendency for 
taxation to unintentionally burden groups other than those directly taxed. This is the 
incidence problem. The incidence of a tax is its ultimate impact, not who actually 
pays the tax to the government but whose income finally is affected by the tax when 
all economic agents have adjusted in response to the tax. The point of incidence is 
not always the point of initial impact. Taxes on domestic corporations may reduce 
the income of capitalists, who in turn might shift their investment patterns to reduce 
taxation. The income of the workers they employ and the prices charged to consum-
ers may be affected as well. Ultimately, all taxes are paid by people, not by things 
such as corporations and property parcels.
The implications of incidence issues may be illuminated by a simple application 
of incidence analysis to the corporation income tax. Consider a profit-maximizing 
company that has no significant monopoly power in the domestic market. If taxes 
on the company’s income are increased in a given year, then after-tax returns to its 
shareholders in that year are reduced by the full amount of the tax. In the short term, 
the incidence of the tax clearly is on shareholders. Because shareholders everywhere 
are concentrated in higher-income groups, the tax is progressive in the short run. If 
capital were immobile, unable to leave the corporate sector, the long-term incidence 
of the tax also would rest on shareholders and the tax would be progressive in the 
long run as well.
But, in the long run, capital can move out of the corporate sector. To the extent 
that capital is mobile domestically but not internationally, the corporate tax also is 
progressive in the long run. Returns on capital remaining in the corporate sector are 
reduced by the tax. Untaxed capital owners employed outside the corporate sector 
also suffer a reduction in returns, because movement of capital from the taxed cor-
porate sector drives down the rate of return in the untaxed sector. Because the corpo-
rate tax reduces returns to capital throughout the economy, all capital owners suffer, 

416   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
including owners of housing assets, and in a closed economy, the long-run incidence 
again is progressive.
However, few if any developing economies are completely closed; indeed, capi-
tal in recent years has become much more mobile internationally. To the extent that 
capital can move across national borders and higher returns are available in other 
countries, domestic capital migrates to escape higher corporate taxes. But as capi-
tal leaves an economy, ultimately output is curtailed and the marginal productivity 
of workers falls. Prices of items produced with domestic capital rise. In this way, an 
increase in corporate taxes may be borne by domestic consumers, who pay higher 
prices for the reduced supply of corporate-sector goods. Domestic workers, whose 
income is reduced when production is curtailed, may also bear a part of the burden 
of the corporate tax. Hence the corporate tax may be regressive (worsen the income 
distribution) in the long run. Although under other plausible conditions, an increase 
in the corporation income tax may result in greater relative burdens on capitalists, 
this scenario is sufficient to illustrate that often the intentions of a redistributive tax 
policy may be thwarted by all the workings of the economy. Policy makers cannot be 
sure that all taxes imposed on wealthy capital owners ultimately are paid by them.
The foregoing discussion suggests that, whereas some tax instruments may 
achieve income redistribution in developing countries, the opportunities for doing 
so are limited in most countries, a conclusion supported by a large number of empir-
ical studies. With few exceptions, these studies show that the failure to administer 
personal income taxes effectively—the failure to utilize the limited opportunities 
for heavier taxes on luxury consumption, overreliance on revenue-productive but 
regressive excise taxes, and inclusion of food in sales taxes—significantly reduces the 
redistribution impact of tax systems. Tax systems in developing countries tend to pro-
duce a burden roughly proportional across income groups, with some tendency for 
progressivity at the very top of the income scale. The very wealthy pay a somewhat 
greater proportion of their income in taxes than the poor, but the poor still pay sub-
stantial taxes: at least 10 percent of their income in many cases studied. Of course, in 
the absence of such efforts, the after-tax distribution of income may have been even 
more unequal. This suggests that, although difficult to implement and often disap-
pointing in results, tax reforms intended to reduce income inequality are not futile 
exercises and they may prevent taxes from making the poor worse off.
The limits of tax policy suggest that, if the budget is to serve redistribution pur-
poses, the primary emphasis must be on expenditure policy. Where redistribution 
through expenditures has been a high priority of governments, the results generally 
have been encouraging. The effects of government expenditure on income distribu-
tion are even more difficult to measure than those of taxes. But both the qualitative 
and the quantitative evidence available strongly indicate that, in developing coun-
tries, budget expenditures may transfer very substantial resources to lower-income 
households, in some cases as much as 50 percent of their income. Some of the mea-
sures using government expenditures to attack poverty were discussed in Chapter 6.

E C O N O M I C  E F F I C I E N C Y  A N D  T H E  B U D G E T   417
ECONOMIC EFFICIENCY AND THE BUDGET
SOURCES OF INEFFICIENCY
On the expenditure side of the budget, social cost-benefit analysis can be deployed to 
enhance efficiency (reduce waste) in government spending. On the tax side, promo-
tion of economic efficiency is more problematic.
All taxes lead to inefficiencies to one degree or another. The objective, there-
fore, is to minimize tax-induced inefficiencies consistent with other goals of tax 
policy. In most developing societies, this objective largely reduces the  necessity 
of identifying examples of waste engendered by taxes and purging them from 
the system. If a particular feature of a tax system involves large efficiency losses, 
called excess burden in public economics, and at the same time contributes little 
or nothing to such other policy goals as income redistribution, then that feature is 
an obvious candidate for abolition. A full discussion of those elements of tax sys-
tems that qualify for such treatment is properly the subject of an extended public 
finance monograph. We can do little more here than indicate some of the  principal 
examples.
A major source of inefficiency in taxation is excessive costs of tax administration. 
In some countries and for some taxes, these costs have been so high that they call 
into question the desirability of using certain taxes for any purpose. This is true for 
certain kinds of narrow-based stamp taxes that have been used in Latin America to 
collect government revenue on the documentation of transfer of assets, rental agree-
ments, checks, and ordinary business transactions. Many stamp taxes cost more to 
administer than they collect in revenue.
In some countries, even broad-based taxes have had inordinately high costs of 
collection. Sales taxes in Chile and Ecuador in the 1960s before the reform of their 
tax systems cost $1 in administration for every $4. Administrative costs to collect net 
taxes of $100 in most Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development 
(OECD) countries in the early twenty-first century in contrast range from $0.42 to 
$2.08, with the United States at $0.47 at the low end and Japan at $1.50 at the higher 
end.13 And, because taxes on capital gains are so difficult to administer everywhere, 
including North America, the cost of collecting this component of income taxes often 
exceeds the revenue in developing countries.
Many developing countries offer substantial tax incentives to encourage invest-
ment in particular activities and regions. Many of these, particularly income tax 
holidays for approved firms, have proven very difficult to administer and few have 
ECONOMIC EFFICIENCY AND THE BUDGET
13These are the average rates for 2000–02 and are taken from OECD, Tax Administration in OECD 
 Countries: Comparative Information Series (Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment, 2004).

418   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
led to the desired result.14 Given persistently pressing revenue requirements in most 
 countries, granting liberal tax incentives may have no effect other than requiring 
higher rates of tax on taxpayers who do not qualify for incentives. It is a dictum of fis-
cal theory that economic waste (inefficiency) arising from taxation increases by the 
square of the tax rate employed, not proportionately. Therefore, it is not difficult to 
see that unsuccessful tax incentive programs involve inefficiencies for the economy as 
a whole that are not compensated for by any significant benefits. Largely for this rea-
son, Indonesia abolished all forms of tax incentives in a sweeping tax reform in 1984.
Finally, some features of major tax sources involve needless waste. From the ear-
lier discussion of the use of import duties for luxury tax purposes, it is clear that this is 
often a major source of inefficiency. The use of progressive tax rates in a corporation 
income tax is another example. Progressive rates of corporate tax, where they can-
not be enforced, do little to contribute to income redistribution; and where they can 
be enforced, they lead to several kinds of waste. Two of the most important are frag-
mentation of business firms and inefficiency in business operations. The incentive 
for fragmentation is evident: Rather than be subject to high marginal rates of taxes, 
firms tend to split into smaller units and lose any cost advantages of size. Where high 
progressive rates are employed for company income, the tax takes a high propor-
tion (say, 70 percent) of each additional dollar of earnings, so the incentive to control 
costs within the firm is reduced. For example, for a firm facing a marginal tax rate of 
70 percent, an additional outlay of $1,000 for materials involves a net cost to the firm 
of only $300, because at the same time taxes are reduced by $700.
NEUTRALITY AND EFFICIENCY: LESSONS FROM EXPERIENCE
Experience around the world, both in developed and developing countries, seems to 
indicate that, in societies where efficiency in taxation matters, this objective is best 
pursued by reliance on taxes that are as neutral as possible. A neutral tax is one that 
does not lead to a material change in the structure of private incentives that would 
prevail in the absence of the tax. A neutral tax system, then, is one that relies, to the 
extent possible, on uniform rates: a tax on all income at a flat rate or a sales tax with 
the same rate applied to all goods and services. A neutral tax system cannot be an 
efficient tax system.
An efficient tax system involves a minimum amount of excess burden for rais-
ing a required amount of revenue, where the excess burden of a tax is the loss in total 
welfare, over and above the amount of tax revenues collected by the government. 
Figure 11–1 demonstrates how the excess burden of, say, a commodity tax is greater 
the more elastic the demand or the supply of the taxed item. Figure 11–1a depicts 
the inelastic case, good A, whereas panel b shows the elastic case, good B. Constant 
14See, for example, Arnold C. Harberger, “Principles of Taxation Applied to Developing Countries: What 
Have We Learned?” in Michael Boskin and Charles E. McLure Jr., eds., World Tax Reform: Case Studies of 
Developed and Developing Countries (San Francisco: ICS Press, 1990).

E C O N O M I C  E F F I C I E N C Y  A N D  T H E  B U D G E T   419
 marginal costs (MC) are assumed in both cases and at the same level for both goods 
to portray more starkly the contrasting results achieved in those cases. Before the 
tax is imposed on either good, the equilibrium price and quantity are Pa and Qa for 
good A and Pb and Qb for good B. Now, we impose a tax rate (t) on both goods. The 
new equilibrium (post-tax) magnitudes are Pat and Qat for good A and Pbt and Qbt for 
good B. For good A, the total amount of government revenue is the rectangle PaPatcd. 
The total loss in consumer surplus arising from the tax is the trapezoid PaPatce. 
The excess of the loss in consumer surplus over the amount of government revenue 
is the conventional measure of efficiency loss from a tax, or excess burden. For good A, 
the excess burden is the small triangle cde. By similar reasoning, the excess burden 
in the case of good B is the larger triangle fgh. We see that taxes of equivalent rates 
involve more excess burden when imposed on goods with elastic demand.
We can see that efficient taxation requires neither uniformity nor neutrality but 
many different tax rates on different goods, with tax rates lower for goods with elastic 
demand and higher for goods with inelastic demand. This is known as the Ramsey 
rule, or the inverse elasticity rule. The problem is that a tax system under this rule 
would be decidedly regressive: The highest taxes would be required on foodstuffs, 
drinking water, and sumptuary items. Taxes would be lower on items such as cloth-
ing, services, and foreign travel, which tend to be both price and income elastic.
The principle of neutrality in taxation is not nearly as intellectually satisfying a 
guide to tax policy as efficient taxation. Nevertheless, neutral taxation is to be pre-
ferred as one of the underlying principles of taxation, along with equity, until such 
Qat Qa
Pat
Pa
Price
Quantity
Good A 
Tax
c
e
d
f
h
g
D1
D2
S (with tax)
Qbt
Qb
Pbt
Pb
Price
Quantity
Good B
(a)
(b)
MC = AC = S
S (with tax)
MC = AC = S
FIGURE 11–1 Taxation and Efficiency: Excess Burden of Commodity Taxes with Constant 
Marginal (MC) and Average Costs (AC), under Competition
(a) Case 1: Inelastic demand. (b) Case 2: Elastic demand. The shaded area in each case 
represents the excess burden of equal tax rates imposed on different goods. The greater the 
elasticity, the greater the excess burden.

420   [CH. 11] F I S C A L  P O L I C Y
time as analysts are able to identify optimal departures from neutrality—and uni-
formity in tax rates—in real-world settings. More intellectually satisfying tax policies 
must also wait until such time as administrative capacities are equal to the task of 
operating necessarily complicated structures of efficient or optimal taxes.
There is a paradox here. Neutral, uniform-rate taxes are less suited for efficiency 
goals than perfectly administered efficient taxes. Yet neutral tax systems are more 
likely to enhance efficiency in the economy than are efficient or optimal systems 
because neutral systems with uniform rates can be administered most easily and are 
much less vulnerable to evasion. This is not to say that neutrality has ever been or 
should be the overriding goal of tax policy. Governments often undertake very delib-
erate departures from neutral tax treatment of certain sectors or groups of society to 
achieve other policy goals. But, in real-world settings, these departures involve costs, 
not only in terms of tax administration but often in both equity and efficiency terms 
as well.
SUMMARY
• The expenditure side of the government budget is made up of capital or 
development items together with a wide variety of current use expenditures 
that are called recurrent costs. Developing country governments and donor 
aid programs frequently waste capital by neglecting the recurrent costs 
needed to maintain that capital.
• Developing countries rely mainly on indirect taxes (sales or value-added 
taxes and customs duties) rather than income and capital gains taxes 
because the latter are extremely difficult and expensive to administer in 
developing countries and thus produce less revenue.
• Tax reform in developing countries generally involves simplifying the tax 
system (one or a small number of different tax rates) and introducing taxes 
such as the value-added tax that have some self-enforcement properties. 
Greater complexity in the tax code leads to greater difficulty and greater 
corruption in administering the code. Simplified tax codes also reduce the 
distortions in the economy introduced by taxes.
• Taxation on the basis of an individual’s ability to pay (higher-income people 
pay a larger share of their income in taxes) is a fundamental principle of 
equity. A good tax system is thus progressive rather than regressive, but 
progressive tax systems are extremely difficult to administer, particularly in 
developing countries, except in limited areas such as the exemption of food 
from sales taxes. When one looks at the actual incidence of taxes on high- 
and low-income earners, taxes that are designed to be progressive often 
turn out to be the opposite, and tax reform needs to take this into account.
SUMMARY

421
A 
country’s financial system consists of a variety of interconnected financial 
institutions, both formal and informal. A central bank lies at the core of the 
organized financial system and is responsible for the control of the money 
supply and the general supervision of organized financial activity. Virtu-
ally everywhere, and particularly in developing countries, the commercial banking 
system is the most visible and vital component of the formal financial system, as 
acceptor of deposits and grantor of shorter-term credit. Other elements of the for-
mal financial system include savings banks; insurance companies; and in a growing 
number of middle-income countries, pension funds and investment banks special-
izing in long-term credit as well as emerging stock exchanges. In high-income coun-
tries since the early 1990s there was the creation of a new set of institutions called 
hedge funds that played an important role in the global economic crisis of 2008–09.
Standing behind these financial institutions are a variety of government and 
sometimes private institutions whose role is to regulate the financial system. Typi-
cally separate agencies exist to regulate the commercial banks and the stock market, 
but the nature of regulation of the financial system is constantly changing. The need 
for regulation arises first and foremost from the fact that financial institutions exist 
primarily to manage the financial assets of people and companies other than the 
owners and managers of the financial institutions themselves. Regulation is designed 
to ensure that the financial assets of the public are managed responsibly without 
excessive risk. In the 1990s and during the first years of the twenty-first century the 
trend in high-income countries in North America and Europe was to reduce and even 
eliminate many of the regulations governing the financial system in the belief that the 
Financial Development 
and Infl ation
12

422   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
market would be an adequate regulator on its own. Many financial companies also 
developed new financial instruments that were designed to provide a service, such 
as insurance, that would not be subject to the standard regulations governing insur-
ance contracts (these new instruments were called credit default swaps). This trend 
toward further liberalization of financial markets came to an abrupt end in 2009 and 
2010 as the global financial crisis made it clear that markets on their own could not 
adequately control risky behavior of financial institutions, and a wide variety of new 
regulations were put in place.
The financial crisis of 2008–09 started in the United States and spread quickly 
to Europe, but developing countries were soon enveloped in the consequences of 
the global recession. The primary difference between developing and high-income 
countries in this context was that the developing country financial systems were sim-
pler and made much less use of the more exotic financial instruments than did high-
income countries. Commercial banks dominated the financial system in developing 
countries, investment banks if they existed at all were smaller and weaker, and insur-
ance companies were in their infancy. The existence of financial systems depends on 
trust that they will manage a depositor’s or an investor’s funds well and that trust is 
built on a history of responsible behavior, on an effective regulatory system, and on 
the transparency of the operations of the financial organizations themselves. It takes 
decades or longer to develop trustworthy institutions and trust can be lost quickly as 
happened in 2008–09, but in developing countries this trust and the related effective 
regulation was largely confined to the commercial banks.
The limited scope of the formal financial sector in developing countries, how-
ever, left many people and small companies without ready access to credit or even to 
a reliable place to put their savings. In recent decades this has led to the creation of 
new micro-credit institutions designed to reach these left-out individuals, but long 
before formal micro-credit institutions were created, there was in virtually all devel-
oping countries an informal financial sector existing alongside the formal one. Infor-
mal financial institutions include pawnshops, local moneylenders, trade credit, and 
other arrangements involving the borrowing and lending of money such as intrafam-
ily transfers and cooperative credit. In very low income countries, or even in some 
middle-income countries, the informal financial sector may rival the formal system 
in size. In almost all cases the informal sector is unregulated, although governments 
do interfere in its operation from time to time.
Financial policy embraces all measures intended to affect the growth, utilization, 
efficiency, and diversification of the financial system. In North America and western 
Europe, the term financial policy ordinarily is used as a synonym for monetary policy, 
the use of monetary instruments to reduce price instability caused by fluctuations in 
either internal or external markets. In the United States, these instruments include 
open-market operations, changes in legal reserve requirements of commercial banks, 
and shifts in central bank (Federal Reserve System) lending (rediscount) rates to 
 commercial banks (these terms are explained later in this chapter). In developing 

T H E  F U N CT I O N S  O F  A  F I N A N C I A L  S Y S T E M  423
countries, the term financial policy typically has a much broader meaning. Monetary 
policy is part of financial policy but so are measures intended to encourage the growth 
of savings in the form of financial assets, develop money and capital markets, and 
allocate credit among different economic sectors. Regulation to control risk, as in the 
1997–98 and the 2008–09 financial crises, is also a component of financial policy.
THE FUNCTIONS OF A FINANCIAL SYSTEM
The financial system provides four basic services essential for the smooth functioning 
of an economy. First, it provides a medium of exchange and a store of value, called 
money, which also serves as a unit of account to measure the value of the transac-
tions. Second, it provides channels for mobilizing savings from numerous sources 
and channeling them to investors, a process called financial intermediation. Third, it 
provides a means of transferring and distributing risk across the economy. Fourth, it 
provides a set of policy instruments for the stabilization of economic activity. When 
these functions are managed poorly the result on a macro level can be a financial cri-
sis leading to a global recession, inflation, or a debt crisis. The management of infla-
tionary pressures will be discussed in this chapter and debt crises are the subject of 
Chapter 13.
MONEY AND THE MONEY SUPPLY
An economy without money as a medium of exchange is primitive. Trade between 
individuals must take the form of high-cost, inefficient barter transactions. In a barter 
economy, goods have prices, but they are expressed in the relative prices of physical 
commodities: so many kilos of rice for so many liters of kerosene, so many meters 
of rope for so many pairs of sandals, and so on. Trading under such circumstances 
involves onerous information costs.
Few societies have ever relied heavily on barter because of the high costs implicit 
in this means of exchange. At some point, prices of goods and services begin to be 
expressed in terms of one or more universally accepted and durable commodities, 
like gold and silver or even beads and cowrie shells. The rise of commodity money 
diminishes the transaction and storage costs of trade but still involves problems of 
making exchanges across space and time. Gold and silver prices fluctuate, and the 
commodities, therefore, are not fully reliable as units of account. As specialization 
within an economy increases, financial instruments backed by commodities appear. 
In the last century, with the rise of central banking all over the world, currency 
evolved into fiat money, debt issued by central banks that is legal tender. It is backed 
not by commodities of equivalent value but only by the full faith and credit of the 
central bank.
THE FUNCTIONS OF A FINANCIAL SYSTEM

424   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
As markets widen and specialization proceeds apace, a need arises for still 
another financial instrument, transferable deposits. In the normal course of devel-
opment, checking or demand deposits (deposits that may be transferred to any eco-
nomic agent at the demand of the depositor) appear first and ordinarily bear little 
or no interest. Rising levels of economic activity, however, create increasing needs 
for transaction balances; individuals will always maintain some balances in demand 
deposits to meet these needs but tend to economize on the levels of such deposits if 
no interest is paid on them. With further monetization still another financial instru-
ment begins to grow in importance, time deposits, which also are legally transferable 
on demand but sometimes only after stated periods. Time deposits involve contrac-
tual interest payments; higher interest rates induce people to hold greater amounts 
of deposits in this form.
While checking (demand) and time deposits are liabilities (or debts) of commer-
cial banks, they are financial assets for the individuals who hold them. Both demand 
and time deposits are known as liquid financial assets. Unlike nonfinancial assets 
that also can be held by households and businesses (inventories, gold, and land), 
demand and time deposits can be quickly and conveniently converted into their cur-
rency equivalents. Currency, by definition, is the most liquid of all assets. The con-
cept of liquid financial assets is an important one in any discussion of financial policy 
in developing countries. For most developing countries, the movement of savers in 
and out of liquid financial assets may be the prime factor behind the success or fail-
ure of a financial policy. We will see that long-term shifts from tangible, or nonfinan-
cial, physical assets to financial assets, particularly liquid assets, bodes well not only 
for economic growth but also for economic stability.
A country’s money supply may be defined as the sum of all liquid assets in the 
financial system. While not all economists agree about what constitutes a liquid 
financial asset, most vastly prefer this money supply concept to those commonly 
employed in early postwar monetary analysis. Formerly, the money supply was con-
ventionally defined as the sum of only two liquid financial assets: currency in cir-
culation outside banks (C) plus demand deposits (D), which together are known as 
M1 (narrow money). However, it later became clear that, because depositors tend 
to view time and savings deposits (T) as almost as liquid as demand deposits, the 
former also should be included in any workable concept of money supply, called 
M2 (broad money). Finally, for high-income countries, specialized deposit-taking 
financial institutions have arisen and offer an array of options to savers other than 
those available in commercial and savings banks. The liabilities of these specialized 
institutions (O) are included in M3 (total liquid liabilities), the broadest measure of 
money. Thus
 
M1 = C + D 
[12—1]
 
M2 = M1 + T 
[12—2]
 
M3 = M2 + O 
[12—3]

T H E  F U N CT I O N S  O F  A  F I N A N C I A L  S Y S T E M  425
For most low-income countries and many middle-income countries, liquid finan-
cial assets constitute by far the greatest share of outstanding financial assets. But, 
as income growth continues and the financial system matures, less-liquid financial 
assets assume progressively greater importance. These include primary securities 
such as stocks, bonds (issued both by government and firms), and other financial 
claims on tangible (physical) assets that are convertible into currency equivalents 
with only some risk of loss to the asset holder and are hence less liquid than demand 
or time deposits.
The evolution of financial activity follows no set pattern across countries. Dif-
fering economic conditions and policies may result in widely divergent patterns of 
financial growth. Nevertheless, as per capita income rises, money increases as a ratio 
to gross domestic product (GDP). Table 12–1 shows these patterns for broad money (M2).
TABLE 12–1  Broad Money (M2) as a Percentage of Gross Domestic Product (GDP),
1980 and 2008
PERCENT OF GDP
COUNTRY/ECONOMY
1980
2008
Low-income countries
19
36
Ethiopia
—
31
Tanzania
—
28
India
32
70
Bangladesh
13
55
Kenya
30
40
Nigeria
24
30
Ghana
16
24 
Honduras
23
51
Lower-middle-income countries
28
54 
Pakistan
39
44 
Bolivia
18
55
Cameroon
21
19
Philippines
22
59 
Sri Lanka
28
33
Indonesia
13
36
Peru
17
31
Egypt
52
84
Upper-middle-income countries
29
79
Colombia
24
33
Argentina
29
25
Mexico
27
26
Malaysia
71
118
Korea, Republic
29
62
High-income countries
72
113
Saudi Arabia
13
48
Japan
138
207
United States
68
83
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators 2011 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011), 
available at http://databank.worldbank.org/ddp/home.do.

426   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
For all income classes shown in the table, the ratio of M2 to the GDP rose substan-
tially from 1980 through 2008. This reflects both economic growth and changing 
 policies. Looking at country income aggregates, the ratio rises as one moves from 
low- to middle- to high-income economies. But the variance among countries is 
notable. In 2008, Kenya, a low-income economy, had a higher monetization ratio 
(40 percent) than either Sri Lanka (33 percent) or Mexico (26 percent) both middle-
income nations. Clearly, income level is not the only determinant of financial growth.
FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION
As financial structures become increasingly rich and diversified in terms of financial 
assets, institutions, and markets, the function of money as a medium of exchange, 
store of value, and unit of account tends to be taken for granted, except in situations 
of runaway inflation. As financial development proceeds, the ability of the finan-
cial system to perform its second major function, financial intermediation, grows as 
well. The process of financial intermediation involves gathering savings from multi-
tudinous savers and channeling them to a much smaller but still sizable number of 
investors. With a few exceptions, households are the main net savers in developing 
countries. At early stages of economic development, a preponderant share of inter-
mediation activities tends to be concentrated in commercial banks. As develop-
ment proceeds, new forms of financial intermediaries begin to appear and gradually 
assume a growing share of the intermediation function. These include investment 
banks, insurance companies, pension funds, and securities markets.
Financial intermediation is best seen as one of several alternative technologies 
for mobilizing and allocating savings. The fiscal system discussed in Chapter 11 fur-
nishes another alternative, and we see in Chapter 14 that reliance on foreign savings 
constitutes still another. Further, we will observe in this chapter that inflation has 
also been employed as a means of mobilizing resources for the public sector. Indeed, 
a decision to rely more heavily on financial intermediation as a means of investment 
finance is tantamount to a decision to rely less heavily on the government budget, 
foreign aid and foreign investment, and inflation to achieve the same purpose.
TRANSFORMATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF RISK
Another major service provided by a well-functioning financial system is the trans-
formation and distribution of risk. All economic activities involve risk taking, but 
some undertakings involve more risk than others. Individual savers and investors 
tend to be risk averse; the marginal loss of a dollar appears more important to them 
than the marginal gain of a dollar. But the degree of risk aversion differs among indi-
viduals. When risk cannot be diversified (or pooled) across a large number of indi-
viduals, savers and investors demand greater returns (or premiums) for bearing risk 
and activities involving high risk tend not to be undertaken. But high-risk activities 

I N F L AT I O N   427
may well offer the greatest returns to the economy as a whole. A well-functioning 
financial system furnishes a means for diversifying, or pooling, risk among a large 
number of savers and investors. The system may offer assets with differing degrees 
of risk. Financial institutions that specialize in assessing and managing risks can 
assign them to individuals having different attitudes toward and perceptions of risk. 
The term well-functioning financial system needs to be emphasized here. Early in the 
twenty-first century, highly sophisticated financial systems in high-income coun-
tries, notably the United States, managed risk poorly and this led to the financial cri-
sis and global recession of 2008–09.
STABILIZATION
Finally, the financial system provides instruments for the stabilization of economic 
activity in addition to those available under fiscal policy and direct controls. All econ-
omies experience cyclical changes in production, employment, and prices. Govern-
ments often attempt to compensate for these fluctuations through policies affecting 
the money supply. Because unemployment in developing countries rarely is of the 
type that can be cured by monetary expansion, the use of financial policy for stabi-
lization purposes generally focuses on efforts to control inflation. As the economic 
crises that began in Asia in 1997 and in the United States in 2008 demonstrated, 
however, the financial system itself can become a major source of instability in the 
country. From the beginning of the twenty-first century, as a result, financial policy 
also has focused on more than simply whether the supply of money is growing too 
rapidly or too slowly. Policy makers have had to devote much attention to ensuring 
the integrity and stability of banks and other nonbank financial institutions to avoid 
a severe recession brought on by financial panic. In the discussion that follows, we 
focus first on the use of the financial system to control inflation and then return to the 
issue of how the financial system should be designed and managed to avoid panic 
and recession.
INFLATION
From the 1980s to the present price inflation, defined as a sustained increase in 
the overall price level, generally was regarded as a malady that in its milder forms 
was annoying but tolerable and in its moderate form corrosive but not fatal. Run-
away inflation, also known as hyperinflation, however, always has been recognized 
as severely destructive of economic processes, with few offsetting benefits. Whereas 
a number of influential thinkers in the 1950s and 1960s advocated some degree of 
moderate inflation (for example, inflation rates between 8 and 12 percent) as a 
tool for promoting growth, few adherents of this view remain. Many others did not 
INFLATION

428   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
actively advocate inflation but tended to have a higher threshold of tolerance for a 
steadily rising general price level than now is common.
INFLATION EPISODES
Inflationary experiences vary widely among developing countries and generaliza-
tions are difficult to make. Nevertheless, postwar economic history offers some 
interesting national and regional contrasts in both susceptibility to and tolerance 
for different levels of inflation. The period before the early 1970s was one of relative 
price stability in developing countries. In the southern cone of Latin America, how-
ever, particularly in Argentina, Brazil, and Chile, chronic inflation (prices rising 20 
to 50 percent per year for three years or more) was an enduring fact of economic life 
for much of the 1950s through the 1980s and even beyond. The experience of these 
countries indicates that a long period of double-digit inflation does not necessarily 
lead to national economic calamity in all societies. In all, about two dozen countries 
experienced chronic inflation from 1950 to 2008, as shown in Table 12–2, but only 
a few, including Tajikistan, Venezuela, and Uzbekistan, have experienced chronic 
inflation throughout much of the first decade of the twenty-first century.
However, a tolerable rate of inflation in one country may constitute economic 
trauma in another. This may be seen more readily by considering the often progres-
sive inflationary disease, acute inflation. Acute inflation, defined here as inflation 
between 50 and 200 percent for three or more consecutive years, was experienced by 
18 countries listed in Table 12–2 over the postwar period, in some cases more than 
once per country. For Brazil, the progression from chronic to acute inflation did not 
result in any noticeable slowing of that country’s relatively robust economic growth, 
whatever it may have meant for income distribution. In Ghana, on the other hand, 
a decade of acute inflation coincided with a decade of decline in GDP per capita. 
Although it may be tempting to attribute economic retrogression in Ghana at the 
time to acute inflation, it is more likely that the same policies that led to sustained 
inflation, not the inflation itself, were responsible for declines in living standards 
there.1 Since the middle of the 1990s acute inflation has been rare.
Although acute inflation has proven toxic to economic development in some set-
tings and only bothersome in others, runaway (hyper) inflation almost always has 
had a devastating effect. Inflation rates in excess of 200 percent per year represent an 
inflationary process that is clearly out of control; 22 countries have undergone this 
traumatic experience since 1950. One major bout of runaway inflationary experience 
occurred in three Latin American countries: Bolivia and Argentina in 1985, Argentina 
again in 1988–90, and Peru in 1988–91. In Bolivia, the annual rate of inflation over 
1For a diagnosis of the causes of the Ghanian economic decline after 1962, see Michael Roemer, 
“Ghana, 1950 to 1980: Missed Opportunities,” and Yaw Ansu, “Comments” (201–30), both in Arnold C. 
Haberger, ed., World Economic Growth (San Francisco: ICS Press, 1984).

I N F L AT I O N   429
TABLE 12–2  Inflation Outliers: Episodes of Chronic, Acute, and Runaway Inflation 
among Developing Countries, 1948–2008 (average annual rates)
CHRONIC INFLATION (20–50 
PERCENT, 3 YEARS)
ACUTE INFLATION (50–200 
PERCENT, 3 YEARS)
RUNAWAY INFLATION (200+ 
PERCENT, 1 YEAR)
COUNTRY
YEAR(S)
RATE
YEAR(S)
RATE
YEAR(S)
RATE
Angola
1997–2003
143
1993–96
858
Argentina
1950–74
27
1977–82
147
1976
443
1986–87
111
1983–85
529
1988–91
1,400
Armenia
1990–97
700
Azerbaijan
1990–96*
590
Belarus
1997–2002
  87
1990–96*
715
Bolivia
1979–81
33
1952–59
117
1983–86
1,132
Brazil
1957–78
36
1979–84
108
1985
227
1986
145
1987–93
831
Chile
1952–71
29
1973–76
308
1978–80
36
1983–85
26
Colombia
1979–82
26
1988–92
28
Dominican 
 Republic
1988–92
  51
Ecuador
1997–2001
49
Georgia
1990–96*
2,279
Ghana
1986–90
32
1976–83
  73
1995–97
  75
Indonesia
1965–68
306
Kazakhstan
1990–96*
605
Kyrgyz 
 Republic
1990–96*
256
Latvia
1990–96*
111
Lithuania
1990–96*
179
Malawi
1998–2002
40
Mexico
1982–88
  70
Myanmar
2001–03
29
1992
116
Nicaragua
1979–84
33
1985–91
2,130
Paraguay
1951–53
  81
Peru
1975–77
32
1950–55
102
1988–91
1,694
1978–87
  85
Romania
1991–93
132
1997–92
  56
Russia
1996–99
42
1993–95
376
Sierra Leone
1983–92
  81
South Korea
1950–55
  95
Tajikistan
2000–08
22
1990–96*
394
Turkmenistan
1990–96*
1,074
Tanzania
1980–89
27
Turkey
1981–87
38
1978–80
  69
1988–2002
  70
(Continued)

430   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
a period of several months in 1985 accelerated to a rate of nearly 4,000 percent. In 
Argentina, the monthly rate of price increases was 30.5 percent in June 1985 alone; 
on an annual basis that would have been an inflation rate of 2,340 percent. In both 
Bolivia and Argentina for much of 1985, workers had little choice but to spend their 
paychecks within days of receipt, for fear that prices would double or triple over the 
next week. In Peru, hyperinflation in 1989 gave birth to publications devoted only to 
the tracking of inflation (see Box 12–1).
In the 1990s, hyperinflation was experienced by virtually all the new republics 
formed after the breakup of the Soviet Union. In the first part of the 1990s, inflation 
reached a rate of nearly 400 percent a year in Russia over a period of several years and 
over 1,000 percent a year in the Republic of Georgia and Turkmenistan. In the latter two 
countries, civil war put heavy demands on government expenditures while reducing 
the ability of those governments to collect taxes, leading them to finance their activities 
by printing money. In Africa in the 1990s, civil war in Angola and the Congo also led 
to inflation rates of over 1,000 percent per year. Since the year 2000, however only the 
Congo (briefly) and Zimbabwe (throughout the first decade of the twenty-first century) 
have experienced runaway inflation. In the Congo the ongoing war in the eastern part 
of the country is the main cause. In Zimbabwe runaway inflation has been the result of 
across the board mismanagement of the economy throughout that decade.
Uganda
1990–92
37
1981–89
101
Ukraine
1993–95
1,167
Uruguay
1948–65
26
1965–68
83
1981–83
34
1972–80
68
Uzbekistan
2000-08 
29
1984–92
76
Venezuela
1987–92
40
1993–98
43
2002–08
28
Zaire/Congo
1981–82
36
1976–80
68
1991–92
2,987
1983–90
68
1992–95
3,206
1996–2002
218
Zambia
1985–87
44
1988–92
113
1993–96
71
Zimbabwe
2002–07
5,305†
*For a number of the former Soviet republics, the gross domestic product (GDP) price deflator data are
given for the entire period 1990–96, not broken down by year.
†Data for Zimbabwe are not available after 2007. Some estimates place Zimbabwe’s annual inflation at 
over 30,000 in the late 2000s.
Sources: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics Yearbook 1994 (Washington, DC: 
International Monetary Fund, 2004) and International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics
Yearbook, 2003 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 2003); and World Bank, World Develop-
ment Indicators 2010, at http://databank.worldbank.org/ddp/home.do accessed June 2011.
TABLE 12–2 Continued

I N F L AT I O N   431
BOX 12–1 HYPERINFLATION IN PERU, 1988–90
The economic and social havoc wrought by hyperinflation is difficult to comprehend
for those who have not lived through the experience. The Peruvian hyperinflation, 
which began in 1988 and continued until 1991, provides some rueful examples.
The inflationary process was triggered by large budgetary deficits and sus-
tained by subsequent ongoing deficits, virtual economic collapse, and steadily
rising inflationary expectations. Peru already had experienced two serious bouts
with acute inflation since 1950, but the pace of inflation in 1989 was the highest
in the nation’s history: 28 percent per month, or about 2,000 percent per year. 
Moreover, inflation accelerated in the first six weeks of 1990, as prices rose by
6 percent per week, or about 1 percent per day. From January 1989 to December
1990, the value of the Peruvian currency (the inti) on the free market fell from
1,200 intis per dollar to 436,000 intis per dollar.
This hyperinflation may turn out to be one of the best documented in history: In
1988, Richard Webb, an internationally respected Peruvian economist, began to pub-
lish a magazine devoted essentially to helping producers and consumers cope with
the chaos associated with runaway inflation. The magazine, called Cuanto? (How 
Much?)
?  appeared monthly. It not only provided details on price developments for a
large number of commodities and services but managed to extract what little humor
there is in a situation in which the price of a movie ticket rises while people are wait-
ing in line to buy it or taxi drivers must carry fare money in a burlap bag because the
domestic currency collected in fares each evening is too bulky to fit in a wallet.
But precious little is funny about hyperinflation. In Peru, it was a story of gov-
ernment employees going without pay for weeks at a time, of indices of poverty
nearly doubling from 1987 to 1989, further impoverishing the poorest 40 percent
of the population. It was a story of precipitous decline in gross domestic product
(GDP) and the rise of pervasive black markets in everything from dollars to gaso-
line to cement. It was a time when, on each payday, laborers rushed to the market
to buy their weekly food supplies before they were marked up overnight. It was a
tale of wide variations in price rises, in which prices for such items as pencils and
chicken increased by more than 25 times from February 1989 to February 1990,
but prices of light bulbs and telephone services increased “only” 10-fold.
Imagine life in Lima, the capital city, in the first few weeks of 1990, for a middle-
income family trying to survive. For the first 40 days of the year, increases in the
price of dying outpaced the price of living: The cost of funerals rose 79 percent,
while house rent rose by 56 percent and the price of restaurant meals and haircuts
increased by 44 percent. By mid-1990, the economic paralysis of Peru was virtually
complete. Peru’s hyperinflation ended in 1992 (although inflation remained acute at
75 percent) as government reduced its budget deficit to 1 percent of GDP.

432   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
The countries listed in Table 12–2 brought on inflation in three different ways.
In one group (including Argentina, Chile, Ghana, Indonesia, Peru, Russia, and
Ukraine), large budget deficits relative to GDP were financed by borrowing from
the central bank. In a second group (Paraguay in the early 1950s and Brazil and
Uruguay before 1974), inflation was caused by a massive expansion of credit to
the private sector. And in Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Uganda, Angola, Congo, Zim-
babwe, and several of the nations created out of the former Soviet Union, political
strife or civil war exacerbated the fiscal and monetary causes of inflation. What-
ever the initial impetus to inflation, once it begins to accelerate, the public begins
to expect inflation to continue, and this leads to even-higher, more-sustained
price increases.
For developing countries as a group, Table 12–3 shows that, on average, infla-
tion was only 13 percent a year until the oil crisis began in 1973 but jumped to
21 percent a year during the period of rising oil prices until 1981. Inflation then
accelerated to more than 30 percent a year even as oil prices began falling and
exceeded 50 percent a year after oil prices collapsed in 1986. In the 1990s, these
high rates of inflation continued through the first half of the decade and then
slowed markedly after 1995. The principal exceptions were the states of the former
Soviet Union, where triple-digit inflation in many cases continued to the end of the
century and in a few cases a few years more. The industrial countries, in contrast,
had much lower inflation throughout and the highest price increases coincided
with the rise in oil prices.
We saw from Table 12–3 that inflation largely was conquered in Asia during the
1970s but accelerated in Latin America and Africa during and especially after
the oil-price boom of the 1970s. In the 1990s, however, attempts to control infla-
tion were more serious and widespread with the notable exception of the repub-
lics formed out of the collapse of the Soviet Union. Even in these former Soviet
republics, inflation by the beginning of the twenty-first century was generally 
down to single digits. The only case of runaway inflation during the first decade of 
the twenty-first century, as already noted, was Zimbabwe, where inflation was the
result of a general collapse of the economy and of a government fiscal policy in the
context of a ruling elite desperately trying to hold onto power. Controlling inflation
in the midst of a civil war and the collapse of government functions requires first
ending the war and reestablishing a functioning government. To control inflation
under more normal circumstances, monetary policy is the principal instrument
used to achieve price stability.
MONETARY POLICY AND PRICE STABILITY

M O N E TA R Y  P O L I C Y  A N D  P R I C E  S TA B I L I T Y   433
MONETARY POLICY AND EXCHANGE-RATE REGIMES
Appropriate use of monetary policy in controlling inflation depends critically on 
the type of exchange-rate regime used by a country. Exchange-rate regimes form a 
continuum with fixed (pegged) exchange rates at one end and floating (flexible) 
exchange rates at the other. Under a fixed-exchange-rate system, a country attempts 
to maintain the value of its currency in a fixed relation to another currency, say, 
the U.S. dollar: The value of the local currency is pegged to the dollar. This is done 
through intervention by the country’s monetary authorities in the market for for-
eign exchange and requires the maintenance of substantial international reserves
(reserves of foreign currencies), usually equivalent to the value of four or more 
months’ worth of imports.
Consider the case of Thailand, where from 1987 to early 1997 the Thai cur-
rency, the baht, was fixed at an exchange rate close to 25 baht to US$1. Because 
the exchange rate, if left to its own devices, would change from day to day to reflect 
changes in both the demand for and supply of exports and imports and capi-
tal flows, to defend the peg, the government must be prepared to use the country’s 
international reserves to buy or sell dollars at an exchange rate of 25 to 1 to keep the 
exchange rate from moving. If, for example, a poor domestic rice harvest caused the 
nation to increase its food imports, the baht–dollar exchange rate would tend to rise 
(the baht would depreciate, as its dollar value falls) in the absence of any net sales 
of dollars from Thailand’s international reserves. To sustain a fixed exchange rate, of 
course, the country must have sufficient foreign exchange reserves to keep on buying 
baht at that fixed rate. In 1997, because of large capital outflows, Thailand actually 
ran out of foreign exchange and had to abandon its support of the pegged rate.
TABLE 12–3 Inflation by Regional Groupings, 1963–2008 (percent per annum)
REGION
1963–73
1973–81
1981–92
1992–95
1995–98
1998–01
2001–08
World
26.3
13.8
17.9
19.2
6.8
4.2 
4.5
Industrial countries
24.6
10.3
13.0
2.5
1.9
1.8 
2.1
Developing countries
12.9
20.7
44.1
47.9
12.6
7.1 
8.5
Africa
24.9
17.3
27.0
40.2
12.1
8.2 
9.1
Asia
13.5
28.8
16.8
11.6
6.9
2.4 
3.9
Middle East*
24.2
16.6
16.0
15.0
9.5
5.5 
12.6*
Latin America and
    Caribbean
18.4
43.7
162.8
216.5
15.5
8.4 
9.6
*The Middle East gross domestic product deflator series ends in 2007.
Sources: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics Yearbook 1994 (Washington, DC: 
International Monetary Fund, 1994); International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, 1998 
(Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 1998); International Monetary Fund, International Finan-
cial Statistics, 2003 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 2003); and International Monetary 
Fund, International Financial Statistics 2010 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 2010).

434   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
Under freely floating rates, the authorities simply allow the value of local cur-
rency vis-à-vis foreign ones to be determined by market forces. Between the two ends 
of this continuum lie a number of intermediate options (Figure 12–1).2 Closest to the 
floating-exchange-rate option is the wider band system, by which the exchange rate 
of a country is allowed to float or fluctuate within a predefined band of values, say, 
between 23 and 27 baht to US$1. But when conditions threaten to push the value of 
the currency beyond the band, the authorities intervene by buying or selling local 
currency as appropriate to stay within the band. Further along the continuum away 
from floating rates is the managed float, where the authorities are committed to 
defend no particular exchange rate, but they nevertheless intervene continuously at 
their discretion. A country with steadily shrinking international reserves, for exam-
ple, might allow the value of its currency to depreciate against the value of other 
 currencies—that is, allow the exchange rate to rise against other currencies.
Two other systems are closely related hybrids of fixed and floating rules. The 
crawling peg, used over a long period by Brazil, Colombia, and Indonesia, involves 
pegging the local currency against some other currency but changing this in gradual, 
periodic steps to adjust for any differential between the country’s inflation rate and 
the world inflation rate. Closest to a fixed-exchange-rate system is the adjustable peg, 
involving a commitment by the monetary authorities to defend the local exchange 
rate at a fixed parity (peg), while reserving the right to change that rate when circum-
stances require.
Two very rigid forms of pegged exchange rates that a small number of coun-
tries have adopted are currency boards and dollarization. With a currency board, the 
government issues domestic currency only when it is fully backed by available for-
eign exchange reserves at the given exchange rate. Currency in circulation increases 
when additional foreign exchange becomes available (say, through increased export 
receipts) and decreases when foreign exchange becomes scarcer (say, through an 
Fixed
(pegged)
exchange
rates
A
B
Adjustable
peg
Crawling
peg
Managed
float
Wider-band
system
Freely
floating
exchange
rates
FIGURE 12–1 Continuum of Prototypes of Exchange-Rate Regimes
As one moves from point A to point B, both the frequency of intervention by 
domestic monetary authorities and the required level of international reserves 
tend to be lower. Under a pure fixed-exchange-rate regime (point A) authorities 
intervene so that the value of the currency vis-à-vis another, say, the U.S. dollar, 
is maintained at a constant rate.
2For a full discussion of these and other types of exchange-rate regimes, see John Williamson, The Open 
Economy and the World Economy (New York: Basic Books, 1983), pp. 238–41; or Anne O. Krueger, Exchange 
Rate Determination (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983), pp. 123–36.

M O N E TA R Y  P O L I C Y  A N D  P R I C E  S TA B I L I T Y   435
increase in imports or capital outflows). This system ensures that the country will not 
run out of foreign exchange. However, the main instrument of adjustment becomes 
domestic interest rates, which increase when foreign exchange (and domestic cur-
rency) becomes scarcer, and decline when foreign exchange becomes more avail-
able. Hong Kong, Bulgaria, Argentina, Brunei, Djibouti, Estonia, and Lithuania all 
have or have had currency boards.
With dollarization, one country adopts another country’s currency, as Panama 
did many years ago when it adopted the U.S. dollar as its currency. Most economists 
believe that currency boards and dollarization are appropriate in only a very limited 
number of developing countries that are small, very open to trade, and not vulnera-
ble to large commodity price swings. In Hong Kong, the currency board system works 
reasonably well, although high interest rates and hence slower growth were required 
to prevent large currency outflows during and immediately after the Asian financial 
crisis. In Argentina at the beginning of the twenty-first century, the inability of the 
central government to rein in excessive local government spending caused pressures 
on reserves that ultimately made it impossible to maintain the peg to the dollar that 
was essential to the continuance of its currency board.
The currencies of all the major industrial countries have floated vis-à-vis one 
another since the early 1970s, with occasional intervention by national monetary 
authorities to prevent very sharp swings in rates. Most developing countries have 
adhered to either the adjustable-peg or the crawling-peg system, although an increas-
ing number, particularly in Africa, have been adopting floating-rate systems as part of 
stabilization programs. Because, in practice, both pegged systems operate for particu-
lar periods like fixed-rate regimes, for our analysis, we focus most of our attention on 
monetary policy issues arising under fixed exchange rates in small, open economies.
SOURCES OF INFLATION
In open developing economies with fixed exchange rates, the rate of monetary 
expansion no longer is under the complete control of domestic monetary authori-
ties. Rather, countries with fixed exchange rates may be viewed as sharing essentially 
the same money supply, because the money of each can be converted into that of the 
others at a fixed parity.3 Under such circumstances, the stock of money (M), by defi-
nition, is the sum of two components: the amount of domestic credit of the banking 
system that is outstanding (DC) and the stock of international reserves of that coun-
try (IR), measured in terms of domestic currency. The money supply, therefore, has a 
domestic component and an international component, so we have
 
M = DC + IR 
[12–4]
3This section draws substantially on syntheses of monetary and international economics by Arnold C. 
Harberger. See his “A Primer on Inflation” and “The Inflation Syndrome,” papers presented in the Political 
Economy Lecture Series, Harvard University, March 19, 1981.

436   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
Changes in the domestic money stock can occur either through expansion of domes-
tic credit or by monetary movements that lead to changes in international reserves. 
That is,
 
M = DC + IR 
[12–5]
Under fixed exchange rates, a central bank of any small country can control DC, the 
domestic component, but has only very limited control over IR, the international 
component. Under such circumstances, developing countries that attempt to keep 
the rate of domestic inflation below the world inflation rate (through restrictive poli-
cies on domestic credit) are unable to realize this goal. If, fueled by monetary expan-
sion abroad (growth in the world money supply), world inflation initially is running 
in excess of domestic inflation, the prices of internationally traded goods rise rela-
tive to those of domestic, nontraded goods.4 Imports fall, exports rise, and the bal-
ance of payments moves toward surplus and causes a rise in international reserves. 
Therefore, the foreign components of the money stock rise. This is tantamount to an 
“importation of money” and eventually undoes the effort to prevent importation of 
world inflation. Again, a small country on fixed exchange rates can do little to main-
tain its inflation rate below that of the rest of the world. For very open countries with 
few restrictions on the movement of goods and capital into and out of the country, 
the adjustment to world inflation can be very rapid (less than a year). For less-open 
countries with substantial restrictions on international trade and payments, the pro-
cess takes longer, but the outcome is inevitable under fixed exchange rates.
The fact that financial policy for stabilization in countries with fixed exchange 
rates is heavily constrained by international developments is sometimes taken to 
mean that changes in the domestic component of the money stock have no impact 
on prices in economies adhering to fixed exchange rates. On the contrary, excessive 
expansion in money and credit surely will result in domestically generated inflation 
that, depending on the rate of expansion, for a time, can be well in excess of world 
inflation rates. However, such a situation cannot continue for long, as excess money 
creation spills over into the balance of payments via increased imports and leads to 
a drain on international reserves and, ultimately, an inability to maintain the fixed 
exchange rate. As reserves dwindle, the country no longer can defend its exchange 
rate and devaluation becomes inevitable.5 Inflation, therefore, can be transmitted to 
small, open economies through the working of the world economy or generated by 
domestic developments.
A growing number of developing countries have floating exchange rates (point B 
on the continuum in Figure 12–1). A floating exchange-rate regime allows countries 
4This is but one of several mechanisms that led to changes in international reserves sufficient to thwart 
efforts by developing countries to insulate themselves from world inflation.
5Import controls are frequently used to stem the drain of reserves and avoid devaluation for a time. But 
import controls engender another set of distortions and inefficiencies, explored in Chapter 18, that even-
tually require more drastic measures, including devaluation.

M O N E TA R Y  P O L I C Y  A N D  P R I C E  S TA B I L I T Y   437
to insulate themselves from world inflation. Under such a system, the rise in world 
prices attendant on world inflation would initially favor exports from the country and 
discourage imports. As a consequence, the current account of the country’s balance 
of payments improves, international reserves rise, and the exchange rate soon appre-
ciates (fewer baht are required to buy dollars, for instance). The appreciation in the 
country’s exchange rate cancels out external price increases and prevents the impor-
tation of world inflation.
Under any exchange-rate regime, domestically generated inflation may result 
from excessive increases in domestic credit from the banking system to either the 
public or the private sector. Budget deficits of the central government, for example, 
must be financed by borrowing, but the embryonic nature of money and capital mar-
kets in most developing countries generally means that governments facing deficits 
ordinarily must resort to borrowing from the central bank. Borrowing from the cen-
tral bank is equivalent to direct money creation via the printing press. The result is a 
direct addition to the reserve base of the monetary system, an increase in so-called 
high-powered money. It is important, however, to recognize that not all budgetary 
deficits are inflationary. We have seen that a growing economy is characterized by 
a growing demand for liquid assets, including money. Moderate budgetary deficits 
year after year, financed by the central bank, can help satisfy this requirement with-
out leading to inflation. In general, the money stock may expand at least as fast as the 
growth in real income, with little or no inflationary consequences.
Earlier we saw that liquid assets normally are between 40 and 60 percent of GDP 
in low- and lower-middle income economies (with wide variations), equivalent to 
roughly three to six months of income. Therefore, the public generally is willing to 
hold this much in money balances. A deficit of 2 percent of GDP financed by money 
creation adds only marginally to the money supply and easily may be accepted by the 
public. But a deficit of 8 percent of GDP increases the stock of money by an amount 
equal to one more month of income, an amount the public may be unwilling to hold 
(unless nominal interest rates on deposits are greatly increased). The excess spills 
over into higher prices.
Use of bank credit to finance government deficits has not been the only source of 
inflationary monetary expansion in developing countries. Sometimes excessive growth 
of credit to the private sector has played a more significant role in domestically gen-
erated inflationary processes. Nevertheless, as a general rule, inflation rates that are 
much in excess of world inflation usually have been traceable to budgetary deficits.
For countries attempting to maintain fixed exchange rates, efforts to avoid price 
increases in excess of world inflation must be a matter primarily of fiscal policy, 
not monetary policy. If budget deficits are not held to levels consistent with world 
inflation, even very deft deployment of monetary policy instruments are unable to 
prevent rapid inflation, devaluation, or both. There still is a role for monetary pol-
icy in developing countries, but that role must be largely passive. Resourceful use 
of  monetary policy can help by not making things worse and moderating strong 

438   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
 inflationary pressures until the budget can be brought under control, provided the 
latter is done fairly quickly.
Monetary factors are causes of inflation in both fixed- and floating-exchange-
rate countries. In the case of fixed exchange rates, both world monetary expansion 
and domestic monetary expansion generate inflation; in flexible-exchange-rate 
countries, inflation arises from domestic monetary sources. But, thus far, no mention 
has been made of so-called nonmonetary causes of inflation. It seems plausible that 
internal and external shocks, such as those arising from widespread crop failure in 
the domestic economy or a drastic increase in prices of imported energy, could have 
important effects on inflation in countries suffering such shocks. This is true, but the 
mechanism whereby nonmonetary factors may initiate or worsen inflation needs to 
be clearly portrayed.
Nonmonetary disturbances indeed may precipitate policy reactions that lead to 
domestic monetary expansion large enough to accommodate higher relative prices 
of food or oil and large enough to cause inflation. In the absence of accommodat-
ing monetary expansion in the face of such shocks, inflation can be contained, but 
at some cost. Failure to allow the money supply to expand to accommodate higher 
relative prices of important goods leads to increases in unemployment that most gov-
ernments find unacceptable. Governments in such cases usually attempt to allow 
monetary expansion sufficient to avoid unwanted consequences for employment. 
But it is important to remember that, however advisable monetary accommodation 
may be on social and employment grounds, expansion in the money stock is required 
to fuel inflation, whatever external or internal factors may precipitate the expansion. 
This truth, known for centuries, is often incorrectly interpreted to mean that non-
monetary factors cannot “cause” inflation. They can, but only through an expansion 
of the national or international stock of money or both.
CONTROLLING INFLATION THROUGH MONETARY POLICY
The array of available instruments for anti-inflationary monetary policy in developed 
countries include (1) open-market operations, in which the central bank can directly 
contract bank reserves by sales of government securities;6 (2) increases in legal 
reserve requirements of banks, so that a given volume of reserves support a lower 
stock of money (and reduce the credit expansion multiplier as well); (3) increases in 
rediscount rates, so that commercial bank borrowing from the central bank becomes 
6Open-market operations are used as an instrument of monetary policy in countries with well- 
developed financial markets. When the Federal Reserve System in the United States or a central bank in 
Europe wants to curtail the growth of the money supply, it sells government securities (bonds, bills) on the 
open market. When a buyer pays for the securities, the effect is to reduce directly the reserves of the bank-
ing system because the funds are transferred from commercial bank deposits or household cash holdings 
to the account of the Federal Reserve. When the Federal Reserve wants to expand the money supply, it 
buys securities on the open market and thus directly adds to bank reserves.

M O N E TA R Y  P O L I C Y  A N D  P R I C E  S TA B I L I T Y   439
less attractive; and (4) moral suasion, by which the exhortations of monetary authori-
ties are expected to lead to restraint in bank lending policies.
For virtually all developing countries, the first instrument (open market opera-
tions) is not available for inflation control. Securities markets typically are absent 
or not sufficiently well developed to allow the exercise of this powerful and flexible 
instrument, although some emerging market economies can now use this tool. The 
other three monetary policy instruments are employed, with varying degrees of suc-
cess, in developing countries. In addition, developing countries often resort to two 
other tools employed only infrequently in developed countries: (5) credit ceilings 
imposed by the central bank on the banking system and (6) adjustments in allowable 
nominal rates of interest on deposits and loans.
RESERVE REQUIREMENTS
All central banks require commercial banks to immobilize a portion of their deposits 
in the form of legal reserves that may not be lent to prospective customers. For exam-
ple, legal reserve requirements for Indonesian and Malaysian banks in the late 1970s 
were expressed as 30 percent of deposits in domestic currency in the former and 
20 percent of all deposits in the latter. Banks in Malaysia were required to add 20 units 
of currency to reserves for every 100 units of deposits. These figures are not too far 
out of line with legal reserve requirements in many industrial nations, where reserve 
ratios of 15 percent for demand deposits and 5 percent for time deposits are common.
Increases in reserve requirements can be used to help moderate inflation. An 
upward adjustment in reserve requirements works in two ways: It reduces the stock 
of money that can be supported by a given amount of reserves, and it reduces the 
money multiplier. The first effect induces banks to contract credit outstanding; the 
second reduces the growth in the money stock possible from any future increment 
to reserves.7 Changes in legal reserve requirements are usually employed only as a 
last-ditch measure, although China raised reserve requirements several times dur-
ing the 2000–10 period, when price increases were still modest but rising. Even small 
changes in the required ratio of reserves to deposits can have a very disruptive impact 
on commercial bank operations, unless banks are given sufficient time to adjust.
CREDIT CEILINGS
In some countries, such as Indonesia from 1947 to 1983; China in 1994 to 1996 and 
during the first part of the twenty-first century; and at various other times in Malaysia, 
Sri Lanka, and Chile, credit ceilings have been used as supplementary instruments 
7In its simplest form the money multiplier (m) can be expressed as
m = (c + 1)/(c + k)
where c = the ratio of currency outside banks to deposits and k = the ratio of reserves to deposits. If k is 
raised, then m falls.

440   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
of inflation control. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) often requires countries 
seeking balance-of-payments support to adopt credit ceilings as a prerequisite for 
assistance. General ceilings of domestic credit expansion represent a useful method of 
controlling growth in the domestic components of the money supply. Credit ceilings, 
however, do not allow full control of money-supply growth in developing countries 
operating under fixed-exchange-rate regimes because the monetary authorities have 
no control over foreign components of the money supply. Nevertheless, general credit 
ceilings sometimes can be usefully deployed in combating inflation in countries not 
experiencing major imbalances in external payments. Unfortunately, ceilings work 
the least well where they are needed the most because countries attempting to deal 
with chronic inflation are usually those experiencing the most destabilizing changes 
in their international reserve positions. General credit ceilings are unlikely to have 
much effect on inflation unless the government simultaneously takes steps to reduce 
the budgetary deficits that, except in major oil-exporting countries, typically are the 
root causes of chronic, acute, and especially runaway inflation.
Countries often supplement general credit ceilings with specific ceilings on lend-
ing to particular sectors of the economy. Indonesia attempted to fine-tune credit 
controls in this way from 1974 to 1983, with poor results. The system of ceilings was 
so detailed and cumbersome that domestic banks were unable to come close to 
exhausting the ceilings. Excess reserves rose. The banks had little choice but to place 
their excess reserves in deposits overseas, primarily in banks in Singapore. Many 
domestic firms in Jakarta were then forced to seek credit from Singapore banks, 
which held well over a billion dollars of deposits from Jakarta banks that might have 
been lent to domestic firms at a lower rate in the absence of credit ceilings. China, in 
the first part of the twenty-first century, placed ceilings on credit to real estate devel-
opers in what was believed to be an overheated real estate market but with only lim-
ited impact on investments in this area.
INTEREST-RATE REGULATION AND MORAL SUASION
In most industrial countries, the central bank can influence interest rates by varying 
the rediscount rate charged on central bank loans to commercial banks that require 
additional liquidity. Because the rediscount rate is central to commercial banks’ 
operations, it is important in determining the market rate of interest on both depos-
its and loans. As more developing countries adopt financial reforms that free interest 
rates from central bank control, they are better able to use the rediscount rate as a 
tool for influencing market interest rates.
In developing countries that controlled rates on loans and deposits, the con-
trolled rates have been instruments of anti-inflationary packages. The use of such 
interest rate adjustments have been common in Latin America, and increases in 
deposit rates and loan rates were major elements in the stabilization programs of 
South Korea and Taiwan in the mid-1960s and Indonesia in both 1968 and 1974. The 

M O N E TA R Y  P O L I C Y  A N D  P R I C E  S TA B I L I T Y   441
objective in each case was twofold: to stimulate the demand for liquid assets and to 
discourage the loan demand for marginal investment projects by private-sector bor-
rowers. The extent to which such measures can be successful depends on the interest 
elasticity of the demand for liquid assets and the interest elasticity of the demand for 
loans. In most of the cases just cited, particularly in the three Asian countries, both 
sets of elasticities evidently were sufficiently high because the stabilization pack-
ages succeeded to a large degree. Interest rate increases, however, were less effective 
in China in the 1990s and during 2000–09, largely because many firms, particularly 
state-owned or -controlled enterprises, are not very sensitive to the impact of higher 
interest costs on their investment plans.
Moral suasion by the monetary authorities, sometimes called open-mouth opera-
tions or jawbone control, is practiced no less extensively in developing than in devel-
oped countries. Warnings and exhortations to commercial banks to restrict lending 
or to encourage them to focus lending on particular activities have been quite com-
mon in Ghana. They also were used at various times in Malaysia, Singapore,  Brazil, 
and elsewhere, sometimes before the imposition of credit ceilings and often to rein-
force pressure on banks to adhere to ceilings. In both developed and developing 
countries, however, moral suasion has proven credible only when accompanied by 
forceful use of more tangible instruments of monetary control.
INTERNATIONAL DEBT AND COMBATING RECESSIONS
Our discussion to this point has focused on the role of monetary instruments in con-
trolling domestic inflation because that was the dominant problem facing monetary 
and fiscal policy makers in developing countries since the end of World War II. In 
this chapter, however, we have not dealt with another major problem that has played 
an important role in developing countries, the role of accumulating debt obligations 
by many countries, particularly in Latin America and Africa. Borrowing from other 
countries and from international institutions such as the World Bank is also a way 
of financing a development program when domestic financial resources are inade-
quate, but it can lead to accumulating international debt to a level that the borrow-
ing country can no longer afford. Because these international debt issues are both 
important and complex, we devote the next chapter to understanding the origins and 
solutions to developing country debt problems.
Until recently most developing countries did not have to face a problem com-
mon in high-income countries in recessions: the lack of sufficient aggregate demand 
to keep a country’s resources of capital and labor fully employed. Developing coun-
tries frequently experienced recessions, but they were typically the result of a fall in 
the price of their natural resource exports or some other balance-of-payments prob-
lem. Increasing demand in these circumstances led not to the employment of unused 
resources but to either inflation or a worsening balance-of-payments deficit. But in 
2008–09, countries that had come to rely on exports of manufactures to Europe and 

442   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
North America suddenly experienced a sharp decline in the demand for their prod-
ucts, as a severe global recession led to a fall in incomes in high-income countries.
In the United States a standard method for getting out of a recession in previous 
years had been to rely on the central bank to lower interest rates, which would then 
lead to an increase in investment in a number of sectors, notably in housing. Even in 
mild recessions, however, interest rates in developing countries are seldom effective 
in generating increases in investment demand, largely because financial markets 
in these areas are undeveloped and many borrowers are not very sensitive to small 
changes in interest charges. In the case of the global recession of 2008–09 lowering 
interest rates was not very effective in either high- or middle-income countries. The 
only alternative for the countries affected was to turn to fiscal policy and to intro-
duce what were called stimulus packages, large government expenditure programs 
paid for by borrowing mostly from the central bank. Among developing countries 
China had the largest stimulus package of well over US$500 billion if all of the com-
ponents are included, and similar smaller packages were tried in Vietnam and else-
where in Southeast Asia. These packages were made possible in part because the 
countries involved had built up large reserves of foreign exchange and thus did not 
have to fear that the increased demand would lead to large balance-of-payments 
deficits that could not be covered from existing foreign exchange reserves. China 
had enormous reserves of over $2 trillion (over $3 trillion in 2011). Many other 
countries in Asia, in the aftermath of the 1997–98 financial crisis that had been due 
in part to a lack of sufficient reserves, had built up their foreign exchange reserves 
as well. In the 1997–98 financial crisis, the most affected countries could not have 
introduced large stimulus packages to offset the impact on incomes and employ-
ment because their reserves were inadequate for even existing balance-of-payments 
requirements.
FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Up to this point we have discussed the general role of financial systems in economic 
development and then turned to how financial systems can be mismanaged in a 
way that undermines stability in the economy and threatens growth in incomes and 
employment. High inflation by itself has been a major reason why the economic 
 performance of many developing countries has suffered, and preventing inflation 
has often been the major focus of policy makers both within developing countries 
and in the international financial agencies. Controlling inflation is a major tenet of 
Washington Consensus–style reforms. But there is more to financial development 
than controlling inflation. The development of a financial system that carries out its 
major functions efficiently and fairly is an important and integral part of the develop-
ment process.
FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT

F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E NT   443
SHALLOW FINANCE AND DEEP FINANCE
Policies for financial deepening seek to promote growth in the real size of the finan-
cial system, the growth of financial assets at a pace faster than income growth. In all 
but the highest-income developing countries, private-sector financial savings pre-
dominantly take the form of currency and deposits in commercial banks, savings 
and loan associations, postal savings accounts, and in some countries, mortgage 
banks. For most developing countries, growth in the real size of the financial sys-
tem is reflected primarily in growth in the share of liquid assets in GDP. In contrast, 
under shallow finance, the ratio of liquid assets to GDP grows slowly or not at all 
over time and typically falls: The real size of the financial system shrinks. Countries 
able to mobilize large volumes of government or foreign savings can sustain high 
growth rates even under shallow finance policies, although even these countries 
may find financial deepening attractive for reasons of employment and income dis-
tribution. But, for countries where mobilization of government savings is difficult 
and foreign savings scarce or unwanted, deep finance may be essential for sustained 
income growth. This is because growth in the share of liquid assets in GDP provides 
an approximate indication of the banking system’s ability to increase its lending for 
investment purposes. We will see that the hallmark of a deep financial strategy is 
avoidance of negative real interest rates; shallow finance, on the other hand, typically 
involves sharply negative real interest rates.
Growth in the real size of the financial system enhances its capacity for interme-
diation, gathering savings from diverse private sources and channeling these savings 
into productive investment. The need for financial intermediation arises because 
savings endowments do not necessarily correspond to investment opportunities. 
Individuals with the greatest capacity to save are usually not those with the entrepre-
neurial talents required for mounting new investment projects. Except in very sim-
ple, rudimentary economies, mechanisms are required to channel savings efficiently 
from savers to entrepreneurs.
If a country is restricted to self-financing by individuals or companies, many pro-
ductive opportunities involving high private and social payoffs will never be seized 
because the resources of even the small number of very wealthy are not unlimited. 
Innovative, smaller-scale investors are not the only groups that fare poorly where 
financial intermediation is poorly developed; savers are penalized as well. Let us first 
examine the case in which even the most basic financial intermediaries, commercial 
banks, are absent. Under these circumstances, the domestic options open to savers 
are limited to forms of savings, such as acquisition of gold and jewelry, purchase of 
land and consumer durable goods, or other relatively sterile forms of investment in 
physical assets. Alternatively, wealthier savers may ship their savings abroad. The 
common feature of all such investments is that the resources devoted to them are 
inaccessible to domestic entrepreneurs who would adopt new technology, begin new 
firms, or expand production in existing enterprises.

444   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
All developing countries, therefore, have financial institutions, however embry-
onic, to serve as intermediaries between savers and investors, even where these 
intermediaries are limited to commercial banks that accept checking (demand) and 
time (savings) deposits from savers, to relend to prospective investors for a short 
term. Intermediation flourishes under deep finance, but under strategies of shallow 
finance intermediation is constricted and the financial system can contribute little 
to further the goals of economic growth. Later, we see that shallow finance may have 
unintended effects on employment and income distribution as well.
SHALLOW FINANCIAL STRATEGY
Shallow financial policies have a number of earmarks: high legal reserve requirements 
on commercial banks, pervasive nonprice rationing of credit, and most of all, sharply 
negative real interest rates. Countries rarely, if ever, have consciously and deliberately 
adopted strategies of shallow finance. Rather, the repression of the financial system 
flows logically from certain policies intended to encourage, not hinder, investment.
In developed and developing countries alike, policy makers often have viewed 
low nominal rates of interest as essential for the expansion of investment and con-
trolled interest rate levels tightly. So long as the supply of investment funds is unlim-
ited, low interest rates foster all types of investment activities, as even projects with 
low returns appear more attractive to investors. In accordance with that observation 
and in the belief that low interest rates are particularly essential to assist small enter-
prises and small farmers, governments often have placed low ceilings on nominal 
interest rates charged on all types of loans. These low ceilings are quite apart from 
special credit programs involving subsidized credit for special classes of borrowers. 
Because financial institutions ultimately must cover costs (or else be subsidized by 
governments), low legal ceilings on nominal loan rates mean low nominal interest 
rates on deposits as well.
As long as inflation is held in check, low ceilings on nominal loan and deposit 
interest rates may not retard growth, even when these ceilings are set below the 
opportunity cost of capital. The United States over the period 1800–1979 managed 
rather respectable rates of income growth, even in the presence of a set of archaic 
usury laws and other interest rate controls that (particularly before 1970) often 
involved artificially low, administered ceilings on interest rates. Even so, throughout 
most of the period before 1979, real interest rates in the United States remained posi-
tive; periods in which real interest rates were sharply negative were intermittent and 
confined to wartime (1812, 1861, 1917–18, and 1940–46).8
Usury laws and other forms of interest rate ceilings also have been common in 
developing countries. Financial officials in many developing countries, observing 
8Steven C. Leuthold, “Interest Rates, Inflation and Deflation,” Financial Analysis Journal (January– 
February 1981), 28–51.

F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E NT   445
gross imperfections in financial markets, have concluded that the market should not 
be permitted to determine interest rates. Monopoly (or oligopoly) power in financial 
markets, particularly in commercial banking, provides ample scope for the banks 
and other lenders to exercise market power in setting interest rates on loans at levels 
higher than the opportunity cost of capital.
There are ample observations of gross imperfections in financial systems in 
developing countries. Barriers to entry into banking and finance often allow a few 
large banks and other financial institutions to possess an inordinate degree of control 
over financial markets and thus exercise monopoly power in setting interest rates. 
Often these barriers are a direct result of government policies. Governments have 
prohibited new entrants into the field, adopted such stringent financial requirements 
for entry that only the very wealthy could amass the needed capital, or reserved per-
mission for entry to political favorites who were attracted to banking and finance 
largely by the monopoly returns available when entry was restricted.
In this way, one set of government policies, entry restrictions, helps give rise to the 
need for extensive controls on prices charged by financial institutions. Typically, these 
controls take the form of interest rate ceilings imposed to limit the scope of monop-
oly power in the financial system. Controls by themselves do not necessarily lead to 
shallow finance. Rather, a combination of rigid ceilings on nominal interest rates and 
inflation impedes financial development and ultimately retards income growth.
Few economists believe that steeply positive real interest rates are essential for 
healthy growth in the real size of the financial system. The Chilean experience with 
very high real interest rates from 1981 to 1983 strongly suggests the opposite. There is 
no widely accepted answer to the question of what the required level of real interest 
rates is for a steady development of the financial system. The required real rate differs 
across countries in different circumstances. In some, financial growth may continue 
even at 0 or mildly negative real interest rates; for others, moderately high positive 
real rates of between 3 and 5 percent may be essential.
Apart from a few Latin American countries and Indonesia, most developing 
countries were able to keep rates of inflation at or below 5 to 6 percent before 1973. 
Inasmuch as nominal deposit rates typically were between 3 and 5 percent, real 
interest rates tended to be slightly positive or only mildly negative. When inflation 
accelerated in many developing countries after 1973, because few countries made 
more than marginal adjustments in nominal deposit rates, real interest rates turned 
significantly negative in a number of nations, as Table 12–4 shows for 1980. Negative 
interest rates endured in a few African and Latin American countries throughout the 
1980s but, as the table suggests, are much less common today.
When real interest rates turn significantly negative, the maintenance of low nom-
inal rates for promoting investment and income growth becomes counterproductive. 
Inflation taxes on liquid financial assets bring real growth in the financial system to 
a halt. Sharply negative real rates lead to shrinkage in the system, as the demand for 
liquid assets contracts. Contraction in the financial system results in a reduction in 

446   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
the real supply of credit and thus constricts investment in productive assets. Under 
such circumstances, nonprice rationing of investible resources must occur and can 
take many forms. In most developing countries, only those borrowers with either the 
highest-quality collateral or the “soundest” social and political connections or those 
willing to make the largest side payments (bribes) to bank officers are successful in 
securing finance from the organized financial system. These criteria do not yield allo-
cations of credit to the most productive investment opportunities.
Negative real interest rates make marginal, low-yielding, traditional types of 
investment appear attractive to investors. Banks and financial institutions find such 
projects attractive as well because they may be the safest and the simplest to finance 
and involve the most creditworthy borrowers. Satisfying the financial requirements of 
such investors constricts the pool of resources available to firms, with riskier projects 
offering greater possibilities for high yields. In addition, in the presence of substan-
tial inflation, interest rate ceilings discourage risk taking by the financial institutions 
TABLE 12–4 Real Lending Interest Rates, 1980s and 2008–09
COUNTRY
1980S
2008–09
Low-income countries
Ethiopia
18
17
Tanzania
18
7
India
4
4
Bangladesh
5
8
Kenya
1
8
Nigeria
4
19
Honduras
12
14
Lower-middle-income countries
Bolivia
2
15
Philippines
0
6
Sri Lanka
1
10
Indonesia
22
6
Peru
19
18
Egypt
4
1
Upper-middle-income countries
Brazil
—
37
Hungary
1
6
Colombia
9
 8
Malaysia
5
13
Korea
5
2
High-income countries
United Kingdom
3
1
Japan
2
3
United States
6
2
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators 2011 http://databank.worldbank.org/ddp/home.do, 
accessed June 2011.

F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E NT   447
themselves because under such circumstances they cannot charge higher interest 
rates (risk premia) on promising but risky projects. Also, negative real interest rates 
are inimical to employment growth because they make projects with relatively high 
capital-output ratios appear more attractive than if real interest rates were positive. 
This implicit subsidy to capital-intensive methods of production reduces the jobs 
created for each dollar of investment, even as the ability of the financial system to 
finance investment is shrinking.
Negative real rates of interest tend to lower the marginal efficiency of invest-
ment in all the ways described. In terms of the Harrod-Domar model described 
in Chapter 4, shallow financial strategies cause higher capital-output ratios. Con-
sequently, growth in national income and, therefore, growth in savings tend to be 
lower than when real rates are positive. Therefore, shallow finance retards income 
and employment growth even if the interest elasticity of savings is 0. And if savings 
decisions are responsive to real interest rates, then shallow finance has even more 
serious implications for income growth, as the ratio of private savings to the GDP 
also contracts.
DEEP FINANCIAL STRATEGY
Deep finance as a strategy has several objectives: (1) mobilizing a larger volume of 
savings from the domestic economy—that is, increasing the ratio of national savings 
to the GDP (where the interest elasticity of savings is thought to be positive and sig-
nificant); (2) enhancing the accessibility of savings for all types of domestic investors; 
(3) securing a more efficient allocation of investment throughout the economy; and 
(4) permitting the financial process to mobilize and allocate savings to reduce reli-
ance on the fiscal process, foreign aid, and inflation.
A permanent move toward policies involving positive real interest rates or, at a 
minimum, avoidance of sharply negative real rates is the essence of deep finance. In 
turn, this requires either financial liberalization that allows higher nominal rates on 
deposits and loans, curbing the rate of inflation, or some combination of both.
Given the difficulties involved in securing quick results in reducing inflation to 
levels consistent with positive real rates of interest, the first step involved in a shift 
from shallow to deep financial strategies ordinarily is to raise the ceilings on nomi-
nal rates for both deposits and loans. In extreme cases of acute inflation, the initial 
step has involved raising ceilings on nominal deposit rates to as much as 50 per-
cent in Argentina and Uruguay in 1976 and to nearly 200 percent in Chile in 1974 
(where real interest rates nevertheless remained negative until 1976). As the real 
rate moves toward positive levels, savers strongly tend to increase their holdings of 
liquid assets; this allows a real expansion in the supply of credit to investors. Avail-
able evidence suggests that countries that attempt to maintain modestly positive 
real interest rates over long periods tend to be among those with the highest rates 
of financial growth.

448   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
Where finance is deep, inflation tends to be moderate; therefore, savers are not 
subject to persistently high inflation taxes on liquid-asset holdings. That being the 
case, they are less inclined to shift their savings into much more lightly taxed domes-
tic assets such as gold, land, or durable goods and foreign assets such as currencies 
or land and securities. Rather, financial resources that otherwise may have been used 
for these purposes flow to the financial system, where they are more accessible to 
prospective investors. Nonprice rationing of credit, inevitable under shallow finance, 
diminishes as well, and the capacity of the financial system to identify and support 
socially profitable investment opportunities expands. Higher-risk, higher-yielding 
investment projects stand a far better chance of securing finance under deep than 
shallow finance. Growth prospects are enhanced accordingly.
Investment finance problems, however, do not end with the provision of a grow-
ing real flow of short-term credit. As economies move to higher levels of per capita 
income, the pattern of investment shifts toward longer horizons. Longer-term invest-
ment requires longer-term finance. Commercial banks everywhere are ill-suited for 
providing substantial amounts of long-term finance, given that their deposits primar-
ily are of a short-term nature.
Therefore, as financial and economic development proceeds, the need for insti-
tutions specializing in longer-term finance rises accordingly: insurance companies, 
investment banks, and ultimately equity markets (stock exchanges) become impor-
tant elements in financial intermediation. The type of well-functioning commercial 
bank system that tends to develop under deep finance almost always is a necessary 
condition for the successful emergence and long-term vitality of institutions special-
izing in longer-term investment finance.
Earlier we observed that entry into the financial field is rarely easy, and other 
factors also often lead to gross imperfections in financial markets. Under such cir-
cumstances, many developing-country governments have found intervention essen-
tial to develop financial institutions specializing in longer-term finance. Intervention 
may take the form of establishment of government-owned development banks and 
other specialized institutions to act as distributors of government funds intended 
as a source of longer-term finance, as in Indonesia and Pakistan. In Mexico and 
Colombia, governments provided strong incentives for private-sector establishment 
of long-term financial institutions. Other governments sought to create conditions 
favorable for the emergence of primary securities (stocks and bonds) markets, the 
source par excellence for long-term finance. In cases in which these measures have 
been undertaken in the context of financial markets with strong commercial banking 
systems (Hong Kong, Singapore, Brazil, and Mexico), efforts to encourage long-term 
finance have met with some success. In cases in which commercial banking has been 
poorly developed as a consequence of shallow finance (Ghana, Uruguay before 1976) 
or the government has sought to “force feed” embryonic securities markets through 
tax incentives and other subsidies (Indonesia before 1988, Kenya, Turkey), the pro-
motional policies have been less effective.

F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E NT   449
INFORMAL CREDIT MARKETS AND MICRO CREDIT
The discussion of financial development to this point has dealt with modern credit 
institutions, the formal market. But in many developing countries, as noted at the 
beginning of this chapter, informal credit markets coexist with modern financial 
institutions. These markets arise in many forms. In rural India, village moneylend-
ers make loans to local farmers who have no access to commercial banks. In Ghana 
and other West African countries, market women give credit to farmers by paying for 
crops in advance of harvest, and they assist their customers by selling finished goods 
on credit. In South Korea, established lenders actually made loans on the street out-
side modern banks; this justifies their designation as the curb (or kerb) market. In 
much of rural Africa wealthy family members make loans to less fortunate kin, and 
all over the developing world there are cooperative arrangements to raise funds and 
share credit among members. Even in modern economies, pawnbrokers and others 
give credit outside the formal credit system.
Informal credit generally is financed by the savings of relatively wealthy individu-
als, such as local landowners, traders, family members who have moved into lucrative 
jobs or businesses, and the pooled efforts of cooperative societies. But informal lend-
ers also may have access to the formal banking system and borrow there, to relend to 
customers with no access to banks. How can they do this if the banks cannot? First, 
because they know their borrowers so well and may have familial, social, or other ties 
to them, informal lenders face lower risks than distant, large banks that might loan to 
the same borrowers. Loan recovery rates are higher (usually much higher than found 
in large banks in developing countries) because those who borrow in informal markets 
know that the availability of loans in the future depends on repaying current loans. Sec-
ond, they also face lower administrative costs in making loans. Of course, moneylend-
ers charge very high interest rates, and this is a third reason they coexist with banks, 
which are often prevented by law from charging rates high enough to cover the risks 
and costs of loans in small amounts to very small firms and low-income borrowers.
Beginning in the 1970s, micro-credit institutions and micro-finance institutions 
more broadly were developed to reach populations in developing countries that had 
no access to credit, except in informal markets in which interest charges frequently 
reached annual rates of 100 percent. The best known of these new institutions was 
the Grameen Bank, founded in 1976 by Muhammad Yunus. Building on innovations 
such as Grameen, the movement to provide micro credit gained momentum and 
spread around the world to Africa, Latin America, and Asia where billions of people 
had no access to reasonable credit. The expansion in micro credit was then supple-
mented with programs to provide institutions designed to facilitate savings and other 
financial transactions by the rural poor in developing countries. Micro finance was 
the term applied to this broader set of financial transactions.
The basic idea of micro credit and micro finance was that the poor could be 
safe credit risks if they were organized appropriately. The Grameen Bank began by 

450   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
 providing micro loans to poor women in the village of Jobra, Bangladesh. Today, 
Grameen covers virtually all of Bangladesh, with more than 2,500 branch offices and 
more than 20,000 employees. The Grameen Bank reports that they have over 8 mil-
lion borrowers in Bangladesh; about 97 percent of whom are women, most are land-
less, and all are poor. Loans are made to individual women, but only through local 
groups that provide social pressure for repayment. Loans for micro enterprises aver–
age 28,000 taka (about US$400) and carry an annual interest rate of 20 percent. 
Loans are also given for other purposes, including for housing and education, at 8 and 
5 percent, respectively. There is even a special program targeted at beggars, which 
offers very small loans at 0 interest. Today, Grameen maintains that its loans are not 
heavily subsidized, neither by donors nor the government of Bangladesh. The recov-
ery rate on Grameen loans is impressive; it exceeds 97 percent and the bank reports 
it has earned a profit every year since it was founded. The Grameen Bank is more than 
a financial institution. Its loans require recipients to accept certain “social disciplines,” 
such as cleanliness and family planning, and the bank provides such services as advice 
on home construction and access to education for some borrowers.9
A major problem with many efforts to promote micro credit, however, was that 
many of the institutions set up to provide such credit depended on subsidies, often 
quite large subsidies, either from international aid agencies or from private dona-
tions from the well to do. This was true of the Grameen Bank earlier in its history. 
In Indonesia in the 1980s, a government bank, the Bank Rakyat Indonesia (BRI), fol-
lowed a different path. It began to provide full banking services, both loans and sav-
ings deposit facilities, to farmers, traders, and other small-scale borrowers, through 
their branches in over 3,000 villages. Loans are provided for either working capital 
or investment purposes. Today, loans range from 25,000 to 25 million rupiahs (from 
about $3 to $3,000), with repayment periods as short as three months and as long as 
two years. BRI programs—kupedes for the lending program and simpedes for the sav-
ings program—replaced a government-promoted effort that depended on heavy gov-
ernment subsidies and had a high rate of loan default. These new loans, in contrast, 
were commercially profitable without any subsidies right from the beginning.
BRI charged market rates of interest, around 30 percent a year, on its loans and 
paid attractive rates, about 12 percent, on deposits. These rates changed during the 
financial crisis of 1997–98, largely because of the high inflation in that period, but 
the basic rate-setting principles remained the same. In the absence of inflation, rates 
of 30 percent on loans may seem high, but they were considerably below the rates 
charged by informal money lenders. At these rates, the BRI was able to attract suf-
ficient savings deposits to more than finance its loan program. Several million sav-
ers and borrowers mostly in rural areas gained access to the formal banking system 
for the first time through these BRI programs. Roughly 97 percent of the loans were 
repaid on time. In addition, the program became a major generator of profits for the 
9World Bank, World Development Report 1989, p. 117; (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989) A. 
Wahid, The Grameen Bank: Poverty Relief (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1993).

F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E NT   451
BRI, something that could not be said about many of its credit programs for large-
scale producers and borrowers during the 1997–98 financial crisis.10 These loans have 
continued to be a major source of BRI profits in the years since the crisis.
Micro credit is sometimes promoted by its supporters as the answer to rural and 
urban poverty in developing countries, but as we have emphasized throughout this 
book, there is no single answer to how to lift the world’s poor out of poverty. Micro 
credit and micro finance have helped poor households in Bangladesh, Indonesia, 
and elsewhere, but there is considerable debate over their impact on poverty (Box 
12–2). While we know that some programs have done well, we do not know whether 
BOX 12–2 DOES MICRO CREDIT REDUCE POVERTY?
To determine whether micro-credit loans reduce poverty, the experience of borrow-
ers might be compared with nonborrowers. If borrowers, on average, have a lower 
poverty rate than do nonborrowers, we might conclude that micro credit was an 
effective instrument for reducing poverty, and the impact of micro credit on poverty
reduction could be quantified. But this approach is problematic. We face a classic
problem of identification. What if borrowers are systematically different from non-
borrowers in some unobservable way? Maybe those who obtain micro-credit loans 
are more entrepreneurial or have a higher tolerance for risk. Their lower poverty 
rates may have more to do with these attributes than with the loans they received.
Borrowers of micro credit might have sought out other types of informal credit, mak-
ing it difficult to isolate the marginal impact of micro credit on poverty reduction.
Problems of identification like these can be addressed by randomized con-
trolled trials (RCTs), which compare the impact of an intervention between an 
otherwise similar treatment and control group. Researchers at the Abdul Latif 
Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) located at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT) conducted an RCT on micro finance in 2005 in the city of 
Hyderabad, India. Working with an Indian micro-finance firm, Spandana, branches 
were opened in half of 104 randomly selected slum neighborhoods; in the other 
half, branches were not opened. Spandana loans are similar to those pioneered 
by the Grameen Bank. They are offered to women who form groups with 6 to 10 
members who are jointly responsible for the loans. Initial loans are for 10,000 
rupees (about $200 at market exchange rates and $1,000 in terms of purchas-
ing power parity [PPP]), with an annual percentage rate of 24 percent. Then 15
10Richard H. Patten and Jay Rosengard, Progress with Profits: The Development of Rural Banking in 
 Indonesia (San Francisco: ICS Press, 1991); Marguerite Robinson, “Rural Financial Intermediation:  Lessons 
from Indonesia,” Development Discussion Paper 434, Harvard Institute for International Development, 
October 1992.

452   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
to 18 months after the introduction of the new branches, detailed household sur-
veys were administered to almost 7,000 households living in the treatment and
control neighborhoods to determine the impact of the micro-credit loans.
Because micro-finance firms other than Spandana were available throughout
Hyderabad, residents of both treated and untreated neighborhoods had access
to micro-credit loans. In neighborhoods where Spandana opened a new branch,
27 percent of residents took out a loan compared to 19 percent in untreated
areas. This suggests that the treatment had an effect on borrowing rates. But
it also indicates that between 70 and 80 percent of households did not take
advantage of Spandana or any other micro-finance loans. The overwhelming
majority of households either were not credit constrained or were unwilling to
assume the risks associated with taking out a loan. This suggests that it may be
a lack of profitable opportunities to invest borrowed funds rather than a lack of
cheaper credit that constrains most poor households.
In comparing treated and untreated neighborhoods, the J-PAL study found that
7 percent of households started a new business in neighborhoods where Spandana
opened a new branch compared to only 5.3 percent of households in the control
areas. Access to micro credit therefore had a significant impact on the formation of
new businesses. About one third of Spandana borrowers started a new business,
and about one fifth spent their loans on equipment for existing businesses. The other
half of borrowers used their loans for current consumption, including on food or med-
icine, to buy a durable for household use (for example, a television set), or to pay
down other debts. In the period covered by the survey, there was no statistically sig-
nificant increase in total consumption expenditures between treatment and control
areas. In other words, micro credit did not reduce poverty rates over this time period.
As the J-PAL study notes, 15 to 18 months may be too short a time to assess the
long-term impact of micro credit. The new businesses started as a result of Spandana
loans may need more time to earn profits and lift families above poverty. In the short
term micro credit did not reduce poverty, nor was it a recipe for improving the school-
ing or health of children or for empowering women. Of course, the J-PAL study is only
one study, and as with all RCTs we must be careful in drawing general conclusions
from any one experiment. Evidence from a variety of nonexperimental approaches
finds many benefits of micro-credit loans and other micro-finance products. The
authors of the Hyderabad study themselves are measured in their conclusions, noting
that micro credit “may not be the ‘miracle’ that is sometimes claimed on its behalf, but
it does allow households to borrow, invest and create and expand businesses.”
Sources: Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan, “The Miracle of
Microfinance? Evidence for a Randomized Evaluation,” Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June
2010; Kathleen Odell, “Measuring the Impact of Microfinance: Taking Another Look,” Grameen Foun-
dation Publication Series, 2010.

S U M M A R Y   453
the hundreds and thousands of such programs around the world justify the large out-
lays of outside aid that they have used. About half of the estimated $12 billion com-
mitted to micro-finance organizations worldwide came as grants or concessional 
loans from aid agencies and donors. These resources might have been spent in other 
ways and had more of a poverty impact.
Micro credit often has its biggest impact when it helps individuals with limited 
means to start a new business and gradually expand that business. But there are 
many other barriers in addition to the lack of credit that can inhibit the development 
of new businesses and undermine the value of the credit. Many individuals borrow 
saying the loan is for a small business but use the money for consumption that leaves 
them with a debt that they may have difficulty repaying. Some borrow funds from one 
micro-finance organization to pay off loans they secured from another micro-finance 
organization. Such practices, clearly, are not sustainable for either the borrower or 
the lender.
Research indicates that profitable micro finance on the BRI model is not a com-
plete substitute for subsidized micro finance in reaching the poorest parts of the pop-
ulation. Profitable micro finance reaches large numbers of people who previously 
had no access to credit or appropriate vehicles for savings, but many of the programs 
designed to reach the poorest parts of the population in poor countries and provide 
other nonfinancial services along with credit also reach people that the for-profit pro-
grams do not. There is clearly a role for both kinds of credit facilities.11
11For a lengthy analysis of these and many other related issues see Beatriz Armendariz and Jonathan 
Morduch, The Economics of Microfinance (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005); Robert Cull, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, 
and Jonathan Morduch, “Microfinance Meets the Market,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23, no. 1 
(2009), 167–92. Another source that evaluates micro finance is David Roodman’s Microfinance Open Book 
Blog (http://blogs.cgdev.org/open_book).
SUMMARY
• The money supply is made up of the liquid assets of an economy but the 
degree of liquidity of particular assets varies, leading to different, more 
precise definitions of the money supply.
• The rate of inflation varies greatly among developing economies. Inflation, 
in effect, is a tax on those who hold money balances, and a moderate rate of 
inflation can sometimes increase government savings and investment and 
not harm growth, but the higher the rate of inflation, the more people shift 
away from liquid assets, thus undermining the development of the financial 
system and harming economic growth.
• Exchange rate management is an essential component of any effort to 
control inflation. Exchange rate systems range from fixed exchange rates, 
SUMMARY

454   [CH. 12] F I N A N C I A L  D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  I N F L AT I O N
by which the local currency is pegged to the dollar or some other currency, 
to floating rates that move with market forces. In small countries with fixed-
rate systems, worldwide inflation is transferred rapidly to the country with 
the fixed exchange rate. With floating rates, inflation arises mainly from 
domestic, not international, sources.
• A variety of additional mechanisms for controlling inflation are at the 
disposal of the central bank, all of which must, in one way or another, 
reduce the growth rate of the money supply. Mechanisms such as open-
market operations are generally more efficient than mechanisms such 
as credit ceilings, but most developing countries are not in a position to 
conduct open-market sales and purchases of government bonds. Credit 
ceilings and increased bank reserve requirements are less efficient but are 
effective in lowering the growth of the money supply and inflation.
• Financial panics have been present throughout the last several centuries, 
but countries have learned how to eliminate some of the reasons for 
financial panic. As the experience in the late 1990s and 2007–09 of several 
countries around the world demonstrated, however, there are reasons why 
panics can still occur.
• The nominal rate of interest is the agreed-on rate between lenders and 
borrowers, but the real rate of interest, the nominal rate adjusted for 
inflation, most influences whether individuals are willing to hold liquid 
assets or not.
• Positive real interest rates are necessary for financial deepening, defined as 
the rising ratio of liquid assets to GDP. Negative real interest rates have the 
opposite effect. Financial deepening generally supports growth, although 
growth sometimes still occurs in its absence.
• As development proceeds and the economy becomes more complex and 
the need for long-term investment financing increases, economies require 
a wider variety of financial institutions. Stock markets and bond markets 
are one source of such long-term finance but so are insurance companies 
and development banks, and the latter are often supported by government 
for the explicit purpose of providing longer term finance.
• The formal financial system particularly in developing countries tends not 
to reach small businesses and individuals with limited financial resources. 
Informal financial markets exist to provide financing for such potential 
borrowers, but the interest charges on such loans tend to be very high. To 
counter this problem a variety of more formal efforts in the form of micro-
credit institutions have arisen, providing more reasonable credit terms. The 
expansion of micro finance since the 1970s has been rapid, but there is still 
much we do not know about its overall impact on poverty.

455
B
eginning in 2007 (and continuing into 2011), much of the world was beset by 
the largest financial crisis since the Great Depression of the 1930s—a crisis 
originating in the United States and other advanced economies. Debt crises 
in several countries have played a central role. In 2010, and again in 2011, 
Greece, a member of the European Union was on the verge of being unable to meet 
its debt obligations, and there was fear the problem would spread to Portugal, Italy, 
and Spain. In 2010, the other members of the European Union, notably Germany, 
pledged up to $1 trillion to help Greece and, if necessary, the others meet their debt 
obligations. For the countries in crisis, devaluation of the currency, a policy often 
used to offset some of the negative effects of having to cut back on expenditures to 
repay debt, was not available because Greece, Italy, Spain, and Portugal use the com-
mon currency of the European Union, the euro. Our focus in this chapter, however, 
is on debt problems in developing countries, thus we will not deal further with the 
details of the debt problems of southern Europe and the threat these problems pose 
for the euro. Nonetheless, it is important to note that the global financial crisis that 
began in the advanced economies has had a severe impact on developing countries 
as both trade and financial flows have fallen rapidly in the late 2000s. The Mexican 
experience provides an informative case with which to begin our discussion of debt 
and financial crises in developing countries.
In the two decades following World War II, Mexico, like most developing coun-
tries, had few transactions with international capital markets. The country borrowed 
relatively little from international banks, and foreign investors only occasionally took 
a stake in Mexican firms. And, while it borrowed some funds from official lenders 
Foreign Debt and 
Financial Crises
13

456   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
(governments and international organizations such as the World Bank), Mexico’s 
total borrowing remained small. At the time, international capital markets were 
relatively undeveloped compared to today, and they were only just beginning to 
recover from the disruptions of the two world wars and the Great Depression. But 
things began to change in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Capital market instruments 
became more sophisticated, and the costs of international transactions fell. Bankers 
and other investors started to look for opportunities outside their traditional Western 
markets. Official lending increased as well. Mexico, along with many other countries, 
was eager to expand investment and accelerate growth and began to look abroad for 
financing. In the decades since then, Mexico’s foreign borrowing has had tremen-
dous impact, both positive and negative, on its economic growth, macroeconomic 
stability, job creation, and even political dynamics.
Most of Mexico’s foreign financing in the early years was in the form of borrow-
ing, especially from private creditors, as opposed to foreign direct investment. Mex-
ico was suspicious of foreign investors and wanted to maintain ownership control of 
its enterprises, so borrowing was more palatable than foreign direct investment. For-
eign commercial banks were more than willing to lend money to the Mexican gov-
ernment, state-owned companies (such as PEMEX, the state oil company), and other 
businesses. In 1970, Mexico’s foreign borrowing from private creditors was relatively 
small, amounting to $350 million, or about 1 percent of the gross domestic product 
(GDP). But by 1980, it was borrowing nearly $15 billion a year from private creditors, 
about 8 percent of the GDP. More than half the debt was short term, meaning that it 
had to be repaid (and usually reborrowed) within one year.
At first, the borrowing seemed to help: Mexico’s GDP per capita rose 4.2 percent 
per year between 1972 and 1981, compared with 2.6 percent during the previous 
seven years. But it turned out that Mexico had borrowed too much too quickly: In 
August 1982, it shocked the world by declaring that it could not service its debts. The 
country plunged into a deep economic crisis that led to a sharp reduction in invest-
ment, negative growth rates, deep strains on government finance, and considerable 
economic hardship for millions of Mexicans. Mexico’s crisis quickly cascaded to 
many other developing countries that had borrowed heavily abroad, and the conse-
quences of these crises are still playing out today in some countries. Foreign lend-
ing to Mexico plummeted after the crisis before recovering in the early 1990s, only to 
plunge again when Mexico faced another payments crisis in 1994 and 1995. Since the 
mid-1990s, Mexico’s net foreign borrowing has been negative in most years, meaning 
that it has been repaying international lenders more than it has been borrowing.
Globally, debt flows to developing countries have followed a pattern similar 
to Mexico’s, swinging back and forth from large inflows to large outflows and then 
back again. Borrowing from private commercial banks became the dominant form 
of international capital flows to developing countries, especially middle-income 
countries, in the 1970s and 1980s, surpassing official borrowing in almost every year. 
But debt flows fell sharply in the 1980s after the debt crises (Table 13–1). In the early 

F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S   457
1990s, private debt flows grew sharply again, quadrupling in size in just six years from 
$30 billion in 1990 to $120 billion in 1996. But then a series of financial crises struck 
several emerging markets around the world, starting with Mexico in 1995; then hit-
ting Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Korea in 1997; Russia and Brazil in 1998; and 
Turkey and Argentina in 2001. Debt flows collapsed, and by 2001, the $120 billion 
inflow of five years earlier had completely disappeared. But once the crises abated, 
borrowing increased again, and private debt flows rebounded to $72 billion just two 
years later in 2003. Official borrowing was much smaller and less volatile than private 
borrowing, but it fell steadily during the 1990s, and by 2003, developing countries as 
a whole were repaying more to official creditors than they were borrowing. For many 
of the poorest developing countries, grants, rather than loans, were the dominant 
source of foreign financing.
Even among the largest borrowers, foreign borrowing has always been small 
compared to domestic capital flows, in most years accounting for perhaps one fourth 
or less of available investable funds and only occasionally amounting to more than 
3–4 percent of GDP. From the perspective of economic growth models that empha-
size the role of capital formation in the growth process (such as the Harrod-Domar 
and Solow models), private debt flows are only modestly important. But foreign debt 
plays a more complex role than the basic numbers indicate. The economic impact 
of debt flows is magnified by their effect on macroeconomic stability, the exchange 
rate, interest rates, government budgets, and domestic financial institutions and their 
potential to trigger widespread financial crises.
This chapter explores the advantages, disadvantages, and risks associated with 
foreign borrowing. It describes various forms of debt, the patterns of debt flows to 
developing countries over the last several decades, and the basic conditions under 
which debt is sustainable. It examines in some detail the developing-country debt 
crises of the 1980s, the ongoing debt problems faced by some low-income countries, 
TABLE 13–1 Debt Flows to Developing Countries, 1980–2008 (billion US$)
 
 
1980 
1990 
1996 
2000 
2008
Private debt finance 
 
70.9 
29.8 
119.9 
-0.4 
107.9
 Commercial Banks 
 
28.7 
3.2 
30.7 
-5.8 
123.0
 Bonds 
 
1.1 
1.1 
49.5 
17.5 
10.5
 Other 
 
11.5 
12.3 
2.3 
-4.3 
-9.3
 Short-term debt flows (net) 
29.5 
13.2 
37.4 
-7.9 
-16.3
Official debt finance 
 
20.5 
26.4 
2.8 
4.9 
-20.4
 Bilateral 
 
13.1 
11.0 
-10.4 
-6.9 
 2.4
 Multilateral 
 
7.4 
15.4 
13.1 
11.8 
18.0
Total 
 
91.4 
56.2 
122.7 
4.5 
128.3
Sources: World Bank, Global Development Finance 2005 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2005) and 
World Bank, Global Development Finance 2009 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2009); and International 
Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, (Washington, DC: IMF, 2009).

458   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
and the emerging-market financial crises of the 1990s. It then explores the main les-
sons that have emerged from these crises for debt management in the future. We also 
probe some of the tough questions that arise when countries default or no longer 
can pay their debt service: How much should be forgiven? How should the burden of 
bad loans be shared between creditors and borrowers? And what conditions, if any, 
should be placed on countries seeking debt forgiveness?
 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES 
OF FOREIGN BORROWING
Foreign debt gained a bad reputation after the crises of the 1980s, the late 1990s, and 
the Greek and Irish debt problems of 2010–11, in many ways deservedly so. However, 
prudent borrowing has been an important part of the development strategy of many 
countries. The United States borrowed heavily in the middle and late nineteenth cen-
tury to finance its westward expansion (especially the railroads). Most countries in 
western Europe relied on foreign borrowing at one time or another.
From a national perspective, borrowing permits a country to invest more than it 
can save and import more than it can export. If the additional funds finance produc-
tive investment, they should yield sufficient returns to pay the interest and principal 
on the initial foreign inflows. As we saw in Chapters 3 and 4, because capital is rela-
tively scarce in low-income countries, these countries have the potential to realize 
higher rates of return on investment and more rapid economic growth than richer 
countries, providing the foundation for lending from rich to low-income countries. 
Under these circumstances, foreign borrowing can help support growth and devel-
opment at the same time as it yields attractive returns to the lender.
For countries interested in augmenting domestic saving with foreign capital, bor-
rowing brings several advantages and disadvantages relative to foreign direct invest-
ment and other forms of capital. When a domestic firm borrows abroad, there are 
no controversies over foreign ownership, profit repatriation, tax holidays, and the like 
that arise with foreign direct investment (FDI). In addition, foreign borrowing can be 
undertaken much more quickly and easily than can FDI. Repayments are limited to 
the terms of the loan, so if an investment is highly profitable, the home country can 
keep the profits rather than repatriate them abroad. To simplify only slightly, as long 
as the rate of return on investment projects exceeds the interest rate on the debt, for-
eign borrowing can be a very sensible strategy to augment domestic savings, add to 
investment, and accelerate growth. In addition, borrowing can play a critical stabili-
zation role for countries buffeted by balance of payments shocks. When a country’s 
export prices suddenly collapse or its import prices rise, some temporary borrowing 
can help bridge the financing gap until prices rebound or the economy can adjust to 
the change, thus helping ease the costs of adjustment.
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES 
OF FOREIGN BORROWING

D E BT  S U S TA I N A B I L IT Y   459
However, there are downsides as well. Debts must be paid, even when a project 
goes bad. Too much borrowing of the wrong kind or for the wrong purposes can leave 
developing countries vulnerable to sudden capital withdrawals and financial crises. 
Short-term debt, in particular, can very quickly switch from rapid inflow to rapid out-
flow, which can cause sudden plunges in exchange rates and skyrocketing interest 
rates and wreak havoc on banks, private companies, and government budgets.
Borrowing too much to finance consumption or poorly conceived investments 
also can lead to trouble. Borrowing is much easier politically than raising taxes to 
pay for spending, especially if governments do not think they will still be in office 
when it is time to repay. If governments borrow to finance monuments, lavish office 
buildings, or fleets of expensive cars, there will be no future income stream to repay 
the debts. But even where governments borrow to finance investments that initially 
seem sound, sudden drops in export prices, rising interest rates or oil prices, or an 
unforeseen world recession can turn a worthwhile project into a financial loss. Gov-
ernments strapped with large debt service payments sometimes face painful choices 
between repaying foreign lenders as promised, or maintaining spending on health, 
education, or other important domestic programs.
DEBT SUSTAINABILITY
How much aggregate debt can a country take on before it begins to get into trouble? 
There is no simple answer. A country’s debts are sustainable if they can be serviced 
without resort to exceptional financing (for example, a special bailout by friendly 
donors) and without a major future adjustment in the country’s income and expen-
diture. But every country’s situation is different. A country’s ability to repay depends 
on a wide array of factors: the size of its debt, its trade and budget deficits, the interest 
rate on its debt, the mix of loans and grants it receives, its vulnerability to shocks (for 
example, natural disasters such as droughts or hurricanes or a fall in export prices), 
and the rate of growth of GDP, exports, and government tax revenues.
At a simple level, a country’s debt sustainability depends on (1) how much it 
owes and (2) its capacity to make the required payments. But neither of these is quite 
as straightforward as they first seem. There are two ways to think about how much 
the country owes: the total stock of debt and the amount of payments due in a par-
ticular year. The usual measure of the total debt stock is the sum of the face value 
of all debts outstanding, but this can be misleading if a significant portion of debt is 
subsidized. For example, the World Bank’s International Development Association 
(IDA), the part of the World Bank that provides finance for low-income countries, 
provides loans with an interest rate of just 0.75 percent and 40 years to repay. Obvi-
ously a $100 million loan extended on these terms creates a much smaller burden 
than a $100 million loan that must be repaid in 5 years with a market-determined 
DEBT SUSTAINABILITY

460   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
interest rate of 7 percent. Under these circumstances it makes much more sense to cal-
culate the net present value (NPV) of the debt. A loan extended on normal market terms 
would have an NPV equal to 100 percent of its face value, a grant would have NPV equal 
to 0, and subsidized loans would have an NPV in between, depending on the interest 
rate and the maturity structure (that is, the schedule to repay the loan’s principal).
Debt service is the amount due for principal and interest payments in a given 
year. Policy makers need to know how much is due each year, but looking at just 
one year can be misleading because it leaves out how much is due the next year or 
the year after, when a big payment might be due. Thus an accurate projection of 
how much debt service is due when is an important component of assessing debt 
sustainability.
What about the second part of sustainability, a country’s capacity to pay? Three 
measures of capacity are most common: GDP, exports, and government tax revenue. 
GDP is the broadest measure of the economic resources available to repay the debt. 
The larger a country’s productive capacity and corresponding income, the greater its 
ability to repay debt. But if a country is repaying foreign debt, the real constraint may 
not be total income, but the ability to earn the dollars (or other foreign exchange) 
needed to repay the loans denominated in foreign currency. When Thailand, Indo-
nesia, and Korea could not fully service their debts in late 1997, the problem was 
not a lack of sufficient income, but a lack of available foreign exchange. Under these 
circumstances, exports earned each year or the stock of foreign exchange reserves 
held by the central bank may be more suitable indicators of debt servicing capac-
ity. Exports and reserves focus attention on the external transfer problem, the 
challenge of generating sufficient foreign exchange to transfer to external (foreign) 
creditors. But foreign exchange is not always the binding constraint either. If the 
government is the major debtor, an important indicator of repayment capacity is its 
ability to generate tax revenue that can be used to repay the debt. The importance 
of tax revenues points to the internal transfer problem, the government’s challenge 
of raising enough revenue from households and firms to enable the government to 
repay the nation’s debts.
DEBT INDICATORS
Analysts typically turn these broad measures into ratios, with the numerator contain-
ing either debt or debt service and the denominator showing a measure of the capac-
ity to repay. The most common debt sustainability indicators include the following:
• Debt/GDP, perhaps the broadest measure of debt sustainability, compares 
total debt to the economy’s total capacity to generate resources to repay. 
A closely related measure uses the net present value: NPV debt/GDP. 
DEBT INDICATORS

D E BT  I N D I C ATO R S   461
Where most debt is on market terms (for example, commercial bank loans), 
the difference between these two measures is small; to the extent debts are 
contracted on concessional (subsidized) terms, the two differ. Although 
each country is different, history suggests that debt distress tends to be 
more likely in countries where the NPV debt/GDP ratio exceeds 30 to 50 
percent.1
• Debt/exports (and NPV debt/exports) compares the total debt to the 
capacity to generate foreign exchange. A wide range of debt/export ratios 
might be compatible with sustainability, reflecting the tendency for exports 
to vary more widely than the GDP. Analysts tend to place threshold levels 
for individual countries anywhere between 100 and 300 percent, most 
frequently around 200 percent.
• Debt/revenue (or NPV debt/revenue) is most relevant when the 
government is the largest debtor and there are concerns about its ability 
to generate tax revenue to repay the loans. Analysts cite ratios of anywhere 
between 140 and 260 percent as thresholds for individual countries.
• Debt service/exports has the great advantage of focusing attention on the 
amount owed in a single year relative to the export earnings available to 
make the payments, but it tells less about the overall burden of debt over 
time. Concern about debt distress tends to grow when this ratio exceeds 
20 to 25 percent.
• Debt service/revenue focuses on the government’s ability to generate tax 
revenues to make payments due in a single year. The higher this ratio, the 
more tax revenue that must be devoted to making debt payments and the 
less available for other government expenditures on health, education, 
infrastructure, or other purposes. History suggests that debt distress tends 
to appear once this ratio exceeds 10 to 15 percent.
• Short-term foreign debt/foreign exchange reserves focuses on the amount 
of debt due to be repaid within the next year compared to the available 
amount of foreign exchange reserves. Analysts suggest that a country is 
vulnerable to a rapid withdrawal of capital and a financial crisis when this 
ratio approaches 1:1.
These ratios reflect two broadly different ways that countries can face debt dif-
ficulties: insolvency and illiquidity. An insolvent borrower lacks the net worth to 
repay outstanding debts out of future earnings. An illiquid borrower lacks the ready 
cash to repay current debt-servicing obligations, even though it has the net worth to 
repay the debts in the long term. An illiquid debtor may need cash to make immedi-
ate payments, but still has the capacity to repay the debt over time, while an insolvent 
1International Monetary Fund, “Debt Sustainability in Low-Income Countries: Proposal for an Opera-
tional Framework and Policy Implications,” February 3, 2004. Available at www.imf.org/external/np/pdr/
sustain/2004/020304.htm, accessed March 2012.

462   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
debtor does not have the income or assets to repay. The debt/GDP ratio in effect is 
a measure of overall solvency, indicating the value of debt relative to aggregate eco-
nomic resources (in theory, ideally we would like a measure of overall wealth—the 
value of all assets—not just annual income, but this is extremely difficult to measure 
for a country). The debt service/exports, debt service/revenue, and short-term debt/
reserves indicators are measures of liquidity, indicating whether a country has the 
capacity to make the payments due this year.
These ratios appear at first to be simplistic and mechanical, but each captures 
and depends on important broader features of both the debt and the economy. To 
see this, we examine two of the ratios in more depth: debt/exports and debt/GDP.
To explore the debt/export ratio, recall that foreign saving (F) equals the differ-
ence between imports and exports of goods and nonfactor services (M - X), or 
roughly the current account of the balance of payments. For simplicity, assume all for-
eign saving is in the form of borrowing. Therefore, the increase in debt in any year is
 
D = iD + M - X 
[13–1]
where D represents the change in the debt stock and i is the average interest rate. 
For simplicity, assume that X and M grow at the same exponential rate, gX. In that 
case, the stock of debt also grows exponentially at the same rate, and in the long run, 
the ratio of debt to exports settles at
 
D/X = a/(gX - i) 
[13–2]
where a is the ratio of the current account deficit to exports, (M - X)/X, and is a con-
stant, assuming that imports and exports grow at the same rate.2
Equation 13–2 tells us that the long-run ratio of debt to exports depends on the 
size of the current account deficit, the growth rate of exports, and the interest rate. 
If exports are growing faster than the average rate of interest (gX 7 i), a country 
can continue to import more than it exports, meaning that a can remain positive. 
This should make intuitive sense: Borrowing to cover the gap between imports and 
exports is sustainable so long as exports are growing more than enough to cover 
interest payments.
Consider a numerical example. If the current account deficit as a share of exports 
were 8 percent (a = 8), the average interest rate were 5 percent, and exports were 
growing 9 percent a year, then the ratio of debt to exports would settle at 2 (or 200 
percent). If exports grew faster than 9 percent, the debt-export ratio would fall. If, on 
the other hand, export growth fell to 5.5 percent, the debt/export ratio would explode 
2Equation 13–1 is solved to yield equation 13–2 by letting D = gXD and substituting into equa-
tion 13–1. Then equation 13–1 becomes gXD = iD + M - X, from which equation 13–2 can be readily 
derived (hint: start by dividing each side by X). The result is given by Albert Fishlow, “External Borrowing 
and Debt Management” (220–21) in Rudiger Dornbusch and F. Leslie C. H. Helmers, eds., The Open Econ-
omy: Tools for Policymakers in Developing Countries (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988).

F R O M  D I S T R E S S  TO D E FA U LT   463
to 1,600 percent. If it fell below the interest rate (either because export growth fell or 
world interest rates rose), the numerator a also would have to turn negative; that is, 
the current account deficit would turn to a surplus. The country could no longer run 
a deficit and borrow to make up the difference; instead it would have to run a surplus 
of exports over imports and use the balance to repay debts. This is precisely what has 
happened to many low-income, high-debt countries, with enormous adverse conse-
quences in some cases.
Turning to the debt/GDP ratio, instead of examining imports and exports, a 
similar calculation can be made from the investment-saving perspective. Because 
we know from Chapter 10 that the current account balance M - X is equal to the 
investment- saving balance I - Sd, equation 13–1 can be converted to the following:
 
D = iD + I - Sd = iD + vY - sY = iD + (v - s)Y 
[13–3]
In this equation, Y = GDP and v and s are the investment and saving shares of GDP, 
respectively. As with the trade balance perspective, assume that debt and GDP grow 
at the same exponential rate, gY. Then the long-run equilibrium ratio of debt to GDP is
 
D/Y = (v - s)/(gY - i) 
[13–4]
In this case, if investment exceeds saving by 1 percentage point, the growth rate of 
GDP (expressed in current dollars) is 7 percent a year, and i averages 5 percent, the 
debt/GDP ratio settles at 0.5 (or 50 percent). But if GDP slips to a long-run rate of 
5.5 percent, the ratio balloons to 200 percent.
Thus a country with poor overall economic performance, reflected in low export 
or GDP growth rates, is far more likely to get into trouble than a country with better 
performance. Policy makers must take these factors into account in determining how 
much a country can borrow and on what terms. Strong debt management, however, 
goes beyond these basics and includes allowing for the risk of a sudden fall in export 
receipts, higher interest rates, or other adverse shocks. And, as we shall see, the terms 
on which the debt is obtained (especially the maturity structure) can have a profound 
impact on vulnerability to a crisis.
FROM DISTRESS TO DEFAULT
Many developing countries have seen their debt ratios climb to uncomfortable lev-
els at one time or another during the last two decades. Sometimes, even countries 
with good economic management can get into debt difficulties when they face drops 
in export prices or unexpected increases in import prices, say, from an increase in 
world oil prices. As debt-service payment burdens grow and it becomes more diffi-
cult to service the debts, countries face several important questions and trade-offs. 
To what extent should they continue to raise taxes and cut spending to service debts? 
FROM DISTRESS TO DEFAULT

464   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
At what point do they try to renegotiate the terms of these loans, or in more extreme 
circumstances, consider outright default?
Most countries rightly see debt agreements as legal contracts in which they have 
an obligation to fully repay. Most want to avoid default because it can have significant 
negative consequences, just as filing for bankruptcy can have adverse consequences 
for a company. A country defaulting on its debts is likely to have much more diffi-
culty borrowing in the future, at least for some period of time, until their prospects 
brighten. When creditors begin to lend again, they are likely to charge higher interest 
rates to compensate for the higher risks. Moreover, the process of renegotiation and 
restructuring can be time-consuming and costly and is something most finance offi-
cials would rather avoid. And most countries do not want the stigma and bad public-
ity that a default might generate.
At the same time, in extreme situations policy makers may see the costs of con-
tinuing to service their debts as outweighing the cost of default. Political leaders are 
willing to ask their citizens to undertake only so much austerity to repay foreign cred-
itors. Moreover, sometimes, it might be fully appropriate for creditors to bear some 
of the cost of bad loans, especially if they pushed hard to provide funds for question-
able projects. To the extent that creditors were partially responsible, they should 
absorb some of the costs through smaller repayments or even forgiveness of some 
of the remaining loan. Defaults are not uncommon for either private companies 
or public entities and certainly are not limited to developing countries (Box 13–1). 
Defaults occurred frequently in many Latin American and European countries dur-
ing the nineteenth century and the 1930s, and Greece threatened to default in 2010 
before being bailed out by the European Union, only to find itself once again facing a 
potential default in 2011 and 2012. Several U.S. states defaulted on their debts in the 
nineteenth century.
In addition, it is possible that continued repayment might undermine a coun-
try’s ability to make future payment to such an extent that both the debtor and the 
creditor would be better off with some debt forgiveness. This situation is known as a 
debt overhang: The debt creates such a drag on growth that it undermines the ability 
of the country to make repayments.3 Inflows of foreign financing should have a posi-
tive impact on growth, but debt service has a negative impact. As debt service grows, 
the negative impact becomes larger, and with debt service large enough, the overall 
impact on growth could be negative.
To see how this could happen, consider the following scenario. A government 
starts to raise taxes to repay the debt, and private companies and individuals begin 
to anticipate even higher taxes in the future, so they reduce investment. The growing 
3Paul Krugman, “Financing versus Forgiving a Debt Overhang,” Journal of Development Economics 
29 (1988), 253–68; Jeffrey Sachs, “The Debt Overhang of Developing Countries,” in R. Findlay, G. Calvo, 
P. Kouri, and J. Braga de Macedo, eds., Debt, Stabilization and Development: Essays in Honor of Carlos Diáz 
Alejandro (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1989).

F R O M  D I S T R E S S  TO D E FA U LT   465
In 1979, then-Citicorp chairman Walter Wriston famously pronounced that “coun-
tries don’t go bankrupt.” While it may technically be true that a country cannot
go bankrupt, the assertion that they cannot default runs counter to the histori-
cal record. Default by governments is a practice as old as the concept of credit. 
Throughout history, there are many examples of countries that have refused to
pay their bills or unilaterally written off debts incurred by previous governments.
The first such recorded default occurred in the fourth century B.C.E. when 10
of 13 Greek city-states with debts to the Delos temple walked away from their
contractual obligations. Not long after, the island of Chios announced publicly
that payments on its unsustainable debt would cease until economic conditions 
improved. Default in ancient times often took the form of currency depreciation,
rather than a declaration of bankruptcy. For example, over the course of the
three Punic Wars (241–146 B.C.E.), Rome reduced the metallic content of its 
monetary unit from 12 ounces to 0.5 ounce, in a series of de facto government
defaults.
The practice of governmental default continued through the Middle Ages and
into modern times. An eighteenth-century French minister of finance contended
that “each government should default at least once every century, in order to
restore equilibrium.” In the nineteenth century, as the practice of lending abroad
became more common, government default increased, and most European
nations at least partially defaulted on their debt commitments. Some defaulted
multiple times, with Spain and its seven recorded defaults leading the way. The
record in developing nations was similar: Every Latin American nation without
exception defaulted during the nineteenth century.
While the U.S. government avoided outright default, many individual states
defaulted during this period. Some defaulted on civil war debts, while others 
did so on bonds issued to failed enterprises, usually railroad or bank endeav-
ors. Arkansas and Florida each defaulted three times during the nineteenth
century. And at the conclusion of the Spanish-American War in 1898, the U.S.
government repudiated the debts that had been incurred by Cuba while under
Spanish rule.
Germany’s reparation obligations after World War I led to protracted debt
difficulties that nurtured German grievances in the early 1930s. In the wave
of defaults that accompanied the Great Depression of the 1930s, the interna-
tional capital market collapsed, thereby leading to further widespread default. 
International capital flows fell sharply during the Depression and World War II,
BOX 13–1 A SHORT HISTORY OF SOVEREIGN 
LENDING DEFAULT

466   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
so sovereign defaults were rare in the late 1940s and the 1950s. But the 
international capital markets gradually revived in the 1960s and 1970s, and 
the debt crises of the 1980s saw a return to the sovereign defaults that had 
been common in the nineteenth century.
Adapted from Nancy Birdsall and John Williamson (with Brian Deese), Delivering on Debt Relief: 
From IMF Gold to New Aid Architecture, Center for Global Development and Institute for Interna-
tional Economics, (Washington, DC: Peterson Institute of International Economics and Center for 
Global Development, April 2002).
debt service burden makes lenders more reluctant to provide new finance, as they 
begin to fear the possibility of default. As debt burdens grow very large, the govern-
ment begins to face perverse incentives against undertaking stringent adjustment 
measures. Economic reforms may help the country avoid default, but local citizens 
bear the cost of adjustment while creditors gain the benefits. Worse policies might 
lead to poorer economic performance but could lead to a larger debt write-off. Thus 
the debt burden becomes a disincentive for the very economic reforms that might 
be most needed. Empirical evidence on the existence of a debt overhang is mixed, 
but the idea has been influential in thinking about the rationale for debt restructur-
ing and write-offs in developing countries.
Finally, while debt agreements are legal contracts, under some circumstances, 
governments may see the agreements as illegitimate, making default an easier option 
to contemplate. Debts taken on by a military dictator who took power through a coup 
and stole the money may not be seen as legitimate obligations by a succeeding dem-
ocratically elected government. We discuss these odious debts later in the chapter.
THE 1980s DEBT CRISIS
The questions about default and debt restructuring are much more than hypotheti-
cal possibilities: They became very real issues for many developing countries during 
the last several decades. During the 1970s a large number of developing countries, 
especially in Latin America, borrowed extensively and accumulated large amounts 
of debt, so large that, by 1983, long-term debt owed by developing countries to com-
mercial banks had grown from $19 billion to $307 billion, 16 times larger than it had 
been in 1970 (Table 13–2). Total debt stocks grew by a factor of 10 between 1970 and 
1983, then doubled again in the 10 years that followed. But the rapid growth of debt 
in the 1970s and early 1980s led to trouble for some countries that had accumulated 
too much debt too fast. In the first half of 1982, eight countries had to reschedule their 

F R O M  D I S T R E S S  TO D E FA U LT   467
debt payments (that is, negotiate new terms to stretch out repayment). In August 
1982, Mexico stunned global markets by declaring that it could not make its debt 
payments, signaling the beginning of a much broader series of debt crises affecting 
dozens of countries. From 1983 to 1987, more than $300 billion of debt repayments 
had to be rescheduled. Now, almost 30 years later, the effects of these crises are still 
reverberating in some countries, and the lessons learned are crucial for future eco-
nomic management in developing countries. That much is clear from the fact that 
the total stock of developing country debt had grown to exceed $2.7 trillion by 2009, 
nearly $2 trillion of which was owed to private creditors (Table 13–2). (It is interest-
ing to note, however, that the role of commercial banks among private creditors has 
declined substantially over time.)
CAUSES OF THE CRISIS
The crisis resulted from several things going wrong at once: adverse international 
economic shocks outside of the control of the debtor countries, poor domestic eco-
nomic management, and bad lending decisions by international banks.4
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC SHOCKS In 1973, the Organization of the Petro-
leum Exporting Countries (OPEC) announced that it would restrict oil production, 
 sparking a very sharp increase in world oil prices. Import values and trade deficits 
4A huge literature examines the 1980s debt crisis. We cite some of the key works here. Jeffrey D. Sachs, 
ed., Developing Country Debt and Economic Performance, 4 vols.: Vol. 1, The International Financial Sys-
tem; Vol. 2: Country Studies: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Mexico; Vol. 3 (with Susan Collins): Country Studies: 
Indonesia, Korea, the Philippines, Turkey; Summary vol.: Developing Country Debt and the World Economy
(Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1989–1990). William Cline, International Debt: 
Systematic Risk and Policy Response (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 1984); Wil-
liam Cline, International Debt Reexamined (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 1995); 
Ishrat Husain and Ishac Diwan, eds., Dealing with the Debt Crisis (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1989); 
Joseph Kraft, The Mexican Rescue (New York: Group of Thirty, 1984).
TABLE 13–2 Long-Term Debt, All Developing Countries, 1970–2009 (billion US$)
STOCKS 
1970 
1983 
1993 
2003 
2009
All sources 
61 
618 
1,316 
1,960 
2,759
Official creditors 
33 
218 
697 
805 
764
Private creditors 
28 
400 
619 
1,155 
1,995
 Of which, commercial banks 
19 
307 
304 
580 
136
Sources: World Bank, Global Development Finance 2005 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2005); and 
World Bank, Global Development Finance 2011 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011).

468   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
immediately increased for oil importers around the world (including developing 
countries), slowed global economic growth (hampering export markets for many 
developing countries), and created volatility in a wide range of other commod-
ity markets. In 1979, OPEC again cut back its production, leading to even larger 
increases in oil prices.
At the same time, the U.S. economy was facing a combination of slow growth 
and accelerating prices. With the economy under pressure, in August 1971, Presi-
dent Richard Nixon released the dollar from the gold standard that had determined 
its value since the end of World War II. This move led to a sharp deprecation of the 
dollar and an increase in currency volatility and uncertainty around the world. Large 
budget deficits emanating from spending on the Vietnam War and the sharp hike in 
world oil prices added to the pressure. By the end of the 1970s, U.S. inflation reached 
double digits, and interest rates rose very sharply, reaching 16 percent in 1981. The 
increase in interest rates substantially increased the interest burden for developing 
country debtors, whose original loans were written with variable interest rates. For a 
group of 15 countries in Central and South America, the rise in interest rates between 
1978 and 1981 added over $13 billion to the costs of servicing their debts in 1981 
alone.
DOMESTIC ECONOMIC POLICIES Even in the face of these shocks, not all debtors 
suffered equally. South Korea and Indonesia were among the world’s largest debt-
ors, yet sound economic policies enabled them to service their debt while continuing 
to grow throughout the 1980s. In particular, these countries responded by reducing 
their budget deficits, restraining the expansion of domestic demand, and encourag-
ing export production. But in many other countries, reactions by policy makers exac-
erbated the crisis.
In the face of rising imports and trade deficits, escalating prices, and growing 
budget deficits, it was much easier for governments to convince themselves that the 
oil crisis would be short-lived rather than try to limit demand. Many believed they 
could borrow to cover the deficits (from either their central banks or from foreign 
banks) and even increase spending, rather than restrain demand and close the defi-
cits. But this strategy, while perhaps politically expedient in the short run, could not 
be sustained and typically led to even higher rates of inflation and larger debts.
At the same time, some governments tried to compensate for rising import prices 
by maintaining an overvalued exchange rate, which restrains price increases for 
imports and exportable goods. This step is popular with consumers because it makes 
imports cheaper, but it discourages export growth and encourages capital flight. 
More generally, countries that had been actively promoting manufactured exports, 
mainly in East Asia, were in a better position to further spur exports and close their 
deficits than countries that followed a less open trade strategy, such as in Latin 
America. Ultimately, countries with overvalued exchange rates and less-active export 

F R O M  D I S T R E S S  TO D E FA U LT   469
promotion strategies faced larger current account deficits and, therefore, larger bor-
rowing needs. Instead of improving, their debt crises just got worse.
IMPRUDENT BANK LENDING The foreign banks also bear some responsibility for 
making poor lending decisions. Banks were more than happy to keep lending to gov-
ernments, even after the economic situation began to deteriorate and normal lend-
ing strategies suggested more prudence. Banks believed that, because the debts were 
sovereign (that is, either contracted or guaranteed by governments), they did not 
have to worry as much about the normal risks of default. And once the banks were 
heavily involved, further lending seemed a sensible way to keep debtor countries 
liquid enough to continue servicing earlier loans. Banks were encouraged by their 
own governments and the international agencies, all of which hoped that more lend-
ing would help countries grow out of the crisis, especially once the world economy 
recovered from its instability.
IMPACT ON THE BORROWERS
Once it became clear that many debtors would be unable to meet their obligations, 
the commercial banks stopped making new loans. From 1980 to 1982, private credi-
tors provided more than $50 billion a year in new lending to developing countries; in 
1987, the net resource flow was essentially zero.
The impact on the most indebted countries was severe. In effect, countries very 
quickly had to turn from net borrowers into net repayers of loans. We know from bal-
ance of payments accounting that net capital inflows always must equal the current 
account deficit, which in turn is equal to the balance of investment over domestic 
saving:
 
Net capital inflows = M - X = I - Sd 
[13–5]
Before the crisis, foreign borrowing (and other capital inflows) allowed the countries 
to finance imports in excess of exports and investment in excess of saving. But when 
countries began to default on the loans, banks demanded immediate repayment and 
reduced new lending. In the absence of other new capital inflows, countries had to 
reverse the signs and run a surplus of exports over imports and of saving over invest-
ment. Economic growth fell abruptly. Many governments found it difficult to raise 
taxes and reduce spending (to increase domestic saving), so they resorted to infla-
tionary financing, which further destabilized the economy.
These kinds of dramatic changes were clearly evident in Mexico before and after 
the 1982 crisis, as shown in Table 13–3. In the five years up to and including 1981, 
imports exceeded exports in Mexico by the equivalent of about 2 percent of GDP and 
investment exceeded domestic saving by the same amount. There was strong growth 
in investment, GDP, and GDP per capita. But the crisis changed everything. Between 

470   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
1982 and 1986, imports fell and exports expanded sharply, providing the trade sur-
plus necessary to pay foreign creditors. The resource balance (the excess of exports 
over imports, and the opposite of net capital inflows) shifted by a huge 8.3 percent 
of GDP (from -2 percent to +6.3 percent). Investment fell by over 4 percent of GDP, 
and domestic saving rose by a similar amount. GDP per capita fell, the budget deficit 
grew, and inflation skyrocketed to 73 percent per year.
These kinds of adjustments were not limited to Mexico. Between 1978 and 1981, 
a group of 15 heavily indebted countries imported about $9 billion more than they 
exported. But from 1983 to 1988, they were forced into a reverse transfer of almost $34 
billion a year to service their debt. From 1970 to 1981, these countries had enjoyed 
per capita income growth of 2.7 percent a year, invested 25 percent of their GDP, and 
tolerated inflation of 39 percent a year on average. During the debt crisis, however, 
from 1982 to 1988, GDP growth per capita was -0.7 percent a year, investment fell to 
18 percent of GDP, and annual inflation grew to 149 percent.5
ESCAPE FROM THE CRISIS, FOR SOME COUNTRIES
For the international commercial banks and many of the countries that had bor-
rowed from them, especially the middle-income countries, the debt crisis of the 
1980s essentially was over by the mid-1990s. For other countries (mainly low-income 
5Rudiger Dornbusch, “Background Paper” (31), in Twentieth Century Fund Task Force on International 
Debt, ed., The Road to Economic Recovery (New York: Priority Publications, 1989).
TABLE 13–3 Mexico before and after the 1982 Debt Crisis
 
BEFORE THE CRISIS,  
AFTER THE CRISIS,
 
1977–81 
1982–86
Exports of goods and services (% of GDP) 
9.6 
16.9
Imports of goods and services (% of GDP) 
11.5 
10.6
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
-2.0 
6.3
Gross domestic investment (% of GDP) 
24.7 
20.4
Gross domestic savings (% of GDP) 
22.7 
26.7
Saving-investment gap (% of GDP) 
-2.0 
6.3
Gross domestic investment (real, average  
13.0 
-12.2
 annual growth %)
GDP (real, average annual growth %) 
7.6 
-0.6
GDP per capita (real, average annual growth %) 
5.0 
-2.9
Inflation, consumer prices (average annual %) 
23.7 
73.2
GDP, gross domestic product
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators, http://databank.worldbank.org/ddp/home.do, 
accessed 2005.

F R O M  D I S T R E S S  TO D E FA U LT   471
countries in sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and Central America) that had borrowed 
predominantly from other governments and the international financial institutions, 
the debt crisis lingered unresolved into the new century.
Debt ratios improved substantially for Latin American countries from the 1980s 
to the 1990s and were much lower by 2005 compared to their previous high levels 
(Table 13–4). In most cases, improvements continued through 2009, albeit at a slower 
pace. Latin American debtors worked out of insolvency through debt relief agreements 
that involved a combination of several forms of debt restructuring and reorganization:
• Refinancing, involving making new loans to repay the old. In a refinancing, 
the amount of debt owed does not change, but the terms for repayments 
are eased, usually through longer repayment periods and perhaps lower 
interest rates.
• Rescheduling, closely related to refinancing, in which the original loans 
stay on the books, but the schedule of payments is altered to allow longer 
repayment periods and possibly lower interest rates.
• Reduction, in which the amount actually owed is reduced (that is, forgiven), 
either partly (a write-down) or completely (a write-off).
• Buybacks, whereby the debtor buys the loan from the creditor, usually for 
a percentage of the face value of the debt. Creditors might prefer getting an 
ensured payment today for part of the debt rather than taking the risk of 
less payment later.
TABLE 13–4 Debt Ratios, Developing Countries, 1980–2009 (percent)
 
MAXIMUM OF 1980–97 
2005 
2009
All developing countries
Long-term debt to GNP 
43 
26 
22
Long-term debt to exports 
203 
75 
75
Total debt service to exports 
33 
13 
11
Latin American countries
Long-term debt to GNP 
60 
29 
24
Long-term debt to exports 
343 
111 
111
Total debt service to exports 
48 
24 
18
Selected countries: total debt service to exports 
Argentina 
83 
19 
17
Bolivia 
63 
16 
14
Brazil 
82 
46 
23
Chile 
71 
15 
23
Mexico 
51 
22 
13
GNP, gross national product;.
Sources: World Bank, Global Development Finance 2004 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2004); and 
World Bank, Global Development Finance 2011 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011). 

472   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
• Debt-equity swaps, in which creditors are given equity in a company (such 
as a state-owned telecommunications company) in return for eliminating 
the debt outstanding.
Strategies to resolve the 1980s debt crisis evolved slowly in two broad stages. 
In 1985, nearly three years after Mexico first defaulted, U.S. Secretary of the Trea-
sury James Baker announced what came to be known as the Baker Plan. This two-
pronged strategy involved providing new finance to the debtor countries in return for 
them undertaking significant economic reforms aimed at stabilizing their economies 
and reducing their current account deficits. The plan did not reduce the amount 
of debt; it was based on the assumption that, with enough new financing and eco-
nomic adjustment, the debtor countries could begin to grow and would fully repay 
the banks.
Financing was provided in part by the creditor banks refinancing and restructur-
ing existing debts and partly through new funds provided by the International Mon-
etary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and official aid agencies. The new financing provided 
some breathing room for the debtors because it reduced the amount of immediate 
adjustment necessary in the current account deficit. But adjustment was still neces-
sary. The policy adjustment programs involved a range of steps aimed at reducing 
deficits in the government budget and the balance of payments, containing inflation, 
stimulating savings, and generating more resources for investment and debt service. 
These stabilization and structural adjustment programs, which were designed and 
overseen by the IMF and World Bank, typically involved devaluing the currency (or 
allowing it to depreciate through a float) to reduce imports and stimulate exports, 
cutting government expenditures, raising taxes, reducing growth in the money sup-
ply, and closing loss-making state companies.
These programs were controversial, and the austerity measures created huge 
burdens on the ordinary citizens of debtor countries in the form of reduced income, 
higher taxes and fees, reduced services from government, and other adjustments. 
Critics argued that, while some of these steps were necessary, the programs were not 
always well designed and required more austerity than was necessary while creating 
little burden for the creditors. Although it was hoped that this combination of new 
money and policy reforms eventually would allow countries to resume growth and 
fully repay the banks, in the end, the Baker Plan proved insufficient to resolve the 
debt crisis.
The key breakthrough came in 1989, when new U.S. Secretary of the Treasury 
Nicholas Brady unveiled a different strategy, this time incorporating the idea that the 
value of the debt would be written down and the commercial banks would share in 
some of the losses. The Brady Plan recognized that debtor countries needed a per-
manent reduction of their debt burdens to get back on sound economic footing. The 
strategy called for banks and debtor governments to renegotiate debts on a case-
by-case basis from a menu of options, including reducing the face value of the debt, 

T H E  D E BT  C R I S I S  I N  L O W - I N C O M E  C O U N T R I E S   473
reducing the interest rate, providing new loans, and other forms of restructuring. The 
debtor countries issued new bonds to the banks, called Brady bonds, to replace the 
old debt. The amount of debt relief encompassed in these deals varied from coun-
try to country. Mexico’s commercial bank debt was reduced by about 35  percent, 
whereas Costa Rica’s was reduced by about 65 percent. By May 1994, Brady deals 
were in place covering about $190 billion in debt for 18 countries, including Poland, 
Ecuador, Venezuela, the Philippines, Brazil, Peru, the Ivory Coast, and other coun-
tries. Over $60 billion in debt had been forgiven. As with the Baker Plan, the new 
scheme included stabilization and structural adjustment programs under the aus-
pices of the IMF and World Bank, new lending from these organizations, and bilat-
eral debt relief.
The key to the program was the recognition by the international community 
and the creditor banks that by continuing to insist on full repayment, they were 
undermining the strength of these economies and ultimately receiving less repay-
ment than they would under a negotiated settlement. By the early 1990s, growth had 
resumed and prices had stabilized. Net capital inflows, after falling to $10 billion per 
year between 1983 and 1989, rose to $60 billion in 1992. Debt reduction alone could 
not have solved the crisis, but debt reduction combined with new financing, strong 
adjustment efforts by the countries themselves, and especially the revival of the 
world economy in the early 1990s helped bring an end to the crisis, at least for some 
countries. A similar approach would be adopted for other heavily indebted nations 
almost a decade later.
THE DEBT CRISIS IN LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES
Although the debt crisis effectively ended in the early 1990s for most middle-income 
countries that had borrowed heavily from commercial banks, it continued for many 
low-income countries, especially many countries in Africa. Most of the debts of 
these countries are owed to either official multilateral organizations, such as the IMF 
and World Bank, or to donor governments, rather than to commercial banks. Thus, 
although the terms of the debts were more generous (and usually subsidized), the 
Brady Plan was not a solution for these countries because it was designed for com-
mercial banks, ultimately providing the creditor with new bonds that it could sell on 
private bond markets. Different approaches were needed for these countries.
Low-income countries borrowed in the 1970s and 1980s for many of the same 
reasons as other developing countries. They were hit by the same set of strong inter-
national economic shocks: high oil import prices, low commodity prices, the end of 
the gold standard, and weak market demand in the industrialized countries. These 
challenges were even more difficult to meet in the poorest countries, which had a 
limited number of well-trained financial and economic experts, many of which had 
THE DEBT CRISIS IN LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES

474   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
gained their independence only recently and had new and untested government 
institutions. The impact of these shocks was exacerbated in many countries by a pro-
longed period of economic mismanagement. Governments kept budget deficits high, 
erected significant barriers to trade, distorted market prices, and failed to provide 
basic infrastructure and health and education services.
Even where economic policies later improved, however, growth remained elu-
sive, partly because many of these countries also face very difficult geographical 
challenges, such as being landlocked, located in the tropics (where disease is much 
more virulent), or located in or near the Sahara Desert. Several currently are ravaged 
by the HIV/AIDS pandemic, which further undermines their capacity for sustained 
economic growth and repayment of debt.
As with the debt crisis in Latin America, creditors sometimes added to the cri-
sis by making loans for bad projects (many designed by the very same donors that 
provided the loans), although in this case the major creditors were government and 
multilateral agencies rather than commercial banks. In some cases industrialized 
country governments provided loans for poor investments and grandiose consump-
tion projects in an attempt to win countries over to one side or the other of the cold 
war. Some Western loans supported corrupt governments that had little intention or 
capability of repaying the loans to finance presidential palaces, showcase steel mills, 
and other wasteful expenditures.
During the 1980s and early 1990s, the international community’s strategy for 
the low-income countries had two components, similar to the original Baker plan: 
provide new finance in return for significant economic reforms in the hopes that the 
debtor countries could grow out of their difficulties. Beginning in 1988, the financ-
ing was augmented by partial write-downs from government creditors. Multilateral 
creditors, including the IMF, World Bank, and other multilateral organizations (such 
as the African Development Bank and Asian Development Bank) offered no write-
downs until 1996.
DEBT REDUCTION IN LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES
Individual creditor governments provide debt rescheduling and debt reduction 
through an informal group called the Paris Club. The governments of the United 
States, the United Kingdom, Japan, Germany, France, and 14 other creditor coun-
tries coordinate to offer common terms for debt restructuring to each debtor. The 
first meeting was in 1956, when Argentina met with a group of its creditors in Paris. 
Since that time, the Paris Club has negotiated over 400 agreements with at least 
80 different countries. Until 1988, all Paris Club agreements involved debt resched-
uling rather than reduction. Since then, agreements typically provide debt resched-
uling for middle-income countries and partial debt reduction coupled with 
rescheduling for low-income countries. The first debt reduction deals in 1988 pro-
vided 33 percent reduction for certain qualifying debts; by 1999, the Paris Club was 

T H E  D E BT  C R I S I S  I N  L O W - I N C O M E  C O U N T R I E S   475
providing 90 percent reduction for at least some debts owed by certain countries. 
Many creditor governments have gone further and provided 100 percent debt relief 
in some circumstances.
The arguments for providing debt relief to the poorest countries were similar but 
not identical to those made for the middle-income countries. The first argument was 
a variant of debt overhang: The debts were so large that they were impeding growth 
and development, partially by undermining private sector incentives but also by 
impeding the government’s ability to make critical investments in health, education, 
and infrastructure.
The second argument was that the creditor governments and institutions should 
not have been providing so much of their financing as loans to the world’s poorest 
countries in the first place because history suggested that accelerating growth suf-
ficiently to repay the loans would be a major challenge. The world’s poorest countries 
have had the most difficulty in initiating and sustaining growth, for reasons that we 
discussed: adverse geography, disease burdens, weak institutions, frequent climate 
and trade shocks, and poor policies. Providing loans to these countries rather than 
outright grants was based on the presumption that growth could be turned around 
relatively easily, providing these countries with the basis to repay their loans. But for 
many of the world’s poorest countries, growth rates remained low, debts piled up, 
and many countries were able to service their loans only by receiving new loans.
The third argument is that creditors knowingly lent money to dictatorships to 
garner their political support, even when the dictators wasted and stole the money. 
Once the dictators left, the citizens of the country were left with the responsibil-
ity of repaying these debts. The Democratic Republic of the Congo, formerly Zaire, 
piled up large debts under the ruthless dictatorship of Mobutu Sese Seko, as West-
ern donors happily lent him more money, even when it was obvious that most of the 
money was wasted or stolen. Many argue that odious debts (obligations accumulated 
by an illegitimate government in the name of a country) should be forgiven, with the 
costs born by the creditor (Box 13–2). The United States, which often has resisted 
attempts by some countries to claim odious debts, pushed hard in 2004 for other 
countries to forgive debts owed by Iraq. Although the United States was careful to 
avoid the term odious debt because of the legal precedent, it nonetheless argued that 
Iraq’s debts were amassed by an illegitimate dictator and were a large impediment to 
future growth. In November 2004, the Paris Club agreed to cancel over $29 billion of 
Iraq’s debts and reschedule an additional $7 billion, by far the largest debt forgive-
ness operation ever undertaken for a single country.
THE HEAVILY INDEBTED POOR COUNTRY INITIATIVE
By the middle of the 1990s, it was becoming increasingly clear that some of the poor-
est and most heavily indebted countries would not be able to repay their debts. Most 
of these countries almost never actually defaulted on their debt payments: Instead, 

476   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
Under the law in many countries, individuals do not have to repay if others fraud-
s
ulently borrow in their name and corporations are not liable for contracts that
s
their chief executive officers enter into without proper authority. The legal doc-
trine of odious debt makes an analogous argument that sovereign debt that is
incurred without the consent of the people and that does not benefit the people 
should not be transferable to a successor government, especially if creditors 
are aware of these facts in advance. But many developing countries carry debt 
incurred by rulers who borrowed without the people’s consent and who used the 
funds either to repress the people or for personal gain.
The doctrine of odious debt originated in 1898 after the Spanish American
War. During peace negotiations, the United States argued that neither it nor
Cuba should be responsible for debt the colonial rulers had incurred without
the consent of the Cuban people and had not used for their benefit. Although
Spain never accepted the validity of this argument, the United States implicitly
prevailed, and Spain took responsibility for the Cuban debt under the Paris peace 
treaty.
Though legal scholars elaborated the details of the doctrine of odious debt, it
has gained little momentum within the international legal community—still, many 
countries could qualify. For example, through the 1980s, South Africa’s apart-
heid regime borrowed from private banks, devoting a large percentage of its bud-
get to financing the military and police and repressing the black majority. The 
South African people now bear the debts of their repressors. Despite appeals—
from the archbishop of Cape Town and South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation
 Commission—to have the apartheid-era debt written off, the post-apartheid gov-
ernment has accepted responsibility for it, perhaps out of fear that defaulting 
would make the country seem not to be playing by the rules of capitalism and
would hurt its chances of attracting foreign investment. South Africa is not poor 
enough to qualify for debt relief under the HIPC Initiative.
Among other dramatic instances of odious debt, Anastasio Somoza was
reported to have looted $100 to $500 million from Nicaragua by the time he
was overthrown in 1979; Ferdinand Marcos amassed a personal fortune of
$10 billion in the Philippines; Mobutu Sese Seko expropriated a reported $4 bil-
lion from the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then Zaire); and Jean-Claude
Duvalier reportedly absconded with $900 million from Haiti. Some of the money 
that built these fortunes was drawn from amounts that these dictators borrowed
in the name of their people. Recently, the United States successfully argued that 
debts accumulated by Saddam Hussein in Iraq were illegitimate and should be 
BOX 13–2 ODIOUS DEBT

T H E  D E BT  C R I S I S  I N  L O W - I N C O M E  C O U N T R I E S   477
as the debt payments grew, the creditors lent them new money so they could repay 
the old, a strategy known as defensive lending (because the loans defend the credi-
tor against the possibility of the debtor defaulting). But this strategy could not be sus-
tained indefinitely, and debt levels continued to grow while growth rates remained 
stubbornly low.
In 1996, the international community recognized that deeper debt reduction 
would be necessarily. The World Bank and IMF, in conjunction with other multi-
lateral agencies and creditor governments, launched the rather awkwardly named 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative.6 The HIPC include 38 countries 
with per capita incomes below $900 (converted using official exchange rates rather 
than purchasing power parity [PPP]) and with NPV debt/export ratios exceeding 
150 percent.7 Most had much higher debts. From 1982 to 1992, the NPV debt/export 
ratio deteriorated from an average of 266 percent to 620 percent for the HIPC. The 
new initiative had two key features, deeper debt relief from bilateral government 
creditors (initially up to 80 percent of qualifying debts, then in 1999 up to 90 per-
cent), and for the first time ever, partial write-downs of debts owed to the multilateral 
agencies.
The first version of the HIPC initiative turned out to be too cumbersome and 
time-consuming to be effective. In the first three years, only five countries received 
debt relief, and the amounts involved were relatively small. In 1999 a new, enhanced 
HIPC Initiative was introduced to provide more relief and provide it more quickly.
To be eligible for debt reduction, a country must first establish a track record 
of  good economic policies, as determined by the IMF and World Bank, usually 
forgiven, although, to avoid setting a legal precedent for other countries to fol-
low, the United States did not use the odious debt terminology. The international 
t
community forgave over $29 billion in Iraqi debt in 2004.
Economists Michael Kremer and Seema Jayachandran have argued for the 
creation of an independent institution to assess whether regimes are legitimate 
and declare sovereign debt incurred by illegitimate regimes odious and thus not 
the obligation of successor governments.
Adapted from Michael Kremer and Seema Jayachandran, “Odious Debts,” Finance and Develop-
ment 39, no. 2 (June 2002).
t
6For a thorough analysis of the HIPC program and related debt issues, see Nancy Birdsall and John 
 Williamson (with Brian Deese), Delivering on Debt Relief: From IMF Gold to New Aid Architecture (Wash-
ington, DC: Center for Global Development and Institute for International Economics, April 2002).
7In certain circumstances, where countries have very open economies and the NPV/export ratio may 
not be appropriate (because large exports drive down the ratio), countries qualify if the NPV debt/revenue 
ratio is above 250 percent. For more information on HIPC, see www.worldbank.org/hipc.

478   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
including a stable macroeconomic environment, lower trade restrictions, policies to 
 support private-sector growth, and strengthening of the financial and legal systems. 
Countries must develop Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers, detailing their plans 
for growth, development, and poverty reduction. Once countries establish this track 
record, they reach the decision point at which creditors provide interim relief—that 
is, they forgive debt payments as they fall due but do not yet forgive the stock of debt. 
Countries that maintain strong economic policies for an additional year or more and 
carry out specific reforms determined at the decision point reach the completion 
point, at which time they receive irrevocable debt reduction.
Under the program as it was conducted until 2009, countries that reach the com-
pletion point received debt reduction sufficient to reduce their NPV debt/export ratio 
to 150 percent, a level the IMF and World Bank deem to be the threshold for sustain-
able debt for low-income countries. Two features of this approach are noteworthy. 
First, a single threshold level is used for all countries. Basic economics would suggest 
that each country can sustain a different level of debt, but politically and institution-
ally, it was simpler for these organizations to treat all countries the same. Second, 
note that whereas the Paris Club forgives a percentage of debt, HIPC forgives the 
excess over the threshold. Thus a country with a NPV debt/export ratio of 200 per-
cent would receive 25 percent debt forgiveness, whereas a country with a 300 percent 
ratio would receive a 50 percent write-off.
In 2005, the shareholders of the IMF, World Bank, and African Development 
Bank decided to go a step further and offer 100 percent forgiveness of all obligations 
owed to the three organizations for countries that reached the completion point. This 
step represented a major change and is the first time any of the organizations pro-
vided 100 percent forgiveness.
As of 2009, 35 HIPC had reached the post-completion point, and 12 countries 
were at the interim or predecision point (several mired in civil conflict were techni-
cally eligible but had made little progress). The 35 countries that reached their post-
completion points had received debt relief amounting to $118 billion from the HIPC 
Initiative and a variety of other related bilateral and multilateral debt relief initia-
tives. The debt service/export ratio fell from an average of about 18 percent in 1999 
to 6 percent in 2009, while debt service/revenues fell from 22 percent to 6 percent. In 
many countries, the benefits from the program were already evident. For example, 
Ghana used its savings to construct 509 new classroom blocks around the country, 
provide micro credit to about 43,000 farmers, and fund 560 sanitation and 141 water 
projects. Both Uganda (Box 13–3) and Tanzania used some of their saving to elimi-
nate primary school fees, leading to sharp increases in school enrollment.
The HIPC Initiative demonstrates that, even after policy makers decided that 
some debt forgiveness is warranted, they face several key questions. These issues are 
more difficult in forgiving debts owed to government and multilateral institutions 
because market-based mechanisms are less relevant. Which countries should be eli-
gible and which should not (that is, what are the right cutoffs for “poor” and “heavily 
indebted”)? How much debt should be forgiven and over what time frame? Should 
the debtors be expected to undertake policy conditions in return for debt relief, and 

T H E  D E BT  C R I S I S  I N  L O W - I N C O M E  C O U N T R I E S   479
When Uganda gained its independence from Britain in 1962, there was wide-
spread optimism that its vibrant agricultural base and diverse, talented people 
could provide the basis for sustained economic development. However, political
instability in the late 1960s and a 1971 coup led by Idi Amin ushered in a long 
period of political terror and economic destruction. By the time Yoweri Museveni
assumed power in 1986, Uganda was one of the poorest countries in the world.
Food production had fallen by a third in 15 years; average income had declined
by over 40 percent; and life expectancy was just 48 years.
The new government embarked on a broad-based economic rebuilding program
that focused on rehabilitating infrastructure, restoring macroeconomic balance, 
lowering barriers to trade, and investing in the social sectors. In the 15 years that 
followed, the economy staged a remarkable recovery. Average income increased
by nearly 60 percent, and the share of the population living below the poverty line 
fell from 56 to 44 percent. By the mid-1990s, however, Uganda had accumulated 
a substantial debt burden. By 1993, total external debt was more than 12 times
the value of annual exports, one of the highest such ratios in the world (total debt
equal to twice the value of exports is generally considered a heavy burden). Two
thirds of the debt was owed to multilateral agencies, so the traditional methods for
debt relief (for private sector or bilateral debt) had limited potential.
In April 1998, Uganda was the first country to become eligible for debt reduc-
tion under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. In the first formu-
lation of the program, Uganda received about $650 million in debt relief, reducing
its $3.2 billion debt stock by about 20 percent. Two years later, Uganda became 
the first country to qualify for the enhanced HIPC program, which offered deeper
debt relief. This second phase reduced Uganda’s debts by about $1.3 billion, bring-
ing the total debt reduction to approximately $2 billion. These steps reduced Ugan-
da’s debt service payments by about $80 million per year, or about two thirds of
debt service payments due. In 2005, Uganda became eligible for 100 percent for-
giveness of debts owed to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and
African Development Bank. Uganda’s early success with the program was encourag-
ing: The country sharply increased the net primary school enrollment rate from 62 
to 86 percent between 1992 and 2003, raised investments in farm-to-market 
roads by 75 percent, and brought the share of the urban population with access
to safe water from 54 percent in 2000 to 65 percent in 2003 (however, the coun-
try also increased its military spending in response to regional conflicts). Gross
domestic product (GDP) per capita grew at a rate just below 3.6 percent between 
1995 and 2010, increasing average income by 70 percent over that period.
This information is drawn primarily from multiple World Bank websites on the HIPC program and
the country page for Uganda (look for links at www.worldbank.org).
BOX 13–3 DEBT RELIEF IN UGANDA

480   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
if so, what conditions (and determined by whom)? How should the cost burden be 
shared? There are no obvious right or wrong answers to these questions because 
they involve economic, financial, political, and institutional considerations, so these 
issues will continue to be major challenges for policy makers in the years ahead.
EMERGING MARKET FINANCIAL CRISES
International capital flows played a central role in a series of financial crises that 
struck several developing countries starting in the mid to late-1990s, including 
Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, Indonesia, Korea, Mexico, Russia, Thailand, Turkey, Uru-
guay, and Venezuela. These crises had some similarities with the 1980s and HIPC 
debt crises, but some critical differences as well. In most cases they struck very sud-
denly and ferociously, with enormous economic and financial consequences in a 
matter of weeks and months. Moreover, several of the worst-hit countries previously 
had strong economic performance and had been favorites of the international capi-
tal markets. These crises led to dramatic falls in GDP and investment, major disrup-
tions of trade and banking relationships, widespread unemployment, and increases 
in poverty. They also led to widespread rethinking of both the role of foreign capital 
flows (especially short-term flows) and the proper timing and sequencing of financial 
liberalization in the development process.
At the heart of these crises were huge, sudden reversals of international private 
capital flows. Economies that had been receiving relatively large amounts of private 
capital suddenly were faced with withdrawals of lines of credit, demands to repay debts, 
an exodus of portfolio capital, and offshore flight by domestic investors. Table 13–5 
shows both the rapid buildup in lending and the depth and speed of the subsequent 
reversal in capital flows for five Asian crisis economies: Indonesia, Malaysia, the Phil-
EMERGING MARKET FINANCIAL CRISES
TABLE 13–5  Five Asian Economies:* Private External Financing before and after 
     the Crises (billion US$)
 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998
Net private flows 
40.5 
77.4 
103.2 
-1.1 
-28.3
 Equity investment 
12.2 
15.5 
19.7 
3.6 
8.5
 Private creditors 
28.2 
61.8 
83.5 
-4.7 
-36.8
  Commercial banks 
24.0 
49.5 
65.3 
-25.6 
-35.0
  Nonbank private creditors 
4.2 
12.4 
18.2 
21.0 
-1.7
*South Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and the Philippines.
Source: Institute of International Finance, “Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies,” (Washington, DC: 
Institute for International Finance, January 1999).

E M E R G I N G  M A R K E T  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S   481
ippines, South Korea, and Thailand. Net private capital flows to these five countries 
more than doubled in just two years, from $40 billion in 1994 to $103 billion in 1996. 
Net commercial bank lending alone nearly tripled from $24 billion to $65 billion. 
But, in the last six months of 1997, the private capital inflow of $103 billion suddenly 
turned into an outflow of $1 billion. This net reversal of capital flows of $104 billion 
was equivalent to about 10 percent of the combined precrisis GDPs of these five 
countries. Mexico suffered a similar fate during its 1994 crisis. The reversal in capital 
flows amounted to $40 billion over two years, equivalent to about 9 percent of GDP. 
Other crisis countries followed a similar pattern. With withdrawals of those magni-
tudes, it is little wonder these countries were plunged into crisis.
As must be the case, the reversals in capital flow immediately led to dramatic 
changes in trade balances, saving-investment gaps, and overall economic activity. 
In the five Asian crisis countries, current account balances changed from deficits 
averaging 5 percent of GDP in 1996 to surpluses averaging 5 percent of GDP in 1998. 
Economic output fell sharply in each of the crisis countries in either the year of the 
crisis or the year after (depending mainly on how early or late in the year the crisis 
struck), as shown in Table 13–6. The plunges in GDP growth in Argentina, Indonesia, 
and Thailand were particularly large. The poor were especially hard hit. For example, 
urban day laborers trying to eke out a subsistence living by loading trucks or working 
on construction sites suddenly were thrown out of work. Poverty rates in Indonesia 
doubled by official estimates from 12 percent to around 22 percent, with some unof-
ficial estimates suggesting even higher levels.
Almost as striking as the collapse in growth was the speed of the rebound, at least 
in some countries. Argentina, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, and Turkey all recorded GDP 
TABLE 13–6 Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Growth before and after the Crisis
 
REAL ANNUAL GDP GROWTH (PERCENT)
 
YEAR OF 
YEAR PRECEDING 
YEAR OF 
YEAR AFTER  
2 YEARS AFTER
COUNTRY 
CRISIS 
CRISIS 
CRISIS 
CRISIS 
CRISIS
Argentina 
1995 
5.8 
-2.8 
5.5 
8.1
Argentina 
2001 
-0.8 
-4.4 
-10.9 
7.0
Brazil 
1998 
3.3 
0.1 
0.8 
4.4
Indonesia 
1997 
7.6 
4.7 
-13.1 
0.8
Korea 
1997 
6.8 
5.0 
-6.7 
10.9
Malaysia 
1997 
10.0 
7.3 
-7.4 
6.1
Mexico 
1995 
4.4 
-6.2 
5.2 
6.8
Philippines 
1997 
5.8 
5.2 
-0.6 
3.4
Thailand 
1997 
5.9 
-1.4 
-10.5 
4.4
Turkey 
1994 
8.0 
-5.5 
7.2 
7.0
Turkey 
2001 
7.4 
-7.5 
7.8 
4.8
Venezuela 
1994 
0.3 
-2.3 
4.0 
-0.2
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators 2004 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2004).

482   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
growth of 5 percent or more two years after their respective crises. As we shall see, 
the relatively rapid recovery is at least partly a reflection of the central role played by 
creditor panic in many of these crises.
How did the crises happen? The affected countries had several characteristics in 
common. First, they tended to be middle-income and upper-middle-income coun-
tries that had been growing quickly. Second, all had received large flows of private 
international capital, much of it with short-term maturity structures. Third, they 
recently had liberalized their financial systems and had recorded a very rapid— 
perhaps too rapid—expansion of bank lending and other financial services. Fourth, 
most of the crisis countries had exchange rates heavily controlled by their central 
banks, often strictly fixed (or pegged) to the U.S. dollar. Fifth, some countries, but 
not all, had large government budget deficits financed by a combination of borrow-
ing from local and overseas banks and bondholders. These similarities suggest that 
government policies contributed to the crises, especially banking, financial, and 
exchange rate policies. However, the quick recovery in several countries, the fact that 
crises struck so many countries in such a short period of time, and the consistent pattern 
of rapid buildup and then withdrawal of private foreign capital all suggest that flaws in 
the operations of international capital markets played an important role as well.
DOMESTIC ECONOMIC WEAKNESSES
Each of the crisis countries had liberalized its financial systems in the late 1980s and 
early 1990s and had done it in ways that inadvertently left the financial systems frag-
ile and overextended. Entry requirements were eased for banks and other financial 
institutions, allowing new private banks to open. Governments removed regulations 
that controlled interest rates and forced banks to allocate credit to particular firms 
and investment projects, so banks had more flexibility in their lending and interest 
rate decisions. At the same time, banks were given much greater freedom to raise 
funds through offshore borrowing, indeed in some countries government policies 
actively encouraged banks to borrow from foreign banks and relend to domestic 
companies. In Thailand, total foreign liabilities of banks and financial institutions 
rose from 5 percent of GDP in 1990 to 28 percent of GDP in 1995, mostly reflecting 
Thai banks borrowing from foreign commercial banks. The combination of these 
changes led to very rapid increases in domestic lending by banks, which grew by the 
equivalent of more than 50 percent of GDP in just seven years in South Korea, Malay-
sia, and Thailand.
Of course, financial liberalization can bring about many benefits to developing 
countries, including the mobilization of additional resources, reduced intermedia-
tion costs, and improved allocation of credit. The problem was not financial liber-
alization per se but how it was done, especially how rapidly it was done. The speed 
and magnitude of the expansion of financial activities outstripped the government’s 
ability to establish strong legal and supervisory institutions to safeguard the system. 

E M E R G I N G  M A R K E T  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S   483
Central banks did not have supervisors with the skills and authority necessary to 
determine which banks were vulnerable and take steps to penalize or close poorly 
performing institutions. Bank regulations were weak, poorly enforced, or both. In 
some cases, supervisors were pressured (or bribed) to overlook violations by banks 
with politically influential owners. As a result, some banks were undercapitalized, 
nonperforming loans were at high levels, and many prudential regulations were bro-
ken with no penalty. Over time, loans tended to go to weaker investment projects, 
and the quality of banks’ loan portfolios deteriorated. This left the banks (and the 
financial systems more broadly) in a vulnerable situation. In Thailand, for example, 
extensive lending was directed at real estate, construction, and property. When prop-
erty prices began to fall in late 1996, banks exposed to these markets began to weaken 
considerably, making these banks’ foreign creditors increasingly nervous.
Exchange rate policies added to the problems. Each of the crisis countries had 
either fixed or heavily managed exchange rate systems; none had fully flexible cur-
rencies. Although fixed exchange rates help keep import prices stable and provide 
a price anchor in a highly inflationary environment, they can create three kinds of 
problems.
First, they tend to encourage short-term capital inflows, which are especially 
vulnerable to rapid withdrawals. With fixed exchange rates, investors believe there is 
little chance they will lose money from a rapid change in the exchange rate. A for-
eign investor is more likely to buy a one-month bond denominated in Mexican pesos 
if the investor believes there is little risk that the exchange rate will change during 
the month. In countries with flexible exchange rates, foreign investors must take into 
account the risk that a relatively small exchange rate movement quickly could wipe 
out any gain they realize from higher interest rates.
Second, fixed exchange rates tend to become overvalued, which makes imports 
cheap and undercuts the profitability of exports. Partly because of their exchange rate 
policies, the crisis economies generally experienced growing imports, a slowdown in 
export growth, and a widening of the trade deficit in the years preceding the crisis.
Third, and more subtly, once capital withdrawals begin in the early stages of a 
crisis, fixed exchange rates tend to help accelerate the withdrawals. Once investors 
recognize that withdrawals are under way, they begin to speculate against the local 
currency, betting that the government will have to remove the fixed exchange rate.8 
This speculation adds to the loss of reserves and the pressure on the exchange rate. 
8Such speculation takes place along the lines of the following, very simplified example. A foreign inves-
tor believes that the Philippine peso will have to be devalued. The investor takes out a short-term loan 
of 25 million pesos from a bank in the Philippines. The investor then converts the money into dollars 
using the current exchange rate of 25 pesos to the dollar, yielding $1 million. If the investor is right and the 
exchange rate moves, fewer dollars will be required to repay the loan. For example, if the exchange rate 
moves to 50 pesos to the dollar, the investor need convert only $500,000 dollars to get the 25 million pesos 
needed to repay the loan, allowing the investor to pocket a tidy profit of the remaining $500,000. This strat-
egy is called shorting the peso.

484   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
When the central bank finally runs out of reserves, it has little choice but to allow 
the currency to float, which usually leads to a very large depreciation. The Thai baht 
jumped from 25 baht to the dollar in July 1997 to 54 baht to the dollar in January 1998, 
and the Korean won moved from about 900 won to over 1,900 won to the dollar in 
just a few months before appreciating back in early 1998. It is easy to see why some-
one holding assets denominated in either baht or won and expecting a devaluation 
would have wanted to get money out of these countries as quickly as possible.
SHORT-TERM CAPITAL FLOWS
While policy weaknesses undoubtedly created vulnerabilities in these economies, to 
fully explain the speed and ferocity of the crises we must turn to the operations of the 
international capital markets and the actions of the foreign creditors.
A key reason that so much capital was able to leave these countries so quickly 
was that so much of it had very short-term maturity structures. A large portion of 
the loans to the firms, banks, and governments in the crisis countries was scheduled 
to be repaid in just a few months or even weeks. These short-term loans (with full 
repayment due in one year or less) were attractive to both borrowers and lenders. For 
the borrowers, short-term loans generally carry lower interest rates; for the lender, 
short-term loans carry lower risk (and require less provisioning by the supervisory 
authorities)9 because the lender is not exposed over long periods of time. As long 
as these economies continued to grow, creditors were happy to roll over the loans 
when they fell due (that is, make a new loan for the same amount to repay the old 
loan), allowing borrowers to continue their operations. So as long as things are going 
well, short-term loans appear to pose few problems. However, as soon as there is 
any  trouble—or more precisely, as soon as creditors think there may be trouble— 
creditors quickly withdraw their lines of credit and demand immediate repayment of 
loans. This is precisely what happened in East Asia: When Thailand’s economy began 
to noticeably weaken in late 1996 and early 1997, creditors began to close off their 
lines of credit and demand repayment, setting off a chain of events that led to finan-
cial panic and severe economic crisis.
Economies become vulnerable to a sudden withdrawal of international capital 
when the short-term foreign exchange liabilities of the economy grow in excess of 
short-term foreign exchange assets. In that situation, economies can become illiq-
uid: Roughly speaking, there may not be enough dollars (or whatever relevant foreign 
currency) on hand to pay all the international debts falling due. Table 13–7 shows the 
size of one significant type of foreign liability for the crisis countries: short-term debts 
9Central banks require commercial banks to set aside (or provision) a percentage of all new loans to 
ensure that the bank has some capital on hand in case loans fail. The amount of provisioning varies by the 
perceived risk of the loan and generally is smaller for short-term loans. In part because banks do not have 
to provision as much for these loans, short-term loans carry lower interest rates than long-term loans.

E M E R G I N G  M A R K E T  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S   485
owed to foreign commercial banks by the government, state-owned companies, 
commercial banks, and private corporations in each economy. The table also shows 
data for the main liquid foreign exchange asset of an economy: the foreign exchange 
reserves held by the central bank. The last column shows the key point: In each of the 
crisis economies, short-term foreign debts exceeded or nearly exceeded the available 
foreign exchange reserves. In this situation, economies are vulnerable to a severe 
crisis because if all short-term loans are called in for repayment, not enough foreign 
exchange is available to repay every debt.
Bear in mind that the short-term bank loans shown in Table 13–7 are just one 
kind of short-term foreign exchange liability. Other kinds of foreign capital also can 
be withdrawn quickly, including portfolio equity (that is, stock purchases), foreign-
exchange bank deposits, hedging instruments, and long-term loans with clauses that 
TABLE 13–7 Short-Term Foreign Debt and Reserves (million US$)
 
 
SHORT-TERM 
 
SHORT-TERM DEBT/
COUNTRY 
PERIOD 
DEBT 
RESERVES 
RESERVES
Crisis countries
Argentina 
June 1995 
21,509 
10,844 
1.98
Argentina 
June 2001 
40,916 
21,077 
1.94
Argentina 
September 2001 
37,792 
20,555 
1.84
Argentina 
December 2001 
32,320 
14,553 
2.22
Brazil 
December 1998 
41,038 
42,580 
0.96
Indonesia 
June 1997 
34,661 
20,336 
1.70
Korea 
June 1997 
70,612 
34,070 
2.07
Malaysia 
June 1997 
16,268 
26,588 
0.61
Mexico 
December 1994 
33,149 
6,278 
5.28
Philippines 
June 1997 
8,293 
9,781 
0.85
Russia 
June 1998 
34,650 
11,161 
3.10
Thailand 
June 1997 
45,567 
31,361 
1.45
Turkey 
June 1994 
8,821 
4,279 
2.06
Turkey 
June 2000 
26,825 
24,742 
1.08
Turkey 
September 2000 
27,845 
24,255 
1.15
Turkey 
December 2000 
28,360 
22,488 
1.26
Venezuela 
June 1994 
4,382 
5,422 
0.81
Noncrisis countries
Chile 
June 1997 
7,615 
17,017 
0.45
Colombia 
June 1997 
6,698 
9,940 
0.67
Egypt 
June 1997 
4,166 
18,779 
0.22
India 
June 1997 
7,745 
25,702 
0.30
Jordan 
June 1997 
582 
1,624 
0.36
Peru 
June 1997 
5,368 
10,665 
0.50
Sri Lanka 
June 1997 
414 
1,770 
0.23
Taiwan 
June 1997 
21,966 
90,025 
0.24
Sources: Bank for International Settlements, The Maturity, Sectoral, and Nationality Distribution of Inter-
national Bank Lending (Basel, Switzerland: various issues); International Monetary Fund, International 
Financial Statistics (Washington, DC: various years); Joint BIS-IMF-OECD-WB Statistics on External 
Debt (November 30, 2004) at www.jedh.org accessed in 2005.

486   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
allow accelerated repayment, but data on these forms of capital are not available. 
Moreover, the withdrawals generally are not limited to foreigners: Local citizens also 
begin to try to convert their assets out of domestic currency and into dollars (or yen), 
putting further pressure on the exchange rate. Note that longer-term loans and FDI 
generally cannot be reversed as quickly as short-term loans and therefore are less 
prone to rapid withdrawals.
CREDITOR PANIC
These financial crises were at least partially the result of what are known as rational 
panics by the creditors. Under certain circumstances, investors may have the incen-
tive to quickly withdraw their money from an otherwise reasonably healthy econ-
omy, if they believe that other investors are about to do the same thing. The classic 
example from within one economy is a bank run, in which bank depositors suddenly 
withdraw their funds and deplete the capital of the bank. The particular conditions 
under which a rational panic can occur are described in Box 13–4.
Self-fulfilling creditor panics are best understood by beginning with the critical
distinction between illiquidity and insolvency. An insolvent borrower lacks the 
t
net worth to repay outstanding debts out of future earnings. An illiquid borrower
d
lacks the ready cash to repay current debt servicing obligations, even though it
has the net worth to repay the debts in the long term. A liquidity crisis occurs if
s
a solvent but illiquid borrower is unable to borrow fresh funds from the capital
markets to remain current on debt-servicing obligations. Because the borrower 
is solvent, capital markets could in principle provide new loans to repay exist-
ing debts with the expectation that both the old loans and the new loans will be
fully serviced. The unwillingness or inability of the capital market to provide fresh 
loans to the illiquid borrower is the nub of the matter.
Why might markets fail this way? The primary reason is a problem of collective
action. Suppose each individual creditor is too small to provide all of the loans 
needed by an illiquid debtor. A liquidity crisis results when creditors as a group
would be willing to make a new loan, but no individual creditor is willing to make
a loan if the other creditors do not lend as well. One possible market equilibrium
l
is that no individual creditor is willing to make a loan to an illiquid borrower pre-
cisely because each creditor (rationally) expects that no other creditor is ready to
make such a loan.
BOX 13–4 MODEL OF SELF-FULFILLING CREDITOR PANICS

E M E R G I N G  M A R K E T  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S   487
Consider a simple illustration. Suppose that a borrower owes debt D to a large
D
number of existing creditors. The debt requires debt service of uD in period one, 
D
and debt service of (1 + r)(1
r
- u)D in period two, where
D
r is the rate of inter-
r
est charged on the unpaid balance of the loan. The debtor owns an investment 
project that will pay off Q2 in the second period. (Note that for the project to 
be profitable, Q2/(1 + r) must be greater than the present value of total debt
r
service payments in both periods uD + [(1 + r)(1
r
- u)D]/(1
D
+ r), which must 
r
be equal to D.) The debtor lacks the cash flow to repay
D
uD because the invest-
D
ment project pays off only in the second period. Moreover, if the debtor defaults, 
the loan repayment schedule is accelerated (that is, creditors demand immedi-
ate repayment). The investment project is then scrapped, with a salvage value of 
Q1 6 D. In that case, the partial repayment of the outstanding loan from the sal-
D
vage value is shared among the existing creditors on a pro rata basis.
Typically, this solvent but illiquid borrower would borrow a fresh loan, L, in
L
the first period, use it to repay uD, and then service (1
D
- u)D + L in the sec-
ond period. Thus with L = uD, the total repayment due in the second period is
D
(1 + r)r uD + (1 + r)(1
r
- u)D = (1 + r)r D, which by assumption is less than
D
Q2. 
In this case, then, the project remains profitable.
Suppose, however, that each individual creditor can lend at most l, where 
l 6 D (that is,
D
l is much smaller than D). This lending limit might result from
D
prudential standards imposed on individual bank lenders, which limit their expo-
sure to particular debtors. If only one lender is prepared to lend in the first period, 
the borrower will be forced into default because it will not be able to service 
its debts in the first period. The new creditor lending l in the first period would 
then suffer an immediate loss on its loans (indeed, it might receive nothing if 
repayments are prioritized such that all of the preceding creditors have priority 
on repayment). Obviously, a first period loan will require at least n1 new lenders, 
where n1 = uD/
D l.
There are clearly multiple rational equilibria in this situation. In the normal case, 
n1 lenders routinely step forward, the existing debts are serviced, and the future 
debts are also serviced. The investment project is carried to fruition. In the case 
of a financial crisis, each individual creditor decides not to lend on the grounds 
that no other creditor is making loans. The debtor is pushed into default. The 
debt repayments are accelerated, and the investment project is scrapped with 
sharp economic losses because the salvage value Q1 is less than Q2/(1 + r).r
Each individual creditor, of course, feels vindicated in its decision not to lend; 
after all, the debtor immediately goes into default.
Source: Excerpt from “The East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis, Remedies, Prospects” by Steven 
Radelet, et al., Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 1998. Reprinted by permission of Brookings
Institution Press.

488   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
In an international context, two conditions provide the foundation for such a 
panic. The first is a high level of short-term foreign liabilities relative to foreign assets. 
In this situation, each creditor begins to recognize that, if all creditors demanded 
repayment, not enough foreign exchange would be available to pay everyone. The 
second is that some event makes creditors believe that other creditors may begin to 
demand repayment. The event could be a military coup, a natural disaster, a sharp 
fall in export prices, a fall in property prices that weakens the domestic banking 
system, or an event in a neighboring country that makes creditors nervous about 
an entire region. Once creditors believe that others might pull out, the only ratio-
nal action for each creditor is to immediately demand repayment ahead of every-
one else, to avoid being the last in line and left unpaid if foreign exchange reserves 
are depleted. This is why the very rapid withdrawals are called rational panics. The 
irony, of course, is that the simultaneous demand for repayment by all the creditors 
ultimately depletes reserves and brings on the very crisis that all would rather avoid. 
In this sense, these crises are often referred to as self-fulfilling: The fact that more 
creditors believe that a crisis is possible in itself makes a crisis more likely to actually 
happen.
In Asia, once Thailand’s economy began to slow in late 1996 and early 1997 and 
banks came under increasing pressure from falling property prices, foreign credi-
tors that had lent to Thai banks began to get nervous and withdraw their loans. 
Other creditors came to believe that Thailand might run out of foreign exchange 
reserves, devalue the baht, or both, and began to withdraw their credits. These 
events ultimately depleted foreign exchange reserves and forced the large deprecia-
tion of the baht that began in July 1997. The weaknesses in Thailand made creditors 
more nervous about its neighbors, specifically Korea, Malaysia, Indonesia, and the 
 Philippines. A similar chain of events (with differences in the specific details and trig-
gering events) occurred in most of the other crisis countries.
Once a panic begins, it tends to perpetuate itself for a period of time, for several 
reasons. First, as foreign creditors demand repayment and the exchange rate begins 
to depreciate, local citizens try to convert their financial assets from local to foreign 
currency, putting additional pressure on reserves and the exchange rate. This was a 
particularly large problem in Argentina, Brazil, Indonesia, and Russia. Second, the 
deprecations wreak havoc on the balance sheets of banks and corporations that had 
borrowed in foreign currency. For example, as the Indonesian rupiah jumped from 
about 2,500 rupiah to the dollar in mid-1997 to over 10,000 rupiah to the dollar in 
early 1998, Indonesian corporations with dollar debts had to come up with four times 
more rupiah to make their payments. The crippling effect of the exchange rate move-
ment was obvious to the creditors, so the more the exchange rate fell, the faster the 
foreign creditors tried to withdraw any remaining loans, putting even more pressure 
on the exchange rate. Third, as exchange rates fall in one country, creditors begin 
to believe something similar will happen in neighboring countries, so they start to 
withdraw their funds from other emerging markets. There was no hint of trouble in 

E M E R G I N G  M A R K E T  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S   489
Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines until the Thai baht collapsed in July 1997. 
Within weeks contagion had struck, and creditors were withdrawing their money 
from almost every country in the region.
These emerging market financial crises were not new phenomena. Similar events 
have been recurring in slightly different forms since the development of banks and 
the emergence of international capital flows several centuries ago. Economists have 
long recognized that financial markets (both domestic and international) tend to be 
prone to instability and panic. Early in the twentieth century, industrialized country 
governments put into place mechanisms and institutions specifically designed to 
reduce the frequency and severity of financial crises, including lender-of-last-resort 
facilities at the central bank, deposit insurance, and bankruptcy procedures, making 
crises much less common within these countries.
However, these key institutions generally do not exist in international financial 
markets, leaving these markets vulnerable to panics. When central banks face a run 
on their foreign exchange reserves (akin to a commercial bank facing a depositor 
run), no international lender of last resort stands ready to supply it with the foreign 
exchange it needs to remain liquid (the IMF only partially fulfills this role, as dis-
cussed later). Similarly, no international insurance mechanism akin to deposit insur-
ance assures creditors that they will be paid if a borrower defaults. And there is no 
international bankruptcy court that can call for a mandatory standstill on debt ser-
vice payments and oversee the distribution of assets when a country cannot meet its 
short-term foreign currency obligations. On each count, there is extensive debate as 
to whether these institutions should exist and, if so, how they might realistically be 
designed to operate effectively in an international context, where there is no single 
legal authority. For example, an international agency that insures creditors could 
lead to excessive lending to weak companies because the creditor always could 
rely on an insurance settlement if the company goes bankrupt. In any event, in the 
absence of these institutions, international financial markets continue to be prone to 
rapid oscillations and financial panics.
STOPPING PANICS
Once a financial panic from international capital withdrawals is under way, it is very 
hard to stop. There are four basic options:
 
1. Governments can try to convince foreign creditors and citizens to stop 
withdrawing funds and even supply new funding. They can reduce the 
demand for foreign exchange by tightening fiscal and monetary policies and, 
perhaps, restricting imports. They can also implement policy reforms aimed at 
correcting perceived weaknesses in the economy. For example, if creditors are 
worried about the banking sector, reforms to strengthen banks might convince 
creditors to begin lending again.

490   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
 
2. Governments can try to increase the supply of foreign exchange by borrowing 
from official sources (such as the IMF and World Bank), much like a 
commercial bank borrows from its central bank in the event of a bank run. 
New funds can help assure creditors that enough foreign exchange is on 
hand to pay everyone, if need be, and allow the economy to operate 
normally.
 
3. Governments can try to stop the creditor rush for repayment by restructuring 
foreign debts so they will be repaid over longer periods of time. This 
option may include a formal debt rescheduling, a limited standstill period 
during which loan repayments are postponed, or in some cases outright 
default.
 
4. The government can do nothing (intentionally or unintentionally) and let the 
panic run its course until all creditors have fled, foreign exchange reserves are 
exhausted, debts are in default, and the economy is in deep recession. At some 
point, even in these dire circumstances, some investors will begin to return to 
take advantage of low asset prices, the foreign exchange market will begin to 
stabilize (at a greatly depreciated exchange rate), and the economy slowly 
will begin to recover.
The appropriate combination of policy actions and financing depends on the 
root causes of the crisis and the perceptions of international creditors, but there 
is little doubt that both policy adjustments and financing are necessary to avoid 
complete collapse. The problem, of course, is that correctly diagnosing a panic 
and prescribing the right response is very difficult when markets are changing by 
the hour, little accurate information is available, and the perceptions and reac-
tions of creditors are impossible to measure. It therefore is not surprising that 
both the affected countries and the international community often make mistakes 
when dealing with incipient crises, like the ones faced by the emerging market 
economies.
In most of the affected economies, once the crisis was under way, the govern-
ment turned to the IMF for advice and financial assistance. The IMF was established 
in 1945 in the aftermath of the Great Depression and World War II to help support 
stability in the international monetary system, including promoting the balanced 
expansion of world trade, the stability of exchange rates, and orderly corrections of 
balance-of-payments problems.10 It aims to prevent crises or moderate their impact 
by encouraging countries to adopt what it sees as sound economic and financial 
polices and by providing temporary financing when necessary to address balance-
of-payments problems. The IMF was undoubtedly in a difficult situation in working 
on these crises. The policies and programs it promoted during the crises were hotly 
debated, with analysts divided on whether the programs initially helped ease the 
10See the description of the purposes of the IMF at www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/exrp/what.htm.

E M E R G I N G  M A R K E T  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S   491
 crisis or unintentionally added to the panic, at least in its early stages, by shaking the 
confidence of investors and further weakening the economy.11
The IMF’s initial set of policy prescriptions, consistent with option 1, centered on 
tightening both fiscal and monetary policies (to reduce aggregate demand and the 
demand for foreign exchange) and closing weak financial institutions. Each requires 
a delicate balance. In countries in which the fiscal deficits were large and part of the 
problem (because they required significant financing) such as Argentina and Turkey, 
some fiscal tightening was necessary. However, in other countries, particularly those 
in Asia, where the fiscal balance was either a small deficit or even a surplus, tighten-
ing fiscal policy was more debatable, and some analysts believe this step may have 
added to the economic contraction. Tightening monetary policy and raising interest 
rates is even more complex. On the one hand, high interest rates might attract some 
foreign currency and slow capital withdrawals. On the other hand, foreign creditors 
might believe that high interest rates would further weaken banks and corporations, 
leading them to accelerate their demands for repayment. The empirical evidence on 
this issue is far from conclusive. Perhaps the most controversial issue was reform of 
financial institutions. There is no doubt that banking systems were weak and overex-
tended and needed significant reform. However, the very abrupt closure of some of 
these institutions may have added to the panic in the short run, leading to an accel-
eration of bank runs as depositors feared their bank would be the next closed.
Actions by governments in several of the crisis economies exacerbated rather 
than eased the crisis. Thailand’s reluctance to float its currency earlier and take steps 
to address the problems facing banks that were heavily exposed to property markets 
made the crisis more severe than it otherwise would have been. The Indonesian cen-
tral bank made huge loans to try to prop up weak banks, ultimately fueling capital 
flight and further weakening the currency.
Turning to the second option, these programs were supported by substantial 
financing from the IMF and, in some cases, bilateral funding from the governments 
of Japan, the United States, and European countries. This financing was designed to 
augment the foreign exchange reserves of the crisis economies, convince creditors 
that sufficient funds would be available to repay everyone, and ease pressure on the 
exchange rate. In several cases, the amount of financing pledged by the international 
community was extremely large (Table 13–8). International financial commitments 
to Mexico, Brazil, South Korea, and Turkey all exceeded $30 billion.
11For debates on these issues, see Steven Radelet and Jeffrey D. Sachs, “The East Asian Financial Crisis: 
Diagnosis, Remedies, Prospects,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (1998), 1–90; Jason Furman and 
Joseph Stiglitz, “Economic Crises: Evidence and Insights from East Asia,” Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity 2 (1998), 1–136; Martin Feldstein, “Refocussing the IMF,” Foreign Affairs 77, no. 4 (March–April 
1998), 20–33; Stanley Fischer, “In Defense of the IMF,” Foreign Affairs 77, no. 4 (July–August 1998); Timothy 
Lane et al., “IMF-Supported Programs in Indonesia, Korea, and Thailand: A Preliminary Assessment,” IMF 
Occasional Paper 178 (1999); World Bank, East Asia: The Road to Recovery (Washington, DC: World Bank, 
1998); Martin Feldstein, ed., Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 2003); Nouriel Roubini and Brad Setser, Bailouts or Bail-Ins? Responding to Finan-
cial Crises in Emerging Economies (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 2004).

492   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
TABLE 13–8 International Financing for Selected Crisis Countries
 
IMF COMMITMENTS 
BILATERAL COMMITMENTS 
TOTAL COMMITMENTS 
ACTUAL DISBURSEMENTS
COUNTRY 
BILLION DOLLARS 
PERCENT GDP 
BILLION DOLLARS 
PERCENT GDP 
BILLION DOLLARS 
PERCENT GDP 
BILLION DOLLARS 
PERCENT GDP
Mexico (1995) 
18.9 
4.6 
20 
5.0 
38.9 
9.6 
27.6 
6.8
Thailand (1997) 
4.0  
2.2 
10.0  
5.5 
14.0  
7.7 
11.2  
6.2
Indonesia (1997) 
11.3  
5.0 
15.0 
6.6 
26.3  
11.6 
10.8  
4.7
Korea (1997) 
20.9  
4.0 
20.0  
3.8 
40.0 
7.7 
19.4  
3.7
Russia (1998) 
15.1 
3.5 
0 
0.0 
15.1 
3.5 
5.1  
1.2
Brazil (1998–99) 
18.4  
2.3 
14.5  
1.8 
32.9  
4.1 
17.5  
2.2
Turkey (1999–2002) 
33.8 
17.0 
0 
0.0 
33.8  
17.0 
23.1  
11.6
Argentina (2000–01) 
22.1  
7.8 
1.0 
0.4 
23.1  
8.1 
13.7 
4.8
Uruguay (2002) 
2.7  
14.5 
1.5  
8.0 
2.7  
14.5 
2.2 
11.8
Brazil (2001–02) 
35.1 
6.9 
0 
0.0 
35.1  
6.9 
30.1  
5.9
GDP, gross domestic product.
Source: Nouriel Roubini and Brad Setser, Bailouts or Bail-Ins? Responding to Financial Crises in Emerging Economies (Washington, DC: Institute for International 
Economics, 2004).

E M E R G I N G  M A R K E T  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S   493
The amounts actually disbursed were often smaller, either because the simple 
announcement of the amounts available helped ease creditor concerns, the crisis 
began to pass before the full amounts were necessary, or sometimes because the 
recipient countries did not fulfill specified conditions so funds were withheld. In 
Mexico, South Korea, Brazil, and Turkey, the funds clearly were sufficiently large to 
help ease the panic; in other cases, it is less clear the amounts were sufficient. How-
ever, some analysts believe that large financing packages are harmful in the long run: 
Some suggest that the bailout of Mexico in 1995 made private creditors more relaxed 
about lending aggressively to other emerging markets and so may have contributed 
to the buildup in capital flows that led to other crises in 1997 and 1998. This kind of 
situation is known as moral hazard, the risk that an agreement or contract will alter 
the behavior of interested parties in perverse ways.12 In this case, the agreement to 
bail out Mexico might have led investors to believe they could take greater risks in 
other emerging markets, as they would get bailed out in the event of another crisis. 
However, many analysts dispute whether Mexico’s bail out had this effect.
Option 3 is to restructure the debts to either stretch out the maturity dates so 
the debts can be paid later or to write off part or all of the debt. In the most extreme 
cases, such as Argentina, Ecuador, and Russia, governments adopted a unilateral 
standstill—that is, they halted all debt payments—or simply defaulted. In effect, 
these steps effectively forced the creditors to provide financing involuntarily, what 
economists Nouriel Roubini and Brad Setser refer to as “bailing in” the creditors.13 
The option for default is even more complicated when the creditors are not just for-
eign banks but local banks or citizens who hold government bonds. When govern-
ments have borrowed from local banks, defaulting on those debts further weakens 
the domestic banking system and can lead to a freeze on deposits, obviously a politi-
cally unpopular step.14
Steps less dramatic than outright default are possible and less disruptive. Brazil 
and Turkey persuaded at least some of the foreign banks to roll over existing lines of 
credit, but these were not mandatory and many banks did not do so. More-formal 
restructurings are also an option. Turkey exchanged about $8 billion of short-term 
local currency debt, held mostly by domestic banks and residents, into longer-term 
dollar and lira debt. Argentina extended the maturity of about $15 billion in govern-
ment debt and capitalized interest on another $15 billion in long-term debt. These 
deals were expensive in terms of the interest rates charged, but they provided imme-
diate financing and avoided the disruptions of default.
Perhaps the most interesting and important debt restructuring was in South 
Korea. In late December 1997, under pressure from the U.S. government and the IMF, 
12The classic example of moral hazard is insurance markets, where coverage against a loss might 
increase risk-taking behavior by the insured.
13Roubini and Setser, Bailouts or Bail-Ins?
14Defaulting on debts owed to foreign banks similarly can weaken those banks, but they tend to be a 
much smaller share of the foreign banks’ balance sheets, so the impact is more limited.

494   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
the major creditors to South Korea’s banks agreed to reschedule about $22 billion in 
debt payments that were to fall due in the first quarter of 1998. This step was taken 
very early in the crisis, and its preventative effect in stopping the panic was immedi-
ate: The Korean won began to appreciate, and the Korean stock market rebounded the 
day after the rescheduling was announced. Within weeks, the most intense part of the 
Korean crisis effectively was over, and the Korean economy rebounded very quickly.
Debt restructurings have several advantages. First, they at least partially share 
the burden of adjustment between the creditors and debtors, rather than forcing the 
debtor to make all the adjustments. This is not only more fair, it may have a preventa-
tive aspect: With standstills or restructuring realistic possibilities, creditors should be 
less likely to engage in excessive lending. Second, when debts are restructured less 
new finance is required from the international community (and its taxpayers). Third, 
because pressure to immediately repay debts is at the heart of the creditor panic, 
restructuring can have an immediate salutatory effect, as was the case in Korea. Debt 
restructurings and standstills are the centerpiece of bankruptcy proceedings in most 
industrialized economies, but engineering them in cross-border situations is much 
more difficult. Several analysts have suggested different ways to establish an inter-
national bankruptcy regime, but putting these ideas into action has proven difficult.
Panics eventually end, even when little or no action is taken to stop them, simply 
because foreign exchange eventually is depleted, so creditors stop demanding repay-
ment and debt falls into default. But the resulting economic contraction can be very 
deep, and the financial system can be left in a shambles. In Indonesia, for example, 
where the financial crisis quickly cascaded into a political crisis that led to wide-
spread rioting and destruction of property and ultimately the resignation of President 
Suharto in May 1998. GDP contracted by about 15 percent in 1998 before the econ-
omy finally began to stabilize in 1999, and GDP per capita did not recover to the level 
of 1997 until 2004.
LESSONS FROM THE CRISES
There are several things we can learn from such economic crises. First, these crises 
are cautionary tales about rapid financial liberalization and the difficulties involved 
in building strong institutions in emerging markets. The crisis economies liberalized 
their financial systems very quickly, without fully establishing and strengthening the 
institutions necessary to oversee and regulate financial transactions. Building well-
functioning financial systems remains a major challenge in the development pro-
cess. These crises suggest that governments should proceed carefully in liberalizing 
domestic financial transactions and ensuring parallel development of the requisite 
regulatory institutions. The financial crisis in the United States and Europe in 2008-
10 further strengthened awareness of the need for caution in financial liberalization 
when it became apparent that even the most developed financial systems were vul-
nerable partly as a result of insufficient regulatory oversight of the financial system. 

E M E R G I N G  M A R K E T  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S   495
Second, the crises reveal the vulnerabilities of relying on a fixed exchange rate, 
at least for countries with large private capital inflows. The conditions under which 
fixed or floating exchange rates are preferable for long-run growth and develop-
ment is an open question that economists have debated for two centuries, and the 
debate is far from resolved. Fixed rates reduce volatility in thin foreign exchange 
markets and can provide some certainty to skittish investors. But the crises indicate 
that fixed rates create vulnerability to a panic and ultimately lead to huge economic 
adjustments when the exchange rate no longer can be defended. Increasingly, many 
economists suggest that the choice for developing countries is between a very rig-
idly fixed rate defended with abundant foreign exchange reserves or a freely floating 
exchange rate. Most economists now tend to believe that the rigid fixed rate options, 
including a currency board or outright dollarization,15 are appropriate in only a very 
limited number of developing countries and flexible exchange rates generally are the 
preferred choice. However, the debate on this issue is far from over and likely to con-
tinue in the years to come.16
Third, in terms of foreign capital inflows, there are clear differences between 
FDI and other long-term capital and short-term capital. Long-term capital flows are 
much less prone to panic and more strongly associated with long-term investment 
and growth. Because short-term flows create vulnerability to a panic, governments 
should be much more careful about, and at times possibly even discourage, short-
term flows, especially while they are in the process of strengthening weak financial 
institutions. Some analysts support restrictions on short-term capital inflows as a 
temporary step to protect nascent financial systems, so long as the restrictions are 
limited to short-term capital (there is little support among economists for restrictions 
on long-term capital or outflows of any kind). Chile has been at the forefront of coun-
tries trying to encourage long-term capital flows and discourage short-term flows. 
During the 1990s, Chile required that foreign investors deposit a share of their invest-
ment funds in a non-interest-bearing account for one year, a step that made short-
term investment much less profitable. Such restrictions reduced short-term capital 
flows to Chile without reducing aggregate capital flows.17
15Recall that, with a currency board, the government issues domestic currency only when it is fully 
backed by available foreign exchange reserves at the given (fixed) rate, thereby keeping the ratio of foreign 
currency to domestic currency constant. With dollarization, a country adopts the dollar (or another widely 
traded currency) as its legal currency, thereby giving up an independent monetary policy.
16An excellent recent survey of exchange rate policies is Michael W. Klein and Jay C. Shambaugh, 
Exchange Rate Regimes in the Modern Era (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2010).
17For discussions of short-term capital flows, see Richard Cooper, “Should Capital Controls Be Ban-
ished?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (1999), 89–141; Jaime Cardoso and Bernard Laurens, “The 
Effectiveness of Capital Controls on Inflows: Lessons from the Experience of Chile,” IMF Monetary and 
Exchange Affairs Department, 1998; Sebastian Edwards, “Capital Flows, Real Exchange Rates, and Capital 
Controls: Some Latin American Experiences,” Department of Economics, University of California at Los 
Angeles, 1998; Felipe B. Larraín, ed., Capital Flows, Capital Controls, and Currency Crises: Latin America in 
the 1990s (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2000).

496   [CH. 13] F O R E I G N  D E BT  A N D  F I N A N C I A L  C R I S E S
Fourth, vulnerability to crises can be reduced not only by reducing short-term 
capital inflows but also by building up foreign exchange reserves. China and Taiwan 
employed just this kind of self-insurance and were able to avoid serious difficulties 
while crises swirled around them in 1997 and 1998, even though China, in particular, 
displays some of the same financial sector weaknesses evident in the crisis countries. 
Although China had over $30 billion in short-term foreign debt in 1997, its foreign 
exchange reserves were almost $150 billion. After the crises, China continued to 
build up its reserves, which reached an astonishing $3 trillion in 2010. Taiwan, with 
about $20 billion in short-term debt in 1997, had over $90 billion in reserves, so also 
was safe from this kind of crisis (it subsequently built its reserves to over $300 billion 
by 2010). Korea, whose usable reserves had dwindled to about $3 billion when its cri-
sis erupted (compared to $70 billion in short-term debts), subsequently built up its 
reserves to $300 billion by 2011, effectively ensuring that it will not soon face a similar 
international payments crisis and have to look to the IMF for emergency financing.
Fifth, the operations of international financial markets and the immediate reac-
tions by the official international community probably added to the severity of the 
crisis. As a result, there has been widespread discussion about possible reforms to 
the international financial architecture. These debates have proceeded on several 
fronts, including reforming the operations of the IMF itself, strengthening interna-
tional banking standards, and establishing new international mechanisms for debt 
standstills and rollovers, but few fundamental changes have been made.18 As they 
have been for two centuries, financial crises are likely to continue to be recurring yet 
difficult-to-predict phenomena affecting emerging markets around the world.
SUMMARY
• Debt flows to developing countries have oscillated widely since the 1970s. 
They grew rapidly until the 1980s, then fell in the aftermath of the 1980s 
debt crises. They accelerated again in the early 1990s, only to drop sharply 
after the financial crises of the late 1990s then rebound again after 2001. 
Middle-income countries tend to borrow from both private lenders and 
official creditors (such as the World Bank), whereas low-income countries 
borrow mainly from official sources (including IDA loans from the World 
Bank).
SUMMARY
18See Roubini and Setser, Bailouts or Bail-Ins?; Feldstein, Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging 
Market Economies; Barry Eichengreen, Toward a New International Financial Architecture: A Practical 
Post-Asia Agenda (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, February 1999); Morris Gold-
stein, Safeguarding Prosperity in a Global Financial System, Report of an Independent Task Force for the 
Council on Foreign Relations (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, September 1999).

S U M M A R Y   497
• Debt can play an important role in financing investment and stabilizing 
an economy buffeted by shocks, but too much borrowing, especially of 
the wrong kind and for the wrong purposes, can create debt problems. 
In particular, borrowing for consumption or weak investment projects, 
borrowing too much when GDP growth or export growth rates remain low, 
or borrowing too much on short-term debt can leave countries vulnerable 
to crisis.
• The debt crises of the 1980s caused major economic dislocations in many 
countries around the world, especially in Latin America. For countries 
that had borrowed heavily from private commercial banks, the debt crises 
by and large were resolved through Brady bonds restructurings in the 
late 1980s and early 1990s. However, for lower-income countries that had 
borrowed from official sources, debt burdens continued to grow through 
the 1990s. The heavily indebted poor-country initiative has begun to reduce 
the debt burdens for some, but not all, the countries.
• The financial crises of the late 1990s struck emerging markets that had 
borrowed substantial funds with short maturities and had relatively 
low levels of foreign exchange reserves, fixed exchange rates, and weak 
financial systems. The rapid withdrawal of funds caused exchange rates 
to plummet and interest rates to soar and caused significant damage to 
domestic banks, private companies, government financial accounts, and 
overall economic well-being.
• International capital flows are more vulnerable to these kinds of crises 
than domestic capital because the institutions that can help reduce risks 
domestically do not operate well across borders, including lender-of-last-
resort facilities, deposit insurance, and bankruptcy procedures. Countries 
have taken steps to minimize their risks by reducing (or restricting) 
short-term capital flows, building up reserves, introducing more flexible 
exchange rates, and strengthening financial systems.


499
One of the greatest accomplishments of the past 50 years—the massive drop in 
the number of child deaths from 20 million children in 1960 to 8.1 million deaths 
last year—is an example of the tremendous progress we’ve made, in large part, 
thanks to foreign assistance. If the world comes together on a plan for financing 
development, the impact on health and development will be enormous. 
(philanthropist Bill Gates, April 2011).1
I have long opposed foreign aid programs that have lined the pockets of 
corrupt dictators, while funding the salaries of a growing, bloated bureaucracy. 
(U.S. Senator Jesse Helms, January 11, 2001)2
T
he two viewpoints given in the quotations opening this chapter succinctly 
reveal the diversity of opinions and the contours of the debates about foreign 
aid. Foreign aid has always been controversial. As early as 1947 Congress-
man (later Senator) Everett Dirksen of Illinois labeled the Marshall Plan, a 
post–World War II aid program for European reconstruction now seen as one of the 
most highly regarded aid programs of all time, as “Operation Rat-Hole.” Prominent 
Foreign Aid
14
1Bill Gates, “Staying Committed to Development,” theGatesNotes, April 11, 2011; www.thegatesnotes
.com/Topics/Development/Staying-Committed-to-Development.
2Jesse Helms, “Towards a Compassionate Conservative Foreign Policy.” Remarks delivered at the Amer-
ican Enterprise Institute, January 11, 2001, available at http://aei.org/speech/foreign-and-defense-policy/
towards-a-compassionate-conservative-foreign-policy/.

500   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
economists such as Peter Bauer and Nobel laureate Milton Friedman have strongly 
criticized aid. Bauer believed that aid only enriches elites in recipient countries and 
famously quipped “aid is a process by which the poor in rich countries subsidize 
the rich in poor countries.”3 Friedman argued, beginning in the 1950s, that aid only 
strengthened and enlarged central governments, and as a result, aid did more harm 
than good. Critics, from both left and right, see aid as a political tool that distorts 
incentives, invites corruption, and entrenches corrupt dictators and elite business 
interests. Many believe that aid has little effect on growth and often has done more 
harm than good for the world’s poor. They cite the widespread poverty in Africa and 
South Asia despite four decades of aid and point to countries that have received sig-
nificant amounts of aid and have had disastrous growth records, including the Dem-
ocratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire), Haiti, Papua New Guinea, and Sudan. 
Critics call for aid programs to be dramatically reformed, substantially curtailed, or 
eliminated altogether.
By contrast, supporters see foreign aid as an important ingredient in fighting 
poverty, accelerating economic growth, and achieving other development objec-
tives in low-income countries, especially in the very poorest countries, where people 
may not be able to generate the resources needed to finance investment or health 
and education programs. Equally prominent economists, such as Columbia Uni-
versity’s Jeffrey Sachs and Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz, argue that, although aid 
has not always worked well, its overall record is positive, and it has been critical for 
poverty reduction and growth in many countries and helped prevent even worse 
performance in many others. Advocates argue that many of the weaknesses of aid 
have more to do with the donors than with the recipients, and because substan-
tial amounts of aid are given for political purposes, it should not be surprising that 
it has not always been effective in fostering development. They point to a range of 
successful aid recipients such as Botswana, Korea, Indonesia, and Taiwan, and more 
recently, Ghana, Mozambique, and Uganda. They also note broader aid-financed 
initiatives such as the green revolution, the campaign against river blindness, and 
the introduction of oral rehydration therapy. They note that in the decades since aid 
became widespread in the 1960s, poverty indicators have fallen in many countries, 
and health and education indicators have risen faster than during any other 50-year 
period in human history.
Since its modern origins in the aftermath of World War II, foreign aid has become 
an important form of international capital flow from the richest to poorest countries 
3Peter Bauer, Dissent on Development (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1972). For more recent 
critiques of aid, see William Easterly, The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures and Misadven-
tures in the Tropics (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2001), and The White Man’s Burden: Why the West’s Efforts to 
Aid the Rest Have Done So Much Ill and So Little Good (New York: Penguin Press, 2006); Dambisa Moyo, 
Dead Aid: Why Aid Is Not Working and How There Is a Better Way for Africa (New York: Farrar, Straus & 
Giroux, 2009).

D O N O R S  A N D  R E C I P I E NT S   501
as well as a way to provide technical expertise and donate commodities such as rice, 
wheat, and fuel. While it plays a much less significant role in middle-income coun-
tries, it remains as much a source of debate and controversy there as in other coun-
tries. Official development assistance from Organization for Economic Co-Operation 
and Development (OECD) nations to low- and middle-income countries totaled 
close to $130 billion in 2010. Aid given to richer countries and aid provided by China, 
the oil-rich nations, and others add to this total. More than 40 governments around 
the world provide aid, and 150 countries receive at least some aid inflow. For some 
countries, the amounts are trivial, amounting to half of a percent of gross national 
income (GNI) or less. In others aid flows are substantial, totaling 20 percent, 40 per-
cent, or even more of GNI.
This chapter explores the motivations for and impacts of foreign aid. The empiri-
cal evidence on aid effectiveness is decidedly mixed, with some research showing 
little or no relationship between aid and development and others showing a positive 
impact. On balance, the evidence suggests that on average aid has had a modest pos-
itive impact on development outcomes, but with wide variation. Aid has supported 
growth and development in some countries and contributed to more broad-based 
improvements in certain areas, such as health and agricultural technology. But, in 
other countries, it has had little effect and did not spur growth; in some countries, it 
probably held back the process of development, particularly when donors have given 
it to political allies with corrupt or ineffective governments that showed little or no 
interest in economic development.
This mixed record has led to sharp debates. Where, when, and how should aid 
be provided? Which countries are most likely to use aid effectively? Who should have 
the major responsibility for designing and implementing aid programs? What kinds of 
conditions should donors impose on recipients? And how can donors ensure that aid 
is not wasted and gets to the people who need it most and can use it most effectively?
DONORS AND RECIPIENTS
WHAT IS FOREIGN AID?
Foreign aid consists of financial flows, technical assistance, and commodities given 
by the residents of one country to the residents of another country for development 
purposes, either as grants or as subsidized loans. Aid can be given or received by gov-
ernments, charities, foundations, businesses, or individuals. Not all transfers from 
wealthy countries to poor countries are considered to be foreign aid (or the equiva-
lent term, foreign assistance). It depends on who gives it, what it is given for, and the 
terms on which it is provided. A commercial loan from Citibank to build an electricity 
generator is not aid nor is a grant from the British government to purchase military 
DONORS AND RECIPIENTS

502   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
equipment. However, a grant from the British government to build an electricity gen-
erator counts as foreign aid.
An official source for definitions, data, and information on foreign aid is the 
Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the OECD, an international organiza-
tion with membership consisting of the governments of over 30 industrialized coun-
tries, including almost all the major donors. According to the DAC, to be counted as 
foreign aid the assistance must meet two criteria:
• It must be designed to promote economic development and welfare as its main 
objective (thus excluding aid for military or other nondevelopment purposes).
• It must be provided as either a grant or a subsidized loan.
The grants and subsidized loans that make up foreign aid are often referred to 
as concessional assistance, whereas loans that carry market or near-market terms 
(and therefore are not foreign aid) are categorized as nonconcessional assistance.4 
Distinguishing between subsidized and nonsubsidized loans requires a precise 
definition. According to the DAC, a loan counts as aid if it has a “grant element” of 
25 percent or more, meaning that the present value of the loan (taking into account 
its interest rate and maturity structure) must be at least 25 percent below the pres-
ent value of a comparable loan at market interest rates (usually assumed by the DAC, 
rather arbitrarily, to be 10 percent with no grace period). Thus the grant element is 
zero for a loan carrying a 10 percent interest rate, 100 percent for an outright grant, 
and something in-between for other loans.
Official development assistance (ODA) is the term used to describe aid pro-
vided by DAC donor governments (hence the term official) to low- and middle-
income countries for development purposes. If a donor provides foreign aid for 
military purposes—as the United States does for many nations, including Egypt 
and Israel—this may be included in the U.S. foreign aid budget but is not included 
as ODA by the OECD. Private voluntary assistance is another and growing form of 
foreign assistance that also is not included in tallies of ODA because it is not official 
assistance. Private assistance includes grants from NGOs, religious groups, charities, 
foundations, and private companies. The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation provides 
over $1 billion per year to support programs especially in health and education in 
low-income countries. World Vision, Save the Children, Care, and Oxfam Interna-
tional are NGOs that may be familiar to you. They collect billions of dollars each year 
from donations by individuals, mostly citizens of rich nations, and spend them on 
humanitarian and other forms of assistance in poor nations. Some estimates suggest 
4Nonconcessional loans from donor agencies are counted as part of official development finance but 
not as official development assistance.
5Homi Kharas, “The New Reality of Aid,” in L. Brainard, and D. Chollet, eds., Global Development 2.0: 
Can Philanthropists, the Public, and the Poor Make Poverty History? (Washington, DC: Brookings Insti-
tution, 2008).

W H O  G I V E S  A I D ?   503
that private voluntary assistance may amount to as much as one half to two thirds of 
ODA.5 This is a dramatic increase from even a few decades ago.
WHO GIVES AID?
Although economic assistance from one country to another has occurred for centu-
ries, today’s foreign aid programs trace their origins to the 1940s and the establish-
ment of the United Nations, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
and the Marshall Plan (Box 14–1). Historically, most aid has been given as bilateral 
assistance directly from one country to another. Some of the major bilateral aid 
agencies today include the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), 
the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development (DFID), the 
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the Saudi Fund for Development, 
the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), and Swedish Interna-
tional Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA). Some governments have multiple 
bilateral aid agencies. The U.S. government has well over a dozen departments and 
agencies that provide bilateral aid, including USAID; the Millennium Challenge 
WHO GIVES AID?
BOX 14–1 THE MARSHALL PLAN
When World War II ended in 1945, world leaders hoped that Europe would 
not require much outside assistance and that the key economies (especially 
Britain and France) could quickly rebuild themselves. But by 1947, there had 
been little progress, and there was growing concern that discontent in Europe 
could encourage the spread of communism or fascism. U.S. Secretary of State 
George Marshall proposed a new approach to reconstruction at a commence-
ment address at Harvard University on June 5, 1947, in which the United 
States would provide substantial amounts of funding, but only if the European 
nations, for the first time, could work together to draw up rational plans for 
reconstruction.
Despite some objections by isolationist members of the U.S. Congress, Presi-
dent Truman signed legislation funding the program, officially called the European 
Recovery Program, in April 1948. By June 1952 (when the program officially 
ended), the United States had provided $13.3 billion in assistance (equivalent to 
over $100 billion in today’s dollars) to 16 countries in Europe. Almost 90 percent 
BOX 14–1 THE MARSHALL PLAN

504   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
 Corporation; the Departments of Agriculture, Defense, Health and Human Services, 
State, and Treasury; and the Peace Corps.
While most bilateral aid is provided to support recipient country governments, 
some is disbursed to churches, research organizations, universities, private schools 
and clinics, and nonprofit agencies. Even private companies sometimes receive for-
eign assistance, such as U.S. assistance through enterprise funds that make invest-
ments in firms (such as in Poland in the early 1990s) or aid to micro-finance agencies, 
like the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh, that provide loans to small-scale entrepre-
neurs. Sometimes aid is provided as cash, but often it is delivered as goods (such as 
food aid or medicine) or services (such as technical assistance), or in the form of debt 
relief. An example of the latter is the nearly $5 billion in debt relief Liberia received in 
2010 from the World Bank, IMF, African Development Bank, and other creditors. This 
was a massive sum, equivalent to almost $1,200 for every Liberian. The debt that was 
taken off the books had been incurred by Liberia’s previous governments in the 1970s 
and 1980s, but 15 years of civil war had destroyed the economy, making repayment 
by the current government impossible.
In terms of total dollars, the United States has consistently been the world’s larg-
est donor, except for a few years in the mid-1990s, when Japan provided the largest 
amount of aid. In 2009, the United States provided $29 billion in ODA, with France, 
of the funds were provided as grants. The largest recipients in dollar terms were 
the United Kingdom, France, Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands. For most of the 
major recipients, funding exceeded 1 percent of gross domestic product (GDP). 
From the perspective of the United States, these were large commitments rep-
resenting 1.5 percent of its GDP. The Marshall Plan was seven times larger than 
current U.S.  official development assistance, which in 2010 was 0.21 percent of 
U.S. GDP.
The Marshall Plan is generally regarded as having been a huge success in 
helping stimulate rapid growth and recovery in Europe (although some analysts 
believe that recovery was already under way and would have occurred without 
the funding). While the Marshall Plan is often held up as a model (Marshall won 
the Nobel Prize for Peace, in 1953), it differed in many ways from today’s aid pro-
grams. Most important, it was aimed at countries that already had relatively high 
incomes, highly skilled workforces, and established financial and legal institutions, 
characteristics absent from most low-income countries. The Marshall Plan was 
designed to help relatively advanced countries rebuild infrastructure and rebound 
to their earlier levels of productive capacity, whereas today’s aid programs are 
aimed at the much more difficult task of initiating growth and development in 
countries where it (by and large) has yet to occur. Nevertheless, the Marshall Plan 
and its perceived success provided the foundation for today’s aid programs.

W H O  G I V E S  A I D ?   505
6Over the past decade one of the largest donors in the world measured as a share of its income was 
Saudi Arabia, which provided more than 1 percent of its GNI in aid. Saudi Arabia had been a much smaller 
donor until it increased assistance to Afghanistan and several other countries in the aftermath of the Sep-
tember 11 terrorist attacks on the United States. It is uncertain whether this trend will continue.
7Since 2001, surveys of public opinion in the U.S. consistently find that Americans overestimate the 
share of government spending devoted to foreign aid. In 2010, World Public Opinion.org asked a random 
sample of over 800 American adults, “Just based on what you know, please tell me your hunch about what 
percentage of the federal budget goes to foreign aid.” The median response was 25 percent. A follow-up 
question then asks, “What do you think would be an appropriate percentage of the federal budget to go to 
foreign aid, if any?” The median response was 10 percent. Survey available at www.worldpublicopinion
.org/pipa/pdf/nov10/ForeignAid_Nov10_quaire.pdf; accessed February 2012. Foreign aid is not alone; the 
public generally overestimates the relative size of most government expenditures.
FIGURE 14–1 Net Official Development Assistance, 2009
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development Aid Statistics. Available at http://www
.oecd.org/document/49/0,3746,en_2649_34447_46582641_1_1_1_1,00.html.
0.40
11.98
Billions of US$
0.00
5.00
10.00
15.00
20.00
25.00
30.00
28.67
15.02
12.43
11.50
9.48
6.57
6.43
4.55
4.09
4.01
3.31
2.81
2.76
2.60
2.31
1.29
1.15
1.00
0.82
0.61
0.51
0.31
France
Greece
Korea
Ireland
Austria
Finland
Italy
Canada
Norway
Spain
Japan
United States
European Commission
Australia
New Zealand
Luxembourg
Portugal
Switzerland
Belgium
Denmark
Sweden
Netherlands
United Kingdom
Germany
Germany, and the United Kingdom the next-largest donor countries (Figure 14–1). 
However, when aid is measured as a share of the donor’s income, a different pattern 
emerges (Figure 14–2). The most generous donors from this perspective are Swe-
den, Norway, Luxembourg, Denmark, and the Netherlands, each of which provided 
between 0.82 and 1.12 percent of GNI in ODA in 2009.6 The United States is one of 
the smallest donors by this measure, with ODA equivalent to about 0.2 percent of 
U.S. income. This figure is well below its 1970 level of 0.32 percent and U.S. contribu-
tions during the 1960s, when ODA averaged 0.51 percent of U.S. income. Foreign aid 
makes up less than 1 percent of the U.S. federal budget. This is much smaller than 
the public believes: Surveys show that Americans think that the United States spends 
upward of 20 percent of its budget on foreign aid.7 Although U.S. ODA levels as a 

506   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
share of income are small compared to other countries, the United States and other 
rich countries affect poor countries in many more ways than just foreign aid: Poli-
cies on trade, technology, migration, security, and others areas are also important, as 
described in Box 14–2.
In nominal terms, global ODA increased steadily from the 1960s until it reached 
a peak of $60 billion in 1991, just after the end of the cold war (Figure 14–3). Aid flows 
then declined for a decade before rebounding in the early 2000s. They have risen 
steadily since due to an increased commitment by rich nations to assist poor ones 
and to the growth in development assistance provided to Iraq and Afghanistan. In 
real terms, increases in total ODA over the past decade indicate an even sharper 
rate of increase from earlier trends. Measured as a share of donor income, ODA fell 
throughout most of the 1980s and especially the 1990s. The 2000s reversed this trend, 
with ODA as a share of GNI now on a level last achieved during the 1970s. Given the 
economic problems currently facing many donor nations it is unclear if this trend 
will continue. Foreign assistance may start to decline in nominal terms and as a per-
centage of GNI as rich nations cut back on many areas of government spending.
The values in Figures 14–1 and 14–2 include both the amounts that donors 
give directly as bilateral aid and the amounts they provide indirectly as multilat-
eral aid, which pools together resources from many donors. The major multilateral 
FIGURE 14–2 Net Official Development Assistance As a Percentage of Donor GNI, 2009
GNI, gross national income.
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development, Aid Statistics. Available at http://www
.oecd.org/document/49/0,3746,en_2649_34447_46582641_1_1_1_1,00.html.
0.82
0.88
1.01
1.06
1.12
0.54
0.52
0.47
0.46
0.46
0.35
0.30
0.30
0.29
0.29
0.20
0.19
0.18
0.16
0.10
0.23
0.54
0.55
Japan
Korea
Italy
Greece
United States
Portugal
Australia
New Zealand
Canada
Austria
Germany
France
Spain
Switzerland
United Kingdom
Finland
Ireland
Belgium
Netherlands
Denmark
Luxembourg
Norway
Sweden
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.80
1.00
1.20
0.60
Percent of GNI

W H O  G I V E S  A I D ?   507
BOX 14–2 THE COMMITMENT TO 
DEVELOPMENT INDEX
Rich countries affect poor countries in many ways, including through their poli-
cies on foreign aid, trade, migration, military spending, and the environment. 
Sometimes, these policies help poor countries; sometimes, they hurt. Open-
trade policies can help provide markets for poor countries, but tariffs and quotas 
imposed by rich countries can keep poor countries out and slow their growth 
and development. To capture these broader channels beyond aid, the Center for 
Global Development produces an annual Commitment to Development Index 
that ranks 22 of the world’s richest countries on the quality of their policies that 
affect poor countries in seven areas:
• Foreign aid, both in terms of its quantity (the amount of both 
government aid and private charitable contributions) and its quality, 
in terms of how it is given, to whom, and how much is required to be 
spent in the donor country.
• Trade policies, capturing tariffs, quotas, and subsidies for domestic 
farmers that impede trade or otherwise disadvantage poor countries 
trying to compete in rich-country markets.
• Foreign investment policies, including tax rates; programs that provide 
political risk insurance for investors against coups or other political 
instability; and other related policies.
• Migration, capturing the extent to which policies ease or hinder 
migration (particularly of unskilled rather than skilled workers) from 
poor to rich countries.
• Environmental policies, including greenhouse gas emissions, fishing 
subsidies, or other actions that lead to environmental degradation in 
poor countries.
• Security, including financial contributions to peacekeeping operations, 
naval operations that secure international shipping lanes, and penalties 
for certain arms exports.
• Technology, including policies that support research and development 
and protection of intellectual property rights, which enable creation and 
dissemination of innovations that help poor countries (like vaccines).
In 2010, Sweden came out on top, thanks to its large foreign aid program 
 (relative to the size of its economy) and liberal immigration policies. Denmark 
ranked 2nd mostly because of its aid program. The United States ranked 11th, 
scoring relatively well on trade and security policies but poorly on aid programs. 
BOX 14–2 THE COMMITMENT TO
DEVELOPMENT INDEX

508   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
 institutions include the World Bank; the IMF; the African, Asian, and Inter-American 
Development Banks; the United Nations; and the European Commission. The basic 
rationale for multilateral institutions is that they can provide larger amounts of aid 
with (presumably) lower bureaucratic costs (because donors do not have to dupli-
cate efforts in each country) and fewer political ties (because funding decisions can-
not be driven as easily by the political concerns of a single donor).
The largest multilateral agency is the World Bank, which began as the Inter-
national Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) after its founding at a 
conference held in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in July 1944. The word recon-
struction in the IBRD’s title describes its first task, which was to help finance the 
reconstruction of Europe after World War II. The World Bank group today consists 
of five affiliated institutions operating in over 100 countries: the IBRD, the Interna-
tional Development Association (IDA), the International Finance Corporation (IFC), 
the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), and the International Centre 
for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID). Most of the funding provided by the 
World Bank is not foreign aid. The IBRD lends to middle-income countries at market 
rates. It obtains its funds by borrowing on world capital markets then relends them to 
member countries at slightly higher rates. Because the IBRD has an excellent credit 
rating, it is able to borrow and relend to developing countries at cheaper rates than 
the recipients could obtain on their own in private markets. The IFC lends on com-
mercial terms and takes minority equity positions in private companies. The MIGA 
provides guarantees to private foreign investors against loss caused by noncommer-
cial (political) risks, and the ICSID helps settle investment disputes between foreign 
investors and host countries.
South Korea, a newcomer to the Development Assistance Committee (DAC), 
ranked at the bottom, with weak scores on aid, environment, and migration and 
a strong score on technology. Japan, a more established donor, scored 2nd from 
the bottom with low scores in every category but technology. As with any com-
posite ranking, the Commitment to Development Index is far from perfect, and 
different assumptions could change the rankings. Its intent, however, is not to 
be definitive in the rankings but to generate debate and discussion on the many 
different ways in which rich countries affect poor countries and on how the most 
important policies can be improved.
Source: David Roodman, a Senior Fellow at the Center for Global Development, is the architect of 
the index. The 2010 results are available at www.cgdev.org/section/initiatives/_active/cdi, accessed 
February 2012.

W H O  G I V E S  A I D ?   509
The only part of the World Bank that actually provides foreign aid is the IDA. 
Donor governments contribute funds to the IDA, which uses it to provide highly con-
cessional loans and grants to low-income countries. Funds from the IDA are used for 
a wide variety of development purposes, including building roads and ports, fund-
ing agricultural research and extension, purchasing medicines and schoolbooks, and 
training government officials. Its standard loan terms include a “service charge” of less 
than 1 percent per year and a repayment period of between 20 and 40 years, including 
a 10-year “grace” period during which no repayment is required. To be eligible for IDA 
funds today, countries must have (2011) GNI per capita of less than $1,165 (although 
the World Bank makes a few exceptions) and not have access to borrowing on private 
international capital markets. About 80 countries are eligible to borrow from the IDA. 
Among the largest borrowers, including countries that are no longer IDA eligible but 
that were in the past, are India, Vietnam, Tanzania, Ethiopia, and Nigeria. The IDA has 
disbursed about $222 billion since 1960; annual commitments today average close to 
$13 billion, 20 percent of which is in the form of outright grants.
The World Bank is owned and controlled by its 187 member governments, with 
each member having a voting share determined by the size of its shareholding, which 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
Nominal value (current US$)
(left-hand scale)
Percent of GNI
Real value (2007 US$)
(left-hand scale)
Percent of GNI
(right-hand scale)
Billions of US$
FIGURE 14–3 Global Official Development Assistance, 1975–2008
GNI, gross national income.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

510   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
in turn is roughly commensurate with its portion of global gross domestic product. 
The U.S. is the largest shareholder in the IBRD (16 percent). The next-largest share-
holders are Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, and France. China and India each 
have about 2.7 percent of voting shares in the IBRD. There are on-going calls to reap-
portion voting rights away from high-income countries to low- and middle-income 
nations. Some progress has been made in this direction.
The International Monetary Fund was also founded at the 1944 Bretton Woods 
conference.8 The IMF’s original mission was to reestablish an international sys-
tem of stable national currencies as part of an effort to rejuvenate world trade after 
World War II. All the IMF’s early programs were in today’s industrialized countries; 
frequent lending operations occurred with the United States, the United Kingdom, 
France, Germany, and other countries until the early 1970s. The IMF played a very 
8The third organization that was meant to be launched at Bretton Woods was the International Trade 
Organization (ITO). However, the U.S. Congress failed to pass the legislation necessary to ensure U.S. 
 participation, and the ITO never came into existence. Instead, the international community established 
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which was the forerunner of today’s World Trade Organiza-
tion (WTO).
Source: “Group of Eight” cartoon by Dan Wasserman from The Boston Globe, January 1, 2000. Copyright 
© 2000 Boston Globe. All rights reserved. Used by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of 
the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of this Content is prohibited.

W H O  G I V E S  A I D ?   511
limited role in developing countries until the late 1970s and early 1980s, when many 
low-income countries began to face severe balance-of-payments problems and debt 
crises.
Today most of the fund’s operations are in low- or middle-income countries. 
IMF involvement in Greece and Ireland after their financial crises are impor-
tant exceptions. The IMF’s main purpose is to provide temporary financing to 
countries facing significant balance-of-payments problems stemming from a 
sharp fall in export prices, a rise in import prices (for example, from an increase 
in world oil prices), a financial crisis that leads to significant international capi-
tal flight, and other shocks. IMF funds are used to shore up the country’s foreign 
exchange reserves and stabilize the currency, not to finance investment projects 
or consumption. The IMF is concerned primarily with helping countries achieve 
and maintain macroeconomic stability rather than directly supporting economic 
growth and development (although, of course, a stable environment is important 
for long-run growth). To receive IMF financing, countries must agree (sometimes 
controversially) to undertake policy reforms typically aimed at reducing the gov-
ernment budget deficit, tightening monetary policy, increasing the flexibility of the 
exchange rate, and quickly reducing the current account deficit to restore macro-
economic stability.
The vast majority of the IMF’s financing is not foreign aid. For its emergency 
loans (called stand-by credits) it typically lends money for a one- to three-year period 
and charges market interest rates. Only about 10 percent of the IMF’s outstanding 
loans are categorized as ODA, all of it provided to low-income countries. Although 
IMF programs are designed to be short term, in many instances they are renewed for 
many years. The IMF had continuous or nearly continuous programs beginning in 
the 1980s and continuing into the 2000s in Bolivia, Ghana, Malawi, the Philippines, 
Uganda, and several other countries.
Africa, Asia, and Latin America each have their own regional development 
banks: the African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and the Inter-
American Development Bank.9 Like the World Bank, each of the major regional 
banks provides financing on both concessional and nonconcessional terms, 
depending on the income level of the borrower. Regional member countries and 
the major aid donors contribute to the capital of these banks, which also borrow on 
private capital markets to finance “hard” (nonconcessional) loans and receive con-
tributions from aid donors for their “soft” (concessional) loan and grant operations. 
Other multilateral donors include the European Union (EU), the Organization 
of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) Fund, and the Islamic Development 
Bank.
9A fourth, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, finances investment in eastern 
Europe and central Asia, but almost none of its finance is concessional.

512   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
The United Nations also has a range of foreign assistance programs that are of 
a considerably smaller scale than the lending programs of the World Bank or IMF. 
Much of this assistance comes as technical cooperation (consultants, advisers, 
and other expertise), primarily from the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), and the World Health Orga-
nization (WHO). Other United Nations agencies provide grants for development 
projects and humanitarian assistance, including the World Food Program (WFP), the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF, winner of the 1965 Nobel Prize for Peace), 
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
WHO RECEIVES FOREIGN AID?
According to the DAC, over 150 countries and territories around the world are receiv-
ing aid. Table 14–1 shows the largest 10 recipients in 2009, each of which received 
more than $2 billion. Afghanistan topped the list (remember, ODA does not include 
military assistance). Total dollar amounts are important, but they do not tell the 
entire story. On a per capita basis, the aid flows to some of these countries are fairly 
small. Bangladesh received $1.2 billion in ODA, which sounds like a big number, but 
Bangladesh is a very populous country with over 160 million people. ODA inflows 
were equivalent to just a few percent of its GNI, or about $7.50 per Bangladeshi, the 
cost of a few kilograms of rice. But for some recipients with smaller economies, the 
amounts involved are quite large. Sierra Leone received $450 million in 2009 equal 
to 24 percent of its GNI that year. For its almost 6 million people, ODA worked out to 
be about $78 dollars per person, compared to a GNI per capita of $340 in the same 
year. For other (even smaller) countries a little bit of aid goes even farther. Tuvalu, a 
middle-income, island nation in the Pacific Ocean with a population of under 10,000 
received $17 million in aid in 2009, which translated into 44 percent of GNI and over 
$1,700 per Tuvaluan. The difference in the apparent magnitudes of aid measured in 
nominal terms, as a share of GNI and aid per capita, reflects not only the behavior of 
the donors but the size of the population and income level of the recipient countries. 
A high aid to GNI ratio can indicate a large amount of aid, but it can also result from a 
low GNI or small population.
On a regional basis, sub-Saharan African countries received ODA flows averag-
ing 4.9 percent of GNI in 2009, or $53 per person (Table 14–2). Despite the massive 
numbers of people living in absolute poverty in South Asia, exceeding the levels in 
sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia received less than 1 percent of its GNI in ODA, about 
$9 per person. For low-income countries around the world, donors in 2009 provided 
aid averaging about $47 per recipient, an increase from $14 in 2003. What happened 
over the those six years? Did the rich nations suddenly triple their commitment to 
the poorest nations? Not really. Since 2003, India graduated from low- to middle-
income status, significantly raising the aid per capita amounts for low-income 
nations.

W H O  G I V E S  A I D ?   513
TABLE 14–1 Major Official Development Aid Recipients (2009)
RANK 
COUNTRY 
TOTAL ODA (MILLIONS OF CURRENT US$)
 1 
Afghanistan 
6,235
 2 
Ethiopia 
3,820
 3 
Vietnam 
3,744
 4 
West Bank and Gaza 
3,026
 5 
Tanzania 
2,934
 6 
Iraq 
2,791
 7 
Pakistan 
2,781
 8 
India 
2,502
 9 
Côte d’Ivoire 
2,369
 10 
Congo, Dem. Rep. 
2,354
RANK 
COUNTRY 
ODA (PERCENT OF GNI)
 1 
Liberia 
70
 2 
Afghanistan 
45
 3 
Solomon Islands 
44
 4 
Tuvalu 
43
 5 
Burundi 
42
 6 
Micronesia, Fed. Sts. 
41
 7 
Marshall Islands 
32
 8 
Palau 
28
 9 
Sierra Leone 
24
 10 
Congo, Dem. Rep. 
22
RANK 
COUNTRY 
ODA PER CAPITA (MILLIONS OF CURRENT US$)
 1 
Mayotte 
2,751
 2 
Tuvalu 
1,785
 3 
Palau 
1,737
 4 
Marshall Islands 
1,101
 5 
Micronesia, Fed. Sts. 
1,093
 6 
West Bank and Gaza 
748
 7 
Dominica 
533
 8 
Grenada 
463
 9 
Vanuatu 
442
 10 
Kosovo 
437
GNI, gross national income; ODA, official development assistance.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
Generally speaking, aid is an important type of capital flow for low-income coun-
tries, but not most middle-income countries. Aid flows averaged 9.3 percent of GNI 
in low-income countries in 2009 but just 0.1 percent of GNI in upper-middle-income 
countries. As discussed in Chapter 10, in the 1990s private capital flows grew sharply 
in middle-income countries, more than compensating for a fall in aid. In low-income 
countries, private capital rose much more slowly and remained significantly smaller 
than aid.
RANK 
COUNTRY 
TOTAL ODA (MILLIONS OF CURRENT US$)
RANK 
COUNTRY 
ODA (PERCENT OF GNI)
RANK 
COUNTRY 
ODA PER CAPITA (MILLIONS OF CURRENT US$)

514   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
TABLE 14–2 Official Development Aid Receipts by Region and Income, 2009
 
MILLIONS OF US$ 
PERCENT OF GNI 
DOLLARS PER PERSON
Sub-Saharan Africa 
44,553 
4.9 
53
South Asia 
14,607 
0.9 
9
East Asia and Pacific 
10,276 
0.2 
5
Europe and central Asia 
8,101 
0.3 
20
Middle East and North Africa 
13,589 
1.1 
42
Latin America and Caribbean 
9,104 
0.2 
16
Low income 
36,279 
9.3 
47
Lower-middle income 
40,482 
1.1 
17
Upper-middle income 
13,222 
0.1 
5
High income 
433 
0.0 
0.4
GNI, gross national income.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
THE MOTIVATIONS FOR AID
What determines to whom donors provide aid and how much they give? Donors 
have a variety of motivations in providing aid, only some of which are directly related 
to economic development.
FOREIGN POLICY OBJECTIVES AND POLITICAL ALLIANCES There is little ques-
tion that foreign policy and political relationships are the key determinants of aid 
flows. During the cold war, both the United States and the Soviet Union used aid to 
vie for the support of developing countries around the world. The United States pro-
vided significant amounts of aid to countries fighting communist insurgencies with 
little regard as to whether the aid was used for development, including Vietnam in 
the 1960s; Indonesia, the Philippines, and Zaire in the 1970s and 1980s; and several 
countries in Central America in the 1980s. The Soviet Union countered with aid to 
North Korea, Cuba, and countries across Eastern Europe. Both sides vied for support 
in newly independent countries across Africa and used aid to gain support for crucial 
votes in the United Nations or other world bodies. The United States and the Soviet 
Union are not the only countries to have used aid in this kind of competitive way: 
France, Germany, the United Kingdom, Taiwan, and China have used aid (among 
other policy tools) to try to gain support and recognition for their governments from 
countries around the world (Box 14–3).
Many donors provide significant aid to their former colonies as a means of 
retaining some political influence. Being a former colony substantially increases the 
probability of receiving aid flows. Between 1970 and 1994, 99.6 percent of Portugal’s 
aid went to former colonies, whereas 78 percent of aid from the United Kingdom and 

W H O  G I V E S  A I D ?   515
BOX 14–3 CHINA’S FOREIGN AID
China has had a small foreign aid program since the founding of the People’s 
Republic of China in 1949. During the following three decades, China was a low-
income country, with annual foreign exchange earnings of less than $10  billion a 
year, barely enough for China to pay for essential imports. China became a mem-
ber of the World Bank in 1980 and became eligible for International Development 
Association (IDA) loans, with their heavily subsidized interest rates, which were 
available only to low-income countries. During these early decades, Chinese for-
eign aid involved small loans and grants mainly to friendly neighbors (North Korea 
for example) and to countries willing to switch formal diplomatic recognition from 
the Republic of China on Taiwan to the People’s Republic with its capital in Beijing.
This situation began to change in the late 1980s and 1990s and changed 
dramatically in the first decade of the twenty-first century. China does not report 
the specific dollar amounts of its total aid to developing countries nor does it 
give a breakdown of that aid by recipient country. It is also not easy to distin-
guish between what is development aid in accordance with the official definition 
of development assistance as used by international organizations, by which the 
grant proportion of any assistance must be at least 25 percent of the total. Still 
there is no doubt that China’s foreign aid had risen to billions of dollars a year by 
2010. Some of this aid was in the form of outright grants, but much of it took the 
form of heavily subsidized loans from the Export-Import Bank of China. The offi-
cial position of the Chinese government is that developing countries know best 
how foreign aid should be used and therefore the government never attaches 
conditions to its assistance, unlike the World Bank and many bilateral aid agen-
cies that typically require the recipient country to institute particular reforms in 
order to receive aid.
While officially the purpose of Chinese aid is to provide unconditional funds to 
low-income countries to help them raise their incomes, the reality is that much of 
the aid is directed to countries that are important to China’s own development. 
China’s rapid industrialization over the past three decades has turned China into 
one of the world’s largest importers of natural resource products, ranging from 
oil to iron and copper ore and much else. Some of the largest recipients of Chi-
nese foreign aid have been countries in Africa that are exporters of oil or have 
given China the right in their country to explore for oil (Angola, Equatorial Guinea, 
 Ethiopia, and Sudan among others). Many of these countries have repressive 
governments, and China often has been criticized for aiding governments that 
carry out repressive measures against their own people, including in the Darfur 
region of Sudan.
BOX 14–3 CHINA’S FOREIGN AID

516   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
10Alberto Alesina and David Dollar, “Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why?” Journal of Economic 
Growth (March 2000), 33–63.
11Alesina and Dollar, “Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why?,” found that income levels were the 
primary motivation for aid from Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden. 
China’s goal is to obtain the rights to develop and import natural resource 
products from whoever is willing to sell, and ownership and drilling rights are 
seen as a way of securing reliable sources of these products. Aid in turn helps 
acquire those rights. The aid finances large infrastructure construction projects, 
ranging from roads to government buildings and hospitals, often built by Chi-
nese construction companies and with Chinese labor battalions. Many countries 
use their aid programs to support their own economic and geopolitical interests 
abroad so China is not unique in this respect.
Sources: State Council of China, “White Paper: China’s Foreign Aid” China Daily, April 22, 2011; 
Thomas Lum, Hannah Fischer, Julissa Gomez-Granger, and Anne Leland, “China’s Foreign Aid Activi-
ties Africa, Latin America, and Southeast Asia,” Congressional Research Service, Washington, DC, 
February 25, 2009; Robert Rotberg, ed., China into Africa: Trade, Aid and Influence (Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution Press, 2008).
between 50 and 60 percent of aid from Australia, Belgium, and France went to their 
former colonies.10
For the United States, the most important geopolitical concern outside of the cold 
war has been the Middle East. Since 1980, two of the largest recipients of U.S. foreign 
aid (which goes beyond ODA) have been Israel and Egypt because the United States 
provided financial support to back the Camp David peace agreement signed by those 
two countries in November 1979. More recently, the largest U.S. aid recipients are 
countries important to key national security interests, such as Afghanistan, Pakistan, 
and Jordan. Beginning in 2002, Iraq became the largest recipient of U.S. aid (and the 
largest aid recipient in the world), and its reconstruction is likely to become the largest 
single foreign aid program ever recorded. Aid commitments to Iraq began to decline in 
2009 while increasing amounts of development assistance shifted to Afghanistan.
INCOME LEVELS AND POVERTY Income and poverty are important considerations 
in aid allocation, at least for some donors, although not as much as is sometimes 
assumed.11 For many people in rich countries, the main rationale for aid is to help 
those in most need in the poorest countries. Income levels and poverty influence 
both the amount of aid donors provide and the extent of its concessionality. Donors 
generally provide their most concessional aid to the poorest countries and give fewer 

W H O  G I V E S  A I D ?   517
grants and subsidized loans for higher-income countries. Some aid programs are 
designed explicitly with this objective in mind. The World Bank’s IDA program has 
an income ceiling (as do the concessional windows of the regional development 
banks). Once countries reach that ceiling, in most cases, they “graduate” from IDA to 
nonconcessional IBRD loans. Other programs have less formal graduation rules but 
still tend to provide less aid as incomes grow.
As incomes of the poorest countries rise, the composition of their capital inflows 
tends to change, with aid flows declining and private capital inflows increasing. 
Botswana is an example. It received aid flows equivalent to 15 percent of GNI in the 
early 1970s, when its income averaged less than $800 per capita, but with its average 
income now over $6,000, ODA amounts to only a few percent of GNI. But Botswana 
grew rapidly. The transition from high to low aid receipts generally takes many years 
because most nations do not grow as quickly as Botswana did. One study calculated 
that, for the most successful countries, the half-life of aid is about 12 years, meaning 
that aid falls to about 50 percent of its peak level after 12 years and about 25 percent 
of its peak after 24 years.12 So, for many of the poorest countries, a rapid transition to 
private capital flows is unlikely.
COUNTRY SIZE Donors provide much more aid (either as a share of GDP or per per-
son) to smaller countries than to large countries. If donors were concerned strictly 
with allocating aid to where the largest numbers of poor people live, much more aid 
would go to China, India, Indonesia, Bangladesh, and Pakistan. However, the very 
size of some of these countries sometimes daunts donors. They prefer to provide aid 
to smaller countries, where the difference it makes is more noticeable. Aid of $50 mil-
lion would be huge in The Gambia, but would not be noticed in India. For political 
reasons, donors generally want to influence as many countries as possible, which 
tends to lead to a disproportionate amount of aid going to small countries. A vote in 
the UN General Assembly counts the same if it is from a small country or a large one, 
so donors may try to influence as many small countries as possible.
COMMERCIAL TIES Bilateral aid is often designed at least partially to help support 
the economic interests of certain firms or sectors in the donor country. Multilateral 
aid is less prone to these pressures, although by no means immune. Many analysts 
have concluded that commercial ties are an important determinant of Japan’s aid. 
Food donations help support farmers that produce the crops in the United States and 
European Union. Many donors tie portions of their aid to purchases within the donor 
12Michael Clemens and Steven Radelet, “The Millennium Challenge Account: How Much Is Too Much, 
How Long Is Long Enough?” Working Paper No. 23, Center for Global Development, Washington, DC, Feb-
ruary 2003.

518   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
country. Automobiles, airline tickets, and consulting services financed by U.S. foreign 
aid, in most cases, must be purchased from U.S. firms. Tying aid has a long history: 
Much of the machinery and equipment for the Marshall Plan was purchased from 
U.S. companies, and all of it had to be shipped across the Atlantic on U.S. merchant 
vessels. Tying aid probably helps strengthen political support for aid programs within 
donor countries, but it adds to the costs of aid programs and makes them less effec-
tive. One study found that tying aid added 15 to 20 percent to its cost, meaning that 
recipients received less of a benefit from the aid notionally allocated to their country.
DEMOCRACY Historically, donors have provided foreign assistance with little regard 
to whether recipient country governments were authoritarian or democratic. This 
was particularly the case during the cold war, but since the breakup of the Soviet 
Union, donors have tended to increase their aid to countries that have become 
democracies. More aid has been aimed at strengthening fragile democracies, sup-
porting the transition of nondemocracies to democracies, or building democratic 
institutions, including financing for parliaments, election monitoring systems, and 
groups supporting civil rights and free speech. Alberto Alesina and David Dollar, in a 
study covering the years 1970 through 1994, found that the typical country received a 
50 percent increase in aid after switching to become a democracy.
AID, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT
Many people think of foreign aid primarily as either building infrastructure (such as 
roads or dams) or providing emergency humanitarian relief after natural disasters, 
but its purposes often are more diverse. Most foreign aid is designed to meet one or 
more of four broad economic and development objectives:
• To stimulate economic growth through building infrastructure, supporting 
productive sectors such as agriculture, or bringing new ideas and 
technologies.
• To promote other development objectives, such as strengthening 
education, health, environmental, or political systems.
• To support subsistence consumption of food and other commodities, 
especially in emergency situations after natural disasters or humanitarian 
crises.
• To help stabilize an economy after economic shocks.
The extent to which aid has been successful in helping achieve these objectives 
is a matter of continued debate and controversy.
Despite these broader objectives for aid, economic growth has always been the 
main yardstick used to judge aid’s effectiveness, with more aid expected to lead to 
AID, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT

A I D,  G R O W T H,  A N D D E V E L O P M E NT   519
faster growth. But, at a very broad level, there is no apparent simple relationship 
between aid and growth, as shown in Figure 14–4. Some countries that received large 
amounts of aid recorded rapid growth (Sierra Leone), whereas others recorded slow 
or even negative growth (Eritrea). At the same time, some countries that received 
very little aid did very well, whereas others did not (note the scatter of points in 
 Figure 14–4 close to the y-axis.)
What does the absence of a simple relationship mean? For some analysts, it is 
evidence of a failure of aid to achieve its basic objectives. But for others, this simple 
correlation is misleading because other factors affect both aid and growth. Some 
countries that received large amounts of aid may face endemic disease or poor 
 geography or may be emerging from long-standing civil conflict, in which case aid 
might have a positive impact on growth even if the overall growth performance 
remains weak. Or the causality could run in the opposite direction: Donors give more 
aid to countries with slow growth rates and much less to rapid growers like China. 
These analysts suggest that, once these other factors are taken into consideration, a 
positive relationship emerges. Still others conclude that aid works well under cer-
tain circumstances but fails in others. Aid might help spur growth in countries with 
FIGURE 14–4 Foreign Aid and Growth, 1999–2008
GNI, gross national income; ODA, official development assistance.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
Armenia
Sierra Leone
Nicaragua
Vietnam
Eritrea
0
5
10
15
20
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Net ODA received (% of GNI)
GDP per capita growth (%)

520   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
reasonably good economic policies but fail to do so where corruption is rife and the 
economy is badly mismanaged. In this view, while the overall trend line is important, 
the variance around the trend and the reasons for that variance are also critical in 
understanding the true underlying relationships.
Debate on these issues has been ongoing for many years, and continues today. 
There is general agreement on some broad issues. Even aid pessimists (at least most 
of them) agree that aid has been successful in some countries (such as in Botswana 
or Indonesia or more recently in Mozambique and Tanzania), that aid has helped 
improve health by supplying essential medicines, and that aid is an important vehi-
cle in providing emergency relief after natural disasters. Similarly, aid optimists con-
cede that much aid has been wasted or stolen, such as by the Marcos regime in the 
Philippines and the Duvalier regime in Haiti, and that, even under the best circum-
stances, aid can have adverse incentives on economic activity. Debate continues on 
the overall general trends, the conditions under which aid works or does not work, 
and on what steps can be taken to make aid more effective. Empirical evidence is 
mixed, with different studies reaching different conclusions depending on the time 
frame, countries involved, and assumptions underlying the research. We summarize 
these by looking at three views on aid and growth.
VIEW 1. ALTHOUGH NOT ALWAYS SUCCESSFUL, 
ON AVERAGE, AID HAS A POSITIVE IMPACT ON 
ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
The clearest economic rationale for aid is to promote growth by financing new invest-
ment, especially investment in public goods. Aid used to build roads, ports, elec-
tricity generators, schools, and other infrastructure augments the process of capital 
accumulation, which (if the investments are productive) should accelerate the rate 
of growth. This motivation for aid has been invoked since the Marshall Plan. Indeed, 
early analyses of foreign aid, such as Walt Rostow’s popular 1960 book The Stages of 
Economic Growth, saw aid wholly in terms of financing investment and adding to 
the capital stock.13 This idea is fully consistent with the Harrod-Domar model, which 
views capital formation as the main driver of growth, as well as with the Solow model, 
which sees capital accumulation as important for growth, albeit with diminishing 
returns and with a strong role for new technology. In the context of these models, aid 
adds to the total amount of saving, which increases investment and the capital stock, 
which in turn accelerates the rate of economic growth.14
13W. W. Rostow, The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1960).
14As discussed in Chapter 4, in the Harrod-Domar model the effect is a permanent increase in the 
growth rate; in the Solow model it is a transitory increase in the growth rate until the economy achieves a 
new steady level of output.

A I D,  G R O W T H,  A N D D E V E L O P M E NT   521
In this view, poor countries are unable to generate sufficient amounts of saving 
on their own to finance the investment necessary to initiate growth, or if they do they 
can finance only very slow growth. As discussed in Chapter 10, saving rates tend to 
be low in the very poorest countries, and even where they are moderately high, the 
actual amount of saving is low. A country with per capita income of $200 and a saving 
rate of 10 percent generates saving of $20 per person per year, which cannot purchase 
much in terms of capital goods. In the strongest version of this view, the poorest 
countries may be stuck in a poverty trap, in which their income is too low to gener-
ate the saving necessary to initiate the process of sustained growth.15 Total saving may 
be too small to compensate for depreciation, let alone add to the capital stock. In a 
more moderate version, the poorest countries may be able to save enough to begin to 
grow, but only at very slow rates. Thus aid flows provide a way to augment domestic 
saving and accelerate the growth process.
Aid can also support growth by building knowledge and transferring new ideas, 
technology, and best practices from one country to another. Some aid helps sup-
port research in low-income countries that can accelerate the pace of growth. One 
of the best examples is aid-funded research in the 1960s and 1970s on new varieties 
of seeds, fertilizers, and pesticides that helped transform agriculture in Asia through 
what became known as the green revolution. Similarly, a significant portion of aid 
finances advisers and technical assistance that ultimately is aimed at strengthening 
institutions and increasing productivity. This kind of aid, when it is effective, can be 
thought of as shifting the production function upward, thereby helping increase the 
rate of growth.16
The majority of studies, although far from all, find a positive relationship 
between aid and growth, on average, after controlling for the impact of other factors 
on growth.17 In particular, beginning in the mid-1990s researchers began to investi-
gate whether aid might spur growth, albeit with diminishing returns—that is, small 
amounts of aid might have a relatively large impact on growth, but each additional 
dollar of aid might have less effect. This may seem like an obvious point because it is 
the standard assumption about capital accumulation in most growth models (such 
as the Solow model), but it is surprising that earlier research tested only a linear 
relationship. Many (but not all) of the studies that allow for diminishing returns and 
control for other variables find a positive relationship, on  average, between total aid 
15See Jeffrey Sachs et al., “Ending Africa’s Poverty Trap,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (2004), 
117–240.
16In the Solow model, the increase in the rate of growth lasts only during the transition to a new steady-
state level of income.
17For a recent review of the research, see Michael Clemens, Steven Radelet, Rikhil Bhavnani, and Samuel 
Bazzi, “Counting Chickens When They Hatch: Timing and the Effects of Aid on Growth,” Economic Journal. 
Published electronically December 1, 2011. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1468-0297.2011
.02482.x/full.

522   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
and growth.18 In terms of Figure 14–4, these studies find that other variables, such as 
geography, political conflict, policies, and institutions explain much of the variance 
in growth rates among aid recipients. They conclude that, after controlling for these 
variables and allowing for diminishing returns, a positive relationship between aid 
and growth emerges, albeit with important variance around the trend line. This view 
is captured by Figure 14–5a. But as we shall see, other research reached different con-
clusions, so the debate about the relationship between aid and growth remains open.
In addition, for defenders of View 1, aid can have a positive impact on other 
important development objectives that may affect growth only indirectly or affect it 
only after a long period of time, such as health, education, or the environment. Simi-
larly, it can provide emergency assistance or humanitarian relief or be used to help 
achieve macroeconomic stability. We briefly review each of these in turn.
PROMOTING HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND THE ENVIRONMENT Nearly half of all aid 
flows are aimed at improving health, education, the environment, and other objec-
tives. Aid that finances immunizations, medical supplies, medicines, bed nets (to 
prevent the spread of malaria), clean water, and school supplies is meant to help 
provide essential goods and services to people too poor to afford them. In economic 
terms, most of these kinds of expenditures count as additions to consumption rather 
than investment (although some aid for education and health, such as building 
schools and clinics, count as investment).
Economic growth is often a secondary, long-term objective of this kind of aid. 
Healthier, better-educated workers should be more productive, shifting the produc-
tion function and expanding output and income. A similar argument can be made for 
at least some aid aimed at protecting the environment. Improving forest or fisheries 
management, cleaning water supplies, or reducing air pollution can improve welfare 
and increase productivity over time. The impact on growth, however, can take a long 
time to materialize. Programs to immunize children or improve the quality of pri-
mary schools do not affect labor productivity until these children join the workforce, 
which is many years after the aid was received.
Research on the relationship between aid and other development outcomes 
tends to concentrate on evaluating specific projects and interventions rather than 
broad cross-country trends. As with growth, in many cases, aid appears to have had 
18Cross-country econometric studies that allow for diminishing returns typically do so by including 
both aid and aid squared as determinants of growth. This specification yields a parabola in which aid has 
a positive effect on growth with diminishing returns, but in theory, with enough aid, the marginal impact 
could be negative. However, in these studies, the data points are concentrated on the upward portion 
of the curve, so they do not conclude that large amounts of aid have a negative impact. See, for exam-
ple, Carl-Johan Dalgaard, Henrik Hansen, and Finn Tarp, “On the Empirics of Foreign Aid and Growth,” 
Economic Journal 114, no. 496 (2004), 191–216; Robert Lensink and Howard White, “Are There Negative 
Returns to Aid?” Journal of Development Studies 37, no. 6 (2001), 42–65; Henrik Hansen, and Finn Tarp, 
“Aid and Growth Regressions,” Journal of Development Economics 64 (2001), 547–70.

A I D,  G R O W T H,  A N D D E V E L O P M E NT   523
FIGURE 14–5 Three Views on Aid and Growth
(a) View 1: Aid has a positive impact on growth with diminishing returns 
after controlling for the impact of other variables. (b) View 2: Aid has little or 
no impact on growth and may have a negative impact. (c) View 3: Aid has a 
positive impact on growth in some circumstances (circles) but no impact in 
others (squares).
GDP, gross domestic product.
(a)
Aid/GDP
Growth
(b)
Aid/GDP
Growth
(c)
Aid/GDP
Growth
a strong impact on health and education, along with many interventions that failed. 
Perhaps the best documented are aid-financed interventions in health. A group 
of experts convened by the Center for Global Development documented 17 cases 
of large health interventions in developing countries that have been very success-
ful in improving health outcomes and saving lives, several of which are discussed in 

524   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
BOX 14–4  CONTROLLING RIVER BLINDNESS 
IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
Onchocerciasis, or river blindness, is a pernicious, parasitic disease that afflicts 
approximately 18 million people worldwide, with well over 99 percent of its vic-
tims in sub-Saharan Africa. Spread through the bite of an infected blackfly living 
near fast-moving waters, river blindness causes symptoms such as disabling itch-
ing, rashes, muscle pain, skin lesions, and in its most severe cases, blindness.
In 1974, governments and donors in 11 West African countries jointly launched 
the Onchocerciasis Control Programme. At the time, 2.5 million of the area’s 
30 million inhabitants were infected with the disease, and approximately 100,000 
were blind. The primary intervention was weekly aerial spraying of larvicide dur-
ing rainy seasons along the region’s waterways to control the disease-spreading 
blackflies. The aerial spraying, augmented by hand spraying of breeding grounds, 
persisted even through civil and regional conflicts and coups. In 1987, the pro-
gram began distributing the drug ivermectin, which treats the disease’s symp-
toms with a single annual dose.
The program was implemented through unusual cooperation between several 
governments and a wide range of donors. It was launched under the leader-
ship of the World Health Organization, the World Bank, the Food and Agricul-
ture Organization, and the United Nations Development Programme. A total of 
22 donor countries contributed $560 million to support the 28-year project, with 
much of the financing provided through long-term commitments. The pharma-
ceutical company Merck & Co. donated ivermectin to the program beginning in 
1987, pledging to provide it to anyone that needed it as long as they needed it, 
making the donation program one of the largest public—private partnerships ever 
BOX 14–4  CONTROLLING RIVER BLINDNESS
IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
Chapter 9 and in Box 14–4.19 A massive global effort spearheaded by the World Health 
Organization succeeded in completely eradicating smallpox from the world in 1977, 
perhaps the greatest public health achievement ever. A worldwide effort to fight 
polio, supported by both government aid agencies and private donors such as Rotary 
International, succeeded in nearly eliminating the disease. The introduction of oral 
rehyrdration therapy has saved millions of lives after being developed first in East 
Pakistan (now Bangladesh) in the 1970s. In Egypt, a donor-funded oral rehydration 
program helped reduce infant diarrheal deaths by an astonishing 82 percent between 
1982 and 1987.
19Ruth Levine with Molly Kinder, Millions Saved: Proven Success in Global Health (Washington, DC: 
Center for Global Development, 2004).

A I D,  G R O W T H,  A N D D E V E L O P M E NT   525
There have also been several successful education initiatives.20 A girls’ pri-
mary school education initiative in Balochistanm, Pakistan, led to a tripling of the 
number of schools, a more than doubling of girls’ enrollment, and an increase in 
the girls’ primary school completion rate from 7 to 30 percent between 1990 and 
1998. In Ethiopia, a systemwide set of education reforms implemented in the 1990s 
with the support of USAID, the World Bank, and UNICEF led to the construction of 
many new schools, increasing the number of teachers and improving their train-
ing, and expanding the availability of textbooks. Between 1991 and 2001, the over-
all primary school enrollment ratio increased from 20 to 57 percent, and the girls’ 
enrollment ratio jumped from 12 to 47 percent. In Indonesia, donors partially sup-
ported the construction of over 61,000 primary schools in the mid-1970s, which 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) economist Esther Duflo showed led 
to significant increases in educational attainment and increased wages for school 
graduates.21
created. Governments and nongovernmental organizations in the recipient coun-
tries were critical to implementing the program effectively.
The program achieved impressive success between 1974 and its conclusion 
in 2002: Transmission was halted completely in all 11 West African countries 
involved, 600,000 cases of blindness were prevented, and 18 million children 
born in the program area are now free from the risk of the disease. In addition to 
the striking health benefits, the economic impact has been impressive. An esti-
mated 25 million hectares of arable land, enough to feed 17 million people, are 
now safe for resettlement. In Burkina Faso, 15 percent of the country’s land that 
had been deserted because of onchocerciasis has been completely reclaimed, 
and its new residents now enjoy a thriving agricultural economy.
The program was extremely cost-effective, with a yearly cost of less than 
$1 per protected person. The World Bank calculated that the annual return on 
investment (attributable mainly to increased agricultural output) to be 20 percent, 
and it is estimated that $3.7 billion will be generated from improved labor and 
agricultural productivity.
Source: Ruth Levine with Molly Kinder, Millions Saved: Proven Success in Global Health (Wash-
ington, DC: Center for Global Development, 2004), chap. 6.
20For a summary of successful education interventions, see Maria Beatriz Orlando, “Success Stories 
in Policy Interventions towards High Quality Universal Primary Education” (Washington, DC: Center for 
Global Development, 2004).
21Esther Duflo, “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in Indonesia: 
 Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment” American Economic Review 91 (September 2001).

526   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
These individual success stories only tell part of the story. There also have been 
many failures, where donors provided funding for health and education reforms 
that did not happen, for technical assistance that did not help, or for interven-
tions that led to little change in health or education. But beyond case studies, little 
systematic evidence has been gathered on the circumstances under which aid-
financed interventions in health and education have been successful and where 
they have not.
PROVIDING EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE AND HUMANITARIAN RELIEF About one 
tenth of all foreign aid provides emergency relief after natural disasters or humani-
tarian crises. Relief programs after earthquakes, floods, or other disasters typically 
provide food, clothing, basic medicines and drugs, and other items to help meet sub-
sistence needs. Similarly, humanitarian aid assists people living in refugee camps 
and those displaced by war or other conflict. From an economic point of view, most 
of this aid is meant to support basic consumption rather than investment and growth, 
although some of it is used to rebuild ruined infrastructure and help output from col-
lapsing further than it otherwise might following disasters.
SUPPORTING ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL STABILITY Some aid is provided to help 
countries facing macroeconomic instability. A fall in export prices, a rise in import 
prices, or an economic shock, such as a drought, flood, or earthquake, can lead to a 
sharp depreciation of the exchange rate, which in turn can ripple through the econ-
omy and increase the prices of traded goods and services. Aid inflows add to the sup-
ply of foreign exchange and can help moderate the pressure on the exchange rate. 
The IMF plays the leading role in this area, with other donors such as the World Bank 
providing supporting funds. Aid flows that are a response to a macroeconomic cri-
sis or a natural disaster, as described in the previous paragraph, are inversely corre-
lated with economic growth. Growth falls because of the crisis, and aid increases as a 
result. These situations account for some of the “below-the-line” cases in Figure 14–4, 
where aid is associated with very low or even negative GDP growth. But because aid 
is responding to the low growth, these cases should not be seen as examples of a fail-
ure of aid to promote growth and development.
VIEW 2. AID HAS LITTLE OR NO EFFECT ON GROWTH 
AND ACTUALLY MAY UNDERMINE GROWTH
How could aid have no impact or a negative impact on growth, as suggested by Fig-
ure  14–5b? One simple way is if most of it simply is wasted. If donors build large 
bureaucracies or spend the money on expensive technical experts from their home 
country that write reports no one reads, aid will not help growth. Aid that winds up 
in the personal off-shore bank accounts of government officials or finances a fleet 
of expensive cars for members of parliament creates little stimulus to growth. If aid 

A I D,  G R O W T H,  A N D D E V E L O P M E NT   527
builds a road but provides no funds for maintenance, there may be an initial burst 
of output, but this could be followed by a decline back to previous levels as the road 
deteriorates. Because donors typically like to finance capital costs of new projects but 
not maintenance, this is a common problem.
More insidious, if aid breeds corruption, government officials and their cronies 
spend their time plotting about how to siphon aid money to their own bank accounts 
rather than increasing output. Aid funds used to pay private contractors for construc-
tion projects or delivery of services can create opportunities for kickbacks and other 
illegal activities, just like any other public funds. One of the strongest critiques of aid 
and how it might undermine development is that it can prop up malevolent dicta-
tors and support political regimes that further impoverish rather than help the poor. 
U.S. aid to the Marcos regime in the Philippines during the 1970s and 1980s, for 
example, may have helped support an anticommunist ally but probably also length-
ened the time in which his corrupt regime remained in power. The same argument 
can be made about aid in the 1970s and 1980s to the Central African Republic, Haiti, 
or Zaire.
But even if aid is not simply wasted or misused, it could have a smaller than 
expected impact on growth because of diminishing returns to investment as the 
recipient begins to reach its absorptive capacity. Government bureaucracies with 
relatively few skilled workers might have difficulty overseeing and managing larger 
and larger aid flows. Purchases of commodities and supplies might strain available 
warehouses or delivery systems. Large donations of medicines might sit unused 
because they cannot be delivered on time to clinics. In the long run, an increase 
in aid flows may help expand absorptive capacity because it can be used to train 
and hire more workers, expand warehouse facilities, or build infrastructure to ease 
bottlenecks, but in the meantime, the impact of aid may be diminished by these 
constraints.
Perhaps the most important way in which aid could slow growth is by undermin-
ing incentives for private sector activity. Large aid flows can spur inflation and cause 
a real appreciation of the exchange rate, which reduces the profitability of production 
of all tradable goods. Aid flows can enlarge the size of the government and related 
services supporting aid projects, drawing workers and investment away from other 
productive activities such as agro-processing, garments, or footwear exports, which 
have been important engines for growth in many countries. These “Dutch disease” 
effects are usually associated with revenues from natural resource export booms 
(Chapter 18), but can result from aid flows as well. Some analysts believe that large 
aid flows to Ghana in the late 1980s and early 1990s undermined export incentives.22 
Similarly, food aid can sometimes undermine local food production, as discussed in 
Box 14–5.
22See Stephen Younger, “Aid and the Dutch Disease: Macroeconomic Management When Everybody 
Loves You,” World Development 20, no. 11 (November 1992), 1587–97.

528   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
BOX 14–5  FOOD AID AND FOOD PRODUCTION
For many people, it seems obvious that donating food is a good way for rich coun-
tries to help poor countries. Although sometimes that is true, under certain circum-
stances, donations of food can hurt local farmers by undermining the incentives 
for them to produce food. If all food is produced locally (that is, there are no 
imports), then an increase in food from aid donations can shift out the supply 
curve for food and drive down food prices, benefiting consumers but hurting 
farmers, as shown in Figure 14–6a. In an economy with no commercial imports, 
food aid shifts the supply curve for food from S1 to S2, causing the price to fall 
from P0 to P1. Producers react by reducing output from Q0 to Q1, whereas con-
sumers increase consumption from Q0 to Q2, with food aid of Q2 - Q1 filling the 
gap. Consumers are clearly better off (important if there is a true food shortage) 
while producers are worse off.
In an economy that produces some food but imports on the margin, the out-
come is different, as shown in Figure 14-6b. With a world price of Pw, initial pro-
duction takes place at Q3 with consumption at Q4 and imports of Q4 - Q3. In 
this situation, food aid displaces imports, with imports falling to Q4 - Q5 and 
food aid making up the difference Q5 - Q3. Domestic prices, food production, 
and consumption do not change, with food aid, in effect, saving the economy the 
cost of the displaced imported food.
BOX 14–5  FOOD AID AND FOOD PRODUCTION
PW
(b)
Domestic
supply
World
supply
Q
P
1P
0P
1Q
1D
1S
2S
Q
P
1D
1S
2S
0Q
2Q
3
Q
5Q
4Q
(a)
FIGURE 14–6 Food Aid, Prices, and Production
(a) Food aid and production in the absence of imports: Food aid lowers prices, benefiting consumers 
but displacing local production. (b) Food aid and production with imports: Food aid adds to the total 
supply without affecting prices or displacing production.

A I D,  G R O W T H,  A N D D E V E L O P M E NT   529
AID, SAVING, AND TAX REVENUE Aid could also have a smaller-than-expected effect 
on growth if it has an adverse impact on saving and investment. Early analysts 
assumed that, because aid is a form of foreign saving, each dollar of aid would add 
one full dollar to investment. But this is unlikely to happen, for at least two reasons. 
First, as mentioned previously, not all aid is provided as investment goods or even 
aimed at increasing investment and growth. Second, even where aid is aimed directly 
at investment, the impact could be partially offset by a reduction in either private sav-
ing (through a decline in the rate of return on private investment) or government 
 saving (through a fall in tax revenues). If a country that currently invests $100 million 
per year receives $10 million in new aid for investment (for example, building roads), 
it is highly unlikely that total investment will reach $110 million. It is far more likely 
that, with $10 million in new investment, some of the original $100 million will be 
shifted into consumption.
The impact of aid on saving is illustrated in Figure 14–7. Before the recipient 
country obtains aid, it can produce consumption goods and capital goods along the 
production possibilities frontier P. To simplify, the diagram ignores international 
trade and other capital inflows, so that consumption initially also must take place 
somewhere along the production frontier. Community tastes are defined by a set of 
indifference curves, of which two are shown (labeled I and II). The country’s welfare 
is maximized if it produces and consumes at point A, where the indifference curve I 
is tangent to the frontier P, with consumption at C1 and investment (and saving) at I1. 
FIGURE 14–7 Impact of Aid on Investment and Consumption
Foreign aid totaling AB turns into actual new investment of only AE because 
the country maximizes welfare on the new frontier, P, at point D, not B. P is 
not really a production frontier but a supply frontier.
Source: Adapted from Paul Mosley, “Aid, Savings and Growth Revisited,” Oxford Bulletin of 
Economics and Statistics 42 (May 1980), 79–91.
A
D
E
B
P'
P
Investment goods
Consumption goods
II
I
2I
1I
3I
1C
3C

530   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
Now donor countries contribute an amount AB of aid with the intention that it be 
used to raise investment to I2. However, the aid moves the consumption frontier out-
ward from P to P. Now, the country maximizes its welfare at point D, the tangency 
between P and indifference curve I2, where it consumes C3 and invests I3. Of the aid 
amount AB, AE (equal to I3 - I1) is invested and “BE” (equal to I2 - I3) is consumed. 
Even if all the new aid money is invested as intended, some of what the country had 
invested before is shifted to consumption, so in effect, the aid finances an increase in 
both investment and consumption, with the precise impact depending on produc-
tion possibilities, community tastes, and other variables left out of the figure, such as 
trade. Aid may finance mostly investment if I3 - I1 is a large percentage of total aid 
(AB), or it may mostly finance consumption if I3 - I1 is a small percentage of AB.
Why would the country react in this way and not invest all the aid it receives? 
Saving always requires a sacrifice of current consumption, based on the anticipation 
that investment will lead to increased output and greater consumption in the future. 
When the country receives a new inflow of aid, investment increases and the country 
is less willing to sacrifice that last dollar of today’s consumption to finance the last 
dollar of investment. Thus domestic saving falls somewhat, although with the addi-
tion of foreign saving from aid total saving (and investment) rises.
When substitutions of these kinds are possible and aid effectively finances activi-
ties for which it was not originally intended, aid is said to be fungible. This kind of sub-
stitution could be good or bad, depending how the money is spent. If donor funds to 
build a school allow members of the community to save less and purchase more food, 
clothing, and medicine for their families, few donors would take issue. But if instead 
the freed-up funds are used to buy several Mercedes Benzes for the mayor and his or 
her staff, donors are likely to be unhappy and economic development is not served.
Aid given as a cash transfer to the budget or as program aid rather than for a 
specific project deliberately gives the recipient the kinds of choices demonstrated in 
Figure 14–7. But even if all aid is used for very specific investment projects and the 
donor audits projects to confirm that the money was spent as planned, substitution 
is possible. Project aid might be used, for example, for investment projects that the 
government would have made without aid. In that case, the government’s resources 
are freed up for other purposes. If the government is intending to build an electric-
ity generator with its own funds, then a donor decides to provide the funding, the 
government’s money is freed up for any purpose the government wishes. Even if aid 
finances projects the government was not planning to implement, the government 
might simply cut back on other projects because it wants to raise the share of con-
sumption for economic or political reasons.
The tendency for aid flows to “stick” as increased government expenditures, 
rather than result in tax relief or offsetting expenditure reductions in other areas, is 
sometimes called the flypaper effect. Several studies find that $1 in aid translates to 
less than $1 in government spending, typically in the range of 33 to 67 cents on the 
dollar. But some studies for specific countries find a strong flypaper effect, with $1 of 

A I D,  G R O W T H,  A N D D E V E L O P M E NT   531
23See World Bank, Assessing Aid: What Works, What Doesn’t, and Why (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1998); Tarhan Feyzioglu, Vinaya Swaroop, and Min Zhu, “A Panel Data Analysis of the Fungibility 
of Foreign Aid,” World Bank Economic Review 12, no. 1 (1998). For the study on Indonesia, see Howard 
Pack and Janet Rothenberg Pack, “Is Foreign Aid Fungible? The Case of Indonesia,” Economic Journal 100 
(March 1990).
24Mark McGillvary and Oliver Morrisey, “A Review of the Evidence on the Fiscal Effects of Aid,” Research 
Paper no. 01/13 Center for Research in Economic Development and International Trade, Nottingham, UK, 
2001. For a classic model on these effects, see Peter Heller, “A Model of Public Fiscal Behavior in Develop-
ing Countries: Aid, Investment, and Taxation,” American Economic Review 65 (1975), 429–45.
aid translating into close to $1 of new spending. One study on Indonesia found that 
$1 in aid led to $1.50 in government expenditures, suggesting that aid “crowded in” 
government spending, perhaps by relieving constraints that were limiting govern-
ment spending.23
Aid flows can similarly influence government revenues. A government that receives 
aid flows is likely to be less willing to raise marginal tax revenue from the general public, 
especially because taxes are not politically popular. A government without aid inflows 
might be willing to raise taxes to finance a new hospital, but if a donor finances the 
hospital, the government has much less incentive to raise the revenue. However, aid 
could help increase revenues if donors require governments to provide matching funds 
for a particular activity; if aid helped governments introduce institutional changes to 
strengthen the tax authority, or in the case of loans, governments knew they would 
need revenues in the future to repay the loans. The empirical evidence on this effect is 
mixed: In some countries, aid inflows corresponded with increased revenues, whereas 
in other cases, revenues declined.24 Where revenues declined, the reduction may ben-
efit ordinary citizens, who can save and consume more for their own purposes, which 
could help accelerate economic growth. Or it may be directed to individuals or busi-
nesses with special connections to the government.
Private saving might also be affected by aid inflows. A host of subtle influences 
from aid on relative prices may contribute to substitution that reduces private sav-
ing and crowds out private sector investment. Aid inflows could reduce interest rates, 
which in turn could reduce private saving. If investment is subject to diminishing 
returns, more capital in general could mean lower returns on investments and hence 
a greater tendency to consume rather than save in the recipient countries.
It is difficult, if not impossible, for donors to stop this substitution, although they 
may be able to limit it to some extent. Research suggests that aid funds are fungible, 
at least partially, meaning that recipients, to some extent, can substitute aid funds 
from their intended purpose to something else. However, the evidence suggests that 
aid is not perfectly fungible: Much of it goes to its intended purpose, and recipients 
cannot or do not transform all aid flows into other purposes.
AID DEPENDENCY Some analysts argue that aid loses some of its  effectiveness 
when aid flows are relatively large for long periods of time, because prices, institu-
tions, and expectations adjust to that level and, to some extent, recipients become 

532   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
dependent on aid. This situation can raise several challenges. First, the larger the 
amount of aid, the greater is the risk of a sudden reduction in aid. Aid flows tend 
to be more erratic than domestic revenues, and the degree of volatility increases 
with greater dependence on aid.25 If donors suddenly reduce aid, whether 
because they face budget cutbacks, in response to a corruption scandal, a change 
in government, or for some other reason, the macroeconomic consequences can 
be difficult to manage. Second, large aid flows give donors substantial leverage 
over the recipient, so that recipients become more willing to introduce whatever 
conditions the donors require, good or bad, to ensure that the aid continues to 
be disbursed. Aid flows thus can weaken public accountability and impede the 
development of civil society, if the recipient government becomes more respon-
sive to the donors than to its own citizens.
As recipients become more dependent on aid, the process of gradually reduc-
ing aid over time as development proceeds becomes more difficult. If aid finances 
public expenditure, a reduction of aid must be matched with either an increase 
in revenue or a reduction in expenditure, neither of which is particularly easy 
or politically popular (although raising revenue is made easier by the process of 
economic growth). The incentives are strong for recipients to continue to request 
aid for as long as possible and resist these adjustments. Egypt has been one of the 
world’s largest aid recipients since 1980, and some observers believe that these 
inflows have taken the pressure off of the government to reduce wasteful expen-
ditures and introduce other needed reforms. The downfall in 2011 of the Egyptian 
government of Hosni Mubarak, in part, may have been an indirect result of these 
consequences of aid.
Aid programs may actually weaken the institutions that society needs to enhance 
the process of development and reduce the need for aid. Budget institutions might be 
weakened by aid, especially if most aid is disbursed as projects with the money not 
flowing through the budget. Aid agencies need qualified accounts, economists, and 
financial specialists to design, monitor, and evaluate their projects. By increasing the 
demand for these skills, aid agencies bid up their wages, making them more expen-
sive for everyone else, including the government (not to mention domestic firms). Aid 
agencies sometimes recruit the most able and promising local staff, leaving govern-
ment agencies and the rest of the economy with less-qualified (and usually lower-
paid) staff. In Mozambique, after the end of its civil war in the early 1990s, donors 
came flooding into the country and recruited many of the most-capable government 
workers, paying upward of five times the government salary and sometimes more than 
private sector salaries. But the departure of some of its most talented staff deprived 
the government of needed skills, and weakened government effectiveness as a result.26
25Aleš Bluír and Javier Hamann, “How Volatile and Unpredictable Are Aid Flows, and What Are the Pol-
icy Implications?” IMF Working Paper No. 01/167, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC, 2001.
26Peter Fallon and Luiz Pereira da Silva, “Recognizing Labor Market Constraints: Government-Donor 
Competition for Manpower in Mozambique,” in D. Lindauer and B. Nunberg, eds., Rehabilitating Govern-
ment (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1994).

A I D,  G R O W T H,  A N D D E V E L O P M E NT   533
This process is not limited to the budget office: It can affect the central bank, the 
ministry of health (which might lose physicians or epidemiologists), the ministry 
of education, and other agencies. Aid agencies might be able partially to counter-
vail these tendencies by supplying technical assistance to train government workers 
(although some then take other jobs) or otherwise strengthen institutional systems. 
Over time, there may be some benefit, as the increased wages entice more school 
graduates to become accountants and financial experts. In any case, aid agencies 
often do not take into account these possible deleterious impacts.
To some extent, the dependency can work both ways, as aid agencies become 
accustomed to operating large-scale programs. Donor agencies, in effect, are asked 
to work themselves out of their jobs by making aid less necessary and less important 
over time. But, like any agency, most aid agencies like to be bigger and have more aid 
flows to disburse. Individuals working on specific projects often like to see them con-
tinued over time; and the larger the programs, the more influence they may have over 
government policy choices. Promotions and other rewards often are geared to the 
size of the aid program they manage. Thus the incentives facing the donors some-
times encourage dependency between donor and recipient.
Proponents of View 2 point to a body of research that finds little relationship 
between aid and growth. Keith Griffin and John Enos were among the first to report 
empirical research questioning the effectiveness of aid, finding negative simple cor-
relations between aid and growth in 27 countries. Since then, other studies con-
cluded that there is no relationship or even a negative relationship between aid and 
growth,27 in contrast to the studies cited earlier that support View 1.
VIEW 3. AID HAS A CONDITIONAL RELATIONSHIP 
WITH GROWTH, STIMULATING GROWTH ONLY UNDER 
CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES, SUCH AS IN COUNTRIES 
WITH GOOD POLICIES OR INSTITUTIONS
This perspective begins by accepting the idea that aid has had mixed results: Even 
where research has found a generally positive relationship, no one claims that aid 
has worked across all countries all the time. It recognizes that aid seems to have 
stimulated growth in some countries under certain circumstances but not in others 
and focuses on trying to decipher the key characteristics that might explain these 
27See, for example, K. B. Griffin and J. L. Enos, “Foreign Assistance: Objectives and Consequences,” 
Economic Development and Cultural Change 18, no. 2 (July 1970), 313–27; Paul Mosley, “Aid, Savings, and 
Growth Revisited,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 42, no. 2 (1980), 79–96; Peter Boone, “The 
Impact of Foreign Aid on Savings and Growth,” Working Paper no. 677, Centre for Economic Performance, 
London School of Economics, London, 1994; William Easterly, Ross Levine, and David Roodman, “New 
Data, New Doubts: A Comment on Burnside and Dollar’s ‘Aid, Politics, and Growth,’” American Economic 
Review 94, no. 3 (June 2004); David Roodman, “The Anarchy of Numbers: Aid, Development, and Cross-
Country Empirics,” Working Paper no. 32, Center for Global Development, Washington, DC, July 2003. For 
a review, see Clemens et al., “Counting Chickens When They Hatch.”

534   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
differences. This view is represented by Figure 14–5c. Three “conditional” explana-
tions have emerged, suggesting that the relationship between aid and growth might 
depend on the characteristics of the recipient country, the type of aid being provided, 
or the way in which donors provide it.
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE RECIPIENT COUNTRY The most influential of the con-
ditional perspectives is that the impact of aid depends on the quality of institutions and 
policies in the recipient country. According to this view, in countries with poor macro-
economic and trade policies, high levels of corruption, and low accountability of gov-
ernment officials, aid is likely to have little or no impact. By contrast, in countries with 
reasonably good policies and institutions, aid programs can help accelerate growth. 
Jonathan Isham, Daniel Kaufmann, and Lant Pritchett initiated this line of research by 
finding that rates of return on aid-financed investments were higher in countries with 
strong civil liberties and other measures of governance. Craig Burnside and David Dol-
lar took the next step by finding a significant positive relationship between aid and 
growth in countries with good policies and institutions and no relationship otherwise.28 
Other researchers explored the possibility that the impact of aid may differ depending 
on the type of government, quality of human capital, location in the tropics (presumably 
a proxy for health), the magnitude and frequency of export shocks, and other factors.
Although subsequent analysis cast doubt on some of these results, the idea has 
had an enormous influence on donor policies, probably because the conclusions of 
a differential effect are consistent with the experience of many development profes-
sionals. These findings have led to a shift among donors to be more “selective” in 
allocating foreign aid, to provide more of it to countries with relatively stronger insti-
tutions and policies, as we discuss later in the chapter.
TYPE OF AID Different kinds of aid might affect growth in different ways. One study 
disaggregated aid flows into those most likely and least likely to affect growth within a 
few years, if at all.29 It separated aid into three categories:
• Emergency and humanitarian aid, likely to be negatively associated with 
growth because it increases sharply at the same time growth falls because 
of an economic shock.
• Aid that might affect growth only after a long period of time, if at all, and so 
a growth impact may be difficult to detect, such as aid for health, education, 
the environment, and to support democracy.
28Jonathan Isham, Daniel Kaufmann, and Lant Pritchett, “Governance and Returns on Investment: An 
Empirical Investigation,” Policy Research working paper no. 1550, World Bank, 1995; Craig Burnside and 
David Dollar, “Aid, Policies, and Growth,” American Economic Review 90, no. 4 (September 2000), 847–68; 
Paul Collier and David Dollar, “Aid Allocation and Poverty Reduction,” European Economic Review 45, 
no. 1 (2002), 1–26; World Bank, Assessing Aid: What Works, What Doesn’t, and Why (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1998).
29Clemens et al., “Counting Chickens When They Hatch.”

D O N O R R E L AT I O N S H I P S  W IT H R E C I P I E NT  C O U N T R I E S   535
• Aid directly aimed at affecting growth (building roads, ports, and electricity 
generators, or supporting agriculture).
It found a strong relationship between the third type of aid and growth, but the 
relationship with the other types was less detectable. The study found some support 
for the proposition that the third subcategory of aid had an even stronger impact in 
countries with stronger institutions.
DONOR PRACTICES Many analysts argue that differences in donor practices are 
likely to influence aid effectiveness. Multilateral aid might be more effective in stimu-
lating growth than bilateral aid because less of it is determined by political factors 
(although some argue just the opposite, that multilateral agencies tend to be too 
large, unfocused, and less directly accountable to taxpayers). Aid “tied” to purchases 
of good and services in the donor countries or used to finance conferences and inter-
national meetings might be less effective than other aid. Large aid bureaucracies add 
to costs and slow down disbursements, making aid less effective. Donors that coordi-
nate with other funders and recipient governments may be more effective than those 
that operate completely on their own. Donors with more effective monitoring and 
evaluation systems might be better able to channel aid to its most productive uses, 
enhancing overall effectiveness. An influential view that emerged in the late 1990s 
is that aid might be more effective where there has been a participatory approach 
among government and community groups in recipient countries in setting priorities 
and designing aid-supported programs, a topic we return to later in the chapter. Sub-
stantial debate centers around these issues, and there is little doubt that donor prac-
tices are critical, but to date there has been very little systematic research connecting 
specific donor practices to aid effectiveness.
In summarizing the aid and growth research, it seems that aid has been suc-
cessful in some countries but not others, with the overall trend a subject of debate. 
Further research is looking beneath the surface to reveal what types of aid are most 
effective, which are ineffective, and the precise conditions under which aid has the 
largest impact on growth. Just as with the evidence on the causes of economic growth 
more generally discussed in Chapter 3, there is still much that we do not know about 
the relationship between aid and growth.
DONOR RELATIONSHIPS WITH RECIPIENT COUNTRIES
The criticisms about foreign aid and the evidence that it appears to have been effec-
tive in some countries but not in others led to debates about how aid programs can 
be improved to more effectively support growth and development. But the challenge 
is not easy. Aid programs face some inherent difficulties in trying to achieve a wide 
DONOR RELATIONSHIPS WITH RECIPIENT COUNTRIES

536   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
range of objectives (which may differ between donor and recipient), provide finan-
cial oversight, and ensure results. In this section, we first explore some of the chal-
lenges in more depth, then turn to some specific changes that have been suggested 
and in some cases implemented by donors and recipients in an attempt to make aid 
more effective.
THE PRINCIPAL-AGENT PROBLEM
A key issue facing aid agencies is that there is only an indirect and distant relation-
ship between the people actually providing the financing (taxpayers in donor coun-
tries) and the intended ultimate beneficiaries of aid projects (poor people living in 
low-income countries). Many institutions, organizations, and transactions are in 
between, and the decisions made along the way may not be in accord with the wishes 
or best interests of either the original taxpayers or the ultimate beneficiaries. All 
 public-sector agencies and many private companies are faced with the principal-
agent problem, but the international dimension makes it an even greater challenge 
for aid. Economist Bertin Martens analyzed the principal agency problem for aid 
agencies, and our account closely follows his.30
Principals in a private company (the owners), club (the members), or public 
administration (taxpayers) cannot make all decisions and carry out all tasks them-
selves, so they must delegate these responsibilities to agents to work on their behalf: 
managers, employees, elected officials, and civil servants. But agents have their own 
goals and motivations, which may not be the same as the principals’. Agents also have 
more information than the principals and can use that information in ways that run 
counter to the principals’ interests. Therefore, principals are faced with the problem 
of writing contracts and establishing rules that more closely align agents’ interests 
with their own. These issues are particularly important for public-sector agencies 
because they tend to have multiple objectives (not just profit) and their many prin-
cipals may not agree on which objective holds the higher priority. These problems 
make it very difficult to match incentives, such as salary, bonuses, and promotions, 
with performance indicators.
Most aid programs have a long, complex chain of principal-agent relationships, 
starting with the taxpayers who delegate authority to elected officials, who in turn 
become principals who delegate authority to a new set of agents, the heads of aid 
agencies. These relationships continue to aid agency employees, contractors, and 
consultants. In the recipient country, similar relationships lie between the ultimate 
recipients, their government, and those who actually implement programs. In most 
public agencies, there is considerable slippage throughout these relationships, but 
30Bertin Martens, “Introduction” in Berten Martens, ed., The Institutional Economics of Foreign Aid 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004).

D O N O R R E L AT I O N S H I P S  W IT H R E C I P I E NT  C O U N T R I E S   537
the problem is compounded in aid agencies by the physical separation of the origi-
nal taxpayers and ultimate beneficiaries. In domestic public programs (such as trash 
 collection or local schools), the taxpayers and ultimate beneficiaries are the same 
people, so they may have clearer information about success or failure and can reward 
or penalize their agents accordingly by reelecting them or voting them out of office. 
But this feedback loop is broken for aid agencies, as Martens points out:
A unique and striking characteristic of foreign aid is that the people for whose 
benefit aid agencies work are not the same as those from whom the revenues 
are obtained; they actually live in different countries and different political 
constituencies. This [separation] blocks the normal performance feedback 
process: beneficiaries may be able to observe performance but cannot modulate 
payments (rewards to agents) as a function of performance. Although donors 
are typically interested in ensuring that their funds are well spent, it is extremely 
difficult for them to do so, since there is frequently no obvious mechanism for 
transmitting the beneficiaries’ point of view to the sponsors.31
The principal-agent problem affects nearly all aspects of aid delivery, including 
program design, implementation, compensation, incentives, evaluation, and allo-
cation of funding. The problem can never be fully avoided: Private companies face 
similar issues between owners, managers, and employees, as do private aid founda-
tions and charities. The challenge is to design institutions and incentives to try to 
mitigate these problems as much as possible to clarify goals, objectives, incentives, 
and rewards. A key challenge for donors is how best to apply conditions to their loans 
to encourage recipients to act more in accord with the donors’ (and possibly the ulti-
mate beneficiaries’) interests and wishes.
CONDITIONALITY
Donors often require that recipient countries adopt specific policies, or packages 
of policies, as prerequisites for funding; and this conditionality is one of the most 
controversial aspects of aid. Broad policy conditions are most often associated with 
financing from the IMF and World Bank, but all donors use them to some extent. 
Many bilateral donors take their lead from these two multilateral organizations and 
do not provide the full amount of their aid until the recipient country has met IMF 
and World Bank conditions. The IMF typically requires that countries adopt a more 
flexible exchange rate, smaller budget deficits, slower growth of the money supply, 
a buildup of foreign exchange reserves, privatization of certain state-owned enter-
prises, a reduction in import restrictions, and the implementation of broad anticor-
ruption measures. World Bank conditions sometimes reinforce these broad policy 
31Martens, “Introduction,” 14.

538   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
reforms and may add some sector-specific requirements, such as liberalizing fertil-
izer markets before providing an agriculture loan.
In many cases, the specific policy conditions required by the IMF and World 
Bank are justifiable and often supported by at least some people within the recipi-
ent governments. But, other times, many people believe that IMF and World Bank 
conditions go too far and their conditions are harder to justify, especially when the 
rationale for specific reforms are less clear-cut and seen by critics as based more on 
ideology than hard facts and sensible economics. For example, while privatization 
of state-owned marketing boards, retail outlets, or trading establishments is gener-
ally not controversial, privatization of public utilities is much more open to debate. 
Many countries may need to impose fiscal discipline as required by the IMF, but the 
Fund is often accused of imposing much stricter discipline than is really necessary 
to achieve stability, at a cost of dampening aggregate consumption and expenditures 
on important social programs. Sometimes, the donors simply impose too many con-
ditions, seemingly wanting the recipient country to fix everything at once without 
showing any sense of priority or feasibility. Turkey’s “Letter of Intent” with the IMF in 
April 2003 included a table listing 131 very specific policy actions (with dozens more 
subcategories of actions) that the government promised to undertake as part of its 
program.32 The IMF admitted that, at times, it has gone too far, as with its program in 
Indonesia after the financial crisis of 1997.33
While donors are often criticized for imposing too many conditions, they are 
almost as often criticized for not imposing enough conditions. Some advocates that 
criticize the IMF for imposing too much fiscal austerity also insist that it require 
 governments to spend a minimum amount on health and education. The World 
Bank is often asked to add conditions to force governments to take specific actions, 
for example, on projects that have potential environmental consequences. This can 
lead to difficult dilemmas. Sometimes governments ask the World Bank to be one 
of many co-funders for a project, hoping that World Bank participation will pro-
vide credibility and security. In return, the World Bank typically wishes to require 
 environmental safeguards or anticorruption measures. But because the World Bank 
is only one lender, its leverage may be limited. If the World Bank requires too many 
conditions, the government can just go ahead without them (and without the envi-
ronmental safeguards), but if they ask for too few, they may find themselves funding 
a project with inadequate conditions.
The rationale for these conditions is straightforward: Donors believe these 
broad-based conditions are important for growth and development, and without 
them, providing aid is futile. It is easiest to see this rationale in extreme cases: If gov-
32See International Monetary Fund, “Turkey: Letter of Intent,” April 5, 2003, available at www.imf.org/
external/np/loi/2003/tur/01/index.htm; accessed February 2012.
33IMF Independent Evaluation Office, “The IMF and Recent Capital Account Crises: Indonesia, Korea, 
and Brazil,” (Washington, DC: IMF, 2003). Available at www.imf.org/external/np/ieo/2003/cac/pdf/all.pdf.

D O N O R R E L AT I O N S H I P S  W IT H R E C I P I E NT  C O U N T R I E S   539
ernment policies have led to high rates of inflation, an overvalued exchange rate, 
massive inefficiencies and waste of public spending, and extensive corruption, then 
providing aid, whatever the specific purpose, without requiring fundamental change 
provides no benefits and perhaps perpetuates the damage. Some even argue that the 
primary purpose of aid is not the money but for aid to act as a lever for the policy 
reforms. The conditionality debate is a microcosm of the principal-agent problem: 
A donor requests a recipient to take specific actions in return for receiving aid, but 
the recipient may have different objectives and controls sufficient information to 
make compliance difficult.
Cornell economist Ravi Kanbur points out two further problems with condition-
ality. First, it is not always clear what conditions are the most appropriate to ensure 
sustained growth and development. Mahbub ul Haq, an influential development 
adviser long associated with the UNDP, once commented that sub-Saharan Africa, 
“often receives more bad policy advice per capita from foreign consultants than any 
other continent in the world.”34 Development doctrine, as discussed in Chapter 5, 
has swung from a state-led approach in the 1950s and 1960s, to basic human needs 
in the 1970s, to a macroeconomic approach focused on open markets in the 1980s 
and 1990s, to a focus on institutions beginning in the mid-1990s, to a greater focus on 
private sector led growth in the 2000s. As a result, the list of conditions is constantly 
evolving.
Second, conditionality does not seem to work. Most analysts agree that gov-
ernments implement reforms only when it is in their interests to do so, and donor 
conditions have little, if any, impact on that decision. They perhaps can spur gov-
ernments to implement changes faster than they otherwise would, or provide sup-
port to reformist elements in policy debates, but cannot persuade governments to 
do what they really do not want to do. Many donors continue to disburse aid even 
when recipients fail to meet conditions, sometimes repeatedly so. Over time, recip-
ients learn that aid flows do not necessarily depend on meeting stated conditions, 
a process that gradually undermines the aid institutions and the conditions they 
attach. Donors are faced with their own internal incentives to continue to disburse 
aid to support the contractors and recipients that depend on it. They also face a 
“Samaritan’s dilemma,” that withdrawing aid would create short-term pain for the 
very people it is aimed to help.35
In the end, there are no clear-cut rules for conditionality. Striking the right balance 
between responsible oversight and accountability, on the one hand, and ensuring against 
34Mahbub ul Haq, “Does Africa Have a Future?” Earth Times New Service, January 1998.
35Ravi Kanbur, “The Economics of International Aid,” in Serge Christophe-Kolm and Jean Mercier 
Ythier, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism, and Reciprocity: Applications (Amsterdam: 
North Holland, 2006). Also see Jakob Svensson, “Why Conditional Aid Does Not Work and What Can Be 
Done About It,” Journal of Development Economics 70, no. 2 (2003), 381–402; William Easterly, The Elusive 
Quest for Growth (Cambridge: MIT, 2002).

540   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
high bureaucratic obstacles and the imposition of unnecessary controls or unwarranted 
policy changes, on the other, requires flexibility, judgment, and the ability to balance 
multiple objectives.
IMPROVING AID EFFECTIVENESS
Since the late 1990s, as global aid flows began to rise, there has been increased discus-
sion and debate about how aid programs could be strengthened and become more 
effective in supporting growth and development. These debates recognized some of 
the weaknesses in aid programs and resulted in some specific ideas for change. The 
“Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the Accra Agenda for Action” is perhaps 
the clearest articulation of the consensus on best practices in aid delivery.36 In recent 
years, donor agencies began to put some of these ideas in practice, and some donor 
practices changed noticeably as a result.
COUNTRY SELECTIVITY One influential idea is that donors should be more selec-
tive about which countries they provide aid to, based on the view that aid works best 
in countries with good policies and institutions. In the strongest version of this view, 
aid should be provided only to countries that meet these criteria and not otherwise, 
with more going to countries with the highest levels of poverty. A more moderate 
view is that more aid should be allocated to countries with stronger policies and insti-
tutions but continue to provide targeted aid to some countries with relatively poor 
institutions, especially in postconflict situations. This proposal takes a turn on the 
conditionality debate: Instead of providing aid to encourage reforms, provide it to 
countries that already decided to implement key reforms. Economists Paul Collier 
and David Dollar suggested a “poverty-efficient” allocation of aid in which funding 
would be provided to the poorest countries with relatively stronger policies and insti-
tutions to maximize the impact of aid on global poverty reduction.37
Donors began to move in this direction. The World Bank uses its Country Policy 
and Institutional Assessment index to determine partly the allocation of its conces-
sional IDA funds. Several European donors moved toward providing broad budget 
support or financing for sector-wide approaches, but only for a relatively small num-
ber of countries considered to be the most responsible. The U.S. Millennium Chal-
lenge Corporation (MCC) provides aid to only a small number of recipient countries, 
based largely (although not completely) on their performance on 17 indicators 
of  policies and governance.38 As of late 2011, the MCC had signed compacts with 
23 low-income and lower-middle-income countries around the world.
36See the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2008), “The Paris Declaration on 
Aid Effectiveness and the Accra Agenda for Action,” available at www.oecd.org/dataoecd/11/41/34428351
.pdf; accessed February 2012.
37Collier and Dollar, “Aid Allocation and Poverty Reduction.”
38Steven Radelet, Challenging Foreign Aid: A Policymaker’s Guide to the Millennium Challenge Account 
(Washington, DC: Center for Global Development, 2003).

D O N O R R E L AT I O N S H I P S  W IT H R E C I P I E NT  C O U N T R I E S   541
Because so much aid is allocated for political, security, and other foreign policy 
reasons, there are limits to how far donors are likely to go in reallocating their aid 
based on strict economic development criteria. This is especially true for the major 
bilateral donors but is true for multilateral donors as well. One frequent suggestion 
is for donors to more clearly separate funding primarily aimed at foreign policy goals 
from funding aimed at development. This would allow programs to be designed, 
implemented, and evaluated in different ways so donor country governments, their 
taxpayers, and recipients could better understand and appraise aid effectiveness.
RECIPIENT PARTICIPATION A second influential idea is that aid has been weakened 
by donor domination in setting priorities, designing programs and projects, choos-
ing implementers (often consulting firms from the donor country), monitoring and 
evaluating results, and that aid recipients should play a much larger role in these 
areas. In this view, bureaucrats and activists from donor countries design too many 
programs, leading to a poor choice of priorities, flawed design, or weak commitment 
among recipients for programs they do not feel are their own. Advocates have pushed 
for a more participatory approach in which various groups in recipient countries 
(government, NGOs, charities, the private sector) play a more active role. The idea is 
to eliminate some of the problems in the long chain of principal-agent relationships 
and more tightly integrate the ultimate beneficiaries in key aspects of the aid-delivery 
process. This might have two benefits. First, projects might be better designed, with 
a more accurate view of the highest priorities and the most appropriate implementa-
tion methods to meet local needs. Second, increasing recipient participation in the 
design and implementation process may provide them with more ownership of the 
activity and a higher stake in ensuring its success. One of the first movements in this 
direction was the introduction of Poverty Reduction Strategy papers as the basis for 
World Bank and IMF debt relief and other financing. Similarly, both the Global Fund 
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria and the Millennium Challenge Corporation 
rely on a significant degree of local participation in designing and implementing the 
programs they finance. USAID’s Feed the Future program, which aims to improve 
food security by supporting increased agricultural production and improved nutri-
tion, relies on country strategies developed by local leaders and national experts.
While the participatory approach holds out promise and has been increasingly 
used since the early 2000s, there is no clear empirical evidence yet on the extent to 
which (or the circumstances under which) it improves aid effectiveness. There is a 
clear and inescapable tension between country ownership, on the one hand, and 
donor priorities and conditionality, on the other. Donors are more likely to facilitate 
a participatory approach in countries in which governments show a strong commit-
ment to sound development policies and less so in countries with corrupt and dicta-
torial governments.
HARMONIZATION AND COORDINATION Managing aid flows from many different 
donors can be a constant challenge for recipient countries because different donors 

542   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
tend to implement their own initiatives and insist on using their own unique pro-
cesses for initiating, implementing, and monitoring projects. Recipients can be 
overwhelmed by donor requirements to provide multiple project audits, environ-
mental assessments, procurement reports, financial statements, and project updates. 
According to the World Bank, developing countries typically work with 30 or more aid 
agencies across a wide variety of sectors, with each sending an average of five mis-
sions a year to oversee their projects. Governments can find themselves hosting three 
or more aid missions a week.39 Many recipient countries have only a limited number 
of skilled and highly trained technocrats; and all the donors want to meet with these 
top people, leaving them with much less time to deal with other pressing concerns. 
The government of Tanzania, which hosts several hundred aid missions each year, 
has introduced a “quiet time” from April to August of each year during which it asks 
donors to minimize meetings and missions so that the government has time to ade-
quately prepare its annual budget.
These concerns have led to numerous suggestions and pledges for donors to 
more closely coordinate their activities; harmonize their accounting, monitoring, 
and evaluation systems; or pool their funds.40 Some progress has been made in the 
form of donors providing more aid as budget support in certain countries, acting 
together through joint missions, and agreeing to use similar monitoring and evalu-
ation procedures. At the same time, some newer donor initiatives appear to want 
to use their own new methodologies, which could compound this problem going 
forward.
RESULTS-BASED MANAGEMENT The emphasis on demonstrating the effective-
ness of aid has led to calls for improved monitoring and evaluation and results-
based management. In this view, aid programs should aim to achieve very specific 
quantitative targets, and decisions about renewing or reallocating aid going forward 
should be based on those results. There are three basic objectives. First, results-
based management can help donors allocate funds toward programs that are work-
ing. Second, ongoing reviews can detect problems at an early stage and help modify 
and strengthen existing programs. Third, donors and recipients can better learn 
what approaches have worked and what have not. Stronger monitoring and evalu-
ation helps strengthen the principal-agent relationship so that aid agencies have 
clearer incentives and taxpayers have better information about the impact of aid on 
its intended beneficiaries. USAID, for example, introduced in 2011 a new evaluation 
approach aimed at strengthening the impact of the agency’s program on achieving 
specified results. There has been an explosion in empirical investigations on the 
impact of development interventions through randomized controlled trials, led by 
39World Bank Development News Media, “Cutting the Red Tape,” February 21, 2003.
40Ravi Kanbur and Todd Sandler, “The Future of Development Assistance: Common Pools and Interna-
tional Public Goods,” Policy Essay No. 5, Overseas Development Council, Washington, DC, 1999.

S U M M A R Y   543
the path-breaking work of the Jameel Poverty Action Lab at MIT. These and other 
similar efforts are leading to a much deeper understanding of what works and what 
does not work in aid-supported programs around the world.
SUMMARY
• Most aid is given by bilateral donors, but a significant portion is channeled 
through multilateral agencies. Global aid flows peaked in 1991, then 
declined in real and nominal terms until 1997, before rebounding again. 
Official development assistance is higher today, almost $130 billion in 2010, 
than ever before but not as a share of the GNI of today’s developed nations. 
The United States currently provides the largest dollar amount of aid but is 
among the smallest in terms of aid as a share of its income.
• For some countries, aid flows are large and significant, while in others 
they are small. Sub-Saharan Africa received aid flows equivalent to about 
5 percent of its income in 2009, or about $53 per person. Because of the war 
in Iraq, the Middle East received $42 per person in 2009, an amount much 
higher than the $9 per person received by South Asia, which is a much 
poorer region.
• For most donors, the primary motivation for providing aid is to support 
foreign policy objectives and political alliances. Income and poverty tend to 
be secondary objectives. Country size, commercial and historical ties, and 
the extent of democracy also play a role.
• There are three broad viewpoints on the relationship among aid, growth, 
and development. First, some analysts believe that aid supports growth 
and development by adding to investment and the capital stock, helping in 
the transfer of technology, supporting key health and education programs, 
and enhancing economic stability. Second, others believe that aid has no 
impact on growth and might undermine growth by distorting incentives for 
private production, encouraging corruption, enlarging the government, or 
creating aid dependency. Third, some argue that aid works under certain 
conditions but not others, depending on the policy and institutional 
environment in the recipient country, the purpose of the aid, or the donor’s 
practices and procedures. The empirical evidence on these relationships is 
mixed, with different studies reaching different conclusions.
• Aid can influence both saving rates and tax revenues through a host of 
subtle impacts on prices, preferences, and incentives. Aid flows add to 
total saving and investment but less than one for one. The fungibility of 
aid can cause private and government saving to decline as aid increases. 
The impact on government revenues varies across countries, with some 
SUMMARY

544   [CH. 14] F O R E I G N  A I D
experiencing a decline and others an increase corresponding to higher aid 
flows.
• Aid agencies face a classic principal-agent problem, compounded by the 
fact that the original funders (taxpayers in donor countries) have only 
indirect and distant connections to the intended ultimate beneficiaries 
(poor people in low-income countries). A particular challenge for donors 
is how to place appropriate conditions on their aid. Donors often are 
criticized for putting too many, too few, or the wrong kinds of conditions on 
aid, and conditionality in general appears to have been largely ineffective.
• In recent years, donors began to try to make aid more effective by becoming 
more selective in choosing recipients, encouraging more participation 
by recipients in program design and implementation, coordinating more 
closely with each other, and managing programs based on results. It is too 
early to judge the effectiveness of these changes, but they are likely to affect 
aid programs for some time to come.

545
Managing Short-Run 
Crises in an Open 
Economy
15
E
conomic development takes place in the long term. Most of the processes dis-
cussed in the previous chapters, whether improving human welfare, increasing 
saving, or shifting toward manufactured exports, take years and even decades 
to bear significant results. If policy makers in developing countries gaze only 
at the far horizon, however, they are unlikely ever to reach it. Much happens in the 
short term, within a few months or a couple of years, to throw an economy off bal-
ance and make pursuing long-term strategies difficult and sometimes impossible. 
Policy makers need to emulate a ship’s captain, who, always steering toward the port 
of destination, nevertheless must deal decisively with any storms at sea.
Among the most dangerous and likely of these storms are changes in world 
prices that throw the balance of payments into deficit, excessive spending that fuels 
inflation or unsustainable debt, and droughts or other natural disasters that disrupt 
production. Unless a government counteracts these economic shocks, they create 
greater uncertainty and higher risk for private producers and investors, who take eva-
sive actions that reduce future investment, worsen the crisis, and cause development 
efforts to flounder.
During the 1970s and 1980s, the late 1990s, and in Europe in 2010–11, as pointed 
out in Chapters 12 and 13, many economies became unbalanced because of unstable 
world market conditions and their own macroeconomic mismanagement. In Chap-
ters 5 and 11 through 13, we discussed the consequences of such macroeconomic 
instability. Countries with overvalued exchange rates and rapid inflation were 
unable to grow rapidly. Stabilization programs, many funded by the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), were intended to correct these macroeconomic imbalances.

546   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
In this chapter, we develop a mechanism for analyzing the macroeconomic poli-
cies that a developing country should pursue to stabilize its economy and create a 
climate for faster economic growth. The model developed here incorporates the two 
main policy approaches for correcting macroeconomic imbalances: changing the 
level of domestic expenditures and adjusting relative prices. In many cases, manag-
ing economic crises specifically requires expenditure reduction (by lower govern-
ment budget deficits and slower creation of money) and exchange-rate devaluation.
EQUILIBRIUM IN A SMALL, OPEN ECONOMY
Developing economies1 have two features central to understanding how macroeco-
nomic imbalances occur and can be corrected. First, they are open economies, in 
that trade and capital flow across their borders in sufficient quantities to influence 
the domestic economy, particularly prices and the money supply. Most economies 
are open in this sense, especially because of economic reforms in China beginning in 
the late 1970s and in Eastern Europe and the states of the former Soviet Union begin-
ning in the early 1990s. Today only a few economies, such as Cuba, North Korea, and 
Burma, are so heavily protected and regulated (and subject to foreign embargoes) 
that they might not qualify as open to trade and finance.
Second, these are small economies, meaning that neither their supply of exports 
nor their demand for imports has a noticeable impact on the world prices of these 
commodities and services. Economists call these countries price takers in world mar-
kets. A number of developing countries can exert some influence over the price of 
one or two primary exports in world markets: Brazil in coffee, Saudi Arabia in oil, 
Zambia in copper, South Africa in diamonds, for example. But they almost never 
affect the price of goods they import, and for macroeconomic purposes, it usually is 
adequate to model even these countries as price takers.2
These two qualities, smallness and openness, are the basis for the Australian 
model of a developing economy.3 Countries typically trade both importable and 
EQUILIBRIUM IN A SMALL, OPEN ECONOMY
1In developing this and the next two sections, we acknowledge an intellectual debt to  Shantayanan 
Devarajan and Dani Rodrik, who wrote an excellent set of notes for their class on macroeconomics 
for  developing countries at Harvard’s John F. Kennedy School of Government in the late 1980s and to 
 Richard E. Caves, Jeffrey A. Frankel, and Ronald W. Jones, who develop the open economy model in Chap-
ter 19 of World Trade and Payments: An Introduction (Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman, Little, Brown, 1990).
2Among developing countries, China and India are large enough that they could become exceptions to 
the small country rule, given continued growth in China and both greater growth and openness in India.
3So called because it was developed by Australian economists, including W. E. G. Salter, “Internal Bal-
ance and External Balance: The Role of Price and Expenditure Effects,” Economic Record 35 (1959), 226–38; 
Trevor W. Swan, “Economic Control in a Dependent Economy,” Economic Record 36 (March 1960), 51–66; 
W. Max Corden, Inflation, Exchange Rates and the World Economy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1977). Australia also is a small, open economy.

E Q U I L I B R I U M  I N  A  S M A L L ,  O P E N E C O N O M Y   547
exportable goods and services. The Australian model lumps importables and export-
ables together as tradables and distinguishes these from all other goods and services, 
called nontradables. (We use this specification again in Chapter 18’s discussion of 
Dutch disease.)
Tradable goods and services are those whose prices within the country are deter-
mined by supply and demand on world markets. Under the small economy assump-
tion, these world market prices cannot be influenced by anything that happens within 
the country and so are exogenous to the model (determined outside the model). The 
domestic (local currency) price of a tradable good is given by Pt = ePt* where e is 
the nominal exchange rate in local currency per dollar (pesos per dollar for Mexico 
or rupees per dollar for Pakistan) and Pt* is the world price of the tradable in dollars. 
Even if the supply of and demand for tradables change within an economy, the local 
price will not change because domestic supply and demand have a negligible influ-
ence on the world price. Yet, changes in the nominal exchange rate change the domes-
tic price of tradables commodities. If a country devalues its nominal exchange rate, it 
increases the amount of local currency required to purchase a dollar (e increases); if a 
country revalues its nominal exchange rate it decreases the amount of local currency 
required to purchase a dollar (e decreases). Devaluations thus increase the local cur-
rency price of tradables (all else equal), while revaluations tend to decrease the local 
currency price of tradables. Because this model simplifies all tradables into one com-
posite good, the price of tradables Pt is best thought of as an index, a weighted average 
of the prices of all tradables, much like a consumer price index.
Tradables include exportables, such as coffee in Kenya and Colombia, rice in 
Thailand, beef in Argentina, cattle in West Africa, palm oil in Malaysia and Indone-
sia, copper in Peru and Zambia, oil in the Middle East, and textiles and electronics 
in East Asia, and importables, such as rice in West Africa, oil in Brazil or Korea, and 
intermediate chemicals and machinery in many developing countries.
Nontradables are goods and services, such as transportation, construction, 
retail trade, and household services that are not easily or conventionally bought or 
sold outside the country, usually because the costs of transporting them from one 
country to another are prohibitive or local custom inhibits trade. Prices of nontrad-
ables, designated Pn, therefore, are determined by market forces within the economy; 
any shift in supply or demand changes the price of nontradables. Nontradable prices 
thus are endogenous to the model (determined within the model). The term Pn, like 
Pt, is a composite or weighted average price incorporating all prices of nontradable 
goods and services.
INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL BALANCE
Figure 15–1 depicts equilibrium under the Australian model. The vertical axis repre-
sents nontradables (N); the horizontal axis takes both exportables and importables 
and treats them together as tradables (T). The production possibility frontier shows 

548   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
the menu of possible combinations of outputs of the two kinds of goods, N and T. The 
community indifference curves show consumer preferences between consumption 
of tradables and nontradables.
Equilibrium is at point 1, the tangency of a consumer indifference curve and the 
production possibilities frontier. At this point, the production of tradables, deter-
mined by the production frontier at point 1, is T1, equal to the demand for tradables, 
determined by the indifference curve at 1, and similarly, for nontradables, supply 
equals demand at N1. This is a defining characteristic of equilibrium in the Australian 
model: At point 1, the markets for both goods are in balance. Put another way, there 
is external balance (EB), because the supply of tradables equals demand, and inter-
nal balance (IB), because the supply of nontradables equals demand.
Point 1 simultaneously indicates the optimal (profit maximizing) combination of 
tradables and nontradables for producers, the optimal (utility maximizing) combina-
tion of tradable and nontradables for consumers. For both producers and consum-
ers, this optimum occurs with respect to relative prices—in this case the relative price 
of tradables to nontradables. This relative price is indicated by the slope of the price 
line in Figure 15–1. This joint equilibrium for producers and consumers is indicated 
by the tangency of the indifference curve and the production possibility frontier. 
The tangency of the indifference curve and production frontier is jointly determined 
with the relative price of tradables in terms of nontradables, P = Pt/Pn. This relative 
1
Tradables
Nontradables
P =
P
Pt / n
= A
Y1
1
N1
T1
Consumer
indifference
curve
Production
frontier
FIGURE 15–1 Equilibrium in the Australian Model
With equilibrium at point 1, the tangency of the production frontier and a community 
indifference curve, the country produces and consumes T1 of tradables and N1 of 
nontradables. The relative price, P, is a measure of the real exchange rate (see text).
Y1, national income measured in tradable prices.

E Q U I L I B R I U M  I N  A  S M A L L ,  O P E N E C O N O M Y   549
price, P, is one way to define the real exchange rate (RER), one of the important 
innovations of the Australian model.4 (Box 15–1 provides a more detailed explanation 
of the real exchange rate.) This formulation separates out prices that are under the 
influence of monetary and fiscal policy and domestic market forces, Pn, from prices 
that can be changed only by adjustments of the nominal exchange rate, Pt = ePt*. 
Note that the slope of the price line that is tangent to the production possibility curve 
and the consumer indifference curve is the only real exchange rate consistent with 
equilibrium in the model.
If P rises (the price line becomes steeper in the diagram), tradables become 
more expensive relative to nontradables. Producers then attempt to switch along 
the production frontier away from N goods, toward T goods. Consumers attempt to 
switch in the opposite direction, up along the indifference curve to consume fewer T 
goods and more N goods. Therefore, a rise in P should increase the surplus of T-good 
production over consumption.
If the production of T goods exceeds consumption of T goods, there is an exter-
nal surplus, which is identical to a surplus in the balance of trade. To see this, start 
with the definition of the trade balance as
 
Bt = X - M 
[15–1]
where X and M are exports and imports. Because exports are the surplus of sup-
ply over demand for exportable goods, while imports are the opposite, a surplus of 
demand over supply, we can write the balance of trade as
Bt =  value of X-goods supply - value of X-goods demand - (value of M-goods 
demand - value of M-goods supply),
=  value of X-goods supply + value of M-goods supply - (value of X-goods 
demand + value of M-goods demand),
=  value of tradables supply - value of tradables demand;
or if we let the supply of tradables be St and demand be Dt,
 
Bt = PtSt - PtDt = Pt(St - Dt) 
[15–2]
In Figure 15–1, with the economy in equilibrium, consumption of tradables is equal 
to production, so the balance of trade is 0.
The value of income (GDP) also can be found in Figure 15–1. It is the sum of 
the value of output of N goods (N1) and T goods (T1). This value is given by Y1, the 
4Chapters 18 and 19 will define the real exchange rate index as RER = RoPw/Pd. The term Ro is an 
index of the nominal exchange rate; in this chapter we use e, the nominal exchange rate itself. The term 
Pw is an index of world prices, often the U.S. consumer or wholesale price index and is similar or identical 
to P* as measured in practice. But Pd is a domestic consumer or wholesale price index that includes both 
tradable and nontradable prices, whereas Pn is an index of nontradable prices only. Thus, the Australian 
formulation of the real exchange rate is a more-precise definition than those given in the later chapters.

550   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
Most anyone who has traveled outside their home country has experience with
nominal exchange rates. The nominal exchange rate is simply the number of units
of local currency you can buy from the country you visit with one unit of your own
currency. For instance, in August 2010, you could buy just over 46 Indian rupees,
or 12.6 Mexican pesos, for US$1. (Note, this implies that you could also have
bought 3.65 Indian rupees with one Mexican peso.) But when you bring a dollar
into India or Mexico what you really care about is not how many rupees or pesos
you can buy with that dollar but rather the quantity of actual goods and services
that you can buy with that dollar. This depends on the prices of goods and ser-
vices in the host country in addition to the price of its currency. This distinction is
the key idea underlying the concept of the real exchange rate (RER).
In the most general sense, RER is the relative price of foreign goods in
terms of domestic goods. In practice, economists have developed a range of
approaches to quantifying this idea. Economists working on developed econo-
mies typically measure the RER as the relative price of domestic and foreign
goods. In contrast, economists working on developing countries typically mea-
sure the RER as the relative price of tradables and nontradables. Tradable com-
modities are goods that are or could be traded internationally, in contrast to
e
nontradable goods (such as housing and many services), which are not traded
internationally. A key practical distinction between these categories of goods
is that there are world market prices for tradable goods, but the prices of non-
tradables are determined purely by local supply and demand conditions in each
country.
The nominal and real exchange rates are linked together by the require-
ment that the relative prices of tradable and nontradable goods in the RER
be expressed in the same currency units. The prices of tradables are typically
expressed in U.S. dollars, whereas the prices of nontradables are expressed in
units of the local currency. Thus we need to use the nominal exchange rate to
convert the dollar-denominated price of tradables into units of the local currency
to calculate the RER.
We can construct this RER as follows. Expressing the nominal exchange
rate, e, in terms of the number of local currency units per dollar, and expressing
e
the prices of tradables and nontradables as Pt and
t
Pn, respectively, we can con-
struct the RER as
BOX 15–1 REAL VERSUS NOMINAL EXCHANGE RATES
RER =
ePt*
Pn
=
Pt
Pn

E Q U I L I B R I U M  I N  A  S M A L L ,  O P E N E C O N O M Y   551
In this equation, the asterisk on Pt in the second term indicates that the price of
t
tradables is expressed in dollars. Multiplying this dollar-denominated price by e,
the nominal exchange rate as defined above, converts the price of tradables into
the same local currency units as the price of nontradables.
It is important to consider several issues related to this concept of the RER. First,
note that the RER is based on price indices rather than actual nominal price lev-
els. The RER is thus expressed relative to a base year, and changes in the relative
price of tradables to nontradables, say from 1 to 1.2, would indicate percentage
changes (in this case, 20 percent) relative to the base year. We refer to an increase
in the RER as a depreciation of the local currency, and a decrease in the RER as
n
an appreciation of the local currency. While this may sound counterintuitive, the 
n
rationale for these terms is that when a currency depreciates in real terms, a given 
quantity of foreign goods can be exchanged for a greater quantity of that country’s 
domestic goods (and vice versa in the case of an appreciation). It is for this reason
that the RER is often thought of an as an indicator of a country’s international com-
petitiveness: When a country’s currency depreciates in real terms relative to its trad-
ing partners’ currencies, that country’s goods become less expensive to foreigners.
An important practical challenge in constructing an RER lies in the need to
choose price indices for tradables and nontradables. Pt and 
t
Pn are indices of the
n
prices of entire categories of goods. Thus constructing these price indices first
requires deciding which goods (and services) belong in which category. Specific
price data may also be lacking. One short cut for addressing these challenges
may be to use the U.S. consumer price index in place of Pt and a similar indicator
t
from the home country (with the same base year) in place of Pn.
Although the availability of such price indicators as the consumer price index
makes them convenient, their use in constructing RERs is problematic. Theory
calls for an index of nontradables prices, but the consumer price index (CPI) is
typically constructed to reflect the price of a basket of consumption goods that
includes both tradable and nontradable goods. The larger the share of tradable
goods in that basket, the greater the divergence between what the RER tells
us in theory and what we actually measure if we construct an RER using those
broad price indices. In practice, aggregate price indices purely for nontradables
rarely exist. Similar problems exist in choosing a price index to represent trad-
ables prices (for use in the numerator of the RER for a given country). In this
case, in which the goal is to choose a price index based to the greatest extent
possible on tradables, many authors use the wholesale price index (WPI) from
the United States or from a given country’s trading partners. Yet this approach
too is problematic because (as Lawrence Hinkle and Peter Montiel notea) for-
aLawrence E. Hinkle and Peter Montiel, Exchange rate misalignment: concepts and measurement 
for developing countries. (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1999).

552   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
 intersection of price line P from point 1 to the T axis.5 In national income accounting, 
we distinguish two concepts. Gross domestic product, a measure of the value of out-
put, is given by
GDP = C + I + X - M 
[15–3]
where C and I are consumption and investment by both the government and the pri-
vate sector. Gross domestic expenditure, often called absorption, is
A = C + I = GDP + M - X 
[15–4]
When, as in Figure 15–1, the economy is in equilibrium, X = M and income equals 
absorption. Indeed, this is the other condition for equilibrium in the Australian 
model. From equation 15–4, we can also see that A - GDP = M - X,  indicating 
eign WPIs may not provide a very close indication of the tradables prices actually 
faced by consumers in the home country. There is no perfect match between the 
theoretical requirements and practical data availability in constructing empirical 
RERs. A common compromise is to use the foreign WPI to represent Pt and the 
domestic CPI to represent Pn.
An additional question is whether the relevant RER is purely between two 
specific countries (the home country and a single trading partner—that is, the 
bilateral RER) or between the home country and multiple trading partner coun-
tries. In general, policy makers in a given country will be more concerned with 
how their currency relates in real terms with all of their trading partners. In that 
case, it is necessary to take a (trade-weighted) average of all the bilateral RERs 
between the home country and its trading partners. This average is called the 
real effective exchange rate (REER).
The central challenge for policy makers concerned with their country’s inter-
national competitiveness is whether the level of the REER at any given time 
reflects its equilibrium value or whether it is overvalued or undervalued rela-
tive to that equilibrium. Equlibrium in this setting generally refers to the level of 
the REER at which a country’s internal market (that is, its supply and demand 
for nontrable goods and labor) and its external market (that is, its supply and 
demand for tradable goods) are in balance.
5Along the T axis, Y1 is measured in prices of the T good, so PtY1 = PtT1 + PnN1 or Y1 = T1 + (Pn/Pt)N1. 
But Pn/Pt = T/N, with N = N1 and T = Y1 - T1, the distance along the T axis from T1 to Y1. Thus 
the value of both goods in T prices is T1 + Y1 - T1 = Y1.

E Q U I L I B R I U M  I N  A  S M A L L ,  O P E N E C O N O M Y   553
that any excess of expenditures over income implies a negative trade balance of equal 
amount. (The appendix to this chapter provides a more detailed review of balance of 
payments accounting.)
This exploration of the Australian model yields three results. First, macroeco-
nomic equilibrium is defined as a balance between supply and demand in two mar-
kets: nontradable goods (internal balance) and tradable goods (external balance). 
Second, to achieve equilibrium in both markets, two conditions must be satisfied: 
Expenditure (absorption) must equal income, and the relative price of tradables 
(the real exchange rate) must be at a level that equates demand and supply in both 
markets (the slope of P in Figure 15–1). Third, this also suggests two remedies for an 
economy that is out of balance: A government can achieve equilibrium (stabilize the 
economy) by adjusting absorption, the nominal exchange rate, or both. Generally, 
both instruments must be used to achieve internal and external balance.
THE PHASE DIAGRAM
Using the perspective of trade theory, we tie the small, open economy model of macro-
economic management to the tools of analysis already used in this text. But the princi-
ples of stabilization can be explored from a more-useful perspective, the phase diagram. 
To develop this approach, consider the markets for tradables and nontradables from the 
perspective of conventional supply and demand diagrams, as in Figure 15–2. 
In these diagrams, we use the real exchange rate, which is the relative price of T 
goods in terms of N goods (Pt/Pn), as the price in both markets. For tradable goods, 
that gives a conventional supply and demand diagram: As the price rises, supply 
increases and demand decreases. But in the nontradables market, a rise in P means a 
fall in the relative price of N goods, so supply decreases and demand increases. Note 
that, in both markets, any increase in expenditure, or absorption, A, causes an out-
ward shift of the demand curve: At any price, consumers buy more of both goods.
To use these diagrams as a basis for macroeconomic analysis, we need to change 
the interpretation of the supply curve for tradables. Until now, we have assumed that 
all tradables are produced within the home country. But foreign investment and for-
eign aid can add to the supply of tradables by financing additional imports. There-
fore, the supply curve should not be St, but St + F, where F is the inflow of long-term 
foreign capital in the form of aid, commercial loans, and investment.
Figure 15–2 constitutes a simple model of the small, open economy that is based 
on two variables: The real exchange rate, P, on the vertical axis and absorption, A, 
which determines the position of the demand curves. These, of course, are the con-
ventional variables of microeconomics, price and income. But in this model, they 
also are the two main macroeconomic policy tools of government: The exchange rate 
and the level of expenditure. Because these two variables are central to macroeco-
nomic management, it would be helpful to develop a diagram that uses them explic-
itly on the axes.

554   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
Figure 15–3 does this. It puts the real exchange rate, Pt = ePt*/Pn, on the verti-
cal axis and real absorption, A, on the horizontal axis. The diagram also contains two 
curves, each representing equilibrium in one of the markets. Along the EB, or exter-
nal balance, curve, the T-goods market is in balance (St = Dt). Along the IB, or inter-
nal balance, curve, the N-goods market is in balance (Sn = Dn).
The slopes of the two curves, EB and IB, can be derived from Figure 15–2. In the 
tradables market, when absorption is A1, equilibrium is at P1, where T1 is produced 
and consumed. This equilibrium point 1 also is shown in Figure 15–3a. If absorption 
increases to A2 in Figure 15–2a, the demand curve moves outward and shifts equi-
librium to point 2. Note that with higher absorption, A2, the real exchange rate, P2, 
must be higher to restore equilibrium in the T-goods market. Increased absorption 
raises the demand for T goods. To meet this demand, it is necessary to raise output, 
which can be achieved only through a higher relative price of T goods, P2. This higher 
price also helps regain balance by reducing the demand for T goods along the new 
demand curve. Point 2 is transferred to Figure 15–3a at (P2, A2).
In the nontradables market, when absorption is A1, equilibrium is at P1, where 
N1 is produced and consumed. This equilibrium point 1 also is shown in Figure 
15–3b. If absorption increases to A3 in Figure 15–2b, the demand curve moves out-
ward and shifts equilibrium to point 3. In the N-goods market, higher absorption, A3, 
3
1
Sn
Dn1
Dn 2
1N
3N
1P
3P
Δ > 0
A
2
1
St
Dt1
Dt 2
T
Quantity (N)
Quantity (N)
(a)
(b)
1
2T
1P
2P
Δ > 0
A
 Price (P)
 Price (P)
FIGURE 15–2 Tradables and Nontradables Markets
(a) Tradables market: The demand and supply curves for tradables St and Dt have the 
conventional slopes. (b) Nontradables market: The slopes are reversed. Sn falls as P 
rises (because the relative price of N is falling) and Dn rises as P rises. In both markets, 
demand increases when absorption (expenditure) increases, shown by and outward 
shift of Dt and Dn.
S, supply; D, demand; P (price) = Pt/Pn.

E Q U I L I B R I U M  I N  A  S M A L L ,  O P E N E C O N O M Y   555
requires a lower, or appreciated, real exchange rate to restore equilibrium. Increased 
absorption raises demand for N goods, met by raising output, which can be achieved 
only through a lower relative price of T goods, P3. This lower real exchange rate, or 
higher price of N goods, also helps regain balance by reducing the demand for N 
goods along the new demand curve. Point 3 is transferred to Figure 15–3b at (P3, A3).
Figure 15–3 also shows the zones of imbalance. In the T-goods market (panel a) 
for any given level of absorption, say, A1, any real exchange rate greater than P1 
causes external surplus: The production of tradables exceeds the demand for trad-
ables because the relative price, P, is at a more depreciated level than required for 
equilibrium. Any real exchange rate below (more appreciated than) P1 causes an 
external deficit and the demand exceeds the supply of tradables. Therefore, the zone 
of surplus is northwest of EB and the zone of deficit is southeast.
In the N-goods market (Figure 15–3b), inflation is to the right of the IB curve, 
where the demand for N goods exceeds the supply. In that region, for any given real 
exchange rate, such as P1, absorption is too high, say, A3. To the left is the zone of 
unemployment, where there is an excess supply of N goods. In that region, for any 
given real exchange rate, say, P3, absorption is too low, say, A1.
The meanings of inflation and unemployment are precise in our model but 
not in the real world. It is best to think of inflation as being an increase in prices 
faster than is customary in the country in question. That rate would be quite low 
in  Germany, Japan, or China, probably less than 5 percent a year, but quite high in 
Surplus
Deficit
Inflation
Unemployment
3
1
1A
3A
1P
3P
Δ > 0
A
Δ < 0
P
2
1
1A
2A
1P
2P
Δ > 0
P
> 0
A
Real exchange rate
Real exchange rate
Absorption
(a)
(b)
Absorption
Δ
FIGURE 15–3 The Phase Diagram
(a) External balance (EB). (b) Internal balance (IB). The axes are the main policy 
variables: the real exchange rate, P, and the real absorption, A. The curves show 
equilibrium in the T-goods market (EB) and N-goods market (IB).

556   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
 Brazil or Argentina. Unemployment implies not only jobless workers but also idle 
capital and other factors of production. In other words, there is unemployment 
when an economy is inside the production frontier in Figure 15–1. A country may 
have high levels of labor unemployment but be unable to increase output because it 
is fully utilizing its capital or land.
EQUILIBRIUM AND DISEQUILIBRIUM
The two balance curves are put together in Figure 15–4. All along the external bal-
ance curve, the demand for T goods equals the supply produced at home plus any 
net foreign capital inflow. All along the internal balance curve, the demand for N 
goods equals the supply of N goods. The only point at which there is both internal 
and external balance (equilibrium in both the T- and N-goods markets) is the inter-
section of the two curves. This is sometimes called the bliss point. It is the same as the 
tangency of the indifference curve to the production frontier in Figure 15–1 at point 1. 
The objective of macroeconomic policy is to adjust the exchange rate and absorption 
to keep an economy stable, in both external and internal balance.
Deficit +
Unemployment
Surplus +
Unemployment
D
A
B
C
Surplus +
Inflation
Deficit +
Inflation
Internal
balance
External
balance
Real exchange rate (P = eP*t/Pn) 
Absorption (A) 
FIGURE 15–4 Zones of Imbalance
The economy is in equilibrium only at the intersection of the external 
balance (EB) and internal balance (IB) curves. Zones of imbalance are 
labeled. For example in zone A, the supply of T goods exceeds demand, 
so there is a surplus, and the demand for N goods exceeds supply, so 
there is inflation.

E Q U I L I B R I U M  I N  A  S M A L L ,  O P E N E C O N O M Y   557
Economies spend considerable time in one of the four zones of imbalance shown 
in Figure 15–4. Zone A to the north is a region of external surplus and inflation, where 
the exchange rate is undervalued. In zone B to the east of equilibrium, the economy 
faces inflation and a foreign deficit, due principally to excessive expenditure (absorp-
tion is greater than income). To the south is zone C, where the exchange rate is over-
valued (too appreciated) and there is both unemployment and an external deficit. 
And west of the bliss point the economy is in zone D, where, because of insufficient 
absorption, there is unemployment of all resources but a foreign surplus.
Once in disequilibrium, economies have built-in tendencies to escape back into 
balance. Figure 15–5 describes them separately for external balance (panel a) and 
internal balance (panel b). Start with an external surplus, point 1 (Figure 15–5a). The 
excess supply of tradables generates two self-correcting tendencies. First, the net 
inflow of foreign exchange adds to international reserves. If the central bank takes no 
countermeasures, the money supply increases and interest rates fall and induce both 
consumers and investors to spend more. The increase in absorption moves the econ-
omy rightward, back toward external balance. Second, the inflow of foreign exchange 
creates more demand for the local currency and, if the exchange rate is free to float, 
forces an appreciation. This is a move downward in the diagram, also toward the 
EB line. The net result of these two tendencies is the resultant, shown as a solid line 
in the diagram, heading toward external balance. If, instead, the economy starts in 
1
Δ
> 0
Pn
Δ
> 0
Pn
Δ
< 0
Pn
Δ
< 0
Pn
Δ 2 > 0
M
Δ 2 < 0
M
Δ  < 0
e
2
Δ  > 0
e
3
4
Real exchange rate
Absorption
Real exchange rate
(a)
(b)
Absorption
Internal
balance
External
balance
FIGURE 15–5 Tendencies toward Equilibrium
(a) External balance (EB). If the economy faces an external surplus (point 1), 
reserves and the money supply tend to rise while the exchange rate tends to 
appreciate; this drives the economy toward EB. (b) Internal balance (IB). For 
a deficit, if the economy faces inflation (point 3), the rise in prices leads to real 
appreciation of the exchange rate and a reduction in the real value of absorption; 
this moves conditions toward IB. Conversely for unemployment at point 4, 
but only if prices can fall flexibly.

558   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
external deficit at point 2, the tendencies are the opposite but the result is the same, 
a tendency to regain external balance.
The tendency to regain internal balance is shown in Figure 15–5b. When there 
is inflation (point 3), it affects both the real exchange rate and real absorption. If the 
nominal exchange rate remains fixed (or is not allowed to depreciate as fast as infla-
tion), the rise in Pn causes a real appreciation. At the same time, the rise in prices 
can cause a fall in the real value of absorption, assuming that the central bank does 
not take steps to increase the money supply to compensate for inflation. Under these 
assumptions, the economy would move from inflation at point 3 back toward internal 
balance. Unemployment (point 4) would be self-correcting also if prices are able to 
fall as easily as they rise, but this seldom is the case.
Despite these self-correcting tendencies, in practice, they often fail to work smoothly 
or quickly enough because of structural rigidities in the economy. For instance, 
exchange-rate changes may take time to affect actual imports and exports, perhaps 
as long as two years to have a full impact. In economies like Ghana and Zambia, 
dominated by one or two export products such as cocoa, oil, and copper, with long 
gestation periods for new investment, supply elasticities for tradables may be espe-
cially low, and foreign deficits can persist for a time despite real devaluations.
Nontradables prices probably rise very quickly when demand exceeds  supply, 
as in Figure 15–5b. But in many developing economies, inflation, once started, may 
resist corrective policies, and prices do not fall so easily when there is unemploy-
ment: Unions strike wage bargains that try to maintain real wages by continually 
raising nominal wages; banks use their market power to keep interest rates high; pro-
ducers depend on imports, the prices of which are responsive only to exchange rate 
adjustments; and large firms with monopoly or oligopoly power keep prices up to 
cover costs that resist downward pressures. Such rigidities have frequently been cited 
to explain chronic trade deficits and inflation in Latin America, especially in Argen-
tina and Brazil.
However, arguments about structural rigidities can be overstated. There is some 
flexibility in production for most export industries, even in the short term. And many 
producer prices are quite flexible, including those of most farm products, those in the 
large informal sector, and even those of some modern manufacturing firms. Neverthe-
less, the automatic tendencies toward external and internal balance depicted in Fig-
ure 15–5 are likely to be too slow and politically painful to satisfy most governments.
Not all the barriers to adjustment are structural. Sometimes, policies work against 
adjustment. When foreign reserves fall, for example, the money supply also falls 
automatically unless the central bank’s policy is to sterilize these shifts by expanding 
domestic credit to compensate for the fall in reserves and keep the money supply from 
falling. Sterilization prevents the move from points 1 or 2 of Figure 15–5a toward exter-
nal balance. And nominal exchange rates respond to changing market conditions only 
if the exchange rate is allowed to float or the government makes frequent adjustments 
in the nominal exchange rate to match changing economic conditions.

E Q U I L I B R I U M  I N  A  S M A L L ,  O P E N E C O N O M Y   559
However, the opposite policy, a fixed nominal exchange rate, is needed if infla-
tion in nontradables prices is to cause a real exchange-rate appreciation, as depicted 
at point 3 of Figure 15–5b. This fixed nominal rate is called an exchange rate anchor
because the fixed rate alone can halt the upward drift of prices as the economy 
moves due south from point 3. Chile used such an anchor to slow inflation during 
the late 1970s (Box 15–2). If government devalues the rate to keep up with inflation, 
In the last year of the Salvadore Allende regime in Chile, when the public sec-
tor deficit soared to 30 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) and was
financed mostly by printing money, inflation exceeded 500 percent a year. In
1973, General Augusto Pinochet overthrew Allende and established an auto-
cratic regime. An early goal of his government was to stabilize the economy. It
proved to be a difficult task of many years, with important lessons for later stabi-
lizations in Latin America.
Faced by rapid inflation and unsustainable external deficits, the government
imposed a fiscal and monetary shock on the economy. The budget deficit was
cut to 10.6 percent of GDP in 1974 and again to 2.7 percent in 1975. Monetary
policy was tight: From the second quarter of 1975 through the middle of 1976, it
has since been estimated, households and firms were willing to hold more money
than was in circulation. But inflation persisted; consumer prices nearly doubled in
1977.
Despite draconian measures, prices continued to rise for two reasons. First,
the peso was aggressively devalued to improve the foreign balance, the more so
because of the 40 percent fall in copper prices in 1975. In 1977, the peso was
worth about one-80th its 1973 value against the dollar. Second, wages in the
formal sector were determined by rules that permitted adjustments based on the
previous year’s rate of inflation, a rule that helped perpetuate the higher rates of
earlier years. It also was argued by some that the monetary policy was not strin-
gent enough.
In 1978, the government switched gears and began using the exchange rate
as its main anti-inflation weapon. At first a crawling peg was adopted with prean-
nounced rates, the tablita, that did not fully adjust to domestic inflation. In 1979,
a
the rate was fixed at 39 pesos to the dollar for three years. The appreciating real
exchange rate, or anchor, helped control inflation, which was down to 10 percent
r
by 1982. But it also discouraged export growth and contributed to a growing
BOX 15–2 PIONEERING STABILIZATION:
CHILE, 1973–84

560   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
Brazil’s practice for many years, then real appreciation is thwarted and there is no 
anchor. Similarly, real absorption falls with inflation only if the government fixes its 
expenditure and its deficit in nominal terms and allows inflation to erode the real 
value of the expenditure and if the central bank restrains the money supply to grow 
more slowly than inflation. More typically, the fiscal authorities adjust the expendi-
ture, while the monetary authorities adjust both the money supply and the nominal 
exchange rate, to fully compensate for inflation. In that case, rising prices have no 
impact on the real exchange rate or real absorption and an inflationary economy 
remains at point 3 in Figure 15–5b.
STABILIZATION POLICIES
Whether the barriers to rapid automatic adjustment are inherent in the economic 
structure or created by policy contradictions, in most cases, governments need to 
take an active role to stabilize their economies. They have three basic instruments for 
doing so: exchange-rate management, fiscal policy, and monetary policy.
Alternative exchange-rate regimes were introduced in Chapter 12. Govern-
ments can vary the exchange rate by having the central bank offer to buy and sell 
foreign currency at a predetermined or fixed official exchange rate (e in our nomen-
clature) that nevertheless can be changed from time to time or by allowing the rate to 
float in the currency market, although the central bank sometimes may intervene to 
influence the price. An intermediate case is the crawling peg, under which the central 
current-account deficit. At the same time, Chile liberalized its controls over for-
eign capital flows and attracted large inflows of loans: Net long-term capital rose 
from negligible amounts before 1978 to average over $2 billion a year in the fol-
lowing five years, equivalent to 8 percent of GDP in 1980. This inflow not only 
financed the growing current deficit but contributed to the real appreciation of 
the exchange rate.
Not until after 1984 did Chile finally achieve a semblance of both internal and 
external balance. It did so through a large real devaluation, approaching 50 per-
cent, supported by tighter fiscal and monetary policies. After a decade and a half 
of falling income per capita, Chilean incomes grew by 5.8 percent a year from 
1985 to 1991.
Source: Based on the account by Vittorio Corbo and Andrés Solimano, “Chile’s Experience with 
Stabilization Revisited,” in Michael Bruno et al., eds., Lessons of Economic Stabilization and Its After-
math (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991).

E Q U I L I B R I U M  I N  A  S M A L L ,  O P E N E C O N O M Y   561
bank determines the rate but changes it frequently, as often as daily, to ensure that 
the official rate stays in line with domestic and world inflation; this results in a con-
stant or slowly adjusting real exchange rate (P).
Governments have two policies that can influence the level of absorption. Fiscal 
policy, adjusting levels of government expenditure and taxation, directly affects the 
government’s components of consumption and investment. It also influences pri-
vate expenditure, especially consumption, which depends on disposable income, or 
income net of taxes. Monetary policy also affects private expenditure. If the central 
bank acts to increase the money supply, as described in Chapter 12, it increases the 
liquidity of households and firms, lowers interest rates, and stimulates private con-
sumption and investment.
The power of the phase diagram is that it indicates the necessary directions for 
these policies, depending on the state of the economy. Figure 15–6 provides such a 
policy map. It shows the same external and internal balance lines as in the previous 
diagrams but adds a new element: four policy quadrants, I to IV, within which the 
policy prescription always is the same.
Take, for example, point 1, which has been placed on the external balance line 
but in the inflationary zone. For many years, Brazil was in this situation, with buoy-
ant exports and balance in foreign payments but chronic inflation running from 40 to 
well over 100 percent a year. Because the demand for nontradables exceeds supply, 
we know that one necessary correction is a reduction in real absorption, monetary 
and fiscal austerity, that would reduce demand and move the economy due west 
from point 1. But, if that is the only policy taken, the economy would not reach inter-
nal balance until point 4, in the zone of external surplus. One imbalance is exchanged 
for another. To avoid generating a surplus, reduced absorption needs to be accompa-
nied by an appreciation of the exchange rate, a move due south from point 1. The 
result would be a move approximately toward the equilibrium or bliss point, 0.
Note three things about this result. First, this combination of policies, austerity 
and appreciation, would work from any point within quadrant I to return the econ-
omy to equilibrium. That is, the same combination is needed whether the economy 
had inflation with a moderate external surplus or inflation with a moderate deficit, 
either just above or just below the EB line. If the economy starts just below external 
balance, with a moderate deficit, it may seem strange (counterintuitive) to recom-
mend an appreciation that, on its own, would worsen the deficit. But the reduction 
in absorption, needed to reduce inflation, also reduces the deficit because it also low-
ers the demand for tradables. Indeed, it reduces the demand for tradables too much 
and throws the economy into surplus; this is the reason an appreciation is needed. Of 
course, the relative intensity of each policy is different, depending where in quadrant I 
the economy starts. But the basic principle holds: Anywhere in quadrant I, the right 
combination of policies is austerity and appreciation, the combination that moves 
the economy toward point 0.

562   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
Second, in general, two policy adjustments are required to move toward equi-
librium. This is a simple example of the general rule enunciated by Dutch economist 
Jan Tinbergen: To achieve a given number of policy goals, it generally is necessary to 
employ the same number of policy instruments. Here we have two goals, internal 
and external balance, and need adjustments in both absorption (austerity) and the 
real exchange rate (appreciation) to reach them both. It is not always necessary to 
use two goals, however. If the economy lies just to the east of equilibrium at point 
5, then a reduction in absorption achieves internal and external balance simultane-
ously. And, if the initial situation is point 6, due north of 0, then appreciation alone 
does the job.
Third, we could view the policy prescription in either of two ways. Austerity is 
needed to reduce inflation (move west) and appreciation is used to avoid surplus 
(move south). Or appreciation can be targeted on internal balance (move south toward 
point 2) but alone would cause a deficit, so that austerity then is required to restore 
external balance. Therefore, no logic in macroeconomics suggests that one particular 
policy should be assigned to one particular goal. Economic institutions often do this 
anyway. In practice, the central bank might use the exchange rate to achieve external 
III
II
I
IV
0
6
5
1
4
EB
IB
Δ > 0
A
Δ < 0
e
Δ < 0
A
Δ < 0
e
2
3
Δ > 0
A
Δ > 0
e
Δ < 0
A
Δ > 0
e
Absorption (A)
Real exchange rate (P = ePt*IPn)
FIGURE 15–6 Policy Zones
From any position of disequilibrium, two policy adjustments generally are needed 
to restore internal and external balance. In each quadrant (I–IV) a particular 
combination of exchange rate and absorption policy is prescribed.

E Q U I L I B R I U M  I N  A  S M A L L ,  O P E N E C O N O M Y   563
balance while the finance ministry uses the budget for internal balance. But if these 
two approaches are not coordinated, they may well fail to reach equilibrium.
With these principles established for quadrant I, it is fairly routine to go around 
the map in Figure 15–6 and see what policy responses are required:
• In quadrant II at a point like 2, with an external deficit but internal balance, 
exchange-rate devaluation is needed to restore foreign balance but, 
taken alone, would push the economy into inflation. Fiscal and monetary 
austerity also are needed to avoid inflation and reach equilibrium. We 
could reverse this assignment of policies and use austerity to achieve 
external balance and devaluation to stimulate the economy. Many African 
countries have been in this situation right up to the present, with low 
inflation but an insufficiency of export earnings and foreign investment to 
pay for the imports required for economic development.
• In quadrant III at point 3, an expansionary fiscal or monetary policy 
eliminates unemployment but at the cost of a foreign deficit, so devaluation 
is needed to reach equilibrium. Or devaluation stimulates employment and 
so requires expansion to eliminate the resulting surplus. This is the situation 
of a mature industrialized economy during a recession, with unemployed 
labor and capital, but it is not so common in developing countries.
• In quadrant IV at point 4, exchange-rate appreciation can eliminate the 
external surplus while fiscal expansion prevents unemployment. Or fiscal 
expansion can end the surplus while appreciation prevents a resulting 
inflation. A few countries in Asia, such as Taiwan and Malaysia in the 1980s, 
have been in this situation.
So the principles of macroeconomic stabilization are simple: If policy makers 
know where to place their economy on this map, they know how to move toward 
equilibrium. But how do policy makers know where they are? The answer lies partly 
in measurement, partly in art. Regularly available data on the balance of payments, 
changes in reserves, and inflation can help locate an economy with respect to the 
external and internal balance lines. Data on the nominal and real exchange rates, 
the budget deficit, and the money supply can indicate movements from one policy 
quadrant to another. Some kinds of data, such as private sector short-term borrowing 
abroad, however, may not be readily available to policy makers. Such was the case 
in Korea at the beginning of that country’s financial crisis in 1997. In principle, bar-
ring such surprises as an unknown large short-term foreign debt that has to be repaid 
immediately, econometric models can locate the economy and indicate the policies 
needed to balance it. In practice, especially but not only for developing economies, 
such models can be too imprecise and too unstable to be wholly dependable. The art 
of stabilization policy comes in knowing just how hard to push on each component 
of policy and how long to keep pushing. In this, experience in managing a particular 
economy is as important a guide as the models estimated by economists.

564   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
APPLICATIONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN MODEL
Throughout this book we refer to different kinds of economic problems that are asso-
ciated with developing countries, including the Dutch disease, debt crises, terms-
of-trade shocks, foreign-exchange shortages, destructive inflation, and droughts or 
other natural catastrophes. The Australian model and its phase diagram can be used 
to show how these and other shocks affect macroeconomic balance and how they 
should be handled.
DUTCH DISEASE
In Chapter 18 we will discuss the strange phenomenon of the Dutch disease, in 
which a country that receives higher export prices or a larger inflow of foreign capital 
may end up worse off than without the windfall. The Dutch disease was first analyzed 
by Australian economists Max Corden and Peter Neary, using a version of the open-
economy model.6 Figure 15–7 traces the impact of a windfall gain using the phase 
diagram. (Box 18–1 provides an alternative exposition of Dutch disease.)
An economy in equilibrium at point 1 suddenly begins to receive higher prices 
for its major export or is favored by foreign aid donors or foreign investors. All the 
oil producers, from Saudi Arabia to Indonesia to Mexico, were in this position in the 
1970s, as were coffee (and many other commodities) exporters during the boom of 
the mid-1970s. Egypt and Israel were rewarded with large aid programs by the United 
States after the Camp David accord of 1978, as was Ghana by the World Bank and 
others during its stabilization of the 1980s (Box 15–3). Both Chile in the late 1970s 
and Mexico after its stabilization in the late 1980s received large inflows of private 
capital, much of it a return of previous flight capital. Foreign exchange windfalls are 
more frequent than sometimes is supposed. In some cases, these windfalls result 
from new discoveries of natural resources, such as the major offshore oil reserves dis-
covered by Ghana in 2007.
When the windfall occurs, the supply of tradable goods rises at any given price. 
This can be shown as a rightward shift in the supply curve in Figure 15–2a. In the 
phase diagram of Figure 15–7, there is a rightward shift in the EB curve. At point 1, 
for example, which had been in external equilibrium along EB1, the economy now is 
in surplus, so the new EB curve must be to the right—for example, at EB2. The econ-
omy cannot remain at point 1 because the inflow of reserves increases the money 
supply; this adds to demand and, because the windfall increases private income 
and government revenue, leads to greater expenditure. So absorption rises, a move 
APPLICATIONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN MODEL
6W. Max Corden and J. Peter Neary, “Booming Sector and Deindustrialisation in a Small Open 
 Economy,” Economic Journal 92 (1982), 825–48.

A P P L I C AT I O N S  O F  T H E  A U S T R A L I A N  M O D E L   565
from point 1 toward point 2. This moves the economy off its internal balance, into 
inflation.7
The resulting rise in Pn has two effects: a reduction in real absorption that par-
tially corrects the initial rise in A and, assuming the official rate is fixed, a real appreci-
ation of the exchange rate. (The real rate also appreciates if the nominal rate is floating 
because the greater supply of foreign currency drives down the price of foreign cur-
rency.) Therefore, the economy first moves from point 1 toward point 2 in Figure 15–7, 
then begins to head in the general direction of the new equilibrium, point 3. In this 
case, market forces are likely to be sufficient to reach the new equilibrium, unless the 
2
3
1
EB1
IB
EB2
1A
3A
3P
1P
Δ
> 0
Pn
Δ
> 0
Reserves
Δ > 0
F
P
ePt Pn
Real exchange rate ( =
)
/*
Absorption (A)
FIGURE 15–7 The Dutch Disease
An export boom or capital inflow shifts the EB curve rightward and leaves the 
economy at point 1 in surplus. As reserves accumulate and the money supply 
rises (or as the government and consumers spend the windfall), absorption rises 
and the economy moves eastward, into inflation. As nontradable prices rise, the 
real exchange appreciates. At the new equilibrium (point 3), because P is lower, 
the supply and demand is balanced with less production of T goods and more 
output of N goods than before. The loss of tradable output is what makes this a 
disease.
7If the windfall is an inflow of capital, this treatment is precise. In the case of a rise in export prices, 
however, the move from point 1 to point 2 is an approximation. Strictly speaking, a rise in export prices 
should raise Pt*, a depreciation of the real exchange rate that moves the economy upward from point 1, 
after which the economy moves east toward EB2.

566   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
In 1983, after a decade of economic mismanagement, Ghana’s gross domestic 
product (GDP) was 20 percent below its 1974 peak, investment was only 4 per-
cent of GDP, exports had sunk to 6 percent of GDP, and inflation rocketed to
120 percent for the year. After a decade of economic decline, Ghana’s military
government, headed by Flight Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings, was ready to undertake
drastic measures to stabilize the economy and restart economic development.
Working closely with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Ghana focused 
on three deep-seated problems: exchange-rate reform, fiscal adjustment, and 
monetary policy. At first, the government maintained its fixed exchange rate but
drastically devalued the cedi from 2.75 to the dollar in 1983 to 90 to the dollar 
by 1986. In 1986, Ghana adopted a restricted floating currency, using periodic
auctions to determine the rate. The official exchange market was broadened in 
1988, when many foreign exchange bureaus were authorized to trade currencies
and virtually absorbed the parallel market in currency; by 1990, the banks were 
empowered to trade in an interbank currency market. This completed the move 
to a floating rate regime. By the end of 1992, the cedi traded at 520 per dollar.
In 1983, with fiscal revenues less than 6 percent of GDP, the urgent need 
was to restore revenues and control expenditures. The deficit was cut from 6.2 to 
2.7 percent of GDP in the first year of austerity, and by 1985, the government
had begun a major public investment program to stimulate growth. By 1988, the 
government had restored total expenditures to 15 percent of GDP, 20 percent 
of which was investment, and was running a surplus of nearly 4 percent of GDP.
Throughout the period, the money supply was constrained but inflation 
remained stubbornly above 20 percent a year until 1991, when it was reduced to
16 percent and real interest rates finally became positive. Because food prices 
play a large role in the consumer price index, investment in food production was
seen as an important component of any long-run attack on inflation.
The aid donors responded handsomely to Ghana’s stabilization and the
accompanying economic reforms: The sum of net official transfers and net long-
term capital rose from just over $100 million in 1983 to $585 million in 1991.
Stabilization helped restore economic growth. From the depression of 1983–91, 
GDP grew by 5.1 percent a year and investment rose to 17 percent of GDP. The
improvement, although dramatic in relation to the early 1980s, still left Ghana 
with a lot to be done: In 1991, income per capita remained 25 percent below its 
1973 level.
Source: This account is based on Ishan Kapur et al., Ghana: Adjustment and Growth, 1983–91
(Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 1991).
BOX 15–3 RECOVERING FROM MISMANAGEMENT: 
GHANA, 1983–91

A P P L I C AT I O N S  O F  T H E  A U S T R A L I A N  M O D E L   567
authorities prevent appreciation and maintain real absorption and so keep the econ-
omy in an inflationary posture like point 2.
What, then, is the problem? The economy is at a new equilibrium, its terms of 
trade improved, its currency appreciated and so citizens have more command over 
foreign resources, people spending and consuming more without having to work any 
harder. There are two flaws in this otherwise idyllic picture. First, such windfalls gen-
erally are temporary. When export prices fall or the capital inflow dries up, the EB 
curve shifts back and a costly adjustment is necessary. We analyze that process in the 
next section.
The second problem is that, in shifting from the old to the new equilibrium, 
adjustments in the economy must be made. The real exchange rate P is lower, so St 
has fallen, while Sn has risen. Because the booming export sector does not retrench, 
nonboom tradables bear the brunt of the adjustment. Frictions in the labor market 
are likely to mean at least temporary unemployment as workers switch from tradable 
to nontradable production. If the tradable sector includes modern manufacturing, 
then long-term development may be set back because manufacturing is the sector 
likely to yield the most rapid productivity growth in the future. And if tradable indus-
tries close, it is more difficult to make the inevitable adjustment back toward point 1 
when the windfall is over. This decline in nonboom-tradable production turns a for-
eign exchange windfall into a “disease.”
What can be done to cure the disease? The government could try to move the 
economy back toward the old (and probably future) equilibrium at point 1. Its tools 
are the official exchange rate, which would have to be devalued against the tenden-
cies of market forces, and expenditure, which would have to be reduced through 
restrictive fiscal and monetary policies that also reduce inflation (lower Pn or at least 
its growth). The resulting buildup of reserves and bank balances have to be sterilized 
through monetary policy so they are held as assets and not spent. It is a neat politi-
cal trick to manage an austere macroeconomic policy in the face of a boom because 
all the popular pressures are for more spending. Not too many countries have man-
aged it. Indonesia is among the few that have.
DEBT REPAYMENT CRISIS
When Mexico announced in 1982 that it no longer could service the debt it acquired 
during the oil boom of the 1970s, many other developing countries followed Mexi-
co’s lead, and the financial world entered a decade of debt crisis (Chapter 13). Most 
Latin American countries largely have overcome their debt problems, but many Afri-
can countries continue to struggle to repay the money they borrowed, mostly from 
aid agencies. Although debt service insolvency encroaches gradually on an economy 
and can be foreseen, it often appears as a national crisis because economic manage-
ment has been inept.
The formal analysis of a debt crisis is similar to that of another common phenom-
enon, a decline in the terms of trade that leads to a foreign exchange shortage, which 
in turn is simply the reverse of the Dutch disease. Therefore, the oil exporters, such 

568   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
as Indonesia, Nigeria, and Venezuela, faced a similar kind of crisis once oil prices 
began falling in the 1980s. We can understand the similarity between a debt crisis 
and a decline in the terms of trade more clearly by seeing them in their common con-
text in the balance of payments. A decline in the terms of trade implies deterioration 
in the balance of trade (in which the excess of imports over exports increases). All 
else equal, a declining trade balance adds directly to the current account deficit. As 
detailed in the appendix to this chapter, one of the few ways in which countries can 
finance current account deficits is by borrowing abroad.8 Indeed, many developing 
countries financed chronic current account deficits by borrowing abroad, in the pro-
cess accumulating enormous stocks of debt (often to levels greater than their GDP). 
Debt crises ensue (as discussed in Chapter 13) when current account deficits become 
unsustainable and lenders want to be repaid.
Figure 15–8 captures this process. An economy in balance at point 1 needs to find 
additional resources to repay its foreign debt or needs to adjust to falling terms of 
trade. The supply of tradables therefore shifts to the left in Figure 15–2a; in the phase 
diagram, the EB curve also shifts leftward to EB2.9 If the crisis leads to debt relief or 
additional foreign aid, the curve moves less far and might settle at EB3.
Now in foreign deficit, the economy begins losing reserves. If the government 
has to repay some of the debt or falling export prices cut into its revenues, the govern-
ment needs to reduce its expenditures as well. Both cause a reduction in absorption. 
These actions move the economy toward external balance but also into unemploy-
ment. To gain the new equilibrium at point 3, it is also necessary to devalue the cur-
rency. This could be done by the central bank under a fixed rate or by the foreign 
exchange market under a floating rate. At the new equilibrium, the country produces 
more and consumes fewer tradables because P has risen. This, of course, is a loss of 
welfare for the populace. The surplus of St over Dt is used to repay the debt or simply 
compensates for reduced export prices.
Debt crises and the hardships they cause are not an inevitable consequence 
of borrowing to finance development, as was discussed in Chapter 13. If the bor-
rowed resources are invested productively, they increase the potential output of 
both tradables and nontradables. Added production increases income and gener-
ates the capacity to repay the debt out of additional income, without a crisis and 
an austerity program. Countries such as Korea and Indonesia have been large 
international borrowers, but before the financial crisis of 1997–99, they escaped 
debt crises.
8The only other ways (beyond foreign borrowing) to finance a current account deficit are to attract for-
eign investment and/or to run down the central bank’s stock of foreign reserves. See the appendix to this 
chapter for a concise summary of balance of payments accounting.
9Strictly speaking, we cannot analyze the fall in export prices this way, but it is a reasonable approxima-
tion for many situations. See note 7.

A P P L I C AT I O N S  O F  T H E  A U S T R A L I A N  M O D E L   569
STABILIZATION PACKAGE: INFLATION AND A DEFICIT
External shock is not the only way an economy gets into trouble. Reckless or mis-
guided government policies often are to blame. Impatient with sluggish develop-
ment or intent on benefiting its constituencies, a government expands its spending 
and incurs a budget deficit. Unable to finance the deficit by borrowing from the pub-
lic, the ministry of finance sells short-term bills to the central bank; this adds to the 
money supply. The economy drifts into inflation and a foreign deficit, at a point 
like point 1 in Figure 15–9, far from equilibrium at point 2 on the economy’s origi-
nal external balance curve EB1. When economies become unstable in this way, pri-
vate investors get skittish and try to invest in nonproductive assets like land or, more 
often, invest abroad; this deepens the external deficit. The government, recognizing 
the error of its ways or just hoping for some outside help to avoid painful adjustment, 
calls in the IMF.
2
3
1
Debt
relief
EB1
IB
EB3
EB2
1A
3A
3P
1P
Δ < 0
A
Δ
> 0
Debt service
Δ > 0
P
P
ePt Pn
Real exchange rate ( =
)
/*
A )
Absorption (
FIGURE 15–8 Debt Crisis or Declining Terms of Trade
An economy in equilibrium at point 1 suddenly needs to repay its debt (or faces 
falling export prices). External balance shifts from EB1 to EB2, although debt 
relief or increased foreign assistance might reshift the balance line back to EB3. 
If policies accommodate the fall in reserves and income, absorption declines. 
A devaluing exchange rate, via central bank action or market forces, helps the 
economy move to its new equilibrium at point 3. With more tradables produced 
and less consumed, the surpluses can be used to repay the debt.

570   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
The core IMF stabilization program consists of a reduction in the government’s 
budget deficit and programmed targets for domestic credit that, in effect, cap the 
growth of the money supply. Together, these measures reduce absorption in the 
economy and move it westward from point 1, closer to external and internal balance. 
IMF packages frequently include an exchange-rate devaluation as well. Whether this 
is needed or not depends on the precise location of the economy (point 1) relative 
to equilibrium (point 2). In some cases, the reduction in absorption is sufficient to 
reach both internal and external balance. As pictured in Figure 15–9, a small devalua-
tion is needed to reach point 2 and avoid unemployment.
However, IMF programs usually come with substantial aid attached, not only from 
the fund, but from the World Bank and bilateral donors. The aid package, by adding 
to the economy’s capacity to buy tradables, shifts the EB curve to the right, to EB2 in 
the diagram, and moves equilibrium to point 3. Note two things about this aid pack-
age. First, it reduces the need for austerity to some extent, as A3 is greater than A2. 
Second, it reduces the need for devaluation of the exchange rate. Indeed, as shown, 
2
3
1
4
IMF
targets
IMF
package
EB1
IB
EB2
2A
3A
3P
2P
Δ < 0
A
Δ < 0?
e
P
ePt Pn
Real exchange rate ( =
)
/*
A )
Absorption (
FIGURE 15–9 Stabilization from Inflation and a Deficit
An economy at point 1, far from equilibrium at point 2, above all needs to 
reduce absorption through austerity: reduced budgetary deficits and slower 
growth of the money supply. An International Money Fund (IMF) and 
donor package of aid might bring equilibrium closer by shifting the external 
balance to EB2, but the aid package is conditional on the austerity program. 
Whether any exchange rate action is required depends on the precise initial 
position, point 1.

A P P L I C AT I O N S  O F  T H E  A U S T R A L I A N  M O D E L   571
there is little or no need to devalue to move from 1 to 3. Donors and the IMF never-
theless frequently insist on devaluation. Sometimes, that may be a requirement just 
to reach a point like 3. In other cases, donors and the IMF may have in mind a self-
sustaining stabilization that will be valid even after aid is reduced and the external 
balance curve moves back toward EB1. Whatever the motive, it is important to real-
ize that aid itself is a partial substitute for both devaluation and austerity. In essence, 
the aid does what higher production of tradables otherwise must do and it finances 
expenditures that otherwise must be cut. Ghana’s experience, which fits this descrip-
tion, is discussed in Box 15–3. More recently, Greece has suffered a major debt crisis, 
the analysis of which draws on elements of both Figures 15–8 and 15–9 (Box 15–4).
Problems of unsustainable debt are not limited to the poorest countries. Start-
ing in 2010, Greece faced a debt crisis so severe as to threaten the stability of
the European Union (EU). As of September 2011, it remained uncertain whether
Greece would be forced to default on its foreign debts or whether other mem-
bers of the EU would provide its second bailout package for Greece in two years.
In May 2010, the EU and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) provided a pack-
age of loans and balance of payments support worth €750 billion (approximately
$938 billion). In return, the government of Greece committed itself to an aus-
terity program that included severe reductions in expenditures and wages, ter-
mination of tens of thousands of government jobs, and extensive tax increases.
This agreement sparked widespread civil unrest in Greece, which contributed to
a lack of confidence in the country’s ability to implement the promised reforms
and service its foreign debts.
Greece’s debt problem accumulated over many years of current account defi-
cits, the magnitude of which ballooned during the late 2000s. Greece’s current
account deficits as a share of GDP began mounting in the mid-1990s. Deficits
on the order of 3 percent of GDP in the late 1990s more than doubled relative
to GDP during 2000–05. By 2005, Greece’s current account deficit was equiva-
lent to 7.5 percent of GDP, a proportion that doubled again to nearly 15 percent
by 2008. Between 2008 and 2010, Greece succeeded in reducing its current
account deficit to 10.5 percent of GDP, mainly by reducing imports. Borrowing by
the Greek government to finance its deficits had also grown rapidly, as the gov-
ernment budget deficit as a share of GDP increased from 5.7 percent in 2006
to 15.4 percent in 2009. The government’s total debt shot up from €183.2 bil-
lion in 2004 (equivalent to 99 percent of GDP, or approximately $228 billion)
BOX 15–4 THE GREEK DEBT CRISIS OF 2010–12

572   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
to €330.4 billion in 2010 (equivalent to 144 percent of GDP, or approximately 
$438 billion). The country’s general economic stagnation was further reflected in 
its unemployment rate, which after fluctuating around 10 percent for a decade, 
fell to 7.5 percent in May 2008, only to double by March 2011. Greece’s GDP 
shrank by 6.6 percent in 2010.
By the fall of 2011, the government of Greece found itself between a rock 
and a hard place, as the EU debt relief package was imperiled by a threatened 
cutoff in response to Greece’s apparent inability to meet its austerity commit-
ments. Yet daily strikes and mounting political pressure within Greece were 
preventing the government (led by a socialist party, with a slim parliamentary 
majority) from fully implementing the promised cuts. A disorderly default was a 
distinct possibility, along with an exit by Greece from the euro zone.
The Australian model lends itself well to a depiction of the Greek debt cri-
sis. The analysis shown in the figure combines elements of Figures 15–8 and 
15–9. By 2005, Greece was suffering from both a balance of payments deficit 
and unemployment, conditions indicated by point 1. By 2010, both unemploy-
ment and the balance of payments deficit had substantially worsened, moving 
Greece toward point 2 (farther from both internal and external balance and far 
from equilibrium at point 3). It seems straightforward, based on the phase dia-
gram, that Greece needed to reduce absorption and depreciate its real exchange 
rate, but there’s a catch. As a member of the EU, Greece was a member of the 
euro zone and was thus unable to devalue its currency as a means of reducing 
its balance of payments deficit. The only way for Greece to induce the neces-
sary real depreciation was to reduce Pn sufficiently. In short, austerity presented 
itself as virtually the only tool available to the Greek government. Pushing down 
wages—a central element of the Government’s austerity program—would reduce 
Pn (because labor can be counted as a key nontradable) and help depreciate 
the real exchange rate. Austerity was also critical to restoring external balance 
because borrowing to finance the current account deficit was no longer an 
option for Greece.
The bailout package offered by EU member states in concert with the IMF 
would effectively shift the EB curve out to EB, thus reducing the amount of 
both real depreciation and spending cuts required to reach the new equilibrium 
at point 4. Herein lay the impasse encountered in the fall of 2011. Greece was 
widely seen as incapable of making the cuts necessary to reach equilibrium at 
point 3. Without the bailout package, default seemed unavoidable. Yet even the 
degree of austerity required to reach the postbailout equilibrium at point 4 
was becoming politically impossible for the Greek government. Absent a cred-
ible commitment by the Greek government to impose the necessary spending 
and public employment cuts (along with substantial tax increases), the EU was 

A P P L I C AT I O N S  O F  T H E  A U S T R A L I A N  M O D E L   573
Another kind of stabilization also can be illustrated with Figure 15–9, rapid infla-
tion (or hyperinflation). In Bolivia’s hyperinflation of the mid-1980s or the chronic 
inflations in the past in Brazil and Argentina, external balance is a secondary con-
sideration or not a major problem. Point 4 in the diagram depicts this situation. 
Austerity still is required to move toward equilibrium at point 2 or 3 (if there is an 
aid package), but devaluation only intensifies inflation. Instead, the currency must 
be appreciated, which also dampens inflation. One way to achieve this would be to 
fix the nominal rate and let the continuing (if decreasing) inflation in nontradable 
prices (Pn) appreciate the real rate P. This is the exchange-rate anchor, a device used 
often in Latin America, especially in Chile during the late 1970s, in Bolivia during the 
 unwilling to provide the bailout. The brinksmanship between Greece’s govern-
ment and its debtors continued into early 2012. Greece’s next round of debt 
repayments were due in on March 20, 2012, and, absent a new bailout agree-
ment, default was inevitable. In late February, just weeks before the prospective 
default, EU and Greek negotiators agreed on a second bailout program worth
€130 billion ($169 billion) in return for renewed promises of severe austerity and 
greater EU influence over Greek budgets. The deal was intended to keep the
Greek government solvent until 2014. Yet, Greece’s continuing deep recession
and political uncertainty suggested that the crisis was far from over.
3
4
1
2
EU/IMF
IB
EB
EB'
bailout
Greece in 2005
Greece in 2010
Absorption (A)
A3
P4
P3
Real exchange rate (P = eP*t/Pn)
A4

574   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
mid-1980s, and in Argentina during the 1990s. It has the disadvantage that a lower 
real rate discourages export growth. Yet investment in new exports may be part of a 
strategy to open the economy, diversify exports, and move the external balance curve 
to the right.
DROUGHT, HURRICANES, AND EARTHQUAKES
The human tragedy of drought, earthquakes, and other natural disasters in places 
such as Ethiopia, the West African Sahel, and Haiti in 2010 dwarfs issues of macro-
economic management. But the adept management of an economy racked by natu-
ral disaster is essential to reduce the misery of starving or displaced people. Drought, 
for example, reduces a country’s capacity to produce food, export crops, and in some 
countries, generate electricity from hydropower. At the same time, income is lower 
because farmers and others have less product to sell. Government then needs to pro-
vide social safety nets; this means spending more on the provision of food, transpor-
tation, health services, and sometimes shelter. Foreign governments often provide 
financial, food, and technical aid under these situations.
The macroeconomic reflection of a drought or earthquake is depicted in Fig-
ure  15–10. The economy begins in equilibrium at point 1. Drought or earthquake 
reduces the economy’s capacity to produce both nontradables (some foods, hydro-
electricity, water supplies) and tradables (export crops, importable foods, some 
manufactures). We show this as a leftward shift in both the IB and EB lines: Reduced 
output of Sn at any given price means a larger zone in which Dn exceeds Sn; this is 
inflationary. Similarly for St, and this enlarges the area of deficit. The new external 
balance curve, EB2, may be augmented (shifted back to the right) by foreign aid 
to EB3, in which case, the new equilibrium is point 3.
The economy, still at point 1, is inflationary. The fall in incomes creates a ten-
dency for absorption to shrink on its own and move the economy leftward toward 
the new equilibrium. At the same time, the government tries to spend more to relieve 
hunger, disease, and other problems. The outcome depends on the relative force of 
these tendencies. The impact of most natural disasters is temporary, typically lasting 
a year, although some African droughts have been much longer, and the Haiti earth-
quake of 2010 is likely to last for several years or more. It is appropriate to try to ride 
out such shocks with minimal adjustment, especially if foreign aid can bear much of 
the burden. Therefore, for example, even if an exchange-rate adjustment is called for 
to reach equilibrium, it is unlikely to work very well during the natural disaster and 
probably should be resisted. This could be said for fiscal austerity too, except that the 
rise in prices can deepen the suffering of those already hurt by the disaster. If the gov-
ernment is able to shift its expenditures so that a greater portion goes into alleviating 
the impact of the disaster, it may be able to relieve the worst suffering while restrict-
ing the rise of total expenditures and containing inflation.

S U M M A R Y   575
SUMMARY
• Open economies may be exposed to a variety of shocks, both positive and 
negative, either of which may require policy responses to balance potential 
negative effects. In many cases, we have seen that a country’s vulnerability 
to external shocks may be increased by its own history of poor policy choices.
• One common problem among developing countries arises from extended 
periods of spending more than they earn and financing the resulting 
current account deficits with foreign borrowing. For many developing 
countries, these persistent current account deficits become unsustainable, 
typically requiring both spending reductions and currency devaluation.
SUMMARY
Food
aid
1
3
2
EB2
IB1
IB2
EB3
EB1
Δ > 0
G
Δ < 0
Y
Absorption ( )
A
= ePt
P
/Pn)
*
Real exchange rate (
FIGURE 15–10 Drought
Drought or another natural disaster reduces the capacity to produce both 
nontradables and tradables, so the curves shift to the west. Disaster relief 
from abroad augments the external balance curve and shifts it to EB3, with 
equilibrium at point 3. Remaining temporarily at point 1, the economy 
becomes inflationary. The reduction in output and therefore in income reduces 
absorption, but the government’s need to spend more on relief tends to offset 
this move toward equilibrium. The outcome could be continued inflation.

576   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
• The Australian model provides a convenient and versatile framework 
within which to diagnose common macroeconomic imbalances. 
Equilibrium in the Australian model requires balance in the markets for 
both tradable and nontradable commodities (the relative price of which 
is one expression of the real exchange rate). Equilibrium in the tradables 
markets is known as external balance; equilibrium in the nontradables 
market is known as internal balance.
• Disequilibrium in the tradables market implies either a balance of 
payments deficit (in the case of excess demand) or a balance of 
payments surplus (in the case of excess supply). Disequilibrium in the 
nontradables market implies either a higher rate of inflation (in the 
case of excess demand) or higher unemployment (in the case of excess 
supply).
• Considered together, these disequilibrium conditions may arise in four 
combinations: balance of payments deficit with inflation, balance of 
payments deficit with unemployment, balance of payments surplus with 
inflation, and balance of payments surplus with unemployment.
• The main policy tools available to regain macroeconomic equilibrium are 
fiscal and monetary policy interventions to change the level of domestic 
spending (absorption) and changes in nominal exchange rate policy aimed 
at altering the real exchange rate.
• Recommendations to use some combination of these policy tools to regain 
equilibrium must take account of the economy’s natural tendencies toward 
equilibrium. The functionality of these natural tendencies will vary with 
each country’s economic and policy circumstances.
 APPENDIX TO CHAPTER 15: NATIONAL INCOME AND 
THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
Many macroeconomic problems and crises in developing countries have their roots 
in the balance of payments. Chapter 10 opens the discussion of balance of payments 
by describing the role of foreign savings in financing investment. Chapter 13 dis-
cusses debt crises in developing countries, and Chapter 15 provides a model for diag-
nosing and responding to macroeconomic crises—including debt crises. Balance of 
payments accounting provides a framework within which to understand many of the 
opportunities and risks created by opening economies to trade and financial flows. 
APPENDIX TO CHAPTER 15: NATIONAL INCOME AND 
THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS

A P P E N D I X  TO  C H A P T E R  15 :  N AT I O N A L  I N C O M E  A N D  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E NT S   577
This appendix provides a brief overview of some key aspects of balance of payments 
accounting.10
We begin by placing the balance of payments in the broader context of national 
income accounting. The value added from all goods and services produced domes-
tically sums to Gross Domestic Product (GDP). In a closed economy, this exactly 
equals gross national expenditure, which consists of private consumption on final 
goods and services (C), government consumption and investment in final goods and 
services (G), and private investments to expand the country’s capital stock (I). That 
is, GDP = C + I + G in a closed economy. In Chapter 15, we refer to gross national 
expenditure as absorption (A), or A = C + I + G. Adopting this notation, we can 
say that in a closed economy, GDP = A. In addition, in a closed economy all of gross 
national expenditures (or absorption) is paid to domestic entities, so GDP also equals 
gross national income (GNI).
When we allow for trade with other countries, it is no longer required that gross 
domestic product exactly equals absorption or gross national income. This is where 
the balance of payments comes in. Balance of payments accounting records all of the 
(home) country’s transactions with the rest of the world, including both trade and 
financial flows. The main components of the balance of payments are the current 
account, the financial account, and the capital account. 
We begin by incorporating the current account into national income. The cur-
rent account records all foreign trade in goods (the trade balance) and services 
(net factor income from abroad), along with net unilateral transfers (such as for-
eign aid or remittances from residents working abroad). The current account 
also includes interest payments on foreign debts (debt service payments, but 
not repayment of principal on the debt). In an open economy, part of absorption 
may be spent on imports (M), and must be subtracted from A; conversely, some 
domestic production may be exported abroad (X), and the resulting payments 
to domestic firms are added to A. In this case, we can write the national income 
accounting identity as
 
GDP = C + I + G + X - M 
[A15–1]
Substituting absorption (A) in for gross national expenditure, we can re-write equa-
tion A15–1 as
 
GDP = A + X - M 
[A15–2]
10This discussion draws on Robert C. Feenstra and Alan M. Taylor, International Macroeconomics, 
2nd  edition (New York: Worth Publishers, 2012), Chapter 5 (to which the reader is referred for a more 
detailed treatment), as well as the IMF’s Balance of Payments and International Investment Position 
 Manual, 6th edition (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 2011).

578   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
That is, gross domestic product equals domestic expenditure plus net exports. Rear-
ranging the terms of equation A15–2, we can see that A - GDP = M - X. In other 
words, if domestic spending exceeds GDP, then our imports exceed our exports and 
we run a negative trade balance. The trade balance is typically the major component 
of the current account. As noted above, net factor income from abroad (NFIA), or 
income from the net export of services (e.g., wages paid to a home country resident 
working abroad for a foreign firm), is also part of the current account and is included 
in gross national income (GNI). Thus, GNI = GDP + NFIA. The difference between 
gross national income (GNI) and gross national disposable income (Y) is that the lat-
ter also includes the final component of the current account, net unilateral transfers 
(NUT). Putting these steps together, we can write
 
Y = A + (X - M) + NFIA + NUT = A + CA 
[A15–3]
where CA is the current account, which equals the sum of net exports, net factor 
income from abroad, and net unilateral transfers. Equation A15–3 is important. It 
implies that if the home country’s total expenditures exceed its total receipts, the dif-
ference must be provided by running a deficit on the current account. From equa-
tion A15–3, we can see that A - Y = -CA. The current account balance thus serves 
as an indicator of whether a country’s spending exceeds its income.
As discussed in Chapter 10, we can also approach the current account from the 
perspective of national savings. National savings is what is left over from total receipts 
net of private and government consumption, or S = Y - C - G. If we expand A in 
equation A15–3 to write Y = C + I + G + CA and subtract C + G from both sides, 
we arrive at the current account identity,
 
S = I + CA 
[A15–4]
which says that we can only save more than we invest if there is a CA surplus, and we 
can only invest more than we save if there is a CA deficit.
Domestic savings has two components—private savings (Sp) and government 
savings (Sg). Income in the private sector must be consumed, saved, or paid to the 
government as taxes. Thus, 
 
Sp = Y - C - T 
[A15–5]
Similarly, government savings is the difference between the tax revenue collected by 
the government (T) and its expenditures (G), or
 
Sg = T - G 
[A15–6]
which is the government’s fiscal surplus (or deficit, if G 7 T). The sum of these two 
equations equals our previous observation that S = Y - C - G = Sp + Sg, or total 
national savings is the sum of private savings and government savings. Substituting 
this idea into equation A15–4 and rearranging, we can see that
 
CA = Sp + Sg - I 
[A15–7]

A P P E N D I X  TO  C H A P T E R  15 :  N AT I O N A L  I N C O M E  A N D  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E NT S   579
Stated slightly differently, if investment is to exceed national savings, the difference 
must be financed from abroad, and that difference equals the current account deficit. 
In this sense, we can think of the current account as foreign savings. In addition, if we 
substitute equation A15–6 into equation A15–7, we see that
 
CA = (Sp - I) + (T - G) 
[A15–8]
which tells us that if investment exceeds private savings and/or the government runs 
a fiscal deficit, the current account must be in deficit by an equivalent amount.
The rest of the balance of payments story is about how the current account is 
financed. As noted above, in addition to the current account, the balance of pay-
ments includes the financial account (FA) and the capital account (KA). The financial 
account records foreign transactions involving financial assets such as stocks, bonds, 
and real estate ownership. The major components of the financial account (using 
the IMF definition) are foreign direct investment, portfolio investment, and (impor-
tantly) reserve assets (which is the stock of foreign currency—usually U.S. dollars, 
euros, or yen) held by the central bank. The capital account refers to the transfer of 
assets such as gifts to and from abroad.11
A fundamental principle of balance of payments accounting is that bills must be 
paid. This implies that the balance of payments must sum to zero, or
 
CA + FA + KA = 0 
[A15–9]
This is the balance of payments identity. It implies that there are only three ways in 
which a country can finance a current account deficit: 1) it can borrow from abroad 
(from foreign governments, banks, or international lending bodies), 2) it can attract 
capital inflows (in the form of direct or portfolio investment), or 3) it can run down its 
stock of foreign reserves. If the current account is in deficit, then it must be balanced 
by a surplus in the financial and capital accounts (which potentially includes running 
down the country’s stock of foreign reserves). If the balance of payments must also 
equal zero, what is meant when we hear about a “balance of payments deficit?” In 
common use, a balance of payments deficit refers to a situation in which a CA deficit 
is not fully balanced by a surplus in FA + KA where FA is defined narrowly to exclude 
the foreign reserve assets of the central bank. In such a case, the total balance of pay-
ments must be brought to zero by a change in foreign reserves (running them down, 
in this instance, to finance the remaining CA deficit). 
Running a surplus in the (non-reserve) financial and capital accounts means 
that the home country is either borrowing from abroad or selling domestic assets 
to foreigners. In either case, the home country is increasing the claims by foreigners 
11This narrow definition of the capital account (and broad definition of the financial account) is in 
accordance with the approach now taken by the IMF, along with OECD and the UN System of National 
Accounts. Previously, the accepted tradition was to define the capital account broadly enough to include 
everything that the IMF now assigns to the financial account, with the exception of the reserve assets of the 
central bank.

580   [CH. 15] M A N A G I N G S H O RT- R U N C R I S E S  I N  A N O P E N E C O N O M Y
on domestic residents. Conversely, if the home country is running a current account 
surplus, it must also be running a deficit on the financial and capital accounts, thus 
increasing the claims by residents on foreigners. Since the home country’s stock of 
net foreign assets equals the difference between claims by residents of the home 
country on foreigners and claims by foreigners on home country residents, the cur-
rent account equals the change in net foreign assets.

PART FOUR
Agriculture, Trade, 
and Sustainability


583
D
uring the years 2006 through 2008 the world experienced its worst food crisis 
since the early 1970s. Over that period, the price of corn on world markets 
nearly tripled, followed closely by the prices of other basic cereals. During 
the six months from October 2007 to April 2008 the world price of rice tripled, 
increasing from $335 to over $1,000 per ton. The results were immediate and some-
times violent. Food riots broke out in Bangladesh, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Egypt, 
Haiti, Mozambique, and Senegal. A report from Cairo, Egypt, by Al Jazeera on March 13, 
2008, recounted, “thousands of people have resorted to violence due to shortages of 
basic food commodities and rising food prices. At least 10 people have died . . .  in 
riots that erupted at government subsidized bakeries.” A few weeks later, on April 18, 
the New York Times reported from Port-au-Prince, Haiti, that, “Hunger bashed in 
the front gate of Haiti’s presidential palace. Hunger poured onto the streets, burning 
tires and taking on soldiers and the police. Hunger sent the country’s prime minister 
packing. Haiti’s hunger, that burns in the belly that so many here feel, has become 
fiercer than ever in recent days as global food prices spiral out of reach, spiking as 
much as 45 percent since the end of 2006 and turning Haitian staples like beans, corn, 
and rice into closely guarded treasures.” Grain prices fell in late 2008, but once again 
rose steeply in 2010–11.
When food prices rise dramatically, what does this imply for developing coun-
tries and the welfare of the poor? If many of the poor are farmers, do they benefit 
from the kinds of food price increases that have occurred in recent years? Some may 
benefit, if they produce and sell food in sufficient quantities; yet, most poor house-
holds are net consumers of food. Similarly, most poor countries are net importers 
Agriculture and 
Development
16

584   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
of food. Increases in world food prices may be quite harmful. According to the Food 
and Agricultural Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, high food prices in 2008 
pushed an additional 40 million people into hunger, raising the total to an estimated 
963 million. In addition, the FAO estimates that the food import bill for developing 
countries increased by nearly 75 percent in 2008 as a consequence of the food price 
shock.1 The implications of such events for developing countries are complex and 
raise central questions about the role of agriculture in both economic growth and 
poverty alleviation.
Agriculture has substantial implications at both the macroeconomic and micro-
economic levels in most developing countries. Among countries categorized by the 
World Bank as low income, agriculture accounted for 25 percent of the gross domes-
tic product (GDP) in 2008, making it the largest single sector in many countries. In 
addition, over 70 percent of the population of these low-income countries lived in 
rural areas. Even though not all rural households earn their primary income through 
farming, the simple observation that nearly three-quarters of the population of low-
income countries was sharing one-quarter of the income suggests that poverty in the 
poorest countries tends to be disproportionately concentrated in rural areas. The 
large size of the agriculture sector, both in its share of GDP and employment, along 
with the likely concentration of poverty in rural areas, points to the unique opportuni-
ties that agricultural development provides. This chapter addresses the role of agri-
culture in economic growth and poverty alleviation; Chapter 17 looks more closely 
at the specific policies and institutions that governments can use to maximize those 
contributions.
 UNIQUE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 
AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
Economists Peter Timmer, Walter Falcon, and Scott Pearson identified five charac-
teristics of the agriculture sector that distinguish it from other sectors of most devel-
oping economies: the agricultural sector’s share of GDP, the agricultural sector’s 
share of the labor force, special characteristics of the agricultural production func-
tion, that much of the agricultural sector’s output is directly consumed by its produc-
ers, and agriculture’s role as a resource reservoir.2
Agriculture is a dominant sector in many of the world’s poorest countries. 
Table 16–1a summarizes trends in the agricultural share of GDP for major areas of 
UNIQUE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
1FAO, Crop Prospects and Food Situation, 2008, www.fao.org/giews/, and A. Mittal, “The 2008 Food 
Price Crisis: Rethinking Food Security Policies,” G-24 Discussion Paper No. 56, United Nations Conference 
on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), Geneva, June 2009.
2Peter Timmer, Walter Falcon, and Scott Pearson, Food Policy Analysis (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, for the World Bank, 1983).

U N I Q U E  C H A R A CT E R I S T I C S  O F  T H E  A G R I C U LT U R A L  S E CTO R   585
the developing world since 1965. While it is clear that agriculture plays an important 
role in generating national income, it is also clear that the magnitude of that role has 
trended downward over time (an observation pursued in greater depth in the follow-
ing section). Nonetheless, the challenge of accelerating economic growth becomes 
much more difficult if a large sector such as agriculture is left to lag behind the rest of 
the economy.
Table 16–1b demonstrates the even greater share of each region’s population that 
lives in rural areas. Not all rural dwellers are farmers, and many farmers earn at least 
some of their income outside of farming. Yet, most nonfarm rural activities depend 
substantially on the existence of a vibrant agricultural sector. Agriculture also plays a 
substantial role in the consumption side of the economy. It is common among poor 
households in developing countries for food expenditures to make up 50 to 70 per-
cent of total household expenditures.
The agricultural sector is also distinguished from other sectors by both the sheer 
number of participants and by the degree of decentralization of those participants. 
A farming sector may consist of hundreds of thousands, or even millions, of indi-
vidual production units, all operating independently, yet all allocating resources in 
response to the same broad set of incentives created by government policy.
Key characteristics of the agricultural production function are also distinctive. 
These features include seasonality, geographic dispersion, the sources of risk, and 
the sources of technical change. Agricultural production is uniquely sensitive to 
 seasonality. Most countries have distinct growing seasons, usually defined by rain-
fall patterns. From an economic point of view, we can think of farmers’ use of sea-
sonality as cost minimization (for example, it is much cheaper to use natural sunlight 
TABLE 16–1 The Share of Agriculture in GDP and Rural Population Share
 
1965–75 
1976–85 
1986–95 
1996–2008
(a) Share of agriculture in GDP (%)
East Asia and Pacific 
35.3 
29.3 
22.8 
14.4
Latin America and Caribbean 
13.3 
10.8 
8.9 
6.4
South Asia 
41.3 
34.0 
28.9 
22.3
Sub-Saharan Africa 
20.4 
18.8 
18.5 
17.1
High-income countries 
 5.7 
4.1 
2.7 
1.8
(b) Rural population share (%)
East Asia and Pacific 
81.1 
78.0 
70.8 
61.2
Latin America and Caribbean 
42.5 
34.8 
29.1 
23.8
South Asia 
81.1 
77.8 
75.0 
72.2
Sub-Saharan Africa 
80.4 
76.1 
71.6 
66.4
High-income countries 
33.1 
29.4 
26.6 
23.7
GDP, gross domestic product.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

586   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
than to use electric grow lights). Yet, with the reliance on seasonality also comes strict 
requirements for the timing of operations. Late planting, for instance, might substan-
tially reduce yields by failing to take advantage of the best natural growing condi-
tions. Strict timing requirements imposed by seasonality may lead to labor shortages 
at critical times, such as planting and harvesting, despite widespread rural under-
employment at other times of the year. If inputs such as seeds and fertilizer are not 
available at the right time, they may become useless. These considerations, plus the 
fact that agriculture is highly geographically dispersed due to its unique use of sur-
face area as an input to production, underscore the need for efficient marketing of 
both inputs and outputs as a critical ingredient for agricultural development (a point 
discussed in more detail in Chapter 17).
Risk and uncertainty also affect production in ways that are unique to agricul-
ture. The primary sources of risk for farmers are prices and weather. While it is true 
that all productive sectors must worry about the price of their output, agricultural 
prices tend to be particularly variable, both within and across seasons. Farmers are 
confronted with challenging forms of price risk, as they must commit resources (and 
potentially take on debt) at the time of planting despite not knowing the price they 
will receive for their output until months later, when they harvest their crops. This 
uncertainty about prices is related to weather being an additional source of risk that 
is unique to agriculture. Most poor farmers (especially outside of Asia) do not have 
access to modern irrigation systems and thus depend on rainfall. In sub-Saharan 
Africa only 4 percent of cropland is irrigated and in drought-prone regions, such as 
Africa’s Sahel, weather-related risk is substantial. Too much rain can also be cata-
strophic, as the destruction of nearly one-fifth of Pakistan’s cultivable area by the 
monsoon floods of 2010 demonstrated.
Productivity growth is essential for sustained agricultural development and is 
a critical component of overall economic development. In the long run, growth in 
agricultural productivity is driven by technical change. Creating and disseminating 
technical change in agriculture is a special challenge for policy makers. The diver-
sity and complexity of agricultural production systems around the developing world 
make agricultural technologies highly context specific. A wheat variety that thrives 
in the Pakistani Punjab may fail miserably in Argentina. Thus substantial effort and 
resources are required not only to create agricultural technologies but also to adapt 
them to particular agroecological settings. The highly atomized and dispersed nature 
of agriculture in most countries then presents additional challenges for disseminat-
ing new technologies, the impact of which are nil if they are not widely adopted by 
farmers.
Agriculture is also unique in that producers in developing countries consume a 
large share of their own output. This highlights the complexity of decision making 
within agricultural households. Production and consumption decisions are inextri-
cably linked. Households must consider the trade-offs inherent in allocating a moth-
er’s time to working in the field or to childcare or in deciding how much time to send 

S T R U CT U R A L  T R A N S F O R M AT I O N   587
children to school versus putting them to work (either on the family’s own farm or as 
hired off-farm labor). Such decisions may have large impacts on the welfare of poor 
households.
Finally, agriculture differs from other sectors in having traditionally been seen 
largely as a reservoir of inexpensive resources (principally labor and capital) available 
for extraction and use in modern industry and services. In many cases, this perspec-
tive justified the neglect of agriculture by policy makers, as agriculture was perceived 
to be a traditional, low-productivity sector with little to contribute to industrializa-
tion. Although later approaches have challenged this view of agriculture’s role in eco-
nomic growth, as economies grow, agriculture tends to account for a declining share 
of both GDP and employment. This robust empirical regularity is part of the broader 
concept called structural transformation.
STRUCTURAL TRANSFORMATION
Structural transformation refers to the systematic changes in sector proportions as 
economies grow. Initially, at low levels of income, agriculture dominates both as a 
share of GDP and as a share of employment. As economies transition toward mid-
dle levels of income per capita, agriculture accounts for a smaller share of both GDP 
and employment (replaced by industry and services). This pattern is a central feature 
of economic development and both a cause and an effect of economic growth. In 
advanced economies, the farming population accounts for a negligible share of the 
total population. As Timmer observes, “there are more lawyers in the United States 
than farmers, more dry cleaning establishments than farms.”3 The relative decline of 
agriculture and rise of industry and services that characterize structural transforma-
tion imply an additional characteristic—namely, a substantial migration of labor from 
the rural to the urban economy. Finally, structural transformation is also character-
ized by a demographic transition (discussed in Chapter 7) in which the high birth 
and death rates of traditional societies are replaced by low birth and death rates (as 
health conditions improve with income growth).
From the perspective of the demand side of the economy, this process of struc-
tural transformation is driven by Engel’s law, the observation by nineteenth- century 
statistician Ernst Engel that the proportion of income spent on food declines as 
income rises (that is, the income elasticity of food is positive, but less than 1). This 
implies that income grows faster than the demand for food, resulting in the decline of 
agriculture as a share of national income.
STRUCTURAL TRANSFORMATION
3C. Peter Timmer, “A World without Agriculture: The Structural Transformation in Historical Perspec-
tive,” Wendt Lecture, American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC, October 30, 2007, p. 5.

588   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Structural transformation is an empirically robust phenomenon. Figure 16–1 
shows the (smoothed) patterns of rural population shares and agricultural shares of 
GDP by region as a function of income per capita. (The same patterns are apparent 
in Table 16–1, which includes the average levels of these variables by decade.) It is 
clear from Figure 16–1 that there is a persistent, though declining, gap between the 
rural population share and the share of agriculture in GDP. This gap reflects the per-
sistent, though declining, concentration of poverty in the rural economy. However, 
as the gap falls, labor productivity and wages across sectors tend to converge. The 
data in Table 16–1 show that significant gaps remain, on average, in the major regions 
of the developing world. Among those regions, only Latin America has approached 
low levels (and convergence) of rural population share and agricultural share of GDP 
that characterize the advanced economies. The particular path followed by any given 
country will vary from these norms, depending on local circumstances. Yet, the broad 
pattern is remarkably robust.
We can begin to consider the potential contributions of agriculture to economic 
growth by looking more closely at the process of structural transformation. History 
reflects that structural transformations broadly consist of four distinct phases.4 The 
first phase begins with an increase in agricultural output per worker (average labor 
Rural Population Shares (1960—2008)
Shares of Agriculture in GDP
(1960—2008)
SSA
SSA
EAP
EAP
LAC
LAC
SAS
SAS
Share (%)
90
150
245
400
670
1,100
1,800
3,000
4,900
8,100
GDP per capita, (2000 US$; log scale)
0
20
40
60
80
FIGURE 16–1 The Structural Transformation
EAP, East Asian and the Pacific; GDP, gross domestic product; LAC, Latin American and the Caribbean; SAS, 
South Asia; SSA, sub-Saharan Africa.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
4C. Peter Timmer, “The Agricultural Transformation,” in H. Chenery and T. N. Srinivasan, eds., Hand-
book of Development Economics, vol. 1, (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1988).

S T R U CT U R A L  T R A N S F O R M AT I O N   589
productivity). This rising level of output per worker creates a surplus in the rural econ-
omy. The second phase of the structural transformation consists of the transfer of that 
surplus from the agricultural to the nonagricultural sector. This transfer can be imple-
mented either directly (through taxation) or indirectly (through other forms of gov-
ernment intervention). This process of resource transfer is facilitated by the increasing 
integration of agricultural and nonagricultural factors and product market linkages, 
with intersectoral trade and labor migration being supported by improved infrastruc-
ture. The progressive integration of the agricultural and nonagricultural sectors is the 
third phase of structural transformation. Finally, the fourth phase occurs when the 
agricultural sector is fully integrated into the macroeconomy, at which point much of 
the economic distinctiveness of agriculture will have faded. This is the situation that 
we currently observe in the advanced economies, where agriculture and nonagricul-
ture operate in essentially the same labor and capital markets.
The concentration of poverty in rural areas that it is implied by the gap between 
rural employment shares and agriculture’s share in GDP also implies that average 
labor productivity tends to be higher in nonagricultural sectors. Indeed, it may be rea-
sonable to believe that poverty is concentrated in rural areas because the level of agri-
cultural productivity is lower than the level of productivity in nonagriculture. Williams 
College economist Douglas Gollin calculated the ratio of nonagricultural output per 
worker to agricultural output per worker in 1999–2000 for a number of countries.5 His 
results are summarized in Table 16–2. Gollin’s calculations confirm that average labor 
productivity is substantially higher in nonagricultural sectors than in agriculture. In 
general, the ratio of average labor productivity in nonagriculture relative to agriculture 
is on the order of 2.5 to 7. Countries in this range include Brazil, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, 
Indonesia, Mexico, and Pakistan. Yet, for more than a few countries, such as Burkina 
Faso, Burundi, China, and Thailand, this ratio is greater than 10.
If average labor productivity is often substantially higher in nonagriculture than 
in agriculture, then the process of structural transformation in which labor flows 
from agriculture to nonagriculture creates a potentially important source of eco-
nomic growth. We can think of part of the benefit of structural transformation as 
arising from the transfer of labor from relatively low-productivity to relatively high-
productivity employment. Columns 3 to 5 of Table 16–2 present Gollin’s calculation 
of the contributions of sectoral shifts of labor to growth in total output per worker 
for  selected countries.6 In China, average output per worker in nonagriculture in 
5Douglas Gollin, “Agricultural Productivity and Economic Growth,” in Prabhu Pingali and Robert 
 Evenson, eds., Handbook of Agricultural Economics, vol. 4 (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2010).
6Gollin calculates the contribution of sectoral reallocation of labor to growth in aggregate output per 
worker as a residual. This residual is the growth in output per worker that is not explained by adding the 
separate contributions to growth in output per worker coming from growth in agricultural and nonagricul-
tural output per worker. Accurate accounting for these distinct sectoral contributions requires that each sec-
tors’ contribution be weighted by the share of GDP coming from each sector. If the weighted sum is different 
from the actual growth in aggregate output per worker for a given country, then the difference (that is, the 
residual) provides an estimate of the contribution of the reallocation of labor between sectors. This type of 
calculation is thus quite similar in its approach to the growth accounting analysis presented in Chapter 4.

590   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
1999–2000 was more than 11 times greater than average output per worker in agri-
culture. Output per worker from 1960 to 2000 grew at 5.3 percent per year, essentially 
all of which was explained by shifts of workers from agricultural to nonagricultural 
employment. In Thailand, the labor productivity ratio was over 13. In that case, 
3.2 percent of the country’s 4.3 percent growth in output per worker during the four 
decades was explained by sectoral shifts of labor. Intersectoral labor shifts accounted 
for about three-quarters of the growth of output per worker in Thailand.
Our awareness of the structural transformation comes from historical observa-
tion. Yet, the notion of economies consisting of two sectors (agricultural and nonag-
ricultural, traditional and modern, etc.) and the understanding of development as a 
process centered around the transfer of labor (and capital and other resources) from 
agriculture to nonagriculture is firmly grounded in the theoretical tradition of two-
sector (or dualistic) growth models.
TWO-SECTOR MODELS OF DEVELOPMENT
Although single-sector growth models, presented in Chapter 4, have the great advan-
tage of simplicity, they do not explore production in different sectors such as agri-
culture, industry, or services (such as banking or tourism); the allocation of capital, 
TWO-SECTOR MODELS OF DEVELOPMENT
 
NONAGRICULTURAL 
 
OUTPUT TO 
 
AGRICULTURAL  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
GROWTH FROM
COUNTRY 
OUTPUT* 
GROWTH RATE† 
AGRICULTURE 
NONAGRICULTURE 
SECTORAL SHIFTS
Burundi 
13.91 
0.005 
-0.011 
0 
0.016
Mexico 
6.28 
0.01 
-0.001 
-0.002 
0.013
Burkina Faso 
29.07 
0.013 
0.002 
0.006 
0.006
Côte d’Ivoire 
3.03 
0.014 
0.004 
0 
0.01
Brazil 
3.37 
0.017 
0.002 
-0.005 
0.021
Ghana 
2.43 
0.025 
0.014 
0.007 
0.004
Indonesia 
5.07 
0.028 
0.001 
-0.001 
0.027
Pakistan 
2.54 
0.03 
0.007 
0.005 
0.018
Thailand 
13.07 
0.043 
0.004 
0.007 
0.032
China 
11.25 
0.053 
0.014 
-0.015 
0.054
*Ratio of nonagricultural output per worker to agricultural output per worker.
†Output per worker
Source: Douglas Gollin, “Agricultural Productivity and Economic Growth,” in Prabhu Pingali and Robert Evenson, 
eds., Handbook of Agricultural Economics, vol. 4. (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2010), tables 4 and 5.
TABLE 16–2  Ratio of Sectoral Labor Productivity, Agriculture, and Nonagriculture (1999–
2000) and the Contribution of Sectoral Labor Shifts to Growth (1960–2000)

T W O - S E CTO R  M O D E L S  O F  D E V E L O P M E NT   591
labor, and land across these different activities; or the implications for growth. Like 
the one-sector models, two-sector models recognize the prime importance of labor 
and capital in the growth process. Two-sector models can also explore differences 
in the levels and growth rates of productivity in different activities and the implica-
tions for relative wages (and returns on capital investment); the allocation of labor 
and capital across the two sectors; and the potential for migration of labor from 
rural (agricultural) to urban (industrial) areas. We present two-sector models here 
to emphasize their value for understanding the interactions between agriculture and 
nonagriculture during the course of development, rather than as growth models per se.
THE LABOR SURPLUS MODEL
Two-sector models have a long tradition in economic thinking. The best-known of 
the early models appeared in David Ricardo’s The Principles of Political Economy and 
Taxation, published in 1817. In his model, Ricardo included two basic assumptions 
that have played an important role in two-sector models ever since.
• He assumed that agricultural production was subject to diminishing 
returns because crops require land and the supply of arable land is limited. 
To increase production, Ricardo felt, farmers would have to move onto 
poorer and poorer land, and therefore each new acre of land matched with 
the same amount of labor would produce less grain.
• Ricardo formulated a concept that today is called labor surplus. Britain 
in the early nineteenth century still had a large agricultural workforce, 
perhaps more than was necessary to produce sufficient food for all 
consumers. Ricardo believed that the industrial sector could draw away 
surplus labor from the farms without reducing total agricultural production 
or causing a rise in wages in either urban or rural areas.
Labor surplus, to the extent that it exists, is closely related to concepts such 
as  rural unemployment and underemployment or disguised unemployment. Very 
few people in rural areas of developing countries are unemployed in the strict 
sense. Yet, agriculture’s seasonality implies that rural employment may fluctuate 
from nearly full employment during planting and harvesting times to substantially 
lower levels of employment at other times, even though the total number of workers 
remains more or less constant. Economists call this underemployment or disguised 
unemployment.
The two-sector models we examine here focus on employment and are designed 
to answer several questions. How does surplus labor (or very low productivity labor) 
in agriculture affect industry? Can workers move to industry without causing a fall 
in agricultural production and thus expand total economic output? Will accelerated 
population growth help or make matters worse? And, what is the effect of agricultural 
productivity growth on intersectoral labor flows and economic growth?

592   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
The modern version of the two-sector labor-surplus model was first developed 
by economics Nobel laureate W. Arthur Lewis in 1954.7 Lewis, like Ricardo before 
him, pays particular attention to the implications of surplus labor for income dis-
tribution and growth. Our concern here, however, is with the relationship between 
industry and agriculture, and for that, we use a version of Lewis’s model formulated 
by economists John Fei and Gustav Ranis in 1964.8
Our starting point is the agricultural sector and the agricultural production 
function. We assume two inputs, labor and land, produce an output, such as grain. 
The production function in Figure 16–2 is similar to but differs slightly from the stan-
dard neoclassical production function with continuously diminishing returns to 
labor. Instead of showing output as a function of capital per worker, agricultural out-
put is shown as a function of labor per unit of land. Because any increase in labor 
must be combined with the existing stock of land (or perhaps new land of decreasing 
quality), the production function exhibits diminishing returns.
The labor surplus model, however, takes diminishing returns to its extreme: It 
assumes that at some point, further additions of labor make zero (or even negative) 
contribution to output. In Figure 16–2, a rise in the labor force from a to b leads to an 
increase in output from d to e; an equal increase in labor from b to c leads to a smaller 
7W. A. Lewis, “Economic Growth with Unlimited Supplies of Labor,” The Manchester School of Eco-
nomic and Social Studies 22 (1954), 139–91.
8John C. H. Fei and Gustav Ranis, Development of the Labor surplus Economy: Theory and Policy 
(Homewood, IL: Richard A. Irwin, Inc., 1964).
f
d
e
a
b
c
g
Quantity of labor
Quantity of total agricultural output
FIGURE 16–2 The Agriculture Production Function

T W O - S E CTO R  M O D E L S  O F  D E V E L O P M E NT   593
rise in output. At point g, however, further increases in the amount of labor used lead 
to no rise in output at all. Beyond point g, the marginal product of labor (MPL) is 
zero or negative, so additional labor causes no increase or reduction in output. This 
could happen if all arable land were fully used and so many workers were available 
already that adding new ones would not result in more grain being produced.
The next step is to show how rural wages are determined. The standard assump-
tion in all labor surplus models is that rural wages do not fall below a minimum level, 
regardless of how many workers are available. More specifically, the usual assump-
tion is that rural wages do not fall below the average product of farm labor. The logic 
behind this view is that a member of a farm household will not look for work out-
side the household unless he or she can earn at least as much as he or she would 
receive by staying at home. At home, total food production would be divided equally 
among all members of the household so each person consumes the average product 
of household production. A slightly different, but comparable concept is that wages 
are not allowed to fall below a subsistence level. In this view, no one would look for 
work off the farm for wages that were below the amount needed for a minimum level 
of subsistence. The minimum wage, however determined, sometimes is called an 
institutionally fixed wage to contrast it with wages determined by market forces.
If the MPL falls to zero while wages remain at some minimum level, a wedge 
emerges between the MPL and the wage rate. This is the key characteristic that distin-
guishes labor surplus models from standard neoclassical models with perfectly com-
petitive markets (examined in the next section) in which the MPL equals the wage 
rate. Labor surplus models include not just the possibility that the MPL falls to zero 
but situations in which the MPL is above zero but less than the rural minimum wage.
These concepts are presented in Figure 16–3, which is derived directly from Fig-
ure 16–2, but with several changes. To begin with, the horizontal axis is flipped, so 
that moving to the right represents a decline in the number of agricultural workers. 
At the origin, the horizontal axis represents the point where the entire labor force 
works in agriculture, with no one working in industry. Next, whereas the vertical axis 
in Figure 16–2 represents the total agricultural product, in Figure 16–3, it is converted 
to represent the marginal product per unit of labor. Thus when moving to the right, 
as the number of agricultural workers declines, the MPL begins to increase (corre-
sponding to Figure 16–2 in which increases in the number of workers leads to dimin-
ishing returns to labor).
The minimum or subsistence wage is represented by the dotted line hi. Agricul-
tural wages remain at this level until the MPL (represented by the solid curve) rises 
above this minimum, which occurs at point i. Thereafter, agricultural wages rise, 
following the marginal product curve as more labor is drawn away from the sec-
tor. This curve plays a dual role: It shows both the agricultural wage and the mini-
mum amount that industry must pay to lure workers off the farm. To hire workers 
away from the farm, factories have to pay at least as much as the workers are earning 
on the farm. Therefore, the line hij in Figure 16–3 can be thought of as the supply 

594   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
curve of labor facing the industrial sector. Actually the usual assumption is that the 
 supply curve of labor in industry is a bit above the line hij because factories must pay 
farmers a bit more than they receive in agriculture to get them to move.
The key feature of this supply curve of labor is that, unlike more common supply 
curves, it does not rise continuously as one moves from left to right but instead has a 
substantial horizontal portion. Formally, this means that the supply curve of labor up 
to point i is perfectly elastic. Elasticity is a measure of responsiveness, equal to the 
percentage change in one variable (in this case, the supply of labor) arising from a 
percentage change in another variable (in this case, wages).9 The elasticity becomes 
very large when small changes in wages induce very large changes in the supply of 
labor. Perfect elasticity occurs when the ratio of these two percentages equals infin-
ity. From the point of view of the industrial sector, this means that the sector can hire 
as many workers as it wants without having to raise wages, at least until the amount 
of labor is increased beyond point i. To the right of this point, sometimes called the 
turning point, industrial wages rise as firms draw more workers from the agricultural 
sector.
Figure 16–4 shows the supply and demand for labor for the industrial market. 
The supply curve kk' is taken directly from Figure 16–3 and shows the wages that 
industry has to pay to draw workers from agriculture. The amount 0k on the vertical
Subsistence wage
h
Marginal product of labor in agriculture
i
j
Point where all labor 
is in agricultural sector,
none in industry
Quantity of labor in agriculture (      movement in this direction 
represents a decline in the agricultural labor force)
FIGURE 16–3 Modern Product of Labor in Agriculture
As the quantity of agricultural labor decreases, the marginal product increases.
9More formally, this elasticity is the ratio of the percentage change in the supply of labor (L/L) to the 
percentage change in the wage rate (W/W): Elasticity = (L/L)/(W/W). In the case of perfect elastic-
ity, this ratio approaches infinity, which implies a flat supply curve along which employers can employ as 
much labor as they choose at that fixed wage.

T W O - S E CTO R  M O D E L S  O F  D E V E L O P M E NT   595
axis in Figure 16–4 is assumed to be slightly higher than the subsistence wage in Fig-
ure 16–3, as discussed previously. The supply curve turns up when the withdrawal of 
labor from agriculture no longer can be accomplished without a decline in the agri-
cultural output (when the MPL rises above 0) because, at that point, the relative price 
of agricultural produce rises and this necessitates a commensurate rise in urban 
wages. In other words, because after the turning point agricultural production is fall-
ing, the price of food rises and industry must pay its workers more to compensate for 
the higher price of food. The demand curve for labor in industry, m, displays the usual 
downward-sloping quality and shows the wages that the industrial sector is willing 
to pay for different quantities of labor. This demand curve is determined by the mar-
ginal product of labor in industry and can be derived from the industrial production 
function. To simplify our exposition, we do not show the details of this derivation.
The final step is to combine Figures 16–2, 16–3, and 16–4 into a complete  version 
of the model, which is shown in Figure 16–5. Figure 16–5a is the agricultural produc-
tion function of Figure 16–2 with the horizontal axis flipped. An increase in the num-
ber of agricultural workers is shown as a movement from right to left from the origin 
(0 workers in agriculture) to point p, which is the initial size of the total labor force. 
Many versions of this model use total population rather than the labor force, and this 
switch has little effect if the labor force is closely correlated with total population. Fig-
ure 16–5b shows the MPL curve from Figure 16–3, and Figure 16–5c shows the supply 
and demand curves for labor in the industrial sector from Figure 16–4. In all three 
panels, a movement from left to right represents both a decline in the agricultural 
labor force and a rise in the industrial labor force—that is, a transfer of labor from 
agriculture to industry.
Demand curve
k
0
Supply curve
m
k'
Wages
Quantity of labor in industry (      movement in this direction
represents a rise in the size of the urban labor force)
FIGURE 16–4 The Supply and Demand for Industrial Labor
The supply curve, kk, is drawn directly from Figure 16–3. Demand, m, is 
derived from the industrial production function.

596   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Total agricultural output
g
i
p
t
Quantity of labor in agriculture
(a)
Direction of increase of labor input in agriculture
0
Quantity of labor in agriculture
(b)
Marginal product of
(subsistence wage)
labor in agriculture
g'
i'
t'
p'
h
i
Industry wages
Quantity of labor in industry
(c)
Direction of increase of labor input in industry
n'
n
m'
m
s'
s
k
0'
0
g"
i"
t"
p"
k'
FIGURE 16–5 The Two-Sector Labor Surplus Model
(a) Agricultural production function. (b) Rural (agricultural) labor 
market. (c) Industrial labor market. The limit imposed by the 
country’s population (0 to p in panel a), coupled with the agricultural 
production function, allows us to analyze the effects of industry 
wages on the mix between agricultural and industrial labor.
If a labor surplus economy starts with its entire population in agriculture, it can 
remove a large part of that population (pg) and move it to industry or other employ-
ment with no reduction in farm output. Industry must pay those workers a wage a 
bit  above subsistence (the difference between the vertical distance pk in Panel c 

T W O - S E CTO R  M O D E L S  O F  D E V E L O P M E NT   597
and ph in panel b) to get the workers to move. As long as there is some way of 
moving the food consumed by this labor from the rural to the urban area, industri-
alization can proceed without reducing agricultural output, implying an increase 
in total GDP because the marginal product of these workers in industry is greater 
than zero.
As industry continues to grow, however, it eventually exhausts the supply of sur-
plus labor. Further removal of labor from agriculture leads to a reduction in farm out-
put. A shift in industrial labor demand to m in Figure 16–5c forces industry to pay 
higher wages to compensate workers for the higher price of food. The rise in the 
price of agricultural output relative to the price of industrial output (which has not 
changed) sometimes is described as the terms of trade between industry and agri-
culture turning against industry and in favor of agriculture. The rising price of food 
as workers move to industry—that is, the shift in the terms of trade against industry—
accounts for the rise in the supply curve of labor between g and i in panel c.
The Fei-Ranis model can be used to explore the implications of population 
growth and a rise in agricultural productivity, among other things. To simplify, if 
one assumes a close relationship between population and the labor force, then an 
increase in population from p to t increases the length of the horizontal axis in all 
three panels. Note, however, that additional workers (or a larger population) do not 
increase agricultural output at all. The elastic portion of both the urban and rural 
labor supply curves are extended by pt and pt, respectively, thus postponing the 
day when industrialization causes wages to rise.10
Most important, if the population rises with no increase in food output, the aver-
age amount of food available per capita falls. From the standpoint of everyone but a 
few employers who want to keep wages low and profits high, population growth is an 
unqualified disaster. Wages actually may fall in the urban areas, and the welfare of 
the great mass of farmers certainly falls. It is a model such as this, even if only imper-
fectly understood, that people often have in mind when they speak of population 
growth in wholly negative terms.
Britain’s economy displayed labor surplus characteristics during Ricardo’s time. 
In the middle of the twentieth century China, India, Indonesia, and some countries 
in Africa appear to have had surplus labor, but there are few such situations today. 
The most recent major example of a clear application of the model is China from the 
1950s through the 1970s (Box 16–1), but China’s surplus labor was fully absorbed by 
the 1980s. More common is a situation in which a withdrawal of labor leads to a small 
decline in agricultural production, which brings us to the neoclassical two-sector 
model.
10In the industrial labor supply and demand part of Figure 16–5c, it is also necessary to move the labor 
demand curves to the left because the 0 point on the horizontal axis has been moved to the left. These 
new demand curves, s, m, and n, therefore really are the same as s, m, and n. That is, the quantity of 
labor demanded at any given price is the same for s as s, and so on.

598   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
BOX 16–1 SURPLUS LABOR IN CHINA
In China, by the 1950s most arable land already was under cultivation, and further 
increases in population and the labor force contributed little to increases in agri-
cultural output. Urban wages rose in the early 1950s but then leveled off and 
remained unchanged for 20 years, between 1957 and 1977. If allowed to do 
so, tens of millions of farm laborers would happily have migrated to the cities, 
despite urban wage stagnation. Only legal restrictions on rural—urban migration, 
backed by more than a little force, held this migration to levels well below what 
would have been required to absorb the surplus. Population growth that aver-
aged 2 percent a year up until the mid-1970s continued to swell the ranks of 
those interested in leaving the countryside. In short, during this period China was 
a labor surplus country.
China invested in agriculture but only enough to maintain, not to raise, per 
capita food production. The rural—urban migration that occurred was not fast 
enough to eliminate the agricultural labor surplus, but it was enough to require 
farmers to sell more of their production to the cities. Thus the prices paid to 
farmers for their produce were gradually raised, while the prices paid by farmers 
for urban products remained constant or fell—that is, the rural—urban terms of 
trade shifted slowly but markedly in favor of agriculture.
To get out of this labor surplus situation, the Chinese government after 1978 
had to accelerate the transfer of workers from agricultural to urban employ-
ment, take steps to keep the agricultural pool of surplus labor from constantly 
replenishing itself, and at the same time invest in agriculture to raise farm output. 
Accelerating the growth of urban employment was accomplished by encouraging 
production of labor-intensive consumer goods (textiles, electronics, etc.) and ser-
vice industries (restaurants, taxis, etc.). To feed this increase in urban population, 
the government increased domestic food production by raising investment in the  
agricultural sector, increased food imports, and allowed a further improvement in 
rural—urban terms of trade that further encouraged growth in food output.
To keep the rural pool of surplus labor from replenishing itself, the Chinese 
government attacked the surplus at its source through a massive (and contro-
versial) effort to bring down the birth rate. By 1980, China’s population growth 
rate had slowed from 2 to 1.2 percent a year, and after 1997 the rate fell below 
1.0 percent a year, where it has remained ever since. Rapid industrial and ser-
vices growth in and around the cities and in the countryside itself has absorbed 
roughly 10 million new workers a year. In 1991, the workforce in agriculture 
reached its peak and has declined steadily since then. The agricultural labor 
force that accounted for 70.5 percent of total employment in 1978 reached a 
BOX 16–1 SURPLUS LABOR IN CHINA

T W O - S E CTO R  M O D E L S  O F  D E V E L O P M E NT   599
THE NEOCLASSICAL TWO-SECTOR MODEL
The neoclassical model, formalized by Harvard economist Dale Jorgenson, differs 
from the labor surplus model in two key ways: (1) The MPL in agriculture is never 
zero and (2) there is no institutionally fixed minimum wage, so wages always equal 
the MPL.11
A simple neoclassical model is presented in Figure 16–6, showing the same three 
panels as Figure 16–5. The agricultural production function in panel a is never flat, 
and the marginal product of labor curve in Panel b is always rising. Correspondingly, 
the supply curve of labor to industry in Panel c no longer has a horizontal section. 
At every point, the removal of workers from agriculture reduces agricultural produc-
tion and increases the MPL for those remaining in agriculture. Industry must pay an 
amount equal to that marginal product (plus a premium) to get workers to move. 
Thus, whereas in the labor surplus model industrial production can increase with-
out reducing agricultural production (leading to an unambiguous increase in GNP), 
in the neoclassical model an increase in industrial production can take place only 
alongside a decrease in agricultural production. As labor is removed from agricul-
ture, farm output falls, and to extract enough food from the agricultural sector to pay 
its workers, industry must pay higher and higher prices for good. Only if industry is in 
a position to import food from abroad will it be able to avoid these worsening terms 
of trade. If imports are not available, rising agricultural prices will lead to a higher 
value of output and hence higher wages for workers in agriculture. As in the labor 
surplus case, industry will have to pay correspondingly higher wages to attract labor. 
The total value of GNP rises only to the extent that industrial production rises more 
than agricultural output falls.
key milestone in 1997 when it fell to 49.9 percent, signifying that for the first 
time in Chinese history, less than half the people employed in the country were 
farmers. By 2009 the share of employment in agriculture had fallen further to 
under 38 percent of the total workforce, and people between the ages of 18 
and 40 were mainly employed in the cities. Due to migration restrictions imposed 
by the government, however, their below-working-age children often remained 
in the rural areas with their grandparents who made up most of the over-age-40 
population and most of the agricultural workforce.
11Dale W. Jorgenson, “The Development of a Dual Economy,” Economic Journal 71 (1961), 309–34.

600   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
0
t 
i
Total agricultural
(or grain) output
(a)
j
i'
Quantity of labor in agriculture
(b)
Marginal product of
labor in agriculture
0
0'
Labor supply
curve with
worsening terms
of trade
Labor supply
curve in absence
of worsening terms
of trade
n
r
Wages in industry 
Quantity of labor in industry
(c)
FIGURE 16–6 Neoclassical Two-Sector Model
(a) Agricultural production function. (b) Marginal product of labor in agriculture. 
(c) Industrial labor market. The key difference between this figure and Figure 16–5 is the 
agricultural production function agricultural sector, but the curve never flattens out—that is, 
the marginal product of labor never falls to a minimum subsistence or institutionally fixed 
wage in Figure 16–6b. 
The implications of population or labor force growth in the neoclassical model 
are different from what they were in the labor surplus model. An increase in popu-
lation and labor in agriculture raises farm output (dashed line t in Figure 16–6a) 

T W O - S E CTO R  M O D E L S  O F  D E V E L O P M E NT   601
because the agricultural production function continues to rise with more labor and 
never flattens out. Thus, in a neoclassical model, population growth is not such a 
wholly negative phenomenon. The increase in labor is much less of a drain on food 
availability because that labor is able to produce much or all of its own requirements, 
and there is no surplus of labor that can be transferred without a consequent reduc-
tion in agricultural output.
If industry is to develop successfully, simultaneous efforts must be made to 
ensure that agriculture grows fast enough to feed workers in both the rural and 
urban sectors at ever-higher levels of consumption and prevent the terms of trade 
from turning against industry. A stagnant agricultural sector with little new invest-
ment or technological progress causes the wages of urban workers to rise rapidly and 
thereby cuts into profits and the funds available for industrial development. In other 
words, investments in improved agricultural technology or rural roads (which reduce 
the cost of transporting farm inputs and outputs, including food) help the industrial 
sector by reducing its costs. Whereas in the labor surplus model policy makers can 
ignore agriculture until the surplus of labor is exhausted, in the neoclassical model 
there must be a balance between industry and agriculture.
These dual sector models provide a clear framework in which to consider the 
economywide effects of productivity growth in agriculture. The best example is 
an extension of the two-sector model proposed by economists Mukesh Eswaran 
and Ashok Kotwal.12 Eswaran and Kotwal begin by considering an economy that 
is closed to trade and consists of two sectors, textiles and agriculture. In this styl-
ized economy, textiles and food are the only goods produced or consumed. Tex-
tiles are assumed to require only labor, while food production requires labor and 
land. Eswaran and Kotwal do not require surplus labor (and thus come closer to 
the neoclassical model described in Figure 16–6) but add an assumption that con-
sumer preferences are such that people begin to consume textiles only once they 
are able to afford at least a subsistence level of food. It is assumed that most of 
the workers have not reached this subsistence level and thus will spend all incre-
mental income on food until they reach that subsistence level of consumption. In 
contrast, landlords (the only other actors in this model besides workers) are richer 
and consume both food and textiles. The assumption that Eswaran and Kotwal 
share with Jorgenson, that labor markets are competitive, implies that wages are 
determined by the productivity of labor. Further, labor is mobile between sectors, 
which implies that the wage is the same in both sectors and that inducing labor to 
migrate from agriculture to textiles requires wages to increase. Because at an early 
12M. Eswaran and A. Kotwal, “A Theory of Real Wage Growth in LDCs,” Journal of Development Econom-
ics 42 (December 1993), 243–69, and “The Role of Service Sector in the Process of Industrialization,” Jour-
nal of Development Economics 68 (2002), 401–20.

602   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
BOX 16–2  DEBATES OVER SURPLUS LABOR
The most famous debate over the existence of surplus labor was an exchange 
between two Nobel economics laureates, Theodore Schultz and Amartya Sen.a
Schultz reasoned that if any country was likely to have surplus rural labor, it 
was India. To test whether there was surplus labor in rural India, Schultz took 
advantage of a sort of natural experiment—the global influenza pandemic of 
1918–19 which killed approximately 50 million people, including 8.3 percent 
stage of development agricultural productivity is typically quite low, so is the wage 
in this economy. As wages are set in the agriculture sector, the low wage in agri-
culture that results from low agricultural productivity also keeps wages low (and 
poverty high) in the textiles sector.
Now, suppose that agricultural productivity increases. This results in both 
higher wages for agricultural workers and increased profits for landlords (as land 
also becomes more productive). This increases both the supply of and the demand 
for food. Landlords will also increase their demand for textiles, bidding up both tex-
tiles prices and wages. Labor will be willing and able to leave agriculture to produce 
those added textiles. Thus agricultural productivity growth in this simple model 
results in the transfer of labor from agriculture to industry while also reducing pov-
erty (through the increased wages).
If instead the productivity increase occurs in textiles, rather than in agriculture, 
each industrial worker can produce more textiles. The price of textiles (in this closed 
economy) will fall. Yet, if most workers have yet to attain the subsistence level of food 
consumption (and hence consume no textiles), they receive no benefit from this 
change and there is no incentive for labor to migrate to industry. The wage and pov-
erty remain unchanged, and the only beneficiaries of productivity growth in industry 
are the landlords, who can now consume more textiles. The implication, at least for 
closed economies, is that it is productivity in agriculture, not industry, that matters 
for poverty reduction. Whether or not surplus agricultural labor exists in any country 
(and therefore which version of the two-sector model is most appropriate) has long 
been a subject of debate (Box 16–2).
BOX 16–2  DEBATES OVER SURPLUS LABOR
aTheodore Schultz’s original analysis was in his book Transforming Traditional Agriculture (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1964). The subsequent round of exchanges between Schultz and 
Sen was published in The Economic Journal 77, no. 305 (March 1967).

T W O - S E CTO R  M O D E L S  O F  D E V E L O P M E NT   603
of India’s agricultural labor force. Schultz’s test of the surplus labor hypoth-
esis was based on the hypothesis that if there were surplus labor, the reduction 
in the labor force would not reduce India’s agricultural output (or, by extension, 
the area planted). He compared the area planted just before the pandemic with 
the area planted just after the pandemic and found a 3.8 percent reduction 
in the postpandemic area planted. This reduction (which was close to Schul-
tz’s prediction of what would have happened in the absence of surplus labor) 
appeared to support his argument against the existence of surplus labor in 
agriculture.
Amartya Sen took issue with Schultz’s approach. Sen made the point that 
surplus labor could exist within families. He gave the example of peasant fam-
ilies with five working members, each of whom was 20 percent idle. In that 
case, withdrawing one member would leave output unchanged, indicating the 
existence of surplus labor. But, Sen continues, if the same 20 percent reduc-
tion in labor occurred because one in five entire households disappeared 
while the other four remained then output would fall (at least in the short run), 
even if there were surplus labor within families. It is this latter scenario that 
Sen argues is a more apt description of the influenza pandemic. Indeed, Sen 
argues that the effects of the pandemic were unevenly distributed over fami-
lies with a given region and between different regions in a given province, 
concluding that Schultz’s test was inconclusive regarding the existence of sur-
plus labor.
This debate did not end with Schultz and Sen. More recently economist 
Mark Rosenzweig presented rigorous microeconomic evidence of an upward-
sloping supply curve for labor in developing countries (in contrast to the surplus 
labor model’s assumption of a perfectly elastic labor supply curve, as seen in 
Figure 16–5, implying surplus labor).b Yet, economist Gustav Ranis (co-author 
of the Fei-Ranis model) later defended the surplus labor model. Ranis con-
cedes that the number of contemporary developing countries with surplus labor 
has been declining but claims relatively recent turning points, at which certain 
countries ceased to have surplus labor— Taiwan in 1968, South Korea in 1973, 
and Thailand in 1993. Ranis contends, however, that as of 2004, China and 
India, as well as “other parts of South Asia, much of Central America, the Carib-
bean, parts of Latin America, and even some countries in sub-Saharan Africa”c 
remain in conditions that qualify as surplus labor.
bMark Rosenzweig, “Labor Markets in Low-Income Countries,” in H. Chenery and T. N. Srinivasan, 
eds., Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 1 (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1988).
cGustav Ranis, “Labor Surplus Economies,” Center Discussion Paper No. 900, Economic Growth 
Center, Yale University, New Haven, CT, December 2004, p. 17.

604   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
EVOLVING PERSPECTIVES ON THE ROLE 
OF AGRICULTURE IN ECONOMIC GROWTH 
AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION
AGRICULTURE AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
If agriculture becomes a smaller share of output and employment as economies 
grow, how can agriculture contribute to broader economic growth? A meaningful 
answer to this question must delve beyond mere national income accounting rela-
tionships. In accounting terms, we can think of a country’s rate of income growth 
as the weighted average of the growth rates of various sectors in the economy. If we 
adopt a dualistic perspective, in which an economy consists of agriculture and non-
agriculture, the direct effect of growth in the agriculture sector may be large initially, 
but soon declines. That is, if value added in the agricultural sector is YA, we can write 
the share of agriculture in national output as a = YA/Y (where a is between 0 and 1). 
If the only sectors are agriculture and nonagriculture, then the share of value added 
from nonagriculture (YNA) in national income is (1 - a), and we can express the 
growth rate of national income as the weighted average,
Y
Y
= a
YA
YA
+ (1 - a)
YNA
YNA
 
[16–1]
where  indicates change. Dividing the change in the level of a variable by its 
level gives us its growth rate. So equation 16–1 simply states that the growth rate of 
national income is the weighted average of the growth rates of income in agriculture 
and nonagriculture, where the weights are the share of each sector’s value added in 
national income.
We can see from this equation that the growth rate of the agricultural sec-
tor matters in a purely arithmetic accounting sense. Borrowing data for South Asia 
from Table 16–1, during the period 1965–75, agriculture’s share of GDP (a in equa-
tion 16–1) was 41.3 percent. If governments in that region had a goal of seeing their 
economies grow at, say, 5 percent per year per capita, then a sector that accounted 
for nearly half of GDP would need to contribute. Maybe both sectors would grow at 
5 percent per year per capita, in which case that would also be the weighted average 
growth rate. Yet, if the agriculture sector was allowed to languish because of the per-
ception that only industrialization mattered and (taking the extreme case) thus did 
not grow at all (that is, if YA/YA = 0), then reaching a weighted average of 5 percent 
would require that the nonagriculture sector grow at the annual rate of 8.5 percent 
per year per capita, a much higher hurdle.
This simple arithmetic highlights the role of agricultural growth early in the devel-
opment process when agriculture represents a large share of the economy but also 
EVOLVING PERSPECTIVES ON THE ROLE 
OF AGRICULTURE IN ECONOMIC GROWTH 
AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION

E V O LV I N G  P E R S P E CT I V E S  O N  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E   605
suggests that agriculture’s role diminishes as the sector becomes smaller over time. All 
we need to do is look at Table 16–1 to see that this arithmetic problem becomes less 
important over time. In South Asia, agriculture’s share of GDP fell from 41.3 percent 
during 1965–75 to only 22.3 percent by the period 1996–2008. This is the structural 
transformation in action. The deeper questions are how does this structural transfor-
mation happen, and what is the role of agricultural growth in that process? In terms 
of equation 16–1, this amounts to asking whether the growth rate of nonagriculture 
depends to some extent on the growth rate of agriculture. Even if agriculture’s direct 
arithmetic contribution to growth diminishes over time, agricultural growth might 
contribute indirectly to economic growth through its effect on growth in nonagricul-
ture. This possibility requires us to think in greater detail about intersectoral link-
ages. Early interpretations of the dualistic development paradigm tended to ignore 
agriculture’s potential indirect contributions to growth.
The Lewis and Fei-Ranis assumption of a very low or zero marginal product of 
labor in the rural economy was the dominant perspective to emerge historically from 
dualism. With that perspective, the post–World War II development paradigm main-
tained that the agricultural sector had little to contribute to the process of economic 
growth. This was not Lewis’s own interpretation. Indeed, in introducing his model, 
Lewis famously wrote, “industrialization is dependent upon agricultural improve-
ment; it is not profitable to produce a growing volume of manufactures unless 
agricultural production is growing simultaneously. This is also why industrial and 
agrarian revolutions always go together, and why economies in which agriculture is 
stagnant do not show industrial development.”13 It is inherent in the Lewis and Fei-
Ranis models (albeit assuming closed economies) that in the absence of increasing 
agricultural productivity, the withdrawal of labor from agriculture eventually (in Fei-
Ranis) or immediately (in the neoclassical version) results in reduced food supply, 
increased food prices, and thus lower real wages in industry. To continue to attract 
labor from agriculture under such circumstances, industrialists would have to pay 
continually higher nominal wages, thus undermining the incentives for continued 
industrial expansion. However, this was not the lesson as understood by most policy 
makers and early development thinkers.
The more dominant early interpretation of classical dualism was that of politi-
cal economist Albert Hirschman, who wrote in 1958, “agriculture certainly stands 
convicted on the count of its lack of direct stimulus to setting up of new activities 
through linkage effects—the superiority of manufacturing in this respect is crush-
ing.”14 This view was reinforced by the then-current assertion that primary products, 
such as agriculture, were doomed to suffer declining terms of trade relative to manu-
factured goods in international markets and thus presented few growth opportuni-
ties for poor countries. (This is the Prebisch-Singer hypothesis, discussed in more 
13Lewis, “Economic Growth with Unlimited Supplies of Labor,” p. 433.
14Albert O. Hirschman, The Strategy of Economic Development (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1958).

606   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
detail in Chapter 18.) Widely seen, then, as a stagnant pool of underutilized labor 
and capital, agriculture was usually neglected in early development strategies.
The evolution of thought regarding the role of agriculture in economic growth is 
best understood in terms of intersectoral linkages. This perspective begins with the 
Lewis linkages of labor and capital flows from agriculture to nonagriculture. These 
are direct linkages across sectors that operate via factor markets. Ideally, labor and 
capital are released from agriculture as a consequence of increasing agricultural pro-
ductivity. However, as discussed in Chapter 17, agricultural productivity growth is not 
automatic. It requires substantial investment in research and development, systems 
to extend new techniques to farmers, and functioning input and output markets with 
appropriate production incentives. In the context of early development paradigms 
in which agriculture was viewed as a stagnant resource reservoir, the need for such 
investments was not well understood. Instead, government policies often sought 
merely to extract labor and capital from the agricultural sector. If the development 
paradigm was one in which rural labor was assumed to have a zero marginal prod-
uct (that is, if the production function for agricultural labor eventually became flat), 
labor could be withdrawn from agriculture with no reduction in output.
By the early 1960s, economists’ perspectives on intersectoral linkages and agri-
culture’s potential contributions to growth began to evolve. In a particularly influ-
ential article, agricultural economists Bruce Johnston and John Mellor listed five 
intersectoral linkages.15 In contrast to the direct Lewis linkages, the Johnston-Mellor 
linkages were indirect. Their list of agriculture’s contributions is (1) increased sup-
plies of food for domestic consumption, (2) released labor for industry, (3) a domes-
tic market for industrial output, (4) a supply of domestic savings, and (5) a source of 
foreign exchange. While the second and fourth linkages in this list built on the Lewis 
tradition, Johnston and Mellor set the stage for a richer understanding of agricul-
ture’s potential contributions to growth.
The first Johnston-Mellor linkage, increased food supply for domestic consump-
tion, underscores the logic, noted earlier, that was implicit in the Lewis and Fei-Ranis 
approaches. A vibrant and productive agricultural sector that could both release labor 
and supply increasing quantities of food for domestic consumption could facilitate 
industrialization by helping keep food affordable for industrial workers. While afford-
able food is an important part of agriculture’s potential contribution to poverty allevia-
tion, it also benefits urban employers by reducing labor costs. There is a big difference, 
however, between government policies that keep food cheap by controlling food 
prices or by heavily taxing agricultural producers and government policies that keep 
food cheap by investing in agricultural productivity. Johnston and Mellor highlight 
linkages that operate not only forward, in the sense of agriculture supplying inputs 
and foreign exchange to nonagriculture, but also backward. The third Johnston-Mellor 
15 B. Johnston and J. Mellor, “The Role of Agriculture in Economic Development,” American Economic 
Review 51 (1961), 566–93.

E V O LV I N G  P E R S P E CT I V E S  O N  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E   607
linkage, in which agriculture provides a market for domestic industrial output, can be 
understood as a backward linkage, one that underscores the consumption externali-
ties that become possible when agriculture is profitable and the sector itself is growing.
Awareness of these intersectoral linkages, arising from the early contribution of 
Johnston and Mellor, led to numerous efforts to quantify the effects of agricultural 
growth on broader economic growth. These efforts generally sought to measure agri-
culture’s contributions to growth in terms of growth multipliers. A growth multi-
plier is a number that answers the question, If a country’s agricultural value added 
increases by $1, what is the ultimate impact on that country’s aggregate GDP? If GDP 
is the sum of value added in agriculture and nonagriculture, then an additional $1 of 
agricultural output automatically adds $1 to national output. The question is to what 
extent intersectoral linkages operate in such a way that an additional $1 of agricul-
tural income stimulates economic activity in nonagriculture, thus adding indirectly 
to national income. Growth multipliers seek to measure the sum of these direct and 
indirect contributions to national income.
Efforts to estimate agricultural growth multipliers based on household-level data 
demonstrate that it is Johnston and Mellor’s backward linkage, the demand from 
within agriculture for domestic goods produced by the nonagriculture sector, that 
dominates the multiplier. The intuition is that when new resources are brought into 
production in the agriculture sector, farmers (and landlords) spend that incremen-
tal income. While some of those expenditures will be on additional food, some por-
tion will also be spent on the purchase of nontradable goods produced domestically 
in the nonagriculture sector. The multiplier effect created by this additional rural 
demand will be greater under certain circumstances than under others. In particular, 
agriculture must make up a large share of total employment. In addition, the multi-
plier effect will be greater when the benefits of agricultural growth are widely shared 
among rural producers. This is more likely when land ownership is relatively evenly 
distributed. Demand-driven multiplier effects will also be larger when consumption 
patterns are such that large portions of the incremental demand are spent on domes-
tically produced labor-intensive goods and services. Finally, multiplier effects will be 
greater when the supply of the additional goods demanded is highly elastic, which 
implies that the increased demand will bring forth increased supply without sub-
stantially increasing prices.16 In practice, the origin of such income shocks, at least 
in Asia, was the technological improvements developed for agriculture as part of the 
green revolution (discussed in more detail in Chapter 17).
Efforts to quantify agricultural growth multipliers date back to the early 1980s in 
Asia. Economist C. Rangarajan calculated that the agricultural growth multiplier for 
India was 1.70, while economists Clive Bell, Peter Hazell, and Roger Slade found the 
16These conditions and more technical details regarding the estimation of growth multipliers are 
explained in C. Delgado, J. Hopkins, and V. Kelly, “Agricultural Growth Linkages in Sub-Saharan Africa,” 
International Food Policy Research Institute Research Report No. 107, Washington, DC, 1998.

608   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
BOX 16–3  THE NUTRITION LINKAGE TO ECONOMIC GROWTH
The nutritional linkage from agriculture to economic growth is based on evi-
dence, not from contemporary developing countries, but rather from research on 
 eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Britain and France by Nobel Prize—winning 
economic historian Robert Fogel.a His research on the secular decline in mor-
tality rates in western Europe combines historical detective work with nutrition, 
human physiology, and economic analysis. By reconstructing the distribution of 
multiplier in Malaysia to be 1.83.17 The interpretation of these numbers is that when 
$1 of additional income is generated in the agricultural sector, it stimulates an addi-
tional $0.70 (or $0.83 in Malaysia) of income in nonagriculture, for a total addition of 
$1.70 to national income. Using similar modeling techniques, a subsequent series of 
studies focused on West African cases. They found agricultural growth multipliers to 
be even greater in Africa than in Asia, ranging from 1.96 in Niger to 2.88 in Burkina 
Faso, though other studies have found growth multipliers in Africa generally smaller 
than in Asia (more on the order of 1.30 to 1.50).18 Applying a simpler methodology, 
Tufts University economist Steven Block estimated an agricultural growth multiplier 
for Ethiopia to be 1.54, compared to an industrial growth multiplier of 1.22 to 1.34.19
The Johnston-Mellor linkages also paved the way for more recent perspectives 
on agriculture’s potential contributions to economic growth. There is strong empiri-
cal support for two additional channels through which agriculture can contribute 
to economic growth: a stability linkage, which connects stability in food prices with 
investment; and a nutritional linkage, which operates through the health of the labor 
force (Box 16–3).20
17C. Rangarajan, “Agricultural growth and industrial performance in India,” International Food Policy 
Research Institute, Research Report 33, Washington, DC, 1982; C. Bell, P. Hazell, and R. Slade, Project Eval-
uation in Regional Perspective (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982).
18Delgado, Hopkins, and Kelly, “Agricultural Growth Linkages in Sub-Saharan Africa,” in S. Haggblade, 
P. Hazell, and T. Reardon, eds., Transforming the Rural Nonfarm Economy (Washington, DC: International 
Food Policy Research Institute, 2009).
19S. Block, “Agriculture and Economic Growth in Ethiopia: Growth Multipliers from a Four-Sector Simu-
lation Model,” Agricultural Economics, 20 (1999), 241–52.
20For a more detailed exposition of these types of linkages, see C. Peter Timmer, “Agriculture and Eco-
nomic Development,” in B. Gardner and G. Rausser, eds., Handbook of Agricultural Economics, col. 2A, 
(Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 2002).
BOX 16–3 THE NUTRITION LINKAGE TO ECONOMIC GROWTH
aRobert Fogel, “Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The Bearing of Long-Term Pro-
cesses on the Making of Economic Policy,” American Economic Review 84, no. 3 (June 1994), 369–95.

E V O LV I N G  P E R S P E CT I V E S  O N  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E   609
caloric intake in late-eighteenth-century Britain and France, Fogel found that 
the levels of caloric intake for the bottom 20 percent of the distribution were 
insufficient to support the physical requirements of much (if any) manual labor. 
In addition, he found that undernutrition of the labor force was also associated 
with high rates of disease and physical disability (which themselves contributed 
back to the problem of undernutrition). This type of chronic undernutrition also 
results in stunted growth (indeed, the average adult male in late-eighteenth- 
century Britain was about 3.5 inches shorter than in late-twentieth-century Brit-
ain). Thus chronic undernutrition in the late eighteenth century was associated, 
not only with increased rates of illness and disability but also with stunted growth 
and increased risk of death. (Because height is in part a reflection of long-term
nutritional status, shorter people, on average, face a higher likelihood of prema-
ture death.)
As agricultural development in Britain and France proceeded and food sup-
plies increased, Fogel found that nutritional status of workers also improved. The 
caloric intake of the bottom 20 percent of the consumption distribution increased 
sufficiently to permit them to work. At the same time, their improved nutritional 
status improved their health status, delaying illness and disability until later in life, 
further enhancing their ability to engage in productive labor. In short, Fogel con-
cluded that improvements in gross nutrition account for roughly 30 percent of 
the growth in per capita income in Britain between 1790 and 1980. With cur-
rent rates of child (under 5 years) stunting greater than 40 percent in much of 
sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, this nutritional linkage may have important 
implications for today’s developing countries. Economist Carmel Nadav provides 
more recent evidence, based on a sample of 97 countries, that improved nutrition 
contributes to economic growth.b
bC. Nadav, “Nutritional Thresholds and Growth,” Department of Economics, Ben-Gurion University, 
Israel, 1996.
The stability linkage operates primarily at the macroeconomic level. One reason 
is that large fluctuations in food prices can provoke broader crises, which may under-
mine both political and economic stability, as the food riots of 2008 reflect. Political 
violence in response to rising food prices resulted in 10 deaths and nearly 500 inju-
ries in Mozambique’s capital city, Maputo, in September 2010, following a 20 per-
cent increase in the price of bread over the course of that year. This type of instability 
undermines incentives for investment. (Recall from Chapter 4 the important role of 
investment in theories of economic growth.)

610   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
The stability of food prices may also impact national investment through another 
channel. In poor countries it is common for consumers to spend 50–70 percent of 
their income on food. In such settings, unstable food prices may directly act to desta-
bilize savings and investment. While consumer theory might suggest that this is true 
for any commodity, the singularity of food in this regard derives from its large share 
of expenditures. Highly unstable food prices can lead farmers to save in a precaution-
ary way to guard themselves from sudden drops in the price of their output, while 
consumers similarly save to guard themselves against sudden increases in food 
prices. This type of precautionary savings must be readily accessible (even held in 
cash), and those resources are thus withheld from productive investment. Food price 
instability can also destabilize demand for other goods and services in the economy, 
further undermining incentives for productive investment in the broader economy. 
This spillover instability arises because the demand for food is price inelastic. When 
food prices increase, food expenditures increase as well, reducing demand for other 
goods and services in the economy. The opposite occurs when food prices fall. The 
resulting instability in prices throughout the economy may further confuse poten-
tial investors who rely on price signals to guide their actions or lead them to allocate 
more investment in speculative, rather than productive, investment opportunities. As 
a result, the quality of investment may also suffer when food prices are unstable.
Empirical support for these arguments comes from several sources. Economist 
David Dawe presents evidence from cross-country data for the period 1970–85.21 
He finds wide fluctuations in export prices, on balance, lower investment, and slow 
the rate of economic growth. More specific evidence comes from Indonesia, where 
rice was a dominant economic sector during the 1960s and 1970s. During that time, 
the government of Indonesia was heavily involved in efforts to stabilize rice prices. 
Indonesia’s rice price stabilization program during that country’s first five-year plan 
(1969–74) generated nearly one percentage point of additional economic growth 
each year (or about one sixth of the country’s growth over that period). As Indonesia’s 
economy continued to grow, and its structural transformation led the rice sector to 
play a diminishing role, the macroeconomic benefits of rice price stabilization also 
diminished. Yet, the net result of these efforts over the period 1969–95 was to increase 
Indonesia’s rate of economic growth by an average of 0.5 percentage points per year, 
resulting in a net increase of 11 percent greater income over that period.
AGRICULTURE AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION
Economic growth tends to reduce poverty (measured either as a head count index 
or a poverty gap); yet the effectiveness with which growth reduces poverty may vary 
from one economic setting to another. Recent research has shown that the sectoral 
composition of growth matters: On average, agricultural growth is more effective in 
21D. Dawe, “A New Look at the Effects of Export Instability on Investment and Growth,” World Develop-
ment 24, no.12 (December 1996), 1905–1914.

E V O LV I N G  P E R S P E CT I V E S  O N  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E   611
reducing poverty than is industrial growth. This conclusion about the special potency 
of agricultural growth for alleviating poverty rests in part on the observation that pov-
erty in many regions of the developing world is disproportionately concentrated in 
rural areas. Figure 16–7 compares the numbers of rural and urban poor in different 
regions for the years 1993 and 2002. For sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and East 
Asia, the numbers of rural poor vastly exceed the numbers of urban poor. Among 
these regions, only East Asia shows substantial reduction in the number of rural poor 
between 1993 and 2002; however, even in that region, the absolute number of rural 
poor in 2002 was about eight times greater than the number of urban poor. In coun-
tries where agriculture accounts for a large share of employment and poverty is dis-
proportionately rural, the extent to which growth is pro-poor depends substantially 
on the extent to which agriculture is included in growth.
The effectiveness of the mechanisms through which agriculture helps reduce 
poverty also depends on the incidence of poverty among various groups in society. 
In reviewing recent evidence, University of California at Berkeley economists Alain 
de Janvry and Elisabeth Sadoulet note that for producers, the effect of agriculture in 
reducing poverty depends on access to assets (notably land), while for rural work-
ers the benefits depend on their access to increased employment opportunities in 
agriculture and rural nonfarm activities.22 For consumers, greater supplies of food 
help to reduce poverty by lowering food prices. Consumers of food might or might 
not also  be producers. The most obvious beneficiaries of reduced food prices are 
pure consumers—the urban poor and rural landless. Yet, in many countries, the 
FIGURE 16–7 Number of Poor, 1993 and 2002
(a) Rural poverty. (b) Urban poverty. The number of poor rose in South Asia and sub-
Saharan Africa from 1993 to 2002, measured as millions of people below the $1-a-day 
poverty line.
Source: Figure 1 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: 
Agriculture for Development, 2008. Reprinted with permission.
500
Millions of people
below $1-a-day poverty line
400
300
200
100
0
Sub-
Saharan
Africa
South
Asia
East
Asia
and
Pacific
Middle
East and
North
Africa
Europe 
and
central
Asia
Latin
America 
and
Caribbean
1993
2002
500
(a)
(b)
Millions of people
below $1-a-day poverty line
400
300
200
100
0
Sub-
Saharan
Africa
South
Asia
East
Asia
and
 Pacific
Middle
East and
 North
Africa
Europe
and
central
Asia
Latin
America
and
Caribbean
1993
2002
22A. de Janvry and E. Sadoulet, “Agricultural Growth and Poverty Reduction: Additional Evidence,” The 
World Bank Research Observer 25, no. 1 (February 2010).

612   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
 majority of smallholder farmers (often the largest group among the poor) are also 
net  consumers of food. They are either incapable of satisfying all of their food needs 
through their own production, or they sell some of their output for cash and buy 
food (and other goods). Thus, they too benefit from lower food prices (provided that 
the gains from reduced spending outweigh any losses to income). Lower food prices 
could, of course, hurt net sellers, unless productivity gains outpace declining prices. 
This consideration points to the importance of agricultural productivity growth, both 
as a driver of reduced food prices and as a source of increased income for producers. 
The broad association between poverty reduction and growth in agricultural produc-
tivity is reflected in Figure 16–8, which compares the experiences of South Asia and 
sub-Saharan Africa. In South Asia, increasing cereals yields during the 1990s accompa-
nied decreasing incidence of poverty, while in sub-Saharan Africa relatively stagnant 
cereals yields accompanied a lack of progress in reducing the incidence of poverty.
While the ability of agriculture to reduce poverty is greater in settings where pov-
erty is concentrated in rural areas, this ability also depends on certain conditions 
within those rural areas. The effectiveness of agriculture in reducing poverty is much 
stronger in settings where land ownership is more evenly distributed and where pro-
duction techniques are more labor-intensive, and thus generate more employment.
How does agriculture compare with nonagriculture in its ability to reduce pov-
erty? A number of studies have attempted to quantify the effects of growth originat-
ing in agriculture versus nonagriculture. The general consensus among these studies, 
based on cross-country evidence, is that growth originating in agricultural growth is 
on the order of three times more effective at reducing poverty than growth originating 
FIGURE 16–8 Cereal Yields and Poverty in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa, 
1984–2002
Cereal yields rose and poverty dropped in South Asia but both indicators remained 
unchanged in sub-Saharan Africa.
Source: Figure 1.1 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: 
Agriculture for Development, 2008. Reprinted with permission.
1987
1984
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
Cereal yields
(tons/hectare)
Yields (left axis)
Poverty (right axis)
0.5
1.5
2.5
3.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1987
1984
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
Cereal yields
(tons/hectare)
Poverty incidence
(percent)
Poverty incidence
(percent)
Yields (left axis)
(b) Sub-Saharan Africa
(a) South Asia
Poverty (right axis)
0.5
1.5
2.5
3.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60

in nonagriculture.23 The World Bank’s World Development Report, 2008, which focuses 
on the role of agriculture in development, presents the results of a study by Univer-
sity of California at Berkeley economists Ethan Ligon and Elisabeth Sadoulet, who 
compared the effects of a 1 percent increase in GDP originating in agriculture versus 
nonagriculture on the expenditures of each decile of the income distribution. Based 
on cross-country data from 42 countries over the period 1978–2003, they estimated 
that growth originating in agriculture was at least three times as effective in reduc-
ing poverty as growth in nonagriculture. They also found that among the poorest 
people (those in the bottom decile of the income distribution), the effect of agricul-
tural growth was approximately six times greater, whereas income growth originating 
in nonagriculture actually resulted in small reductions in income among the poorest 
households. Of course, these cross-country results do not describe the experience of 
any particular country, where the results will depend on a range of conditions.
AGRICULTURAL GROWTH AS A PATHWAY OUT OF POVERTY
Having established some of the theoretical connections between agricultural growth 
and poverty alleviation and also having considered some empirical evidence, we now 
turn to the question of mechanisms. For households living in poverty, what specific 
opportunities does agricultural growth provide for pathways out of poverty? There 
are three broad avenues: One possibility is for poor, subsistence-oriented farm-
ers to increase their on-farm output for sale; a second pathway can be to engage in 
rural labor markets, especially for off-farm rural work; and, a third is to migrate to 
the urban economy. As the World Development Report of 2008 notes, these pathways 
are complementary. Nonfarm earnings can be used to invest in improved farming, 
and linkages within the rural economy are such that agricultural growth can both 
generate off-farm employment and facilitate migration. Migration, in turn, can be an 
important source of remittances back to rural areas that can support household con-
sumption or investment, as has been the case in the Philippines in particular.
The 2008 World Development Report describes various success stories. In Tan-
zania the farmers that were mostly likely to exit poverty were those who diversified 
their production to include vegetables, fruits, and vanilla for export, in addition to 
traditional food crops. Similar diversification of farm output to higher-value com-
modities contributed to poverty reduction in Uganda and Malawi. In contrast, India 
and Indonesia are cited as examples in which labor markets provided an important 
pathway out of rural poverty for households engaged in nonfarm rural activities, such 
as rural services and small-scale industry. In China and Nepal, migration to cities has 
played a larger role. A more detailed examination of rural poverty reduction in Viet-
nam highlights the complementarity of these pathways out of poverty.
23These studies are summarized in de Janvry and Sadoulet, “Agricultural Growth and Poverty Reduc-
tion,” and in World Development Report, 2008, Agriculture for Development (Washington, DC: World 
Bank, 2007).
E V O LV I N G  P E R S P E CT I V E S  O N  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E   613

614   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Table 16–3 summarizes the experience between 1992–93 and 1997–98 of three 
categories of Vietnamese farming households who earn more than 50 percent of 
income from agriculture (a category that makes up 47 percent of Vietnam’s rural 
population). This was a period in which value added in Vietnamese agriculture was 
growing at the rapid pace of 4.1 percent per year. The table distinguishes between 
subsistence-oriented farmers (6 percent of rural farming households, who sell less 
than 10 percent of their output), market entrant households (13 percent of farm-
ing households, who began the period as subsistence farmers but ended the period 
as market-oriented farmers), and market-oriented farmers (28 percent of farming 
households, who sell more than 25 percent of their output).
Table 16–3 shows that the market-oriented households enjoyed the greatest 
reduction in poverty, with rates falling from 64 percent in 1992–93 to 37 percent in 
1997–98 (a reduction of 27 percentage points, or 42 percent reduction relative to the 
base year). This group diversified away from agriculture as a source of income, and 
within their agricultural earnings they also diversified away from staple crops into 
higher-valued crops. Market entrants tended to be poorer than the market-oriented 
TABLE 16–3  Changing Market Participation among Farming Households 
 in Vietnam
HOUSEHOLD
 
SUBSISTENCE  
MARKET 
MARKET
CHARACTERISTICS
 
ORIENTED (6%)* 
ENTRANT (13%)* 
ORIENTED (28%)*
 
1992–93 
1997–98 
1992–93 
1997–98 
1992–93 
1997–98
Assets
Land owned (hectares) 
0.37 
0.43 
0.50 
0.57 
0.60 
0.72
Education of household 
head (years) 
4.6 
 
6.3 
 
6.3
Context
Market in community (%) 
31 
 
40 
 
47
Outcomes
Real income per capita 
(1998 dong 1,000) 
893 
1,702 
1,138 
2,042 
1,359 
2,978
Share of agricultural income 
in total income (%) 
80 
62 
83 
66 
83 
73
Share of households below 
the poverty line (%) 
86 
62 
73 
48 
64 
37
Share of gross agricultural 
output by crop type 
 
 
Staple crops (%) 
78 
73 
70 
61 
63 
54
High-value crops (%) 
14 
13 
21 
31 
29 
39
*Number in parentheses is percent of Vietnam’s rural population. These three categories of farmers 
collectively make up the 47 percent of the Vietnam’s rural population that earns most of its income from 
farming.
Source: Table 3.1 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: 
Agriculture for Development, 2008. Reprinted with permission.

households but also experienced significant reductions in their poverty rate (from 
73 percent to 48 percent, a reduction of 34 percent). They too diversified away from 
agriculture as a source of income and away from staple crop production. Even those 
households that remained subsistence-oriented producers participated in agri-
cultural growth. Yet, by comparison, the subsistence households experienced the 
smallest reductions in poverty rates (24 percentage points, or a 28 percent reduc-
tion) and remained heavily reliant on staple agricultural production. Agriculture thus 
provides a variety of pathways out of poverty. In reviewing these results, de Janvry 
and Sadoulet make the important point that public policies designed to reduce rural 
poverty (a focus of Chapter 17) must be tailored to specific types of households.24 
Market- oriented households, they note, will benefit from improved competitive-
ness, whereas market entrants will benefit from access to assets and markets, and 
subsistence- oriented farmers require improved production opportunities and access 
to rural labor markets. In this sample, it is clear that the beneficiaries of the greatest 
rate of poverty reduction among these households were the market-oriented house-
holds, whose lower initial poverty rate likely reflects greater initial access to markets. 
These examples from Vietnam highlight the importance of income diversification 
within the rural economy.
While nearly all rural households participate in agriculture, they vary widely in 
the shares of their income coming directly from agriculture itself. Figure 16–9 illus-
trates this variability across countries and regions. Nearly all rural households in 
Ghana, Guatemala, Vietnam, and Nepal participate in agriculture. Yet, the share of 
household income coming from agriculture varies widely across these illustrative 
countries, from a high of nearly 60 percent in Ghana, to approximately 40 percent 
in Vietnam. Looking within these countries, Figure 16–10 reveals fairly consistent 
patterns of income diversification in regard to the income distribution. In general, 
the poorest households are the most directly dependent on agriculture as a source 
of income. Agricultural wage labor also declines sharply as a share of household 
income as income increases, while nonagricultural income shares increase substan-
tially. These types of income diversification may reflect strategies for coping with 
various risks associated with farming. It is likely that relatively wealthier households 
have more options for diversification than relatively poor households. Poor house-
holds, lacking land or other assets, may be forced into low-wage nonfarm employ-
ment, whereas relatively better-off rural households may have access to the capital 
required to take advantage of local business opportunities.
The ability of the nonfarm rural economy to provide a pathway out of poverty 
depends on the rate of economic growth, but also on population density.25 India and 
China are examples of countries in which urban crowding, high rents, and improving 
infrastructure have contributed to the growth of opportunities in the nonfarm rural 
24de Janvry and Sadoulet, “Agricultural Growth and Poverty Reduction.”
25Haggblade et al., eds., Transforming the Rural Nonfarm Economy.
E V O LV I N G  P E R S P E CT I V E S  O N  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E   615

616   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
FIGURE 16–9 Percent of Households Participating in and Deriving Income from 
Agriculture
Source: Figure 3.2 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: 
Agriculture for Development, 2008. Reprinted with permission.
Malawi 2004
Nigeria 2004
Ghana 1998
Vietnam 1998
Panama 2003
Ecuador 1998
Guatemala 2000
Nicaragua 2001
Bulgaria 2001
Albania 2005
Indonesia 2000
Percent
0
20
40
60
80
100
Pakistan 2001
Bangladesh 2000
Nepal 1996
Sub-Saharan
Africa
South Asia
East Asia
and Pacific
Europe and
central Asia
Latin America
and Caribbean
Participation in agriculture
Income share from agriculture
FIGURE 16–10 Sources of Income
Source: Figure 3.3 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: 
Agriculture for Development, 2008. Reprinted with permission.
60
40
20
0
Poorest
Second
Third
Fourth
Richest
Poorest
Second
Third
Fourth
Richest
Poorest
Second
Third
Fourth
Richest
Poorest
Second
Third
Fourth
Richest
80
100
Income (percent)
Ghana 1998
Guatemala 2000
Vietnam 1998
Nepal 1996
Onfarm income
Agricultural wage labor
Nonagricultural income
Transfers & other

S U M M A R Y   617
economy in a way that is much less common in sub-Saharan Africa. In most coun-
tries, the nonfarm rural economy is characterized by a high degree of heterogeneity in 
the scale of operations and the types of activities undertaken. Services tend to domi-
nate manufacturing. A key point regarding the viability of nonfarm rural employment 
as a pathway out of poverty is that it depends on the viability of agriculture itself. 
Many opportunities in the nonfarm rural economy involve the processing and trans-
portation of food, selling agricultural inputs, servicing agricultural machinery, and 
providing other services for which the demand arises from agriculture.
Similarly, out-migration from rural areas, although a potentially important path-
way out of poverty, can reflect either a severe lack of livelihood opportunities in the 
rural economy or the real promise of greater welfare in urban employment. Some 
migration is temporary and follows agricultural seasonality, while some is perma-
nent. From the perspective of rural development, migration can be a two-edged 
sword. Often, those who leave the rural economy are younger, better educated, and 
more skilled. Although this might reduce average labor productivity in rural areas, 
migrants may also be an important source of remittance income, which can contrib-
ute to improved productivity by increasing access to agricultural inputs and other 
productive assets.
SUMMARY
• A variety of characteristics differentiate agriculture from other sectors of 
the economy. These characteristics include its large share of GDP and 
employment, unique features of the agricultural production function, a 
large share of the sector’s output consumed directly by its producers, and 
agriculture’s role as a reservoir of resources.
• One of the defining characteristics of economic development is the 
structural transformation, during which an economy’s sector proportions 
systematically evolve. At early stages of economic development, agriculture 
dominates both GDP and employment shares in the economy. Structural 
transformation consists of the shift of sector proportions away from 
agriculture toward industry and services.
• The decline in the relative size of the agricultural sector is driven, in part, by 
Engel’s law, an implication of which is that the demand for food grows more 
slowly than income.
• Growth in agricultural productivity plays a critical role in facilitating the 
release of labor and capital from agriculture for employment in industry 
and services.
SUMMARY

618   [CH. 16] A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
• Dual-sector growth models provide a stylized depiction of the interactions 
between the agricultural and nonagricultural sectors of the economy, 
specifying the conditions under which labor and capital migrate from 
agriculture to nonagriculture. The dominant dual-sector model, developed 
by Lewis and elaborated by Fei and Ranis, assumes that the defining 
characteristic differentiating agriculture from nonagriculture is the 
existence of surplus labor with low or zero marginal product.
• The Lewis and Fei-Ranis models were widely misinterpreted by policy 
makers in developing countries as a justification for ignoring agriculture’s 
potential contributions to growth and concentrating investment on 
industrial development.
• Subsequent research demonstrated a more nuanced role for agriculture 
in economic growth by considering intersectoral linkages. Building on the 
Lewis linkages, through which agriculture supplies labor and capital to 
nonagriculture, Johnston and Mellor compiled a broader list of linkages, 
which includes agriculture’s role in supplying food for nonagricultural 
laborers, agriculture’s importance in earning the foreign exchange 
necessary to finance industrialization, and agriculture’s role as a source of 
demand for the output of the nonagriculture sector.
• Intersectoral linkages also include the benefits to investment from 
agricultural price stabilization and agriculture’s contribution to growth by 
supporting improved nutrition (and health) of the labor force. Agriculture 
provides a potent vehicle for addressing poverty, much of which is 
concentrated in the rural population. These contributions are direct and 
indirect and include both those employed in agriculture and net food 
consumers for whom agricultural growth reduces the price of food, often 
the major share of the household expenditures.
• On average, a 1 percent increase in aggregate GDP originating in agriculture 
has about three times the effect in reducing national poverty as a 1 percent 
increase in aggregate GDP originating in nonagriculture.
• Three mutually reinforcing avenues, through which agriculture can 
provide a pathway out of poverty, are increased on-farm output, increased 
engagement in rural labor markets and nonfarm rural employment, and 
migration to cities.
• Although many middle-income countries have grown out of their 
dependence on agriculture, it is clear that agriculture still has a central role 
to play in the development of some of today’s most challenging regions, 
large parts of sub-Saharan Africa in particular.

619
Agricultural 
Development: 
Technology, Policies, 
and Institutions
17
T
he previous chapter discussed the role of agriculture in economic develop-
ment, highlighting the sector’s potential contributions to both economic 
growth and poverty alleviation. We turn now to the question of what policies 
and institutions are needed to maximize those contributions. Addressing that 
question requires a more detailed focus on the agricultural sector itself. What kinds 
of policies should governments adopt to promote agricultural development? Which 
kinds of investments are most effective? And, what kinds of institutions and rules are 
necessary to make the most of the policies and investments that are chosen? In short, 
what is required to get agriculture moving?
This chapter approaches that question by addressing the broad constraints that 
have limited agricultural development in general, and food production in particu-
lar, in many parts of the developing world. These constraints take many forms, and 
their severity varies widely across regions and countries. Some of the constraints to 
increasing agricultural productivity may be technological. Before the 1950s, agricul-
ture in nearly all developing countries relied on traditional technologies and crop 
varieties. Traditional agriculture, while stable and well-suited to its environment, was 
typically characterized by low levels of productivity. Growth in agricultural  output 
relied almost entirely on expansion of the areas under cultivation. By the 1960s, 
large public investments in crop science had begun to pay off in the form of seeds for 
improved crop varieties and packages of complementary inputs, the combination of 
which led to substantial increases in agricultural productivity. Yet, the benefits of this 
green revolution have been concentrated in Asia and Latin America, with compara-
tively little impact on agricultural development in sub-Saharan Africa.

620   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
Other constraints on agricultural development arise from unfavorable govern-
ment policies (relating in particular to food prices) or from inadequate institutional 
support for agriculture. Both of these categories of potential constraints relate to 
the incentives faced by farmers. If food prices are too low, farmers may have limited 
incentive to expand production. In the long run, low food prices might also be a dis-
incentive for investments in agriculture. Governments in developing countries face 
a fundamental dilemma in this respect: while higher food prices might provide an 
important incentive for farmers to increase their output, higher food prices might 
simultaneously increase the problems of hunger and malnutrition that are endemic 
in many developing countries. Farmers’ incentives are also determined by institu-
tions (that is, by the rules of the game that govern economic relations in society). 
Institutions governing land rights are of particular concern because farmers who 
own their land may have greater incentive to invest in maintaining its quality. Before 
exploring these issues in greater detail, we first set the scene for agriculture in devel-
oping countries by characterizing traditional agriculture and farming systems.
 CHARACTERISTICS OF TRADITIONAL AGRICULTURE 
AND AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS
Farms and farmers in developing countries differ widely from one another, both 
within and between countries. They differ in size, technology, environmental condi-
tions, crop mix, and degree of commercialization to name but a few categories. Many 
farmers in poor, densely populated, countries such as Bangladesh might own no 
land at all and work as day laborers on other people’s farms. A farmer in sub-Saharan 
Africa, most likely a woman, may own and cultivate several small plots totaling one 
to two hectares,1 grow five or six different crops, and keep a few chickens. The current 
model of agricultural development in Brazil involves commercial farms of thousands 
of hectares, often growing soybeans for sale, coexisting with a multitude of small 
family farms. Given such diversity, generalizations about traditional agriculture are 
necessarily stylized. Most farms in developing countries are small-scale family farms. 
They consume a large portion of their own food production, though few farmers are 
purely subsistence farmers.2 The livelihood, health, and productivity of farm families 
depend directly on the efficiency with which they allocate their scarce resources.
Traditional farms tend to be small in area, typically less than three hectares, but 
intensively cultivated. The demand for labor fluctuates with the agricultural seasons. 
CHARACTERISTICS OF TRADITIONAL AGRICULTURE
AND AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS
1One hectare equals 2.47 acres.
2This section draws on the discussion in chapters 7 and 8 in George W. Norton, Jeffrey Alwang, and 
William A. Masters, Economics of Agricultural Development, World Food Systems and Resource Use, 2nd ed. 
(New York: Routledge, 2010).

C H A R A CTE R I S T I C S  O F  T R A D I T I O N A L  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  A G R I C U LT U R A L  S Y S T E M S   621
Labor may be in short supply during planting and harvesting time, but underem-
ployed in other seasons. Seasonality may also bring with it wide fluctuations in food 
prices, as prices are at their lowest point immediately after the harvest but increase 
continually from that time until the next harvest. This seasonal fluctuation arises in 
part because traditional farms often lack adequate facilities to store their crops and 
must sell them shortly after harvest. The months preceding the next harvest, when 
prices reach their seasonal high, are often referred to as the lean season.
Traditional farms use traditional technologies, which typically rely on few pur-
chased inputs (such as fertilizer, insecticides, and pesticides), grow locally indig-
enous crop varieties, and operate at low levels of productivity. It is widely accepted 
that traditional farmers allocate their resources rationally (as defined by economists) 
and thus do the best that they can with the few resources at their disposal. Hence the 
famous description by economist Theodore W. Schultz that traditional farmers are 
“poor but efficient.”3 Traditional farmers may also earn a significant portion of their 
livelihood by engaging in nonfarm rural activities, such as providing services and 
engaging in petty trade.
AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS
Farming systems, characterized by technology, mix of crops and livestock, and the 
physical environment, vary widely across the developing world. Farming systems 
tend to be dominated by a small number of crops—typically a staple cereal such as 
rice, wheat, or corn—and many minor crops or livestock. The major types of farm-
ing systems (each of which includes a variety of subsystems) are shifting cultiva-
tion, pastoral nomadism, and settled agriculture. Shifting cultivation describes a 
system in which producers cultivate one area until its fertility is exhausted and then 
migrate to another plot of land. If the new areas must first be cleared of brush and 
the remaining brush then burned to clear the fields and increase the nutrient content 
of the soil, it is termed slash and burn agriculture. Economists George Norton, Jef-
frey Alwang, and William Masters estimate that shifting cultivation is still practiced 
on about 15 percent of the world’s cultivated area, mostly in Latin America and sub-
Saharan Africa.4 They note that shifting cultivation has been linked to soil erosion.
Pastoral nomadism, as the name implies, describes a farming system in which 
producers travel more or less continuously. This mobility requires that their produc-
tion system be based on livestock, which the nomads shepherd across grazing areas. 
This system can function only in areas of low population density and is thus most 
frequently found in arid and semiarid agroecological zones, such as in much of the 
Sahel region of Africa or in the Indian state of Rajasthan. Nomadic groups typically 
3Theodore W. Schultz, Transforming Traditional Agriculture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1964), p. 38.
4Norton et al. Economics of Agricultural Development,” p. 150.

622   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
include five or six families traveling together with medium-size herds of livestock, 
perhaps 25 to 60 sheep and goats or a smaller number of camels or cattle. Increasing 
population densities and global climate change are particular threats to this type of 
farming system, which is also associated with environmental damage, resulting from 
overgrazing.
Settled agriculture includes a variety of systems, which as a group represent 
the best potential for productivity growth. Some settled agricultural systems are the 
following:
• Intensive annual crops, the most dominant system in terms of total 
cultivated area, typically concentrating on production of staple cereal crops 
(wheat, rice, and corn)
• Mixed farming, which builds on the interactions of crops and livestock 
production to manage risk and maintain soil fertility
• Perennial crops, generally tree crops such as bananas, coffee, cocoa, along 
with sugarcane, that produce for a period of years (often in combination 
with annual food crops)
• Livestock systems, producing both dairy and meat products, either through 
grain feeding (intensive production) or exclusively by grazing (extensive 
production)
Settled agriculture forms the core of efforts to modernize agriculture. The chal-
lenges are numerous, complex, and ever evolving. With cereals demand in develop-
ing countries projected to increase by nearly 50 percent between 1997 and 2020, the 
challenge of getting agriculture moving is urgent.5 The starting point is a framework 
for diagnosing the constraints to increased productivity.
 DIAGNOSING THE CONSTRAINTS TO AGRICULTURAL 
DEVELOPMENT
Increasing agricultural output is a high priority for most developing countries. In 
addition to the obvious benefit of providing greater access to food for domestic con-
sumers, increasing agricultural output also enhances the livelihoods of those working 
in agriculture and related industries. In many developing countries, the agricultural 
DIAGNOSING THE CONSTRAINTS TO AGRICULTURAL
DEVELOPMENT
5Projections of future demand for food take into consideration not only projections of how many peo-
ple will need to be fed but also projected income levels, which shape both the quantity and the type of 
food demanded. It is widely documented that demand for meat increases with income, and meat produc-
tion implies additional demand for grain as feed. Much of this demand will be in China. Mark Rosegrant, 
Michael Paisner, Siet Meijer, and Julie Witcover, Global Food Projections to 2020, Emerging Trends and 
Alternative Futures (Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute, 2001), p. 58.

D I A G N O S I N G  T H E  C O N S T R A I NT S  TO A G R I C U LT U R A L  D E V E L O P M E NT   623
labor force is both the largest and the poorest segment of the population. Agriculture 
also may involve a significant proportion of exports, as we see in such examples as 
cocoa exports from Ghana and coffee exports from Ethiopia. Yet, despite the substan-
tial efforts (and ample rhetoric) that many developing countries devote to the task of 
increasing agricultural output, progress has often been halting and difficult. A par-
ticularly useful framework for diagnosing the constraints to increasing agricultural 
productivity was proposed by agricultural economist Arthur Mosher.6
The Mosher framework compares the actual performance of agricultural pro-
ducers with their potential performance. Performance in this framework is rep-
resented by the output per hectare (or yield) of a particular commodity, often a 
staple cereal. Yield, even for a particular cereal, may vary widely from farm to farm 
in a given country. Some farmers may have better-quality land, a more conducive 
climate, or more regular access to water; other farmers may be closer to roads and 
have greater access to markets for both inputs and their output or more exposure to 
agricultural extension agents who teach them improved techniques. Some farmers 
may simply be better at farming than other farmers. The Mosher framework begins 
by recognizing these variations and observing the actual distribution of yields across 
farms, ranking them from highest to lowest. Given this distribution, the approach 
then addresses the question of why some yields are not higher.
What are the constraints that prevent farmers from producing more output per 
unit of land? The Mosher framework considers two categories of explanations: tech-
nical and economic. Figure 17–1 illustrates the sense in which we can think of techni-
cal and economic constraints as ceilings on the levels of crop yield that farmers might 
achieve.7 The horizontal axis in Figure 17–1 measures the distribution of land culti-
vated to a particular cereal crop, and the vertical axis measures yield per hectare for 
that crop. Curve a illustrates the distribution of yields across farms, or the achieve-
ment distribution. These are the yields actually obtained by farmers, ordered from 
highest to lowest, as observed in field surveys. (This distribution would be flat if all 
farmers had the same yields.) Because of the differences across farms and farmers 
noted earlier, the achievement distribution typically slopes downward.8
The technical ceiling, represented by curve t in Figure 17–1, describes the 
maximum biologically possible yield given available technology. This is defined 
by the yield achieved by experiment stations in various regions where agricultural 
scientists grow the crop using the best technologies under controlled conditions. 
6Arthur Mosher, An Introduction to Agricultural Extension (Singapore: Singapore University Press for 
the Agricultural Development Council, 1978).
7Figure 17–1 originated with Mosher, An Introduction to Agricultural Extension. Our discussion of this 
framework draws on C. Peter Timmer, Walter Falcon, and Scott Pearson, Food Policy Analysis (Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, for the World Bank, 1983), chap. 3.
8Because the height of the achievement distribution measures output per hectare and the horizontal 
axis indicates the land area achieving each yield, the area beneath the achievement distribution measures 
total production.

624   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
FIGURE 17–1 The Mosher Framework
Source: Figure 3.9 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: Food 
Policy Analysis, 1983. The Johns Hopkins University Press for The World Bank. Reprinted with permission.
0
100
Arable land area
(percentage distribution)
Yield per hectare
t'
e'
a'
t
e
a
The technical ceiling is raised by:
The economic ceiling is raised by:
• Biological and engineering research
• Land improvement
• Raising the technical ceiling
• Increasing the number of localities served
   by and the efficiency of:
Markets for farm products
Outlets for farm supplies
and equipment
Farm-to-market roads
Favorable price relationships
Favorable tenure relationships
The achievement distribution is
raised primarily by raising the 
economic ceiling, but it can be
accelerated by:
• An efficient extension service
• An efficient production credit system
 Farmers can do no better than the technical ceiling because it represents the maxi-
mum yield physically possible in a given environment. The economic ceiling, rep-
resented by curve e, describes the distribution of yields that are possible when all 
farmers maximize their profits given the opportunities available to them in a given 

D I A G N O S I N G  T H E  C O N S T R A I NT S  TO A G R I C U LT U R A L  D E V E L O P M E NT   625
policy environment. The economic ceiling cannot lie above what is physically pos-
sible (the technical ceiling); how far below the technical ceiling the economic ceil-
ing lies is determined by the policy environment. Limited access to credit and the 
risks of uncertain weather can keep actual achievements well below the economic 
ceiling. As a result, the true  economic ceiling (unlike the technical ceiling) cannot be 
observed from field data.9 The achievement distribution, in turn, can be no higher 
than the economic ceiling.
Figure 17–1 also describes scenarios under which the achievement distribu-
tion and the technical and economic ceilings might be raised, thus creating space 
in which the achievement distribution might be raised. Improved agricultural tech-
nologies, such as improved seed varieties, can raise the technical ceiling from t to t. 
This could create the possibility of raising the economic ceiling from e to e by improv-
ing price incentives or improving the connections between farmers and markets or 
reforming land tenure arrangements. With the economic ceiling raised from e to e 
it may then be possible to raise the achievement distribution from a to a. Improved 
agricultural extension services or access to credit can contribute to raising the 
achievement distribution by helping farmers take maximum advantage of their tech-
nical and economic circumstances.
Figure 17–2 illustrates various relationships between the technical and economic 
ceilings and the achievement distribution, which may be observed in practice. Area 
A illustrates a low-productivity environment in which the achievement distribution 
is tightly constrained by the economic ceiling and in which the economic ceiling 
itself is tightly constrained by the technical ceiling. In such a setting, farmers can-
not be expected to do much better, even if economic policies improve. The binding 
constraint in this case is the technical ceiling, which may be low owing to a lack of 
improved seeds. In contrast, Area B describes a situation in which the technical ceil-
ing is far from binding but in which farmers are close to doing the best that they can, 
given what might be an unsupportive economic policy environment or poor institu-
tions for land tenure. In Area C, neither the technical nor the economic ceilings are 
binding for most farmers, but the achievement distribution indicates that only a 
few farmers may be benefiting from the best available technologies. This diagnosis 
might point to the need for improved agricultural extension services. In Area D, the 
technical and economic ceilings are high, to the benefit of most farmers. Additional 
increases in yield under this scenario may require long-term investments in agricul-
tural research to raise the technical ceiling even further.
The Mosher framework is not intended to provide a basis for detailed recommen-
dations regarding technological development or economic policies. This  framework 
9Timmer et al., Food Policy Analysis, suggest that a general placement of the economic ceiling is pos-
sible by comparing the marginal product of fertilizer (the additional output of cereal resulting from using 
an additional unit of fertilizer) with the ratio of the grain price to the fertilizer price. If an additional unit of 
fertilizer will produce five units additional cereals output but the cost of that additional unit of fertilizer is 
six times the price of grain, then a rational farmer will not use additional fertilizer.

626   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
FIGURE 17–2 Possible Scenarios in the Mosher Framework
Source: Figure 3.10 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: Food 
Policy Analysis, 1983. The Johns Hopkins University Press for The World Bank. Reprinted with permission.
0
Yield
100
a
e
t
Area A: Local technological
constraint
Area C: Farmer Knowledge
constraint
0
Yield
100
a
e
t
0
Yield
100
a
e
t
Area B: Economic incentives
constraint
0
Yield
100
a
e
t
Area D: Scientific and
technological constraint

R A I S I N G  T H E  T E C H N I C A L  C E I L I N G   627
provides a flexible diagnostic tool for prioritizing potential initiatives to support 
agricultural development and for understanding the relationships between those 
initiatives. The categorization of constraints as pertaining either to technology or to 
economic policy also provides a springboard from which to consider the challenges 
presented by both categories in greater detail. We begin by considering possible ways 
to raise the technical ceiling.
RAISING THE TECHNICAL CEILING
The height of the technical ceiling is defined in part by agroecological conditions 
and the agricultural potential of different areas. This is of particular concern when 
considering rain-fed agriculture, in which production is especially sensitive to dif-
ferences in soil quality and temperature, in addition to rainfall. According to the 
World Bank, two-thirds of the rural population in developing countries (over 1.8 bil-
lion people) live in areas with favorable agroecological potential: about 40 percent 
within irrigated areas and an additional 26 percent live in areas with reliable mois-
ture.10 One-third of the population of the developing world (over 820 million people) 
live in areas with less-favorable potential, where the irrigation is scarce and rainfall is 
unreliable. These less-favorable areas account for 54 percent of the agricultural area 
but produce only 30 percent of the total value of agricultural production. Investing in 
irrigation is one (albeit expensive) way to raise the technical ceiling. A broader and 
more flexible approach to raising the technical ceiling lies in improving agricultural 
technology.
In the short and medium run, average technology might improve because more 
farms adopt improved technologies (a process known as technology diffusion), 
because the least productive farms ceased to exist, or because the best available 
technologies themselves improve. In the long run, however, average technology can 
improve only if the best technology is also improving. In this section, we consider var-
ious approaches to raising the technical ceiling on agricultural production. We exam-
ine the sources of new agricultural technologies and their impact on  productivity in 
developing-country agriculture as well as a model of technological innovation. There 
has been substantial progress in developing and diffusing improved  agricultural 
technologies, resulting in impressive gains in productivity, yet equally substantial 
challenges remain. Most of the gains in agricultural productivity over the past 50 
years have resulted from the green revolution.
RAISING THE TECHNICAL CEILING
10World Bank, World Development Report, 2008: Agriculture for Development, (Washington, DC: World 
Bank, 2007), p. 54.

628   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
THE GREEN REVOLUTION
11
The term green revolution refers broadly to the science-based innovations in crop 
breeding and farming practices, with roots dating from the 1940s, that transformed 
global agriculture during the second half of the last century. Agronomist Norman 
Borlaug is often referred to as the Father of the Green Revolution for his early sci-
entific work in Mexico on developing semidwarf disease resistant wheat variet-
ies. These new wheat varieties were an early example of modern crop varieties 
(MVs), or high-yielding crop varieties, that were to become the centerpiece of the 
green revolution. Plants are vulnerable to a wide range of pests, diseases, and para-
sitic weeds that can severely reduce yields. By cross-breeding appropriate strains of 
wheat, Borlaug and colleagues were able to fortify the wheat then grown in Mexico 
against major diseases. In addition, existing wheat varieties tended to grow tall and 
thin as each plant competed with its neighbors for sunlight. Efforts to increase wheat 
yields through the application of chemical fertilizers increased the grain production 
of plants, but the tall thin wheat varieties tended to fall over under the added weight 
of grain. The creation of semidwarf wheat varieties, which had shorter and thicker 
stems than the traditional varieties as well as improved responsiveness to fertilizers 
was a solution to that problem. By the mid-1960s, similarly improved varieties of 
rice had also been developed and released, along with MV wheat, to farmers in Latin 
America and Asia.
These research programs were housed at new international agricultural research 
centers (IARCs). The International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (known by 
its Spanish acronym, CIMMYT) was established in Mexico in 1963 (with Borlaug as 
its founding director), and the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) was estab-
lished in the Philippines in 1960. Both centers were supported by large grants from 
the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations. These were the first two centers of what is now 
the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), a global net-
work of 15 research institutes. While popular accounts of the green revolution tend to 
focus on the early advances with MVs in the 1960s, a comprehensive review by econ-
omists Robert Evenson and Douglas Gollin suggests the green revolution remained 
in full swing until at least the year 2000.12
Part of this extended history of the green revolution is the recognition that the 
early successes were largely limited to wheat and rice for use in Latin America and 
Asia. Green revolution advances ultimately included the release of more than 8,000 
MVs for 11 major crops, yet progress was uneven across both commodities and 
countries. Advances for certain semiarid crops, such as sorghum, millet, barley, and 
root crops such as cassava, did not come until the 1980s. The adoption of modern 
11This section draws on R. E. Evenson and D. Gollin, “Assessing the Impact of the Green Revolution, 
1960 to 2000,” Science 300 (2003); World Bank, World Development Report, 2008.
12Evenson and Gollin, “Assessing the Impact of the Green Revolution.”

R A I S I N G  T H E  T E C H N I C A L  C E I L I N G   629
varieties was widespread but unevenly distributed over time and space. Figure 17–3 
illustrates the diffusion of MVs by crop and region. By the early 2000s, adoption rates 
across commodities in East Asia were uniformly high (exceeding 80 percent, with the 
exception of cassava, a root crop that plays only a small role in Asian diets). MVs for 
major commodities had also diffused widely through South Asia and Latin America. 
Yet, with the exception of wheat, adoption of MVs in sub-Saharan Africa by the early 
2000s lagged far behind other developing regions. Adoption of modern varieties for 
rice and sorghum in sub-Saharan Africa are particularly low in comparison with 
other regions, even though these two crops are widely grown in the region.
Lagging adoption of MVs in sub-Saharan Africa has several explanations. One 
problem has been that agroecological conditions in Africa are extremely diverse—
sometimes even within a single country. Another problem, particularly before the 
1980s, was that the new varieties were engineered to be highly responsive to pur-
chased inputs, such as chemical fertilizers, or (especially in the case of rice) thrived 
best in irrigated fields. These complementary inputs have been less common in 
Africa than in Asia or Latin America, limiting the ability of African farmers to ben-
efit from green revolution innovations. Figure 17–4 demonstrates the stark disparities 
in input intensity across regions. By the year 2002, nearly 40 percent of cropland in 
South Asia was irrigated, compared to only 4 percent of the cropland in sub-Saharan 
Africa. Similarly, fertilizer application per hectare in sub-Saharan Africa remained 
but a small fraction of average fertilizer applications in other regions.
Most of the MVs were the result of genetic research performed at the interna-
tional research centers. Yet the real measure of success in agricultural research is not 
the number of varietal releases, but their impact in farmers’ fields. In the language of 
Rice
100
80
60
40
20
0
Wheat
Maize
Sorghum
Cassava
Potatoes
Sub-Saharan Africa
Middle East and North Africa
Latin America and Caribbean
South Asia
East Asia and Pacific
Area planted with improved varieties, 2000–05, (percent of crop area).
FIGURE 17–3 Modern Variety Diffusion by Crop and Region
Note: Data are provided for the period 2000–05, except for maize in some Sub-Saharan African countries 
where data are from 1997.
Source: Figure 7.1 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: 
Agriculture for Development, 2008. Reprinted with permission.

630   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
the Mosher framework, new agricultural technologies may raise the technical ceil-
ing, but it raises the achievement distribution only if those technologies are widely 
adopted and properly used by farmers. Table 17–1 describes growth rates by produc-
tion, area, and yield for food crops by region, distinguishing between the early and 
late green revolution periods. The growth rate of output declined significantly from 
the early to the late green revolution period in every region of the developing world 
except for sub-Saharan Africa. These changes in the rates of output growth were 
driven primarily by changes in the growth rates of agricultural area, which fell in all 
regions except Africa.
Table 17–1 distills the growth rate of crop yield into the contributions of MVs 
and the contributions to yield of increases in the use of other inputs. During the 
FIGURE 17–4 Use of Agricultural Inputs by Region
Source: Figure 2.2 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: 
Agriculture for Development, 2008. Reprinted with permission.
(c) Fertilizer Use
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Asia
East Asia and Pacific
Middle East and North Africa
Europe and central Asia
Latin America and Caribbean
0
20
40
60
80
100
Kilograms of nutrients per hectare of arable and permanent cropland
120
140
160
180
200
98
190
73
81
34
2002
1982
1962
(b) Improved Varieties of Cereals
24
77
48
59
85
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Asia
East Asia and Pacific
Middle East and North Africa
Latin America and Caribbean
0
20
40
Cereal area (percent)
60
80
2000
1980
(a) Irrigation
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Asia
East Asia and Pacific
Middle East and North Africa
Europe and central Asia
Latin America and Caribbean
0
10
4
29
33
11
11
20
Arable and permanent cropland (percent)
30
40
1962
1982
2002
13
39

R A I S I N G  T H E  T E C H N I C A L  C E I L I N G   631
TABLE 17–1 Average Annual Growth Rates of Food Production, Area, Yield, and   
 
the Contribution of Modern Varieties
EARLY GREEN 
REVOLUTION (1961–80)
LATE GREEN 
REVOLUTION (1981–2000)
Asia
Production
3.65
2.11
Area
0.51
0.02
Yield
3.12
2.09
MV contributions to yield
0.68
0.97
Other input per hectare*
2.44
1.12
Latin America
Production
3.08
1.63
Area
1.47
-0.51
Yield
1.59
2.15
MV contributions to yield
0.46
0.77
Other input per hectare*
1.12
1.38
Middle East and North Africa
Production
2.53
2.12
Area
0.95
0.61
Yield
1.56
1.51
MV contributions to yield
0.17
0.78
Other input per hectare*
1.39
0.72
Sub-Saharan Africa
Production
1.70
3.19
Area
0.52
2.82
Yield
1.17
0.36
MV contributions to yield
0.10
0.47
Other input per hectare*
1.07
-0.11
All developing countries
Production
3.20
2.19
Area
0.68
0.39
Yield
2.50
1.81
MV contributions to yield
0.52
0.86
Other input per hectare*
1.98
0.95
*Refers to such factors as fertilizer and machinery. Growth rates of other inputs are taken as a residual.
MV, modern crop variety.
Source: R. E. Evenson and D. Gollin, “Assessing the Impact of the Green Revolution, 1960 to 2000,” 
Science 300 (2003).
early years (before 1980), as revealed by the table, MVs played a large role in driving 
yield growth in Latin America and Asia but made little contribution in other regions. 
For example, between 1961 and 1980 in Latin America, crop production grew at an 
annual rate of just over 3 percent, of which nearly 1.6 percent was the result of growth 
in yield. MVs explained over one-fourth of that 1.6 percent growth in yield. Over 
the same period, however, MV’s accounted for only 0.097 percentage points of the 

632   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
1.17 percent per year growth rate of yield in sub-Saharan Africa (thus explaining only 
8 percent of the growth in Africa’s crop yields).
For the developing world as a whole, crop production grew at an average rate of 
3.2 percent, of which just under 0.7 percent was the result of growth in an agricul-
tural area and 2.5 percent the results of growth in yield. The use of MVs accounted for 
0.5 percentage points of the growth rate in yield, or just over one-fifth. Between 1981 
and 2000, the rate of production growth for all developing countries (on average) fell 
to about 2.2 percent per year, whereas yield growth fell to 1.8 percent. Although yields 
grew more slowly after 1981, it is notable that yield growth accounted for a larger 
share of growth in total output post-1981, and the share of yield growth explained by 
MVs increased to nearly one half. Sub-Saharan Africa was the only region in which 
food production accelerated in the late green revolution, in part as a result of the sub-
stantially increased contribution of MVs in that period.
What would the world have been like by the year 2000 had the green revolution 
not occurred? Economists at the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI; 
the economic policy center of the CGIAR) used a simulation model to answer this 
hypothetical question.13 If no MVs had been released in developing countries, agri-
cultural yields in developing countries would have been around 20 percent lower 
by the year 2000 than their actual level in that year. Cropped area in both developed 
and developing countries would have been 3 to 5 percent greater than their actual 
level, and crop prices would have been 35 to 66 percent higher. Crop production in 
developing countries would have been 16 to 19 percent lower than they actually were 
by the year 2000. The consequences of the green revolution for human welfare were 
enormous. The IFPRI simulation exercise indicates that had the green revolution not 
occurred, the percent of malnourished children in developing countries would have 
been 6 to 8 percent greater than it actually was (a difference of 32 to 42 million pre-
school children), and calorie consumption per capita in developing countries would 
have been about 14 percent lower than it actually was by the year 2000. Norman Bor-
laug was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970 for his pioneering contributions to 
the green revolution.
RECENT TRENDS IN AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY
Figure 17–5 illustrates trends in cereals yields, first comparing developed and devel-
oping countries and then distinguishing between developing regions. It is clear from 
Figure 17–5a that cereals yields in the developed countries are higher and have grown 
faster than in the developing countries. Among regions of the developing world, the 
differences are also striking. Although the various regions depicted in Figure 17–5b 
attained similar cereal yields in the early 1960s, they diverged quite dramatically 
13This simulation exercise is summarized by Evenson and Gollin, “Assessing the Impact of the Green 
Revolution.”

R A I S I N G  T H E  T E C H N I C A L  C E I L I N G   633
by 2005. Consistent with Table 17–1, the flat trend in cereals yields for sub-Saharan 
Africa contrast sharply with the rapid growth experienced in East Asia, where by 
2005, average yields were more than four times the level found in Africa.
While the levels of yields in cereals illustrated in Figure 17–5 increased in most 
regions, the growth rates of those increases, while remaining positive, have slowed 
over time. Figure 17–6 captures this disturbing global trend: The growth rate of yields 
in the world’s major cereal crops (wheat, rice, and maize) has trended strongly down-
ward since the 1980s. This slowdown in productivity growth may reflect that the easy 
gains of the green revolution’s early years have been exhausted. It may also repre-
sent declining public expenditures for agricultural research and development (R&D) 
during the 1990s. In sub-Saharan Africa, for example, public agricultural R&D spend-
ing declined in nearly half of the 27 countries with available data, as did the R&D 
share of agricultural gross domestic product (GDP) for the region as a whole.14 Yet, 
it is also important to recognize that agricultural innovations must be continually 
renewed. The stability of yield gains depends heavily on the resistance of new variet-
ies to various pest and disease risks. As those threats evolve, agricultural technology 
must strive to stay one step ahead. In summarizing this problem, the World Bank’s 
World Development Report 2008 makes reference to the Red Queen in Lewis Car-
roll’s Through the Looking Glass, who complained, “Now here, you see, it takes all the
14World Bank, World Development Report, 2008.
Yields (tons per hectare)
(a)
(b)
Developed countries
Developing countries
1960
0
1
2
3
3
4
5
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
Yields (tons per hectare)
0
1
2
3
4
5
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
East Asia and Pacific
Latin America and
caribbean
South Asia
Europe and central Asia
Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Middle East and North
FIGURE 17–5 Cereal Yield Trends by Region
Source: Figure 2.1 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: 
Agriculture for Development, 2008. Reprinted with permission.

634   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
FIGURE 17–6 Growth Rates of Cereals Yields
Source: Figure 2.12 from The International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: 
Agriculture for Development, 2008. Reprinted with permission.
Average annual growth rate (percent)
Wheat
Maize
Rice
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 running you can do to keep in the same place.”15 That report then notes that one-third 
to one-half of current investments and crop breeding may be aimed simply at main-
taining past gains.
This discussion of agricultural productivity trends highlights the diversity of experi-
ence across the developing world, yet a consistent theme is the relative lack of progress 
in sub-Saharan Africa. Figure 17–7 compares average maize yields with potential maize 
yields (the so-called yield gap) for selected countries in sub-Saharan Africa. In each 
case, average on-farm achievement falls far short of the technical ceiling implied by the 
maize yields obtained on demonstration plots, reflecting the best possible conditions 
15World Bank, World Development Report, 2008, p. 161.
FIGURE 17–7 The Yield Gap for Maize in Selected African Countries.
Source: Figure 2.13 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: 
Agriculture for Development, 2008. Reprinted with permission.
Tons per hectare
Malawi
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Ethiopia
Nigeria
Uganda
Average national yield
Average yield in farm demonstrations
Mali
Mozambique

R A I S I N G  T H E  T E C H N I C A L  C E I L I N G   635
and optimal inputs available in each country. Yield gaps in Asian agriculture tend to be 
much smaller, consistent with the more rapid rate of yield growth seen in Figure 17–5. 
The problems in sub-Saharan Africa include the greater complexity of its agricultural 
systems and diversity of agroclimatic conditions (both of which have increased the 
challenges of creating new technologies for use there), in addition to its relative lack of 
market infrastructure and lower levels of education. Box 17–1 introduces an important 
theory about how the kinds of agricultural  technologies that are invented depend on 
economic circumstances, the theory of induced innovation.
aThis theory thus portrays technical change as an endogenous process, in which realized tech-
nologies are determined by economic circumstances.
BOX 17–1  A MODEL OF INDUCED TECHNICAL CHANGE 
IN AGRICULTURE
The green revolution technologies that were so effective in Asia tended to 
emphasize biological technology. Improved seed varieties that were highly 
responsive to chemical fertilizers formed the core of the innovations. Biological 
approaches primarily work to increase output per unit of land and we can think 
of them as land-saving technologies. In contrast, mechanical innovations, such 
as better tractors and improved harvesting machinery, enable the cultivation of a 
larger area per worker. We can think of mechanical approaches as labor- saving 
technologies. Is it merely coincidence that land-saving technologies were devel-
oped for application in Asia, where labor is abundant and land relatively scarce? 
The broad idea that links factor endowments to the evolution of technical change 
is the theory of induced innovation.
The notion that new agricultural technologies can economize on either land 
or labor illustrates that multiple paths of technology development are possible. 
Advances in mechanical technology are motivated by the desire to reduce labor 
costs; advances in biological technology are motivated by the desire to increase 
crop output per unit of land (or animal output per unit of feed). Mechanical technol-
ogy may be more appropriate in settings in which the supply of labor is constrained; 
biological technology might be more appropriate in settings in which the supply of 
land is constrained. The theory of induced innovation, popularized by economists 
Yujiro Hayami and Vernon Ruttan, addresses the question of which among these 
alternative paths of technology development is actually followed. Its answer is that 
technology evolves in response to changes in relative factor prices, economizing 
on the relatively scarce (and hence more costly) factors of production.a

636   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
Fertilizer
c
c
b
b
Land
i0
i1
i1*
i0*
bWe revisit this construct and provide a more detailed exposition in the discussion of producer 
price incentives later in this chapter.
cThe elasticity of an isoquant refers to the ease with which producers can substitute one input 
for another in response to changes in relative input prices. Graphically, an inelastic isoquant will have 
more of an “L” shape (indicating little scope for substituting one input for another), whereas a more 
elastic isoquant will curve more gradually.
The figure below illustrates the process of induced innovation for the case 
of biological technology. The model builds on the concept of a production iso-
quant, which describes the various combinations of inputs (in this case, land 
and fertilizer) that can be combined to produce a given quantity of output.b
The induced innovation model posits that at any given time, a large family of 
potential technologies could be invented. Each of these technologies can be 
represented by its own isoquant. We will consider the evolution of technology 
between two points in time (the initial point being designated “time zero,” as 
indicated by the subscript 0, and the other point in time similarly designated 
as “time 1”, as indicated by the subscript 1). In the figure, the isoquant i0 might 
represent a particular crop variety, which could be grown in a given quantity by 
combining fertilizer and land in any of the combinations that lie along i0. The 
more elastic (dashed ) isoquant, i0*, is termed the innovation possibility curve.c
In this model, the innovation possibility curve traces the envelope (or boundary) 
of the entire family of potential crop technologies that might be invented at that 

R A I S I N G  T H E  E C O N O M I C  C E I L I N G   637
time zero. The line bb is the
b
isocost line. Every point on bb reflects a combina-
b
tion of fertilizer and land use with the same total cost. Its slope reflects the rela-
tive price of fertilizer to land. The specific crop technology that gets invented in
the first period (i0) is the one that minimizes input costs with relative prices of
fertilizer and land indicated by the slope of line bb.
Technological progress is represented by a shift over time of the innovation
possibilities curve toward the origin of the graph in the figure. This reflects 
the idea that technological progress permits the production of a given quan-
tity of output using a smaller quantity of inputs. Thus by time 1 in this graph,
the innovation possibilities curve has shifted inward from i0* to
0
i1*. Suppose that
1
between time 0 and time 1 fertilizer production increases, thus reducing the
relative price of fertilizer to land. This is reflected in the flatter isocost line cc. In
c
response to this change in relative factor prices, the induced innovation model
suggests that a new technology (depicted by isoquant i1) is developed, a new
crop variety that is more responsive to fertilizer (perhaps semidwarf wheat). 
This new technology will lie along the envelope of technologies that could 
potentially be developed at time 1, summarized by the new innovation possi-
bilities curve, i1*. This particular crop variety is invented because it minimizes
1
production costs given the new set of relative factor prices. The key intuition
is that the technology actually invented from among potential innovations is
y
the one that most efficiently economizes on the factor of production that has 
become more costly.
Source: This box draws on Yujiro Hayami and Vernon Ruttan, Agricultural Development: An Inter-
national Perspective (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985).
e
RAISING THE ECONOMIC CEILING
The height of the economic ceiling in the Mosher framework is determined by a com-
bination of economic incentives, farmers’ access to markets, and institutions such 
as the rules governing land tenure. We begin by considering the impact of prices on 
farm-level decision making and resource allocation. The goals of agricultural devel-
opment strategies may include increasing the sector’s output or promoting rural 
welfare. In either case, a price environment that provides positive incentives to pro-
ducers and makes agriculture a profitable enterprise typically calls for relatively high 
food prices. Such strategies are inevitably constrained by the harmful implications of 
high food prices for consumers, many of whom may be poor and allocate large bud-
get shares to food, the poorest of whom may be highly vulnerable to malnutrition. 
RAISING THE ECONOMIC CEILING

638   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
The conflicting interests of producers and consumers in regard to food prices are a 
central challenge for policy makers, one that is sufficiently pervasive to be termed 
by economists C. Peter Timmer, Walter Falcon, and Scott Pearson “the food policy 
dilemma.”
FOOD PRODUCTION ANALYSIS
16
Designing policies to promote agricultural development first requires an under-
standing of how farmers respond to price incentives. This section addresses three 
dimensions of decision making by farmers: what mix of crops to produce, what com-
bination of inputs to use in production, and what quantity to produce. Poor farmers, 
they have to make all these decisions simultaneously. We have the luxury to examine 
them in turn, and then see how they combine to describe the supply curve for food. 
We assume in each case that farmers allocate their resources with an eye toward 
maximizing profits, which implies that their choices equalize marginal costs and 
marginal benefits.
WHAT TO PRODUCE? THE PRODUCT–PRODUCT DECISION
Farmers in developing countries rarely produce only one crop; indeed in sub- 
Saharan Africa it is common to see four or five different crops simultaneously planted 
in the same field (an approach known as intercropping). Whether multiple crops 
are grown in the same field or in different fields, farmers must decide on an optimal 
crop mix. Economists model this decision by considering how the opportunities 
made available by nature interact with market incentives. Figure 17–8 illustrates this 
interaction between markets and nature with a production possibility frontier and 
an isorevenue line. In practice farmers must determine their crop mix by choosing 
from among a large number of commodities. We simplify this problem by reducing 
it to a choice between only two commodities, for instance corn and beans. In this 
case, the production possibility curve, IKLE, describes all of the different possible 
combinations of corn and beans that a farmer might grow in a given field in a single 
season. If the farmer were to devote all of his or her resources to the production of 
beans alone, output would be OE. Similarly, if the farmer devoted all resources to the 
production of corn, output would be OI. Typically however farmers will grow some 
of each crop. The slope of the production possibility frontier, known as the marginal 
rate of technical substitution, thus changes at every point along the frontier. At any 
given point that slope equals C/B, where the Greek letter  (capital delta) indi-
cates changes in the quantity produced of corn (C) and beans (B). The production 
possibilities frontier bows outward to reflect the increasing marginal cost of produc-
16This section draws on Timmer et al., Food Policy Analysis, chap. 3.

R A I S I N G  T H E  E C O N O M I C  C E I L I N G   639
FIGURE 17–8 The Product–Product Decision
17We can see that the slope of the isorevenue line is described by these relative prices by solving the 
revenue function for C.
Iso-revenue line: R = PBB + PCC
Production possibility curve
L
Bean Output
Corn
Output
K
G
H
I
J
0
A
E
D
ΔC
ΔB
F
ing either commodity. This implies that a farmer who was initially growing a crop 
mix that included lots of beans but little corn might be able to increase corn output 
significantly by sacrificing a relative small quantity of bean production.
The production possibility frontier indicates all of the technically efficient com-
binations of corn and bean output. A crop mix indicated by a choice inside the pro-
duction possibility frontier would be inefficient and would indicate a yield gap, as 
discussed earlier. A technically efficient crop mix is necessary for profit maximization 
(or economic efficiency), but it is not sufficient. The profit maximizing combination 
of corn and bean output can be determined only with reference to how markets value 
each of those crops. The total revenue generated by any particular combination of 
corn and bean output depends on their respective prices, PC and PB. The revenue 
generated by producing either commodity equals the price of that commodity times 
the quantity produced, and total revenue (R) is the sum over all of the commodities: 
R = PBB + PCC. For given quantities of corn and beans, this equation describes a 
constant level of total revenue and is known as an isorevenue line. As represented in 
Figure 17–8, the isorevenue line has a slope equal to -PB/PC.17 The distance of the 

640   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
isorevenue line from the origin in the graph indicates the level of revenue along any 
given isorevenue line, with higher lines indicating higher revenue. A profit-maximizing 
producer will choose a crop mix that places him or her on the highest possible iso-
revenue line, where possible is defined by the production possibility frontier. This is 
indicated in Figure 17–8 by the combination at point K, where the farmer produces 
OA quantity of beans and OH quantity of corn. The highest possible isorevenue line 
that the farmer can attain given the limitations imposed by nature and technology is 
the one that is just tangent to the production possibility frontier. This means that at 
point K the slope of the isorevenue line equals the slope of the production possibility 
frontier, that is C/B = -PB/PC. This is the only crop mix that is economically effi-
cient among the set of technically efficient combinations defined by the production 
possibility frontier.18
We can see that the crop mix indicated by point K satisfies our requirements for 
profit maximization, that marginal revenue equals marginal cost by considering the 
implications of moving along the production possibility frontier from a point like L to K. 
This move would require forgoing bean production in the quantity B, incurring 
marginal cost B*PB, to produce additional corn of the amount C, generating mar-
ginal revenue C*PC. Setting marginal cost equal to marginal revenue would give us 
the expression B*PB = C*PC. Rearranging this expression, dividing both sides 
first by B and then by PC, gives us C/B = -PB/PC. Thus the tangency between 
the isorevenue line and the production possibility frontier meets our criterion for 
profit maximization.
Beans are an important source of protein. Suppose policy makers sought to 
increase the availability of protein for their population. This framework shows that 
they could do so by increasing the price of beans relative to the price of corn. This 
would increase the slope of the isorevenue line, shifting the tangency with the pro-
duction possibility frontier to a point such as L, where bean output would be OD 
rather than OA. Similarly, many countries have recently sought to diversify their 
agricultural exports to include nontraditional products such as fresh vegetables. 
This product–product framework demonstrates that governments might promote 
such diversification by intervening to raise the relative prices of those nontraditional 
export goods. This framework should also help policy makers recognize that such a 
change of incentives designed to increase output of one commodity generally comes 
at the cost of reduced output of something else. In some cases, reducing output of 
something else might be the goal. Efforts to reduce poppy cultivation in Afghanistan, 
for instance, need to consider the relative prices local farmers face for poppy versus 
wheat, which is their primary alternative.
18In terms of the Mosher framework, we could think of point K as indicating a point on the achievement 
distribution that touches both the economic and the technical ceilings.

R A I S I N G  T H E  E C O N O M I C  C E I L I N G   641
HOW TO PRODUCE IT? THE FACTOR–FACTOR DECISION
In addition to deciding what mix of crops to grow, farmers must also determine the 
least costly combination of inputs needed to produce a given quantity of output. 
This too is a multidimensional problem in that farmers face choices over multiple 
inputs, including land, labor, capital, fertilizers, water, pesticides, and insecticides. 
Again we simplify this problem by reducing it to two dimensions, capital and labor. 
Figure 17–9 illustrates farmers’ factor–factor decision problem. As before, the opti-
mal choice depends on the interaction between the constraints imposed by nature 
and those imposed by the market. The curve MDEN in Figure 17–9, known as an iso-
quant, describes the different combinations of capital and labor that farmers may 
combine to produce a given quantity of output of a particular crop (in this illustration, 
100 kilograms of rice). The slope of an isoquant changes at every point on the curve, 
and is given by L/K, where L is the quantity of labor and K is the quantity of capital 
employed in production. In practice, farmers may face a range of discrete choices of 
technique in producing that 100 kilograms of rice. Point P on the isoquant employs lots 
of capital and little labor and may indicate a production system built around combine 
harvesters or other large farm machines. In contrast, point D on the isoquant employs 
lots of labor and little capital and may thus rely on hand labor using small tools.
FIGURE 17–9 The Factor–Factor Decision
Isoquant for producing 100 kg of rice
M
A
Labor
H
I
E
D
P
Isocost line:
N
B
L
J
0
Captial (K)
ΔL
ΔK
wLr
K
C =
+

642   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
Every point on a given isoquant indicates a technically efficient combination of 
capital and labor for producing that quantity of output. Any combination of capital 
and labor that lies above the given isoquant would be inefficient because the same 
quantity of output could be produced using less of one or both inputs. Only one point 
among this set of technically efficient combinations of inputs is economically effi-
cient, defined here as the minimum cost combination of inputs capable of producing 
a given quantity of output. Finding this optimal combination requires consideration 
of how the market values capital and labor. If factor markets are competitive, labor is 
paid a wage that reflects its marginal product. Similarly, producers must also pay for 
the capital (machinery) they employ. If there is a market for machinery, then the cost 
of renting a given machine is called the rental rate of capital and is analogous to the 
wage paid to labor. If the hourly price of labor is its wage (w) and the hourly price of 
capital is the rental rate paid for its use (r), then the cost of hiring a given number of 
workers is w*L and the cost of hiring a given quantity of capital services is r*K, then 
the total cost (C) of producing 100 kilograms of rice is given by C = wL + rK. This 
cost line is called an isocost line because the total cost of production is the same at 
every point on the line. The isocost line in Figure 17–9 has a slope equal to -r/w, the 
relative factor prices.
A cost-minimizing producer will want to choose the least cost combination of 
capital and labor that still enables the production of a given quantity of output. In 
Figure 17–9, this choice corresponds to choosing the lowest isocost line that permits 
production of 100 kilograms of rice. This is the isocost line that is just tangent to the iso-
quant, point E in the graph. This unique tangency means that the slope of the isoquant 
is equal to the slope of the isocost line, or L/K = -r/w. Does this point satisfy our 
criterion for profit maximization that marginal cost equal marginal revenue? Imagine 
moving from the input mix indicated by point D to point E. Doing so would imply sub-
stituting capital in the amount K for labor in the amount -L. The marginal cost of 
this substitution is -K*r and the marginal benefit (savings) is L*w. Equating mar-
ginal cost and marginal benefit in this case implies that -K*r = L*w. Rearranging 
these terms, as above, gives us L/K = -r/w, indicating that the tangency of the iso-
quant and isocost line describes the profit-maximizing (cost-minimizing) mix of capi-
tal and labor to produce 100 kilograms of rice.
This framework also gives rise to a number of interesting policy applications. Is 
farm mechanization always appropriate? This framework suggests that if labor in a 
given country is abundant (and, by extension, inexpensive) and capital is scarce (and 
expensive), then a capital-intensive production technique may not be economically 
efficient. If policy makers want to increase rural employment, then policies such as 
overvalued exchange rates (that make imported capital artificially cheap) or ceilings 
on interest rates (potentially reducing the rental rate on capital below its equilib-
rium value) would be a bad idea. Such interventions would reduce the slope of the 
isocost line, creating an incentive for producers to shift their choice of technique in 
Figure 17–9 from point E toward a point like P. This would motivate an inefficient 

R A I S I N G  T H E  E C O N O M I C  C E I L I N G   643
allocation of resources (adding to unemployment in this case) if these altered factor 
prices did not reflect society’s true opportunity cost of labor and capital.
HOW MUCH TO PRODUCE? THE FACTOR–PRODUCT DECISION
Having decided what to produce and how to produce it, farmers must still decide 
how much to produce of any given crop. This relates directly to the decision of how 
much of any given input to use in production. The physical relationship that maps 
the quantity of inputs used to the quantity of output produced (once again, nature’s 
constraints) is represented by the production function. In presenting the Solow 
growth model in Chapter 4, we introduced a production function that represented 
the entire economy’s output. The production function in Figure 17–10 has all of the 
same technical characteristics as the previous ones, but now describes output for a 
particular crop. We can consider a two-dimensional relationship between output and 
a single input if we are clear that the resulting figure implicitly holds all other inputs 
at a constant level. A production function such as curve EJKP in Figure 17–10 thus 
maps the quantity of fertilizer used to rice yield per hectare (for given fixed quantities 
of all other inputs). The curve EJKP reflects diminishing marginal returns to fertil-
izer use. This implies that an additional unit of fertilizer applied when fertilizer use 
is low, such as F in Figure 17–10, may bring forth a relatively large output response 
in rice, R. Yet, the increase in rice resulting from additional units of fertilizer grows 
Production fuction for traditional variety
N
M
J
C
D
E
B
A
Rice Yield
per Ha
P
Fertilizer
I
H
G
0
Production fuction for modern variety
R
Q
K
L
ΔR
ΔF
FIGURE 17–10 Agricultural Production Functions and the Factor–Product 
Decision

644   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
smaller with each incremental unit of fertilizer applied and ultimately may reduce 
rice output (as happens beyond point K in the graph) if too much fertilizer is applied. 
These diminishing returns to fertilizer are reflected in the decreasing slope of the 
production function as fertilizer use increases. The slope of the production function 
at any point, R/F, is the marginal product of fertilizer.
The maximum rice yield in Figure 17–10 is attained at point K, where fertilizer 
use is OI. Yet, the presence of diminishing returns to fertilizer makes it unlikely that 
OI would be the profit-maximizing quantity of fertilizer. As in the previous cases, we 
must consider the interaction between what nature makes possible (for a given tech-
nology) and the economic incentives signaled by the market. In this case, we must 
consider the market prices for rice and fertilizer. The ratio of these prices is the rate 
at which farmers can exchange rice for fertilizer. In Figure 17–10, the slope of line ON 
is given by the relative prices of fertilizer and rice, PF /PR (increases in the price of 
fertilizer make this line steeper, whereas increases in the price of rice make it flatter). 
How much fertilizer would a profit-maximizing farmer apply (and hence how much 
rice would he or she produce)? So long as the value of the additional rice produced 
by applying additional fertilizer is greater than the cost of that additional fertilizer, it 
pays to use more fertilizer.
In Figure 17–10, line ON reflects the cost of production while the production 
function EJKP reflects revenue. Profits are maximized at the point at which the dif-
ference in height between the production function and the cost function are greatest, 
which we find by shifting the line ON upward (in a parallel manner) until it is just 
tangent to the production function (which happens at point J). A profit-maximizing 
farmer will thus apply quantity OG of fertilizer and produce quantity OC of rice. It 
is only at point J that the slope of the production function (the marginal product of 
fertilizer) exactly equals the relative price of fertilizer to rice, or R/F = PF /PR. 
Applying the criterion that marginal cost equal marginal revenue, we must compare 
the value of the additional rice produced by an additional unit of fertilizer with the 
cost of that additional unit of fertilizer. With diminishing returns, the value created 
by each additional unit of fertilizer is less than that created by the previous unit. The 
marginal revenue created by increasing rice production is R * PR, and the marginal 
cost of using more fertilizer is F * PF. Setting these terms equal to one another and 
rearranging as in the previous examples, we find that the profit-maximizing combi-
nation of fertilizer use and rice output occurs precisely where R/F = PF/PR, our 
expression for the tangency at point J. In practice, most farmers tend to hedge against 
weather and price risk by applying less than the optimal quantity of fertilizer (even if 
they could afford the optimal quantity).
In Chapter 3 we presented a sources of growth analysis and represented growth 
in total factor productivity (TFP) as a vertical shift of the production function, lead-
ing more output to be produced from a given quantity of inputs. The same concept 
applies to the agricultural production function depicted in Figure 17–10. TFP growth 
in agriculture would be reflected in a vertical shift of the production function in Fig-
ure 17–10, to curve DLQR. This increase in agricultural TFP reflects that a given quan-

R A I S I N G  T H E  E C O N O M I C  C E I L I N G   645
tity of fertilizer application results in a higher level of rice output per hectare than 
previously. Indeed, if rice is responsive to fertilizer, the optimal allocation of rice may 
increase with productivity growth, from OG to OH, even though the relative price of 
fertilizer to rice is unchanged.
As in the previous farm-level decision models, important policy implications 
arise. Governments can intervene to encourage increased food production by reduc-
ing the relative price of fertilizer to rice (or the relative price of inputs to outputs more 
generally). Doing so flattens the relative price line, leading to a tangency with the 
production function with increased fertilizer being used to produce increased rice. 
The choice regarding which policies to deploy is complex. Governments can lower 
this price ratio either by increasing the price of rice or by reducing the cost of fertil-
izer (or both). Either choice is likely to be both expensive and controversial. In recent 
years several countries have revived the strategy of subsidizing fertilizer, a previously 
common approach that countries were encouraged by such organizations as the 
World Bank to abandon as being too costly, economically inefficient, and ultimately 
unsustainable. (See Box 17–2 for a discussion of Malawi’s renewed fertilizer subsidy 
scheme.) Conversely, any strategy that involves increasing food prices to incentivize 
farmers immediately brings us back to the food policy dilemma when we consider 
the impact of higher food prices on consumers, especially poor ones.
BOX 17–2 FERTILIZER SUBSIDIES IN MALAWI
“Ending Famine, Simply by Ignoring the Exports,” so claimed a front page head-
line in the New York Times in describing a controversial fertilizer subsidy program 
in the southern African country of Malawi.a Malawi had long suffered from high 
rates of chronic hunger, and the country’s average maize yields were just over one-
tenth the average level in the United States. In 2007, however, Malawi attained a 
record-breaking maize harvest. According to the New York Times, “Farmers explain 
Malawi’s extraordinary turnaround—one with broad implications for hunger- fighting 
methods across Africa—with one word: fertilizer.” During 2004, Malawi experienced 
both a severe hunger crisis and a contentious presidential election in which the 
main parties competed in their claims about how much each would do to support 
farmers. A parliamentary committee recommended a nationwide program of fertil-
izer subsidies, which President Bingu wa Mutharika announced in June 2005.
Two initial points of contention were whether the fertilizer subsidy  program 
would be targeted (and if so, toward which income groups) and whether it would 
aNew York Times, December 2, 2007.

646   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
include tobacco, one of Malawi’s chief exports, along with maize, its  primary 
 consumption crop. Initially, the government decided to include only maize 
 producers, who were unable otherwise to purchase fertilizer, so long as they were 
productive farmers. The program was not targeted at the smallest, least-able pro-
ducers. A universal (untargeted) subsidy program was rejected by the president 
as being too expensive, but he later bowed to political pressure and included 
both maize and tobacco producers in a universal subsidy program.
The plan was to include both fertilizer and improved maize seed. In its first 
year, the program excluded private-sector fertilizer suppliers, but several large 
suppliers subsequently were included. The program was built around a voucher 
scheme, in which qualifying farmers would receive coupons for fertilizer, entitling 
them to purchase a 50-kilogram bag of fertilizer for US$6.50, or just over one- 
quarter of the full cost (with the government paying the remainder). During the 
2005–06 growing season, the program distributed about 175,000 metric tons of 
fertilizer and 4,500 metric tons of improved maize seed, costing $91 million.
Malawi’s record maize harvest in 2007 resulted, not only from this seed and 
fertilizer distribution program but also from quite favorable weather. The New York 
Times reported, “In the hamlet of Mthungu, Enelesi Chakhaza, an elderly widow 
whose husband died of hunger five years ago, boasted that she got two ox-cart-
loads of corn this year from her small plot instead of half a cart.” Malawi’s maize 
production in 2004–05 had fallen to 1.23 million metric tons from 1.61 million 
the previous year. In 2005–06, the first year of the subsidy program, output 
increased to 2.58 million metric tons, and to 3.44 million in 2006–2007.
Adoption of the fertilizer subsidy program created a dilemma for the government 
of Malawi, which had counted on restoring donor confidence as the country recov-
ered from a severe economic crisis. The donor community in general looked unfa-
vorably on large subsidy schemes as being costly, unsustainable, and economically 
inefficient. The strongest donor opposition came from the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) and U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID). Their concern, 
in addition to the economic inefficiency of subsidies, was that the scheme threat-
ened to undermine Malawi’s nascent private fertilizer marketing sector, which had 
emerged after the end of the government’s fertilizer monopoly in the early 1990s. 
Other donors, such as the United Kingdom, the World Bank, and the European 
Union were skeptical but willing to work with the government to minimize the poten-
tial negative effects of the program. In contrast, the United Nations and many non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) were openly supportive of Malawi’s fertilizer 
subsidy program.
Precisely how much of the increased maize harvest of 2007 resulted from 
the fertilizer program and how much from that year’s favorable rainfall remains 
unclear. One of the few formal attempts to estimate the subsidy’s contribution 

R A I S I N G  T H E  E C O N O M I C  C E I L I N G   647
to increased maize production concluded that Malawi’s maize harvest was 15 to
22 percent greater as a result of the program.
Donor attitudes toward input subsidies may have softened in response to this
experience. Talk now is of “smart subsidies.” As economist Derek Byerlee, a co-
director of the team that produced the World Bank’s World Development Report
2008: Agriculture for Development, notes, “The World Development Report takes
t
a pragmatic position, favoring ‘smart subsidies’ in select circumstances. Smart
subsidies should be transparent, well targeted to the poor . . .  , should help jump-
start agricultural input markets and should be part of a comprehensive strategy
to improve agricultural productivity.” Commenting specifically on the Malawian
experience, Byerlee continues, “The Bank’s position is that the program should
be targeted to achieve as large a set of development gains as possible. . . . 
Smart subsidies are important but need to be weighted against other priorities in
national budgets. For example, Malawi only spends 3% of its agricultural budget
on R&D—an important source of future productivity increases.”b
bInterview with the World Bank Meetings Center, December 18, 2007, available at http://blogs.
worldbank.org/meetings/discuss/world-development-report-2008, accessed February 2012.
Source: This box draws largely on two sources: Blessings Chinsinga, “Reclaiming Policy Space:
Lesons from Malawi’s 2005/2006 Fertilizer Subsidy Programme,” Futures Agricultures and University 
of Malawi, July 2007; I. Minde, T. S. Jayne, E. Crawford, J. Ariga, and J. Govereh, “Promoting Fertilizer
Use in Africa: Current Issues and Empirical Evidence from Malawi, Zambia, and Kenya,” International
Water Management Institute, Pretoria, South Africa and U.S. Agency for International Development, 
November 2008.
The expectation that higher food prices motivate increased food production 
ties together each of the dimensions of farm-level decision making that we have 
discussed. Economists summarize these multiple dimensions by considering the 
relationship between changes in price and changes in supply for a given crop or 
for agriculture in general, a relationship known as farmers’ supply response. Fig-
ure 17–11 illustrates the theory. Figure 17–11a summarizes the relationship between 
input and output in terms of total revenue and total cost of production. For a given 
price of rice, total revenue increases by the same amount for each additional unit of 
output. The total revenue function (0B) in Panel a is thus linear with a slope equal 
to the unit price of rice, P0. The total cost of producing rice also increases with the 
quantity produced. However the diminishing-returns characteristic of the pro-
duction function implies that the total cost function (0A) curves upward as illus-
trated. Because profit is the difference between total revenue and total cost, profit 
is  maximized in Figure 17–11a at the level of output where the vertical difference 
between the height of the total revenue line and the total cost curve is greatest. As 
in the example of the production function, we can find this point geometrically by 

648   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
Total cost curve
C
(b)
0
Total Revenue curve
Total Revenue and total cost
with price = P0
E
B
A
Marginal cost curve
Marginal Revenue curves
E'
E
P0
P1
Price per unit of output
C'
C
0
Total Output
(a)
Total Output
FIGURE 17–11 The Relationship between Output and Price
locating the tangency point between the total cost curve and a line parallel to the 
total revenue function. This tangency is at point E, implying that 0C is the profit maxi-
mizing quantity of rice.19
19We can think of a subsistence farmer tending to his or her own small plot with little more than a few hand 
tools as having no fixed costs, in which case the y-intercept of the total cost curve in Figure 17–11 would be zero 
(as drawn). A larger producer, for instance with a significant capital stock, may have fixed costs. In that case, the 
total cost curve would have a positive intercept, but the equilibrium condition would still be MR = MC.

R A I S I N G  T H E  E C O N O M I C  C E I L I N G   649
Figure 17–11b demonstrates that rice production in the quantity 0C satisfies our 
condition for profit maximization. Panel b simply summarizes the relationships in 
panel a by recording the slopes of the total revenue and total cost functions at each 
level of output. Bear in mind that the slope at any point of a “total” function defines 
the analogous “marginal” function. Because the total revenue function is linear, its 
slope is constant so the marginal revenue function in Figure 17–11b is simply a hori-
zontal line the height of which measures the initial price of rice, P0. Because the total 
cost curve bows upward, its slope increases as a function of total output. The mar-
ginal cost curve in panel b records the slope of the total cost curve at each level out-
put and thus also slopes upward. Figure 17–11b directly illustrates that total output 
equal to 0C is the profit-maximizing level because that is where marginal revenue 
equals marginal cost. If the price of rice were to increase from P0 to P1, the marginal 
revenue line would shift up as illustrated and intersect the marginal cost curve at 
E instead of point E. At this higher price, the profit-maximizing quantity of output 
would increase to 0C. The marginal cost curve thus defines the supply curve.
Based on these relationships, we can summarize farmers’ supply response to 
increased prices by the price elasticity of supply for rice:
 
es = %R
%PR
 
[17–1]
where R is the quantity of rice output, and PR is the price of rice. Estimates of the 
magnitude of this elasticity, calculated for agriculture more generally, vary from near 
zero (which would imply that producers do not increase supply in response to higher 
prices) to about 1.5 (which would imply that a 10 percent increase in price brings 
forth a 15 percent increase in supply). One reason supply elasticity might be quite 
low could be the existence of nonprice constraints to production. Farmers may lack 
access to the inputs necessary to increase output, either because markets are inad-
equate or inaccessible, input costs are too high, or credit is unavailable. Production 
may also be constrained by poor institutions, such as lack of secure land tenure.
One potential point of confusion in the estimation of supply elasticity lies in the 
question of whether this elasticity refers to a single commodity or to agriculture in gen-
eral. Although the price elasticity of supply for a single commodity in a given country 
may be relatively high, the elasticity of supply for agriculture in general in that same 
country may be relatively low. Why? Recall the production possibility frontier of 
Figure 17–8, in which increased production of corn comes at the direct expense of 
reduced production of beans. Generalizing from this example, opportunities for farm-
ers to substitute across commodities in response to changes in relative prices make 
such a result likely. It is also important to consider the time frame of the analysis. In 
the short run, many of the conditions of production are fixed; yet, in the long run con-
ditions can change, perhaps because nonprice constraints are relaxed. As a rule of 
thumb, the long-run supply elasticity for given crops is approximately twice the mag-
nitude of the short-run elasticity. From a theoretical perspective, we can think of short-
run supply response as reflecting a movement along a given (static) supply curve as 
quantity produced responds to a change in price. Yet, it is important to note that in the 

650   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
long run, technical change can also contribute to farmers’ supply response. In this con-
text, we can think of technical change as reducing the marginal cost of production. This 
shifts the marginal cost curve downward (or, equivalently, shifts the supply curve to the 
right), increasing the supply of food at every price. In addition, in the long run other 
nonprice constraints to production response may be overcome. Improved infrastruc-
ture might provide farmers greater market access for both inputs and outputs, credit 
supply might increase, and farmers may learn how to improve their farming practices.
Estimates of the aggregate supply elasticity for African agriculture have tended 
to be low, on the order of 0.2 in the short run and 0.4 in the long run. Yet some stud-
ies of specific crops have claimed to find significantly greater elasticities. One study 
of Trans Nzoia, a corn-producing district in Kenya, estimated the short-run elastic-
ity of supply of corn to be 0.53 and the long-run elasticity to be 0.76. Thus a 10 per-
cent increase in the price of corn would result in a 5.3 percent short-run increase in 
corn production and a 7.6 percent increase in output in the long run.20 Another study 
of food production in Tanzania found that a 10 percent increase in the price of food 
crops (relative to export crops) would result in a 3.9 percent short-run increase in per 
capita food production and a 9.2 percent long-run increase.21
This discussion of how agricultural producers respond to price incentives provides 
a foundation for understanding how policy makers might intervene to change farmers’ 
production decisions. Whether the goal is to reduce a country’s dependence on imported 
cereals, to increase the local supply of vegetables, to increase its supply of coffee for export, 
or to employ more rural labor, price policies provide a powerful, if blunt, tool for policy 
makers. Box 17–2 discusses fertilizer subsidies in Malawi; yet this is only one of many pos-
sible examples of how governments have tried to influence farmers’ behavior. It bears 
repeating, however, that producer incentives are only one component of the broader 
realm of food policy. Food policy analysis would be relatively simple if the only goal were 
to increase production and maximize producers’ incomes. The challenge in practice (the 
food policy dilemma) is how to make farming profitable while at the same time protect-
ing poor consumers from the threat of high food prices. The prices received by farmers are 
lower than the prices paid by consumers. The margin between the farm-gate price and 
the retail price is called the marketing margin. This is the cost required to store, trans-
port, and process basic farm output so that it can be purchased and used by consumers 
who may be far from the point of origin or who may be purchasing the food months after 
harvest. To the extent that these marketing margins are increased by poor infrastructure 
or limited access to markets, the food policy dilemma is aggravated. It is important to con-
sider market access in conjunction with the analysis of producer incentives.
20Lawrence O. Moses, Kees Burger, and Arie Kuvyenhoven, “Aggregate supply Response to Price 
 Incentives: The Case of Smallholder Maize Production in Kenya,” African Crop Science Conference Proceed-
ings, 8 (2007), 1271–75. 
21Andrew McKay, Oliver Morrissey, and Charlotte Vaillant, “Aggregate Export and Food Crop Supply 
Response in Tanzania,” DFID-TERP: CREDIT Discussion Paper 4 (No. 98/4), Center for Research in Economic 
Development and International Trade, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, England, 1998.

R A I S I N G  T H E  E C O N O M I C  C E I L I N G   651
MARKET ACCESS
Poor infrastructure in much of the developing world limits farmers’ access to markets and 
their ability both to purchase inputs and to sell the crops they produce. Farmers may see 
little benefit in accepting the risk of adopting modern varieties and incurring debt to buy 
inputs in return for the promise of increased production when markets for their produce 
are remote. Selling output in distant markets, particularly when transport is scarce, can 
be costly for farmers. Many may be limited to moving small quantities, perhaps over long 
distances. Production incentives are reduced when farmers face high marketing costs. 
The World Bank reports that 16 percent of the rural population of developing countries 
(about 440 million people) lives in remote areas that are at least five hours from a mar-
ket town of 5,000 or more.22 This problem varies widely across regions: in sub-Saharan
Africa, the Middle East, and North Africa, nearly one-third of the population lives in 
these remote areas, while that is the case for 17 percent of the population of East Asia and 
only 5 percent of the population of South Asia. In many cases even high-potential agri-
cultural areas lack the infrastructure necessary to connect them to markets. In Ethiopia, 
the World Bank reports that 68 percent of the rural population lives in areas with ample 
rainfall, but the average farm household lives 10 kilometers from the nearest road and 18 
kilometers from the nearest public transport. These variations in quality of rural infra-
structure relate to differences in both income levels and population density (as invest-
ments in public goods such as roads are more costly in low population density areas). 
In addition to poor infrastructure, poor institutions can also limit the agricultural supply 
response and more generally impede agricultural development. Box 17–3 describes the 
growing role of cell phones in agricultural marketing in developing countries.
22World Bank, World Development Report, 2008, p. 54.
BOX 17–3 CELL PHONES AND AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
Cell phones are transforming rural markets in developing countries,  particularly 
in sub-Saharan Africa where traditional land lines were largely unknown in 
rural areas. By 2009, there were 10 times as many cell phones as land lines 
in  sub-Saharan Africa, and the number continues to grow rapidly. In 1999, 
only 10 percent of Africans were potentially covered by mobile phone technol-
ogy; yet, by 2008, this number had increased to 60 percent (though cover-
age remains much greater in some countries than others). This rapid growth 
prompted Rwandan president Paul Kagame to declare that “what was once an 

652   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
object of  luxury and privilege, the mobile phone, has become a basic neces-
sity in Africa.”a  Efficient markets require easy access to information by market 
participants. Knowledge of market prices, wages, weather patterns, and other 
relevant events are critical pieces of information for farmers and traders. The 
rapid penetration of cell phones has greatly reduced the cost of gaining such 
information.
Traditionally, traders in rural African markets could learn prices in distant 
markets only by actually traveling to those markets. The cost and time required 
imposed a severe limitation on traders’ knowledge of the markets in which they 
operated. For the traders with cell phones, information that previously required 
hours of travel to obtain can be learned in a short phone call or text message. 
Economist Jenny Aker finds that the use of cell phones by grain traders in rural 
Niger reduces their search costs by 50 percent.b She interviewed grain trad-
ers in Niger, one of whom said that with a cell phone, “in record time, I have 
all sorts of information from markets near and far.” A second trader reported to 
Aker that, “[Now] I know the price for two dollars, rather than traveling [to the 
market], which costs $20.” As a result, prices across distant markets tended to 
converge and consumer grain prices fell by 3.5 percent. Both traders and con-
sumers were better off. Similarly, economist Robert Jensen finds that the avail-
ability of mobile phones in India creates substantial benefits for fish traders and 
consumers. There, too, prices across markets tended to converge (a sign of effi-
cient price formation) when traders had access to mobile phones; fishermen’s 
profits increased by 8 percent, and consumers of fish benefited from a 4 percent 
decline in retail prices.c The benefits of such rapid information sharing are par-
ticularly clear in fish markets, where the product is highly perishable. Economists 
Megumi Muto and Takashi Yamano note that access to mobile phones increased 
the likelihood that banana producers in Uganda would participate in markets by 
10 percent.d Bananas, like fish, are highly perishable. For the marketing of such 
commodities, the benefits of speedy information flows are particularly clear. The 
digital provide, as Jensen called it, will surely continue its rapid expansion and 
transformation of rural markets around the world.
aAddress at the Connect Africa Summit, Kigali, Rwanda, October 29, 2007.
bJ. Aker, “Information from Markets Near and Far: Mobile Phones and Agricultural Markets in 
Niger,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2, no. 3 (2010), 46–59.
cR. Jensen, “The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance and Welfare in 
the South Indian Fisheries Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, no. 3 (2007), 879–924.
dM. Muto and T. Yamano, “The Impact of Mobile Phone Coverage Expansion on Market Participa-
tion: Panel Data Evidence from Uganda,” World Development 37, no. 12 (2009), 1887–96.
Source: This box draws on Jenny C. Aker and Isaac M. Mbiti, “Mobile Phones and Economic 
Development in Africa,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24, no. 3 (summer 2010): 207–32.

I N S T I T U T I O N S  F O R A G R I C U LT U R A L  D E V E L O P M E NT   653
INSTITUTIONS FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
Economic historian and Nobel laureate Douglass North famously defined institu-
tions as “the humanly devised constraints that structure human interaction. They are 
made up of formal constraints (rules, laws, constitutions), informal constraints (norms 
of behavior, conventions, and self-imposed codes of conduct), and their enforcement 
characteristics. Together they define the incentive structure of society and specifically 
economies.”23 Institutions thus define the rules of the game by which individuals in 
society interact with one another. In the context of agricultural development, institu-
tions governing the ownership and transfer of land are of particular importance.
In most countries, land ownership is a key determinant of power and social sta-
tus, making land allocation a highly political concern. Land (like income, wealth, and 
political power) is unevenly distributed. For selected countries, Table 17–2 provides 
data on the size of an average land holding as well as an indicator of the equity with 
which land is distributed within the country. The equity of land distribution is sum-
marized in Table 17–2 by a Gini coefficient for land ownership. Recall from Chapter 6 
that a Gini coefficient summarizes relative distributional equity with a number rang-
ing between 0 and 1. The closer the Gini coefficient is to 1, the more unequal is the 
distribution. Several points stand out in these data. There is great variation in the size 
of average land holdings and the equity of land ownership across regions and coun-
tries, reflecting large differences in population density, culture, and history. Aver-
age farm sizes in Africa and Asia tend to be quite small relative to some of the larger 
countries in South America. In Ethiopia, the average farm size is 0.8 hectare, as com-
pared with 469 hectares in Argentina and 740 hectares in the United States.
The Gini coefficients for land ownership in Africa tend to be on the low side, 
such as 0.37 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and 0.38 in Namibia. These low 
Gini coefficients reflect highly equitable distributions of land ownership. Conversely, 
the distribution of land in South American countries is highly skewed. Gini coeffi-
cients on the order of 0.85 for Brazil and 0.93 in Paraguay indicate that a large portion 
of land is owned by a small number of large landowners, while the large majority of 
rural dwellers in those countries must divide up whatever land is left over. The highly 
unequal distribution of land in Latin America has such deep historical roots that spe-
cial terms have evolved to describe it: latifundia (the term for the large estates that 
dominate the distribution) and minifundia (the small family farms on which peasant 
farmers struggle to feed their families).
Institutions governing land rights play a large role in shaping incentives for 
agricultural producers, both in terms of their level of effort and their willingness to 
invest in maintaining the quality of their land. Insecure land rights can undermine 
INSTITUTIONS FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
23Douglass North, “Economic Performance through Time,” in Torsten Persson, ed., Nobel Lectures, Eco-
nomics 1991–1995 (Singapore: World Scientific, 1997).

654   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
TABLE 17–2 Farm Size and Equity of Land Holdings in Selected Countries
REGION/COUNTRY
CENSUS YEAR
AVERAGE FARM SIZE 
(HECTARES)
GINI COEFFICIENT FOR 
LAND HOLDINGS
Africa
Burkina Faso
1993
3.92
0.42
Congo
1990
0.53
0.37
Egypt
1990
0.95
0.65
Ethiopia
1989–92
0.80
0.47
Guinea
1995
2.03
0.48
Malawi
1993
0.75
0.52
Namibia
1995
2.64
0.38
Uganda
1991
4.70
0.59
North and Central America
Bahamas
1994
11.5
0.87
Barbados
1989
190.0
0.94
Canada
1991
349.1
0.64
Honduras
1993
11.17
0.66
Panama
1990
110.0
0.87
Puerto Rico
1987
100.0
0.77
United States
1987
740.0
0.74
South America
Argentina
1988
469.0
0.83
Brazil
1985
64.64
0.85
Colombia
1988
120.0
0.79
Paraguay
1991
77.53
0.93
Peru
1994
20.15
0.86
Asia
India
1991
1.55
0.58
Indonesia
1993
0.87
0.46
Japan
1995
1.20
0.59
South Korea
1990
1.05
0.34
Nepal
1992
0.95
0.45
Pakistan
1990
3.78
0.57
Philippines
1991
2.16
0.55
Thailand
1993
3.36
0.47
Turkey
1991
5.76
0.61
Vietnam
1994
0.52
0.53
Source: FAO, World Census of Agriculture (Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations, 2000).
producers’ incentives and limit productivity. Secure land rights can enhance agri-
cultural productivity by creating access to credit markets through which farmers can 
purchase improved inputs. The rules governing land sales can influence agricul-
tural productivity by facilitating the transfer of ownership rights to the most efficient 
producers.
Land rights take a variety of forms in developing countries, ranging from purely 
individual rights to purely collective forms of land ownership, with numerous forms 

I N S T I T U T I O N S  F O R A G R I C U LT U R A L  D E V E L O P M E NT   655
in between these polar extremes. Thus at one end of the spectrum, owners have full 
control over who uses their land and what they produce; at the other extreme, all 
members of a community are entitled to use the land and benefit from the output. 
The most common intermediate forms of land rights are fixed-rent tenancy and 
share cropping. Share cropping is the dominant contractual arrangement in South 
Asia, while other regions of the developing world more typically rely on fixed-rent 
tenancy. Under tenancy, a family might rent land from a large landlord and pay a 
fixed cash rent. Under share cropping, the farm family rents a plot of land from the 
landlord, with whom the family shares a fixed portion of their output. A key difference 
between these systems lies in how the risks inherent in farming are divided between 
the landlord and the tenant. Under a fixed rent scheme, the tenant farmers bear all 
of the risk; their rent due on the land does not depend on the level of their output. In 
contrast, under share tenancy, the landlord and the tenants share the risk more evenly 
because the in-kind payments to the landlord depend on the tenant’s level of output. 
Incentives for producers may also differ across types of tenancy. On large commercial 
farms worked by hired wage labor, owners face a complicated problem of monitoring 
the level of effort of their workers. In contrast, on purely communal farms, on which 
everyone shares the communal output, workers’ incentives might be limited because 
an individual’s rewards may not reflect that individual’s efforts to maximize collec-
tive output. In terms of producer incentives, a key distinction across types of tenancy 
arrangements is whether the producers are residual claimants to the output of the 
farm—that is, whether their individual benefits increase with their level of effort.
Another critical distinction between different land institutions is the security 
and stability of producers’ rights to farm particular parcels of land. A rental contract 
written for one or two years is certainly less secure than clear title to a given parcel. 
Economists Klaus Deininger and Gershon Feder summarize the costs and benefits 
of secure individual property rights.24 The main benefits include (1) improved incen-
tives to conserve and invest in the land itself; (2) the ability to transfer land owner-
ship, possibly to those able to make the best use of the land (for instance by taking 
advantage of economies of scale); and (3) the ability to use land as collateral, pro-
viding farmers access to credit markets (and the potential to adopt modern variet-
ies and inputs). The main costs are the administrative costs of actually defining land 
boundaries and enforcing land rights and the risk that the poorest farmers, who often 
depend on access to common property resources (such as open pastures for graz-
ing their livestock), could be deprived of their sources of livelihood.
There is substantial evidence to support the idea that secure land rights increase 
both agricultural productivity and investments in land conservation (which enhance 
future productivity). In China, the transition from collective to private cultivation 
has been associated with significant increases in productivity, as individual  farmers 
24Klaus Deininger and Gershon Feder, “Land institutions and land markets,” in B. L. Gardner and G. C. 
Rausser, eds., Handbook of Agricultural Economics, 1st ed. (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2001) vol. 1, pp. 288–331.

656   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
stand to retain more of the benefits of increased effort. Longer-term investments 
in land conservation are also evident. In Ghana, studies have found farmers with 
greater tenure security are more likely to plant trees and to invest in drainage and irri-
gation. In Niger, farmers who owned their land applied larger quantities of manure 
to maintain their soil fertility than did tenant farmers. In addition, there is evidence 
that secure tenure rights not only induce investment in land conservation but also 
facilitate access to the formal credit markets necessary to finance those investments. 
In Thailand, land ownership titles not only increased the value of land and boosted 
productivity but also increased the supply of credit. Another study in Paraguay found 
that the benefits of land titling were roughly equivalent to 10 percent of farm income. 
Yet, that study also found that those benefits were strongly concentrated among the 
larger land owners, whereas producers with less than 20 hectares received no ben-
efits of increased credit supply.25
Improving systems of land titling is one approach to securing tenure rights. Land 
titling involves providing legal documentation of land ownership. Plans to improve 
tenure security through titling must also consider the costs of implementation. These 
costs are largely administrative and include measurement and demarcation of areas, 
adjudication of conflicting land claims, and the cost of documentation. Land titling can 
also facilitate the operation of land markets, which are often underdeveloped in poor 
countries. Land markets, however, may not facilitate access to land by the poor if the 
poor lack access to credit markets. When land titling alone is insufficient to achieve 
social goals in regard to land rights, various forms of land reform have been attempted.
LAND REFORM
Efforts to reform land rights can take a variety of forms, including the following:
• Reform of rent contracts works to increase the security of tenure of the 
tenant farmer. Laws requiring long-term contracts that restrict the 
landlord’s right to remove the tenant strengthen the tenant’s property 
rights at the expense of those of the landlord without necessarily 
transferring income from owner to tenant.
• Rent reduction typically involves placing a ceiling on the percentage share 
of the crop that a landlord can demand as rent. If the percentage share is 
substantially below what prevailed in the past, the impact both on tenant 
welfare and the tenant family’s surplus available for investment can be 
substantial.
• Land to the tiller (the former tenant) with compensation to landlord for 
loss of land is a measure that can take many different forms. Government 
LAND REFORM
25These studies are summarized in Deininger and Feder, “Land Institutions and Land Markets.”

L A N D  R E F O R M  657
might pass a law stating a ceiling on the number of acres an individual can 
own and so force individuals to sell all land over that limit. Or the reform 
law can state that only those who actually till land can own it, and all other 
land must be sold. A key issue in this kind of reform is whether the former 
landlord receives full or only partial compensation for the land that must 
be sold.
• Land to the tiller without compensation is the most radical transformation 
of land rights. All land not cultivated by its owner is confiscated, and the 
former landlord receives nothing in return. This type of reform is most 
commonly found in the aftermath of a major political upheaval, such as a 
revolution or losing a war.
The implementation of these types of land reforms becomes more complex as 
we move down the list, and the potential for harmful unintended consequences 
exists in each case. Placing ceilings on land rents is one of the least intrusive of these 
potential reforms. Yet rent ceilings may create incentives for landowners to evict their 
tenants. This was a common result in Latin America as well as in India, where similar 
reforms led to the loss of 30 percent of the total area operated by the poor. Conversely, 
Deininger and Feder report that tenancy reform in West Bengal was associated with 
productivity gains of 40 percent.26 Efforts to limit the size of land holdings have gen-
erally failed. The major problem in these cases is that ceilings can be evaded, for 
instance, by subdividing large landholdings among family members.
Land to the tiller programs are examples of redistributive land reform. These 
programs involve transferring ownership of land and thus face increasing politi-
cal obstacles. Experience has been mixed, with greater success under certain pre-
existing circumstance. In settings in which tenants already cultivate given parcels 
of land that are pieces of larger landlord estates, transferring ownership of the land 
is administratively simple and can increase productivity by improving produc-
ers’ incentives. Successful examples of this type of reform have occurred in Bolivia, 
Ethiopia, India, Iran, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan. Yet, experience with land reform in 
hacienda systems, by which tenants typically work most of the time on a landlord’s 
plot of land but have their own subsistence plots, has been less positive. A com-
mon experience in Latin America when faced with the prospect of redistributive 
land reform was for landlords to evict their tenants or to convert them into wage 
laborers. In addition, land compensation schemes can be extremely costly and the 
task of estimating a fair compensation price for confiscated land is complicated by 
the poor quality of land markets in many countries. When land redistribution cre-
ates new landowners who were not previously cultivating that land, the need for 
 complementary types of support (such as infrastructure and farmer training pro-
grams) might add substantially to the costs.27
26Deininger and Feder, “Land Institutions and Land Markets.”
27Deininger and Feder, review these issues in greater detail; see “Land Institutions and Land Markets.”

658   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
If land redistribution with compensation is complicated, redistribution without
compensation is virtually impossible in the absence of a social revolution, foreign 
invasion, or both. The successful examples of redistributive land reform in Japan, the 
Republic of Korea, and Taiwan were possible only as the result of defeat in war or 
foreign occupation. In China and the Soviet Union, foreign invasions preceded social 
revolutions that destroyed the old agrarian orders and paved the way for large-scale 
land reform. In other cases, revolution alone created the conditions necessary for 
redistributive land reform. Examples include Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Nicaragua, and 
Vietnam.
Redistributive land reform continues to be a key and controversial issue in 
many countries. This is particularly true in countries with highly unequal distribu-
tions of land ownership, often the result of historical legacy or ethnic discrimina-
tion. The southern African states of Zimbabwe and South Africa, for example, were 
settler colonies in which white minorities owned much of the prime agricultural 
land.  Redistributive land reform has been a dominant social issue in these coun-
tries. Forced expropriation of white-owned farms in Zimbabwe began in 1999 with 
the support of President Robert Mugabe. Land reform in Zimbabwe has been widely 
criticized, not only for its violence but also because political favoritism in distributing 
newly seized land has contributed the failure of Zimbabwe’s program to benefit most 
of the rural poor. In South Africa, the collapse of the Apartheid regime and the transi-
tion to democracy in 1994 brought with it high expectations among the indigenous 
majority for restitution in the form of land. These expectations were fueled by events 
in Zimbabwe. Yet, in contrast to that example, the government of South Africa has 
taken a more cautious approach to land reform. A desire to avoid the economic chaos 
that befell Zimbabwe helps explain this caution. After its election in 1994, the govern-
ment of the African National Congress announced plans to redistribute 30 percent of 
commercial farmland to blacks by 2014; yet as of 2010, progress was limited to only 
6 percent, and tensions continued to surround this issue. Redistributive land reform 
is also a key issue in many postconflict settings. Mozambique and Liberia, after long 
periods of civil war, face serious challenges of resettling large displaced populations 
on land since occupied by others. Land reform has also been a central issue in South 
America, where indigenous Indian minorities have long suffered discrimination. In 
Bolivia, for example, the government planned to redistribute 400,000 acres of land in 
2011, a substantial increase over the 2010 level.
THE WORLD FOOD CRISIS OF 2005–08
During the years 2005–08, the world suffered its most severe food crisis since the early 
1970s. The key indicator of this crisis was the rapid increase in the prices of a range 
of basic foods. As Figure 17–12 shows, the prices of rice, maize, and wheat increased 
THE WORLD FOOD CRISIS OF 2005–08

T H E  W O R L D  F O O D  C R I S I S  O F  2 0 0 5 – 0 8   659
dramatically between early 2007 and mid-2008, following more gradual increases 
beginning in 2004. The price of maize showed the least increase, yet still reached a 
level by June 2008 that was two and a half times greater than it had been just two 
years earlier. The run up in wheat prices was even more severe, but both were out-
paced by the skyrocketing price of rice during 2007–08. From October 2007 to April 
2008, the world price of rice tripled (increasing from $335 to over $1,000 per ton).
CAUSES OF THE CRISIS
Explanations for the crisis include a wide range of possibilities and are the subject 
of continuing debate. The list of potential culprits includes both supply shocks and 
demand shocks: growth in demand from China and India, speculation on financial 
markets, hoarding and export restrictions, weather shocks, decreased productivity, 
low interest rates, a depreciation of the U.S. dollar, rising oil prices, declining food 
stockpiles, and demand for biofuels.28 There is no definitive consensus regarding 
the relative contributions of these potential causes. Notably, some of these potential 
causes are common to all commodities (such as the effect of oil price increases and 
the depreciation of the U.S. dollar), whereas other causes are commodity-specific 
(such as supply shocks and the effect of biofuels demand).
FIGURE 17–12 Trends in the Nominal Prices of Cereals and Oil, January 2003 to 
May 2009
Source: Headey, D., S. Malaiyandi, and S. Fan. 2009. “Navigating the Perfect Storm: Reflections on 
the Food, Energy, and Financial Crises.” IFPRI Discussion Paper 00889, Figure 1. Washington, DC: 
International Food Policy Research Institute.
November 2003
April 2004
July 2005
August 2007
April 2009
Rice
Maize
Wheat
Petroleum
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
Prices indices (January 2003 = 1)
November 2008
June 2008
January 2003
January 2008
June 2003
March 2007
October 2006
May 2006
December 2005
February 2005
September 2004
28See D. Headey and S. Fan, “Anatomy of a Crisis: The Causes and Consequences of Surging Food 
Prices,” Agricultural Economics 39 (suppl., 2008), 375–91.

660   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
Among these causes of the world food crisis, the most hotly debated has been 
the effect of demand for biofuels, which has increased rapidly since 2003 (in part due 
to subsidies by the U.S. government and related demand-stimulating policies). This 
development was particularly important for corn prices. By 2007, biofuels consumed 
25 percent of the U.S. corn crop. Economists Derek Headey and Shenggen Fan con-
clude that among the widely varying estimates, the best estimate is that 60 to 70 per-
cent of the increase in corn prices was explained by the diversion of corn for biofuels 
production. Other studies attribute a much smaller role to biofuels in explaining 
the increase in corn prices. That debate illustrates two important considerations 
that complicate analysis of the food crisis. One is that although the prices of a wide 
range of commodities increased, the causes of these increases differed across spe-
cific commodities. (Rice, for example, has not been widely used in biofuels produc-
tion.) A second point that arises in considering the impact of biofuels demand is the 
need to consider interactions between crops. In the case of biofuels, the increased 
demand for corn is thought to have explained up to 40 percent of the increase in soy-
bean prices. What’s the connection? The 23 percent increase in acreage in the United 
States devoted to corn came at the expense of a 16 percent reduction in soybean 
acreage in 2007. In addition, to the extent that consumers substitute between staple 
gains, increased corn prices have contributed to increased demand for wheat and 
rice, adding to price increases for those commodities.
The explanation for the tripling of world rice prices relates more to the com-
bustible mixture of distortionary trade interventions and panic buying. Historically, 
world rice markets are thin compared with those for other grains. That is, only 5 to 
7 percent of global rice production is traded internationally (compared with 20 per-
cent of wheat). This makes world rice prices relatively volatile. In addition, global rice 
exports are dominated by a small number of countries: Thailand, India, Vietnam, 
and Pakistan alone account for about 70 percent of global rice exports. So conditions 
in the world rice market were ripe for an implosion in November 2007, when India 
reacted to rising rice prices by banning exports. India’s ban on rice exports set off a 
chain reaction in world rice markets. Importing nations, the Philippines in particular, 
accelerated their import orders, fearing further price increases. These orders, them-
selves, helped drive up prices, in response to which Vietnam, China, Cambodia, and 
Egypt also intervened to restrict rice exports. Figure 17–13 places these and related 
events on a chart of world rice prices.29
Commodity-specific factors also affected world wheat prices. In this case, the 
main culprit was a weather-induced supply shock. Australia, one of the world’s lead-
ing exporters of wheat, suffered its worst drought in a thousand years in 2006, cut-
29D. Headey, S. Malaiyandi, and S. Fan, “Navigating the Perfect Storm: Reflections on the Food, Energy, 
and Financial Crises,” Discussion Paper No. 00889, International food Policy Research Institute, Washing-
ton, DC, August 2009. For a comprehensive review of the rice crisis, see D. Dawe, ed., The Rice Crisis: Mar-
kets, Policies and Food Security (London: Earthscan, 2010).

T H E  W O R L D  F O O D  C R I S I S  O F  2 0 0 5 – 0 8   661
ting in half that country’s wheat exports. That year’s harvest in other major producing 
countries, including the United States, Russia, and Ukraine, were also smaller than 
usual.
A more general factor was the price of oil. The price of oil surged just in advance 
of the prices of wheat, maize, and rice. Oil prices are relevant for several reasons. 
For instance, chemical fertilizers are largely petroleum-based products, and most 
farm machinery runs on gasoline or diesel fuel. In addition, higher oil prices also 
increased the cost of transporting agricultural output, both within and between 
countries. Here too we see an interaction effect with other potential causes of the cri-
sis: biofuels production becomes more profitable when oil prices are high. In addi-
tion, the ability of markets to respond to price increases in a range of commodities by 
releasing stockpiles of those grains into the market was severely constrained by the 
historically low levels of grain reserves at that time. Ironically, one cause of the low 
levels of grain reserves was the secular decline in prices before the crisis.
CONSEQUENCES OF THE CRISIS
The consequences of the world food crisis of 2005–08 are even more difficult to sort 
out. While our ultimate concern may be the welfare of poor households, the causal 
chain running from global cereals price shocks to household welfare is long and 
FIGURE 17–13 Events in World Rice Market
mt, metric tons.
Source: Headey, D., S. Malaiyandi, and S. Fan. 2009. “Navigating the Perfect Storm: Reflections on 
the Food, Energy, and Financial Crises.” IFPRI Discussion Paper 00889, Figure 2. Washington, DC: 
International Food Policy Research Institute.
January 2009
January 2008
February 2008
March 2008
April 2008
June 2008
May 2008
July 2008
August 2008
September 2008
October 2008
November 2008
December 2008
January 2007
100
200
300
400
500
Nominal rice price (US$; Thail A1 Super)
600
700
800
900
April: Nigeria scraps 100% tariffs and
imports 0.5 million mt Thai rice
March: Cambodia
bans exports
January—April: Saudi imports from
Thailand rise by nearly 90%
after India’s ban
January: Vietnam and
Egypt restrict exports,
China imposes export taxes
November: India bans exports
after a bad wheat harvest
June: Japan allowed to
reexport rice stocks June: Cambodia
removes ban
June: Egypt announces
export of rice from September
September: India lifts export
ban on some higher
quality varieties
Strong demand from energy
exporters keeps rice prices
25—30% above 2007 levels
January—February: Drought
in Iran leads it to order
0.8 million mt of Thai rice
January—April: Phillippines
buys Normal annual quota in
just 4 months, rolls back tariffs
February 2007
March 2007
April 2007
June 2007
May 2007
July 2007
August 2007
September 2007
October 2007
November 2007
December 2007
February 2009
March 2009
April 2009
May 2009
June 2009

662   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
complex. Headey and Fan distinguish between macroeconomic and microeconomic 
links in that chain. The macroeconomic linkages entail such considerations as the 
size of a country’s food import bill, changes in exchange rates between the local 
currency of an importing country and the U.S. dollar (the currency in which inter-
national grain prices are quoted), and countries’ stocks of foreign exchange reserves 
(the funds used for imports). These considerations generally indicate the extent to 
which governments of food importing countries may be able to buffer their domestic 
consumers (poor consumers especially) from rising prices of food on international 
markets. For instance, the price in local currency (say, in pesos) of an imported com-
modity such as wheat is equal to the world price in dollars times the exchange rate 
(in pesos per dollar) for the local currency. So if the world price of wheat in U.S. dol-
lars increases at the same time that the peso appreciates against the dollar (that is, 
if the peso–dollar exchange rate changes such that a peso purchases more dollars, 
resulting in a “lower” exchange rate indicating fewer pesos per dollar), then some of 
the increase in world wheat prices will be absorbed by this exchange rate movement 
and not passed along to domestic (local currency-denominated) food prices. Over 
the period 2003–07 countries’ experiences in this regard varied widely.
Yet the welfare impacts also depend on a set of microeconomic factors that 
come into play once world market events have been translated into domestic food 
prices. At that point, changes in the relative prices of foods may motivate  consumers 
to  substitute among commodities (in favor of those that have become relatively 
cheaper). Opportunities for substitution away from suddenly more expensive com-
modities can help dampen the potential adverse effects on consumers. But these 
opportunities also depend on consumer preferences and the patterns of food con-
sumption for households at different levels of income. In particular, the effect of ris-
ing food prices on household welfare depends on whether the household is a net 
buyer or net seller of food (as discussed earlier).
Estimates of the welfare impact of the world food crisis have also varied widely. 
Studies have tended to conclude that poverty (even rural poverty) tends to increase 
with rising food prices. This is not surprising, given that nearly all urban dwellers and 
a substantial proportion of rural dwellers (especially the poor) are net buyers of food 
(though net sellers, many of whom are still relatively poor, have benefited). While 
countries varied widely in the impact of the food crisis on poverty, effects also varied 
widely within individual countries. Economists Maros Ivanic and Will Martin con-
cluded that on average (over the nine countries they studied) poverty rates increased 
by 4.5 percentage points in the short run.30 Projecting this result to all low-income 
countries, they suggest that the food crisis could have increased the global poverty 
head count by 105 million. Their estimate is thus substantially higher than that of the 
Food and Agricultural Organization, which found that the food crisis increased the 
30M. Ivanic and W. Martin, “Implications of Higher Global Food Prices for Poverty in Low-Income 
Countries,” Agricultural Economics 39 (suppl. 2008), 405–16.

S U M M A R Y   663
poverty head count by 40 million. These examples demonstrate both the variation 
in estimates of the magnitude of the impact and the broad consensus that the world 
food crisis hurt the poor.
SUMMARY
• A variety of characteristics distinguish agriculture from other sectors in a 
typical developing economy. These unique features of agriculture include 
its large share of GDP and employment, several technical characteristics 
of the agricultural production function, that much of the sector’s output 
is directly consumed by its producers, and agriculture’s role as a resource 
reservoir.
• Farms and farmers in developing countries differ widely from one 
another, both within and between countries. These differences include 
wide variations in farm size, technology, environmental conditions, crop 
mix, and degree of integration in markets. Nonetheless, it is possible to 
characterize traditional agriculture at a broad level of generalization as 
consisting of small-scale family farms producing food primarily for their 
own consumption, using traditional crop varieties and techniques and few 
purchased inputs, with low levels of productivity.
• Agricultural systems can take a variety of forms, with the major types being 
systems of shifting cultivation, pastoral nomadism, and settled agriculture. 
Most of the progress made in promoting agricultural development in recent 
decades has concentrated on systems of settled agriculture.
• Growth in agricultural productivity (commonly defined as the level 
of output per unit of land) is a central component of agricultural 
development. The growth rate of yields for cereal crops has been 
consistently high in East Asia, but quite low in sub-Saharan Africa (with the 
performance of other developing regions ranging between these extremes).
• Productivity growth in agriculture may be constrained by a variety of 
factors, including a lack of improved technology, unfavorable economic 
incentives, and poor-quality institutions.
• The green revolution produced new agricultural technologies and 
contributed significantly to agricultural productivity growth in Asia and 
Latin America. The benefits to farmers in sub-Saharan Africa have been 
more limited.
• Government policies that influence food prices play a critical role in 
shaping the incentives for farmers as they decide what to produce, how 
to produce it, and how much to produce. Meeting the goal of increasing 
agricultural output and productivity requires positive incentives for 
SUMMARY

664   [ C H .  1 7 ]  A G R I C U LTU R A L D E V E L O P M E NT: TE C H N O L O GY, P O L I C I E S A N D I N STITUTI O N S
farmers, typically in the form of higher food prices. Yet government efforts 
toward that end may be severely constrained by the negative impact of high 
food prices on poor consumers, many of whom may be at severe risk of 
undernutrition and hunger.
• Institutions governing land rights are of particular importance in shaping 
incentives and opportunities for farmers. Secure tenure arrangements 
encourage both greater levels of effort in current farm production and 
greater levels of investment in conserving soil resources for future 
production. Efforts to improve tenure security through land reform are 
often appealing in theory, but difficult to implement.

665
Trade and 
Development
18
I
n April 2009, Trinidad and Tobago hosted the fifth Summit of the Americas. The 
summit was viewed as a huge success, devoid of confrontation and heralded 
as a new beginning for relations with the region. It stood in sharp contrast to 
the summit held four years earlier in Mar del Plata, Argentina, when thirty-four 
presidents from the Western Hemisphere assembled to discuss the Free Trade Area 
of the Americas, an idea proposed in 1994 by Bill Clinton and supported by his suc-
cessors. Mexican President Vicente Fox also backed the proposal, as did other Latin 
American leaders. But there were voices of dissent. Populist presidents from Argen-
tina and Brazil had their doubts. Most critical was Hugo Chávez, the leftist leader of 
Venezuela, who rallied a crowd of an estimated 25,000 protesters in a stadium near 
the closed-door meetings proclaiming, “Each one of us brought a shovel, a grave-
digger’s shovel, because here in Mar del Plata is the tomb of the Free Trade Area of 
the Americas.”
Rioting broke out after the rally, something that has happened repeatedly during 
official meetings about international trade. The meetings of the World Trade Organi-
zation (WTO) in Seattle in 1999 were disrupted by street protesters who felt free trade 
hurt workers in both developing and industrialized nations. In Cancun, Mexico, in 
2003, there also were protests during the WTO meetings, both among official partici-
pants in the trade talks and by demonstrators outside. One of those demonstrators 
was Lee Kyang Hae, who headed South Korea’s Federation of Farmers and Fisher-
men. Lee stabbed himself in the chest, and later died, in protest against the WTO 
and the more open-trade policies it advocated. Lee specifically opposed further trade 
liberalization of agriculture, which he believed would ruin the livelihood of many 

666   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Korean farmers. As these events demonstrate, globalization and free trade generate 
some of the world’s most heated controversies over economic policy.
But, despite these controversies and concerns, trade among nations has been 
growing rapidly, and most developing countries are actively trying to expand their 
trade. Global trade has increased more than fivefold in the last three decades, with 
trade in developing countries increasing by even more. Developing nations import 
many more goods and services than they once did, ranging from food to pharmaceu-
ticals to sophisticated machinery. They also export much more, not only agricultural 
products, oil, and other raw materials but also automobile parts, clothing, semicon-
ductors, shoes, and toys. Revolutions in transportation (including containerized 
shipping), telecommunications, and production methods have facilitated this pro-
cess. Supply chains have been broken up, with components made in one country and 
finished good assembled in another. This is true for complex products, such as auto-
mobiles, so there no longer is such a thing as “a national car.” Even simple products 
undergo global manufacturing; a Barbie doll made in China may be assembled from 
plastic pellets from Taiwan, given nylon hair from Japan, and packed in a cardboard 
box from the United States.
Trade provides low- and middle-income nations with significant opportunities 
to improve welfare and accelerate growth and development. With more open trade, 
families and businesses have more and better choices in price, quality, and array 
of products than if they buy only from domestic firms. Producers have much larger 
markets to which they can sell. If successful, exporting firms can generate rapid job 
growth for large numbers of low-skilled workers, which can have a strong impact on 
poverty reduction. Trade also invites investment and creates the possibility for the 
transfer of new technologies from rich to poor countries, which can raise productivity 
and incomes.
But the news is not all good. Although more open trade creates many winners, it 
also creates losers. Firms and farmers producing at high prices for the domestic mar-
ket can be forced out of business, with job losses and other disruptions. Exporters 
operating on world markets face the risk of rapidly falling prices or other vagaries of 
the world market that are out of their control. Poor weather in Nicaragua may hurt 
its coffee crop, sending up world prices and benefiting coffee farmers in Uganda, but 
a bumper crop in Vietnam can lead to a drop in prices that can leave the Ugandan 
farmer with much lower income. The 2008 financial crisis that precipitated a steep 
recession in the United States and European Union hurt exporters most everywhere 
in the world.
The evidence suggests that, on balance, more open trade is beneficial for devel-
oping countries and leads to more rapid growth and poverty reduction, particularly 
when exports are focused on labor-intensive products including agriculture and 
basic manufacturing. But there is plenty of controversy. Some economists argue that 
the contribution of trade, while positive, is smaller than many suggest and other fac-
tors are much more important in the development process. There is much debate 

T R A D E  T R E N D S  A N D  PAT T E R N S   667
about the key policies necessary to stimulate trade and the balance between tradi-
tional market-oriented policies and government interventions to help spur exports. 
Some believe that more open trade creates sweatshops and leads to a race to the 
bottom in wages, labor standards, and environmental outcomes. And some argue 
that multilateral trade negotiations are biased against poor countries, allowing rich 
countries to continue to protect their own agricultural and textile producers, as well 
as intellectual property, while forcing developing countries to open their economies.
In this chapter, we begin to examine these debates by considering recent trends 
and patterns in trade flows across countries. We then develop the core concept of 
comparative advantage and its powerful implications for international trade. Build-
ing on this essential theory, we turn to those economies whose comparative advan-
tage lies in primary products, including food and other agricultural products; oil and 
natural gas; timber, minerals and other raw materials. The advantages and disadvan-
tages of trade in such goods are then evaluated.
TRADE TRENDS AND PATTERNS
World trade has expanded dramatically over the past 50 years. Figure 18–1 shows 
the level of exports, expressed in current U.S. dollars, by region, from 1974 to 2007.1
The trend in imports by region would look similar even though some nations, like the 
United States, import more than they export and others, like China, export more than 
they import. The persistence of trade deficits and surpluses do little to alter the aggre-
gate pattern of regional trade flows.
Exports (and imports) from high-income nations continue to dominate global 
exchange. This may surprise you because it often seems that everything is made in 
China. The label, “Made in China,” appears in much of our clothing, shoes, toys, and 
hundreds of other consumer goods. But the bulk of world trade, whether in airplanes, 
automobiles, computer software, machinery, pharmaceuticals, wheat, and other 
goods still originates and is exchanged between high-income economies. Beginning 
in 2009, China replaced Germany as the world’s largest exporter of goods. But even 
as the world’s largest exporting nation, China accounted for only 10 percent of world 
exports. Canada, not China, remains the major trading partner of the United States.
Measured at market exchange rates, the high-income economies account for 
almost 80 percent of world gross domestic product (GDP). Even if these nations trade 
a smaller percentage of their GDP than China, as many do, they still dominate world 
TRADE TRENDS AND PATTERNS
1Figure 18–1 refers to merchandise exports only—that is, exports of goods, including primary products 
(such as agricultural goods, oil, and minerals) and manufactures, measured in current U.S. dollars unad-
justed for price inflation. Trade in services, such as tourism and international transport, insurance and 
financial services, and call-center activities and data processing, is not included. Merchandise trade in 
2007 accounted for 80 percent of total world trade.

668   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
trade. Remember, GDP is the sum of all expenditures on consumption, investment, 
and government spending plus net exports (exports minus imports). If the high-
income economies produce 80 percent of world output, it is no surprise that they 
also produce almost 75 percent of world exports and imports.
But there has been significant growth in exports from low- and middle-income 
economies. This growth can be traced back to the late 1970s, after China’s reversal in 
policy toward a more outward-looking trade strategy. Even earlier, Hong Kong, Korea, 
Singapore, and Taiwan had considerable success with trade serving as an engine of 
economic growth. Other nations, including China, began to follow a similar model. 
The growth in exports from East Asia is shown in Figure 18–1 and can be seen more 
dramatically in Figure 18–2, which shows the share of total trade in GDP, including 
imports and exports of both goods and services, by region and decade. East Asia, the 
region with the highest rate of growth in GDP per capita over the past 30 years is also 
the region with the steepest increase in the ratio of trade to GDP. This ratio averaged 
around 20 percent in the 1970s but exceeded 75 percent in the 2000s, considerably 
higher than any other region. There is little doubt that trade played a central role in 
East Asia’s achievements in both economic growth and development.
FIGURE 18–1 Growth in World Exports by Region, 1974–2007
EAP, East Asia and Pacific; LAC, Latin America and Caribbean; MENA, Middle East and North Africa; OECD, 
Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development; SA, South Asia; SSA, sub-Saharan Africa. 
Exports from Europe and Central Asia are not included. Korea is included in EAP.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
High-income OECD
EAP
MENA
LAC
SA and SSA
1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
Year
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Merchandise exports (trilllions current US$)

T R A D E  T R E N D S  A N D  PAT T E R N S   669
For developing countries as a whole, imports plus exports on goods and services 
combined are now equivalent to over 64 percent of their total output, indicating that 
large portions of these economies are influenced by global markets. But there are 
stark regional differences in these trends, and Figure 18–2 reveals some patterns that 
may be less familiar. Sub-Saharan Africa is often thought to be marginalized from the 
global economy. This is true in terms of the region’s minuscule contribution to world 
exports and imports. Its merchandise exports constituted 3.6 percent of the world 
total in 1970, falling to just 1.8 percent by 2007. But viewed from the perspective of 
the region, trade has always accounted for a large share of Sub-Saharan Africa’s GDP. 
In the 1970s the trade to GDP ratio, at 53 percent, was higher than in almost any other 
region at that time; in the 2000s, it averaged 66 percent, second only to East Asia. The 
problem for the region has not been the share of trade in output but the failure of 
trade and GDP to grow by very much overtime. South Asia, where India’s economy 
dominates, is the region where trade continues to play the smallest role, although 
that is beginning to change with a greater emphasis on both exports and imports in 
India and elsewhere.
As economies grow and the share of trade increases, the products imported and 
exported tend to change as well. On the import side, as incomes grow, countries 
1970
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
East Asia and Pacific
Sub-Saharan Africa
Middle East and North Africa
High income
Latin America and Caribbean
South Asia
1980
1990
2000
Trade (% of GDP)
Year
FIGURE 18–2 Importance of Trade to Economies, 1970–2007
The ratio of trade to gross domestic product (GDP) is the average value by decade by region.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

670   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
typically import more sophisticated consumer goods and intermediate products as 
inputs to manufacturing. On the export side, as workers gain new skills and increase 
productivity, the composition of exports shifts away from primary products to manu-
factured products and even to some services, including call centers, data processing, 
and other examples of what is commonly referred to as outsourcing.
Figure 18–3 shows how the composition of merchandise exports has changed 
by region. The concern, once widely held, that developing nations might get stuck 
exporting primary products in return for imports of manufactured goods from devel-
oped countries, has limited validity today. Over the past three decades manufactures 
have replaced primary products as the main exports for three regions: East Asia, 
Latin America, and South Asia. These regions still export primary products, including 
natural gas from Indonesia, copper from Chile, and tea from Sri Lanka, but the export 
of manufactured goods now constitutes the majority.
Mauritius, an island economy off the east coast of Africa, has followed a simi-
lar pattern. In 1975, Mauritius’s primary export was sugarcane, with manufactured 
goods accounting for only 12 percent of merchandise exports. By 2000, 81 percent 
of merchandise exports was from manufactures, as Mauritius became a major pro-
ducer of clothing. Today, Mauritius is relying less on sugarcane and clothing and is 
developing exports in services, such as offshore banking, telecommunications, and 
1984
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2006
1974 2006
1974 2006
1974 2006
1996 2006
1974 2006
1974 2006
Manufactures’ share of merchandise exports (percent)
East Asia
and Pacific
High
income
South Asia
Latin America
and Caribbean
Europe
and Central Asia
Sub-Saharan
Africa
Middle East
and North Africa
35
79
70
75
70
47
27
52
47
45
14
9
16
30
FIGURE 18–3 Importance of Manufactured Exports by Region
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

T R A D E  T R E N D S  A N D  PAT T E R N S   671
tourism. But on the African continent, primary products, including coffee, diamonds, 
groundnuts, oil, and minerals, continue to dominate merchandise trade. The impact 
of primary product exports on African and other economies is considered in detail 
later in this chapter.
For all developing regions, the majority of trade (around two thirds) continues to 
be with high-income economies. Since 1990, this share, not surprising, has increased 
significantly for the former Soviet Union and Soviet bloc. It has fallen in the Middle 
East as more oil exports go to other developing areas. The biggest change in Asia is 
that almost half of Asia’s exports today are sent to other countries in Asia, including 
the larger high-income economies in the region (Japan, Korea, Singapore, and Tai-
wan). In 1980, within-Asia trade made up about one third of the region’s total. Raw 
materials and intermediate products produced in one Asian country now are likely to 
be exported to a neighboring country for finishing and final export. China’s dramatic 
rise is particularly significant. Its imports have grown almost as fast as its exports, and 
it is now one of the biggest markets in the world. A significant share of China’s man-
ufactured export products are assembled using components imported from other 
Asian economies.
WHO TRADES?
The extent to which a country trades with the rest of the world depends on many 
factors. Small countries, measured in this instance by population size, tend to trade 
more than larger ones, as they cannot efficiently produce the full range of consumer 
goods, intermediate products, and capital equipment demanded by consumers and 
businesses. Just as a small town cannot offer the same range of stores and services 
for shoppers as a large town, small economies cannot efficiently produce everything 
that households and firms would like to buy, so they tend to import more products 
to satisfy those demands. On the export side, as firms in small economies increase 
production, they are more likely to be constrained by the limited size of the market 
and unable to take advantage of economies of scale if they sell only locally. By export-
ing to global markets, they can sell larger amounts of more-specialized products. 
Export earnings then pay for the imports small nations demand. Producers in larger 
economies can sell a much larger share of their output locally without being con-
strained by market size. In Guyana, with a population of under 1 million, imports and 
exports together exceed 200 percent of GDP; in Mauritius they reach 133 percent. But 
in much larger Brazil and India, the ratios are 27 and 45 percent, respectively. Fig-
ure 18–4 confirms this relationship across all countries. It helps explain why sub-
Saharan Africa, which has a large number of nations, half of them with populations 
below 10 million, has such a relatively high ratio of trade to GDP.
Trade patterns are also influenced by a country’s geographical characteristics, 
including its access to shipping routes—especially whether it is landlocked—and its 
location relative to major markets. For the last several hundred years, the cheapest 

672   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
and most important form of transporting goods between countries was by sea, and 
to this day, countries with easier access to sea-based shipping tend to have larger 
exports and imports than do landlocked countries. Adam Smith recognized the 
advantages of access to the sea for trade and commerce more than 230 years ago in 
The Wealth of Nations:
As by means of water-carriage a more extensive market is opened to every sort 
of industry than what land-carriage alone can afford it, so it is upon the sea-
coast, and along the banks of navigable rivers, that industry of every kind 
naturally begins to sub-divide and improve itself, and it is frequently not till a 
long time after that those improvements extend themselves to the inland part 
of the country.
2
As Smith predicted, most landlocked countries trade less. Figure 18–5 identi-
fies 44 nations that do not have a coastline. As a group, their trade to GDP ratio is 
25 percent as compared to 75 percent for all other economies.3 Less trade among the 
landlocked countries is a result of much higher transport costs, as they must not only 
pay for sea-based shipping but overland costs to and from the nearest seaport. These 
costs can skyrocket when relationships between neighboring countries deteriorate. 
Periodic conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea has forced firms in Ethiopia to seek 
<2
(21)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
133.0
117.6
112.1
91.0
73.6
49.0
59.9
2—5
(23)
5—10
(26)
10—25
(28)
25—90
(29)
90—400
(7)
400-1000
(2)
Trade (% of GDP)
Total population in millions (number of countries)
FIGURE 18–4 Importance of Trade to Less Populous Nations
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
2Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (New York: Modern 
Library, 1976), bk. 1, chap. 3, para. 3.
3These trade to GDP ratios are unweighted—for example, in the case of the landlocked nations it is the 
simple average of the 44 countries. When presenting most averages, by region or income group, we usually 
provide weighted averages, implicitly giving more importance to the region or group’s largest economies.

T R A D E  T R E N D S  A N D  PAT T E R N S   673
other more distant ports, for example, in Djibouti or Kenya. Landlocked Nepal almost 
totally depends on shipment through India. In Africa, 16 countries are  landlocked, 
and their shipping costs have been two or three times higher than for their coastal 
neighbors.4 As a result, everything that is imported is much more expensive. Simi-
larly, exporters must pay more for shipping, raising the costs of export products and 
making firms less competitive on world markets.
As noted in Chapter 3, being landlocked not only reduces trade but is also associ-
ated with slower economic growth. An inability to trade more may account for this 
slower growth. But there are exceptions. Some landlocked high-income countries 
have done well, such as Austria and Switzerland, but they are located in the midst 
of major markets, are connected by high-quality road networks, and have had good 
relations with neighboring states, so shipping costs are not a major barrier. Land-
locked countries that ship raw materials for which the margins between production 
costs and world prices are large are also in a better position to export, despite higher 
shipping costs. Landlocked Botswana has been very successful, as its diamonds bring 
in plenty of revenue to overcome higher shipping costs. Uganda’s coffee, the nation’s 
primary export, does not enjoy the same advantage. In addition to landlocked coun-
tries, countries isolated from major markets, such as Samoa and other small island 
countries of the Pacific Ocean, face similar issues with high shipping costs. As air 
shipment costs decline these disadvantages are reduced, but the vast majority of 
trade still takes place by sea.
In addition to size and geography, government strategies for trade and choices 
about trade policy determine trade outcomes. Broadly speaking, governments in 
developing countries have employed two different trade strategies, import substitution 
4United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), Review of Maritime Transport 
1995 (Geneva: United Nations Publications, 1995).
FIGURE 18–5 Landlocked Nations of the World

674   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
and outward-looking development. Import substitution is the production of goods 
and services that replace (or substitute for) imports. Outward orientation shifts the 
focus to producing for export for global markets. Before examining these two strategies 
in Chapter 19 it is necessary to understand some of the core ideas that shape economic 
reasoning about international trade.
COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE
For more than 200 years, trade theorists have tried to explain why nations engage in 
international trade, what goods and services they trade, and how firms and consum-
ers gain or lose. The workhorse models rely primarily on the theory of comparative 
advantage, which describes trade patterns under assumptions of static conditions
that hold the factors of production in fixed supply and unable to cross borders. Com-
parative advantage has rich implications about the gains from trade. Among the most 
powerful results are the following:
• A country can increase its welfare by trading because the world market 
provides an opportunity to buy and sell goods at different prices than those 
that otherwise would be available to a nation that closed its economy to the 
rest of the world.
• The smaller the country, the greater is this potential gain from trade.
• A country often gains most by exporting commodities that it produces using 
its abundant factors of production most intensively, while importing goods 
whose production requires relatively more of scarcer factors of production.
The first implication is one of the most powerful ideas in all of economics. It is 
associated with the work of David Ricardo appearing in his Principles of Political 
Economy and Taxation, published in 1817. It is a testament to Ricardo’s core insight 
that almost two centuries later comparative advantage still provides the foundation 
for thinking about trade between nations.
Any country can engage in and benefit from international trade, including the 
world’s highest-cost and lowest-cost producers of any good. To see why, let us con-
sider some examples. Mexico is the third largest trading partner of the United States. 
The United States is Mexico’s largest trading partner. Many goods cross their borders. 
Among them, it is easy to understand why Mexico exports crude oil to the United 
States and why the United States exports aircraft to Mexico. The United States has 
depleted much of its oil reserves and imports oil from many countries, including 
Mexico. Mexico does not have an aircraft industry, nor is it likely to develop one any-
time soon. That these nations would chose to trade, in essence, oil for airplanes is 
easy to understand. Some world trade is of this kind, by which nations trade goods 
that they essentially could not produce on their own. But most international trade 
does not have this characteristic, making the next example far more interesting.
COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE

C O M PA R AT I V E  A D V A NTA G E   675
Mexico and the United States also trade farm equipment, say, tractors, and agri-
cultural goods, say, tomatoes. These are goods, unlike airplanes and oil, that both 
nations are capable of producing. We can build a highly simplified model of trade in 
these goods between these two nations. The labor required to produce each product 
differs in the two countries, as shown in Table 18–1. By assumption, it takes fewer 
labor hours to produce either product in the United States. The United States is said 
to have an absolute advantage in both goods, the result, in this example, of a labor 
force that is more productive than Mexico’s in producing both tractors and tomatoes. 
In our earlier case of airplanes and oil, the United States had an absolute advan-
tage in airplanes and Mexico had one in oil. In the tractor and tomatoes example, 
Mexico has an absolute disadvantage in both goods. Yet even under the conditions 
described in Table 18–1, both nations are better off engaging in trade.
Without trade, Mexicans would have to produce six tons of tomatoes to buy one 
tractor in their home market because each tractor takes 300 labor-hours to produce 
compared to 50 labor-hours for one ton of tomatoes. In the United States, tractors sell 
for the equivalent of five tons of tomatoes because each tractor requires 200 labor-
hours to produce compared to each ton of tomatoes, which requires 40 labor-hours.5
Since each nation’s autarky prices (domestic prices without trade) differ, there is the 
opportunity for mutually beneficial trade. Trade will occur when the price of tractors 
in terms of tomatoes lies in between the Mexican and United States autarky prices. 
Under free trade, the forces of supply and demand guarantee that prices will fall 
within this range.
Assume that both nations agree to trade one tractor for 5.5 tons of tomatoes. By 
selling to the United States, Mexico needs to give up only 5.5 rather than 6 tons of 
tomatoes to get a tractor. Thus Mexico is better off by switching its labor into produc-
ing more tomatoes and selling them to the United States. Instead of working 300 hours 
to produce one tractor, Mexican labor can work for 275 hours (50 hours/ton times 
5.5 tons of tomatoes) and import one tractor. The 25 hours that are saved through 
trade can be used to produce more tomatoes and consume more of either good. The 
surprising result is that the United States also is better off if it buys tomatoes from 
5This way of calculating relative prices, in Mexico tractors selling for six times the price of a ton of toma-
toes and in the United States for five times, works in this oversimplified example because labor is the only 
input into production and production costs are the only determinant of relative prices.
TABLE 18–1 Production Costs and Comparative Advantage
LABOR-HOURS TO PRODUCE 
MEXICO 
UNITED STATES
Agricultural goods (1 ton of tomatoes) 
50 
40
Farm equipment (1 tractor) 
300 
200
Relative price (tons of tomatoes per tractor) 
6 
5

676   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Mexico and sells tractors in return, even though it can produce both tractors and 
tomatoes at home with fewer hours of labor. U.S. workers can spend 200 hours to pro-
duce either one tractor or 5 tons of tomatoes. If U.S. labor is shifted away from farming 
and into tractor production, one tractor exported to Mexico is equivalent to producing 
5.5 tons of tomatoes, half a ton more than those 200 U.S. labor-hours could produce 
themselves. U.S. firms can produce enough tractors to satisfy domestic demand and 
export to Mexico, and U.S. consumers get to consume more tomatoes. Both Mexico 
and the United States are better off in the sense that for the same amount of effort, 
measured in labor-hours, they can consume more goods by engaging in trade.
Ricardo’s insight was that trade would be mutually beneficial if each nation pur-
sued the good in which it is relatively more productive—that is, the good in which it 
has a comparative advantage. In Mexico the opportunity cost of one tractor is six 
tons of tomatoes (or for one ton of tomatoes, one sixth of a tractor.) In the United 
States the opportunity cost of one tractor is five tons of tomatoes (or for one ton of 
tomatoes, one fifth of a tractor.) The United States gains by trading tractors and get-
ting something more than five tons of tomatoes in return. Mexico gains by trading 
tomatoes and getting something better than one sixth of a tractor in return. The gains 
are the higher level of consumption trade permits. As economist Paul Krugman, who 
won the Nobel Prize in economics in 2008 for his pioneering work on international 
trade, has written, “imports, not exports are the purpose of trade. That is, what a 
country gains from trade is the ability to import things it wants. Exports are not an 
objective in and of themselves; the need to export is a burden that a country must 
bear because its import suppliers are crass enough to demand payment.”6
The theory of comparative advantage may seem straightforward and intuitive, 
but it is often misunderstood. Whenever someone claims it is unfair for workers in 
high-income economies to have to compete with low-wage workers in developing 
nations, they are not appreciating the benefits of international trade between rich 
and poor nations. It is still true, as we discuss later, that trade creates winners and los-
ers within each country; however, the theory of comparative advantage suggests that 
when countries trade freely, the total gains to each country outweigh the losses. Simi-
larly, when critics refer to international trade as a competition, implying that some 
nations win and others lose as if trade were a zero-sum game, they are misunder-
standing the mutually beneficial gains that follow from comparative advantage. And 
if someone says that no nation can compete with China’s exports of manufactured 
goods they are both missing the reality of global exchange and do not understand 
Ricardo’s basic insight.7
6Paul Krugman, “What Do Undergrads Need to Know about Trade?,” American Economic Review 83, 
no. 2 (May 1993).
7In “Ricardo’s Difficult Idea: Why Intellectuals Don’t Understand Comparative Advantage,” in G. Cook, 
ed., The Economics and Politics of International Trade (London: Routledge, 1998), economist Paul Krug-
man demonstrates how even sophisticated policy makers and commentators often miss the basic insight 
of comparative advantage.

C O M PA R AT I V E  A D V A NTA G E   677
THE BENEFITS OF TRADE
The core of comparative advantage is that both countries gain from trade whenever 
the relative prices of commodities in each country differ in the absence of trade. 
Once the two countries begin to trade, the relative prices of commodities begin to 
shift until they are the same in the two countries. This is because the model assumes 
no tariffs, quotas, or other barriers to free trade and it assumes that transport costs 
are negligible. In the example in Table 18–1, the relative price of tractors in terms of 
tons of tomatoes settles somewhere between five and six. The final world price that 
will prevail in both countries under free trade will be closer to the initial price in the 
market of the country whose economy is larger.
In our example, the final price in both countries would probably not settle at 
5.5 tons, equidistant from the Mexican and U.S. autarky prices, but closer to 5 tons 
of tomatoes per tractor. This is because the U.S. economy is so much larger than that 
of Mexico and would exert more influence on both the supply and demand of each 
good. One implication is that small countries may benefit more from trade because 
the relative price of commodities shifts more, and therefore the gains from trade are 
greater. In our example, Mexico would be better off if the world price settled at 5.1 
rather than 5.5 tons of tomatoes per tractor, because it would have to give up fewer 
tomatoes (and the labor time to produce them) for each tractor. Where world prices 
settle, often referred to as the international terms of trade (the ratio of the prices a 
nation receives for the goods it exports relative to the prices it receives for the goods 
it imports) is an important determinant of the gains from trade and is discussed in 
more detail later in this chapter.
The theory of comparative advantage as posed here is in the very simple form 
developed by Ricardo during the nineteenth century: two countries, two goods, and 
only one factor of production (labor).8 Some of the complexities of the real world can 
be incorporated into the theory. A trading world of many countries can be handled by 
taking the home country, say, Kenya, and treating the rest of the world as its trading 
partner. Swedish economists Eli Heckscher and Bertil Ohlin expanded the theory dur-
ing the first half of the twentieth century to deal with two factors of production, such as 
labor and capital. The Heckscher-Ohlin model leads to an extremely important result: 
A country tends to export products that use its abundant factors of production more 
intensively and imports products that require relatively more of its scarce factors.
This more general approach to comparative advantage is encapsulated in Figure 18–6. 
The economy of the home country is divided into two goods, one that will be exported 
(tomatoes) and one that will be imported (tractors). The country’s collective utility in 
consuming these goods is represented by the community indifference curves.
Without trade, the home country achieves its greatest utility by producing and 
consuming at point A, the tangency of the community indifference curve IC1 and 
8Ricardo’s example, fitting his era, relied on England and Portugal trading wine and cloth.

678   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Production
frontier
Relative price
before trade
International
terms of trade
IC
IC
A
B
D
C
Agricultural goods (e.g., tomatoes)
Farm equipment (e.g., tractors)
(a)
3
1
FIGURE 18–6 Gains from Trade
Relative price
before trade
International
terms of trade
IC
A
E
F
B
D
C
Agricultural goods (e.g., tomatoes)
Farm equipment (e.g., tractors)
(b)
3
IC2
IC1

C O M PA R AT I V E  A D V A NTA G E   679
the production frontier. Because it is producing on its frontier, all resources are fully 
employed. The slope at A determines the domestic relative price of tomatoes in terms 
of tractors. Assume that the rest of the world is better endowed with capital than 
labor relative to the endowments of the home country and that world consumers 
have tastes broadly similar to those of the home country. Then, in world markets, the 
relatively higher production of tractors compared to the demand for tractors drives 
their prices lower than in the home country, and the relatively lower production of 
tomatoes compared to the demand for tomatoes drives their price higher than in the 
home country. Because only relative prices matter, these two statements mean the 
same thing: In world markets, the price of tomatoes in terms of tractors is higher than 
in the home country leading to the international terms of trade being steeper than 
the autarky price line.
This difference in relative prices between the home country and the rest of the 
world presents an opportunity for the home country to improve its welfare through 
trade. With trade, the country, taking advantage of its factor endowment, can pro-
duce more tomatoes and fewer tractors and can sell tomatoes on the world market 
at the higher relative price. By producing more tomatoes, the home country moves 
along its production frontier from A to B, where the international terms of trade 
line is tangent to the production frontier. With tomatoes to export, the country can 
import tractors and consume more of both goods and be better off. The consump-
tion point C is determined by the tangency of the international terms of trade line 
with the community indifference curve IC3. The country now exports BD tons of 
tomatoes and imports CD of tractors; the amounts for both goods equal to the dif-
ference between consumption at C and production at B. (Note that the ratio CD:BD 
is an exact description of the international terms of trade.) As indifference curve IC3 
is above indifference curve IC1, the country is better off with trade than without it. 
Note that both with and without trade the home country produces along its produc-
tion frontier and all resources are fully employed. By pursuing its comparative advan-
tage, the home country, exerts the same level of effort because all resources are fully 
employed in both cases but consumes more with trade than without trade.
Figure 18–6 can be used to gain some further insight into the sources of the gains 
from trade. In Figure 18–6b, the international terms of trade line is drawn through 
point A, the equilibrium without trade. This depicts the opportunities a nation faces 
by trading with other nations even when it does not change production. Under such 
a scenario, the nation could still gain from trade benefiting from the higher prices the 
rest of the world is willing to pay for its export good and the lower prices the nation 
would pay for its imports. The country could now move from the equilibrium at point 
A to the one at point E, exporting AF tons of tomatoes in return for EF tractors. This 
exchange permits the nation to move from indifference curve IC1 to IC2 and be better 
off. (In this example, note that the ratio EF:AF  CD:BD  the international terms of 
trade.) The implied increase in welfare is called the gains from exchange because it 
is due only to the difference between autarky and world prices.

680   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
But facing the opportunities trade provides, a nation will also reallocate its 
resources as it pursues its comparative advantage. At point A producers in the home 
country are not maximizing profits and consumers are not maximizing utility (both 
of which are requirements for equilibrium in this type of general equilibrium model). 
It will not remain producing at point A when other nations are willing to pay more 
for its exports and to sell imports for less. The change in production from point A to 
B maximizes producers’ profits and results in an additional improvement in welfare 
depicted in the change in consumption from point E to C, and the movement from 
indifference curve IC2 to IC3. These are the gains from specialization. The gains 
from trade are therefore made up of the gains from exchange plus the gains from 
specialization.
Figure 18–6 shows the gains from exchange and specialization, but trade con-
fers many more benefits to a nation that are not illustrated by the figure. First, trade 
exposes domestic firms to competition. Especially in small economies, there may 
be a limited number of producers of particular products. This may enable them to 
exercise market power, supplying less and charging more for their goods. Faced with 
competition from imports, market power is eroded, prices fall, and consumption and 
welfare increases. Trade disciplines domestic firms that wield market power. Compe-
tition from foreign firms can also increase the productivity of domestic firms. Faced 
with competition from abroad, firms may invest less in rent seeking, gaining special 
favors from government to protect their market power, and more in increasing effi-
ciency and lowering costs. In competitive markets, the most productive firms survive 
and in so doing improve the use of scarce resources and raise output levels.
Second, trade, especially in intermediate goods including machinery and other 
forms of capital, often embodies new technologies that raise productivity. In our 
example of trade in tomatoes and tractors, if imported tractors contain better tech-
nology (for example, higher fuel efficiency or longer-lasting tires or other parts), 
Mexican farmers will become more productive, producing more tomatoes per hour, 
because of the imported technology embodied in imports that is absent in domestic 
farm equipment. Referring to Figure 18–6, trade-induced productivity effects such as 
these would shift the home nation’s production frontier outward, a graphical reflec-
tion of economic growth. These benefits are in addition to trade enabling a nation to 
consume beyond its production frontier.
Third, trade increases not only the amount of goods a nation can consume but 
also the quality and variety of goods available. Before their transition, tropical fruits, 
especially bananas, were viewed as an exotic luxury in countries such as East Germany 
and Poland. An opening to trade made such products commonplace, increasing con-
sumer welfare. In addition to final consumption goods like bananas, trade increases 
the variety of other goods available, including medicines. Cellphones provide an 
example of the benefits trade can confer to even some of the poorest workers. With-
out trade, cellphones might not be available because domestic firms may not have the 
knowledge and technology to produce them. But because of imports, cellphones can 

C O M PA R AT I V E  A D V A NTA G E   681
be found in even remote areas. In India, traditional fishermen often carry cellphones 
with them and use them to communicate with other fishermen about where to fish 
and to find out about available prices for their catch at various local ports. Cellphones, 
a product that would have been unavailable unless imported, have eroded the market 
power of the fish buyers onshore and improved the livelihoods of the fishermen.
Fourth, trade also brings people into contact with one another. Whether this 
promotes peace, global understanding, and democracy remains an intriguing 
hypothesis.9 Added to Ricardo’s insight about exchange and specialization based on 
comparative advantage, there are many other important benefits poor nations can 
realize from international trade.
WINNERS AND LOSERS
Any country, whatever its size and stage of development, can benefit from trade. 
This is true for large countries like China and India, small countries such as Laos 
and Togo, high-income countries like Japan and the United States, and low-income 
countries such as Haiti and Mozambique. Ricardo’s theory uses two goods and two 
nations with no restrictions on what type of nation is involved. As long as relative 
prices at home differ from those on world markets (or would differ in the absence 
of international trade), countries can increase their aggregate welfare by engaging in 
international trade.
Many of you may read these conclusions and remain skeptical and unconvinced. 
If the economic argument that trade is such a good thing is true, why is there so much 
opposition to globalization, the WTO, and free trade? What about sweatshops and 
the harsh conditions in the maquiladoras, a Spanish term used in Mexico and else-
where that refers to factories, usually just over the border, that assemble goods for 
richer nations? What about the loss of jobs, factories, and a way of life throughout the 
old industrial belt in the European Union and United States? Trade played some role 
in these outcomes. Clearly the benefits of trade that stem from economic theory are 
missing an important part of the story.
The answer lies, in part, in the distributional consequences of trade. Comparative 
advantage as described by Ricardo focuses on the efficiency gains of trade, on how 
a given amount of resources can result in more total consumption. Although every 
country can gain from trade in the aggregate, not all individuals or groups within each 
country necessarily gain.
In the tomatoes for tractors example, Mexican vegetable growers gain from trade 
because they can sell more tomatoes at a higher price. Mexican consumers of trac-
tors also gain, because they can now purchase imported tractors at a lower price. But, 
once trade begins, Mexican tractor manufacturers face competition from imports 
9Douglas Irwin, Free Trade under Fire, 3rd ed. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009), chap. 2, 
provides an excellent survey of the benefits of trade.

682   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
and hence sell fewer tractors at a lower price than before, whereas Mexican con-
sumers of tomatoes must pay higher prices. (By an analogous argument, the price 
changes brought about by trade benefits tractor producers and tomato consumers 
in the United States but hurt U.S. tractor consumers and tomato growers.) If firms 
producing tractors (tomatoes) in Mexico (the United States) shut down in the face of 
imports, workers in those firms will be hurt, at least in the short run, and so may the 
communities in which they live. If there are such clearly defined losers from interna-
tional trade, how can we be so sure that trade is a good thing?
The explanation lies in the core insight of comparative advantage. The theory 
tells us that the aggregate gains from trade outweigh the losses for the country as a 
whole. This is because the value of output in total rises, implying that the gains of the 
winners are greater than the losses of the losers. The winners gain enough to com-
pensate the losses of the losers. But that may be cold comfort to Mexican producers 
of computers and consumers of tomatoes because there is no guarantee that they will 
be compensated for their losses. These are the distributional consequences of trade 
that are the seed of the political opposition to policies that promote freer trade.
The work of Heckscher and Ohlin leads to further important insights into the 
distributional consequences of trade.10 If a nation’s comparative advantage lies in 
those goods that intensively use a nation’s abundant factor, than that factor gains 
from trade while the less abundant factor loses. If Mexico is labor abundant relative 
to the United States, then Mexican labor will eventually gain from trade no matter if 
it is employed in the production of tomatoes or tractors. This is because trade reallo-
cates factors of production, from point A to B in Figure 18–6. Because the economy is 
now producing more of the labor-intensive good (tomatoes), the aggregate demand 
for labor rises and increases its return.11 Of course such transitions are not seamless. 
Some workers, especially older ones, will find it hard to move and take on new jobs 
in the export sector. Trade often benefits the next generation, which is better able to 
take advantage of the new opportunities whether in farms now producing for export 
rather than subsistence, in factories making goods for overseas markets, or in call 
centers providing tradable services.
However suggestive the theory of comparative advantage may be for developing 
countries, it is only the beginning of an explanation of development through inter-
national trade. Ricardo’s discussion of comparative advantage assumes static condi-
tions that hold the factors of production in fixed supply and unable to cross borders. 
But economic growth is fundamentally a dynamic process. To explain growth and 
10These insights are originally attributed to Wolfgang Stolper and Paul Samuelson, “Protection and Real 
Wages” Review of Economic Studies 9, no. 1 (1941).
11In the developed nation, which generally is capital abundant relative to its developing nation trading 
partner, comparative advantage lies in the capital-intensive good, and capital, not labor, is the factor that 
benefits from trade. This helps explain why labor in developed nations, especially less-skilled labor, and 
politicians who seek the vote of such groups, are often opposed to trade agreements and in favor of pro-
tecting domestic industries.

T R A D I N G  P R I M A R Y  P R O D U CT S   683
structural change we need to account for changes over time in the amount of capi-
tal, land, and labor available to producers as well as improvements in the quality or 
productivity of those factors. This is something comparative advantage alone cannot 
do. The theory of comparative advantage also does not capture the two-way relation-
ship between trade and development. In one direction, increased trade can lead to 
improved welfare and higher incomes. In the other direction, advances in develop-
ment go hand in hand with more highly skilled labor and higher-quality capital and 
machinery, opening up new opportunities for increased trade. To better understand 
how trade and development affect each other we need to examine some of the alter-
native trade strategies nations have adopted, some of which are consistent with com-
parative advantage and others not.
TRADING PRIMARY PRODUCTS
Most world trade involves manufactured goods. But primary products, whether agri-
cultural raw materials, food, fuels, minerals, or ores, still represent about one third of 
the value of all traded goods. Figure 18–7 identifies economies that are dependent on 
exports of primary products, that is, where more than 75 percent of their merchan-
dise exports is in primary products. This group includes 13 low-income, 27 middle-
income, and 9 high-income economies. For most of these economies petroleum is 
the dominant export. But for others it might be coffee (Nicaragua), copper (Mongo-
lia), or cotton (Burkina Faso). Given how many nations continue to depend on pri-
mary product exports, it is worth examining the role of trade in primary products on 
economic growth and development.
There are additional reasons for focusing on trade in primary products. First, for 
most developing economies, international trade often began with primary products, 
and subsequent thinking about the impact of trade on development has its roots in the 
exchange of primary products from the south for manufactured goods from the north. 
Second, the growth performance of resource-rich economies often has been disap-
pointing, referred to as the resource curse and seemingly the opposite of the predic-
tions of comparative advantage. The rest of this chapter considers trade in primary 
products as an engine of growth, its potential and its failures, as well as its broader 
implications for whether movements in the international terms of trade support devel-
oping economies. Trade in manufactured goods is considered in Chapter 19.
The promise of primary product exports is clear. Many low- and middle-income 
nations have resources that are unavailable or severely depleted in high-income 
economies. Tropical fruits and beverages, including bananas and coffee, cannot be 
grown in Europe, Japan, and North America (except in greenhouses) but are in high 
demand. Diamonds and oil are obvious examples of primary products in abundance 
in some low- and middle-income economies that face limited demand at home 
TRADING PRIMARY PRODUCTS

684   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
FIGURE 18–7 The Importance of Trade in Primary Products
OECD, Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development. Included are countries where 
primary products account for 75 percent or more of all merchandise trade.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.
Niger
Tajikistan
Ethiopia
Gambia
Malawi
Benin
Burkina Faso
Sierra Leone
Mauritania
Mozambique
Rwanda
Yemen
Côte d’Ivoire
Mongolia
Nicaragua
Kiribati
Paraguay
Iran
Bolivia
Ecuador
Turkmenistan
Azerbaijan
Belize
Cameroon
São Tomé
Sudan
Nigeria
Iraq
Maldives
Kazakhstan
Chile
Panama
Venezuela
Jamaica
Gabon
Suriname
Seychelles
Algeria
Greenland
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Bahrain
Oman
Kuwait
Faeroe Islands
Brunei Darussalam
Norway
0
20
40
60
80
100
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Zambia
Low income
Lower middle
income
Upper middle
income
High income
non-OECD
High income
OECD
Primary exports (% of merchandise exports)
but significant demand abroad. Copper deposits in Chile and Zambia, coltan in the 
Congo (a mineral used in making the electronics for cellphones), and palm oil grown 
throughout Southeast Asia offer further examples.
Referring to Figure 18–6, we can substitute resource-intensive primary products 
on the x-axis and manufactures on the y-axis. Without trade, a nation will produce 

T R A D I N G  P R I M A R Y  P R O D U CT S   685
some combination of the two goods, as represented by point A. Once trade becomes 
an option, a relatively resource-rich nation will devote more of its resources to the 
primary goods sector, shifting capital and labor to produce more of its primary prod-
ucts, where it has a comparative, if not an absolute, advantage. This permits the 
economy to consume more, as represented by point C. The gains can be even greater 
if land or some other natural resource lies idle. If this is the case, without trade the 
nation might find itself in an interior point well within the production frontier. Trade 
creates an opportunity to take advantage of such idle resources and improve domes-
tic consumption outcomes even more.
Burmese economist Hla Myint long ago observed that when parts of Africa and 
Asia came under European colonization the consequent expansion of their interna-
tional trade enabled those areas to use their land or labor more intensively to pro-
duce tropical foodstuffs such as rice, cocoa, and oil palm for export. Myint applied 
Adam Smith’s term vent for surplus to these cases.12 The concept applies to a situ-
ation in which a country has the capacity to produce more than it can sell on the 
domestic market. Trade enables the country to employ either land or labor more fully 
and sell the goods produced with its “surplus” land and labor to the rest of the world. 
In many ways, this describes the economic development of Australia, Canada, and 
the United States during the nineteenth century.
In addition to helping an economy use its current factor endowments more 
intensively and more efficiently, the expansion of primary product exports can lead 
to the accumulation of additional factors of production, including capital and labor. 
Primary export–led growth can spur increases in foreign investment to complement 
the fixed factors of production, land, and natural resources. In the context of Fig-
ure 18–6, the country would be able to produce more because its production frontier 
would shift out.
Once profitable opportunities in tropical agriculture or natural resources become 
apparent, foreign investment is likely to be attracted to the country to exploit the coun-
try’s comparative advantage. The influx of foreign investors has been a familiar story 
in all mineral-exporting industries and in many tropical-product industries based 
on plantation agriculture. Well-known historical examples include Standard Oil in 
Venezuela, British Petroleum in Iran, Anaconda in Chile, Alcoa in Jamaica, Firestone 
in West Africa, and United Fruit in Central America.13 All these examples resulted in 
an increase in primary product production and exports. They also often involved 
political manipulation by these foreign firms in the domestic affairs of their host 
country, leaving a legacy that made other countries wary of foreign investment. The 
situation today, generally, is viewed differently, with governments able to negotiate 
12Hla Myint, “The ‘Classical Theory’ of International Trade and the Underdeveloped Countries,” Eco-
nomic Journal 68 (1959), 317–37.
13Anaconda developed Chile’s copper mines, Alcoa pursued Jamaica’s bauxite deposits, Firestone oper-
ated rubber plantations in Liberia and elsewhere for use in tire production, and United Fruit focused on 
bananas throughout Central America.

686   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
better terms for the development of natural resources and the sharing of resource 
rents.14 (Foreign direct investment was discussed in Chapter 10.)
Another potential benefit from primary product exports is the possibility of stim-
ulating production in other, related sectors. The very notion of export-led growth 
implies that exports would lead to more broad-based economic growth. Several 
types of linkages to the rest of the economy are possible, including to upstream or 
downstream industries, increased production of consumer goods, enhanced infra-
structure, more widely available skilled labor, and increased government revenues. 
Albert O. Hirschman coined the phrase backward linkages for the situation in which 
the growth of one industry (such as textiles) stimulates domestic production of an 
upstream input (such as cotton).15 Expanded production of primary products also 
can stimulate forward linkages by making lower-cost primary goods available as 
inputs into other industries. In many developing countries, agricultural products are 
used as inputs to the food processing industry. Senegal and the Gambia process raw 
groundnuts (peanuts) into shelled nuts and cooking oil; in Indonesia, forest products 
are used in furniture production. Forward linkages can develop for mining and min-
eral products (such as, petroleum refining, plastics, or steel), but the more complex 
production techniques and demand for highly specialized capital and labor make it 
difficult for many developing countries to compete in these activities. Furthermore, 
developed nations often employ tariff escalation, imposing higher tariffs on imports 
of processed goods than on the raw material, making it harder for the developing 
nation to move up the value-added ladder.
Infrastructure linkages arise when the provision of overhead capital (roads, rail-
roads, power, water, and telecommunications) for the export industry lowers costs 
and opens new production opportunities for other industries. Primary export sectors 
also may stimulate human capital linkages through the development of local entre-
preneurs and skilled laborers. The growth of the Peruvian fishmeal industry, with 
its many small plants, encouraged scores of new entrepreneurs and trained many 
skilled workers to operate and maintain equipment. These resources then became 
available for subsequent development. Rubber, palm oil, and tin production for 
export encouraged entrepreneurs in Malaysia, and small-scale farming for export has 
proven an outlet for entrepreneurial talent in several African countries. But perhaps 
the best case for petroleum, mining, and some traditional agricultural crops is the fis-
cal linkage. Governments can capture large shares of the economic rents from these 
exports as taxes, dividends, or through leasing arrangements and use the revenue to 
finance development in other sectors.
14Economists use the term rent to refer to the excess of revenues over the costs of production plus the 
normal profit margin. When commodity prices rise, as in the case of petroleum exports, resource rents 
also tend to rise because the cost of oil drilling often does not change appreciably.
15Albert O. Hirschman, The Strategy of Economic Development (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
1958), chap. 6.

E M P I R I C A L  E V I D E N C E  O N  P R I M A R Y  E X P O RT- L E D  G R O W T H   687
 EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON PRIMARY 
EXPORT-LED GROWTH
Since the 1950s, some economists and the leaders of many developing countries 
have argued that, despite the possible benefits, primary exports cannot effectively 
lead the way to economic development. The most common arguments have been 
that the markets for primary products grow too slowly to fuel growth, the prices 
received for these commodities have been declining, earnings are too unstable, 
linkages do not work, and the fiscal windfall more often than not breeds corruption 
and civil strife rather than growth and development. We examine these arguments 
in the next section. Here, we discuss the direct empirical question, What has been 
the relationship between primary exports and economic growth in recent decades? 
A few resource-rich developing countries have performed relatively well, including 
Botswana, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mauritius, and some of the oil-rich states of the Per-
sian Gulf. However, many others have grown very slowly or not at all, or have experi-
enced increases in GDP per capita, which have been accompanied by little economic 
development. Such nations are Angola, Burma, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Jamaica, 
Nigeria, and Zambia. At the same time, many of the fastest-growing Asian economies 
are resource poor—for example, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, and, more recently, India 
and Vietnam.
Using regression analysis, economists Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner exam-
ined the relationship between primary product exports and economic growth in a 
sample of 95 countries from around the world between 1970 and 1989.16 They ran 
growth regressions that isolate the independent effects of various determinants of 
GDP per capita growth, including initial per capita income, openness to trade, gov-
ernment efficiency, investment rates, inequality, and the share of primary product 
exports in GDP. They found strong evidence showing that, on average and hold-
ing constant the other determinants of growth, countries with substantial primary 
product exports have grown much more slowly than resource-poor countries. They 
found that an increase of 10 percentage points in the ratio of primary exports to 
GDP was associated with a 0.7 percentage point slower annual rate of growth of per 
capita income. Figure 18–8 illustrates the basic negative relationship over a slightly 
longer time period (1970–96). For the 27 countries in which primary exports (in 
1970) were 5 percent of GDP or less, annual per capita growth averaged 2.7 per-
cent. By contrast, annual per capita growth averaged less than 0.5 percent in the 
16 countries with primary exports equal to 20 percent or more of GDP. This 
EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON PRIMARY
EXPORT-LED GROWTH
16Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner, “Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth,” NBER 
Working Paper No. W5398, Cambridge, MA, December 1995.

688   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
17A recent study confirms these findings: “Developing countries, which in 1980 derived more than 
70 percent of their export revenues from non-fuel primary commodities, increased their per capita GDP by 
only 0.4 percent a year between 1980 and 2006, and countries that mainly exported fuels raised their per 
capita GDP by 1.1 percent a year. By contrast, more-diversified exporters achieved per capita growth of 1.6 
percent a year.” World Bank, Global Economic Prospects (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2009), p. 98.
27
countries
25
countries
33
countries
16
countries
>20
0—5
5—10
10—20
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
Primary exports as percent GDP in 1970
Average growth rate of per capita GDP,
1970–96 (PPP$)
FIGURE 18–8 Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth
Countries with small amounts of primary product exports have grown more 
quickly than resource-abundant countries.
GDP, gross domestic product; PPP, purchasing power parity.
Source: Updated from Steven Radelet, Jeffrey Sachs, and Jong-Wha Lee, “Economic Growth 
in Asia,” Harvard Institute for International Development, Cambridge, May 1997. Data from 
World Bank, World Development Indicators and Penn World Tables, mark 5.6.
represents a massive difference in the rate of economic growth and the potential 
for economic development.17
How can resource abundance be associated with slower rates of economic 
growth? Following the law of comparative advantage and capturing the dynamic 
gains from trade, primary product exports should help raise aggregate income and 
allow a country to increase imports and investment. There are several possible expla-
nations for this apparent puzzle.
EXPORT PESSIMISM
Long before the growth regression results of Sachs and Warner and well before “the 
resource curse” became part of the vocabulary of development economics, there were 
reservations about primary product exports as an engine of growth for poor nations. It 
is worth reviewing this history because some of its themes still resonate today. What 
became known as export pessimism has its origins in work first published in the 1950s 

E M P I R I C A L  E V I D E N C E  O N  P R I M A R Y  E X P O RT- L E D  G R O W T H   689
by economists Raul Prebisch, Hans Singer, and others.18 These economists argued that, 
over the long run, prices for primary commodity exports on world markets tend to 
fall relative to prices of manufactured goods. Because at the time the Prebisch-Singer 
hypothesis was advanced, developing countries mostly exported primary products and 
imported manufactured goods, such a shift in the international terms of trade implied 
that, over time, developing countries would have to export more primary products 
to import the same amount of manufactured products. Countries relying on primary 
product exports, therefore, would continue to lag behind in the development process 
as the gains from trade would become more and more limited.
The root of the relative price movements suggested by Prebisch and Singer were 
traced to structural factors in the global economy. First, there is Engel’s law (named 
after Ernest Engel, a nineteenth-century German statistician who first proposed the 
idea) that the demand for staple foods grows more slowly than income. For high-
income countries, the income elasticity of demand for food is below one half, imply-
ing that the demand for food (including food imported from developing countries) 
tends to lag far behind income growth. At the same time, the demand for manufac-
tured goods is income elastic, causing demand and hence prices to grow relatively 
more rapidly for such goods. The implication is that developing nations would wind 
up earning relatively less for their exports and paying relatively more for their imports.
Second, technological change in manufacturing also works against the demand 
for raw materials and the nations that produce them. New technologies and improved 
machinery help firms reduce wastage so that less raw material is needed in the pro-
duction process. Modern looms waste less cotton yarn, new mining techniques are 
more efficient, and so forth. Perhaps even more significant, new technologies allow 
for the substitution of synthetics for raw materials. Synthetic rubber long ago replaced 
natural rubber in automobile tires and other applications; fiber optics has substan-
tially reduced the use of copper in wire; and automobiles use fiberglass instead of 
steel, decreasing the demand for iron ore. There is widespread evidence that indus-
trial production has grown more rapidly than the consumption of raw materials.
Third, Prebisch argued that manufacturing firms in developed countries tended 
to have market power, whereas primary producers in developing countries faced 
much greater competition. As a result, prices for manufactures were less flexible than 
those for primary goods. With productivity growth, primary producers would face 
lower prices due to competition from other producers, but this would not happen 
to the same degree with manufactured goods. In manufactures, productivity growth 
might raise profits rather than lower prices. This reasoning provided one more rea-
son why poor nations might expect declining terms of trade and export pessimism.
18United Nations (Raul Prebisch), The Economic Development of Latin America and Its Principal 
Problems (Lake Success, NY: United Nations, 1950); Hans W. Singer, “The Distribution of Trade between 
Investing and Borrowing Countries,” American Economic Review 40 (May 1950), 473–85. See also the later 
reflections of these two economists in G. Meier and D. Seers, eds., Pioneers in Development (Washington, 
DC: World Bank, 1985).

690   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Prebisch, Singer, and the others concerned about trade and development based 
some of their findings on characteristics of the global economy that existed in the 
first half of the twentieth century and no longer hold. They also did not focus on such 
commodities as diamonds, natural gas, oil, tropical woods, and other primary prod-
ucts that face either relatively income elastic demand, shrinking supply, or few syn-
thetic substitutes. They did not expect primary producers to be able to transition to 
manufactured goods as have many low- and middle-income economies. Nor did they 
envision the fierce global competition in manufactured goods that exists today or the 
cartels that influence the prices of some primary product markets. The export pessi-
mism they expressed half a century ago, which went on to influence the trade strate-
gies of many nations, is mostly rejected today. Too many low- and middle-income 
nations have benefited from exports as an engine of growth. But Prebisch and 
Singer’s attention to the terms of trade and its implications for developing nations 
remains an important issue, one worthy of further examination.
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE?
Concern over the direction of the terms of trade is easy to understand within the 
context of the theory of comparative advantage; but it is not a critique of that theory. 
Figure 18–9 reproduces Figure 18–6a and adds a decline in the terms of trade. The 
Production
frontier
Relative price
before trade
International
terms of trade
New terms
of trade
IC’
A
B
B’
C
C’
Agricultural goods (e.g., tomatoes)
Farm equipment (e.g., tractors)
IC3
IC1
FIGURE 18–9 Declining Terms of Trade

E M P I R I C A L  E V I D E N C E  O N  P R I M A R Y  E X P O RT- L E D  G R O W T H   691
counterclockwise rotation in the world price line indicates that the relative price of 
the exported good (tomatoes) has fallen relative to the price of the imported good 
(tractors). With these price changes, the nation exporting agricultural goods is worse 
off than before. It captures fewer gains from specialization, now producing at B’ 
rather than at B, and lower gains from exchange and finds itself on a lower commu-
nity indifference curve, IC’.
According to Figure 18–9, any country experiencing a decline in its terms of 
trade still realizes gains from trade. The nation is better than if it returned to autarky 
at point A and did not engage in any trade. But it would obviously prefer the initial 
terms of trade that permitted consumption at point C rather than at point C’. While 
the shift in the terms of trade in the figure diminishes the gains from trade for the 
nation exporting agricultural goods, the opposite would be true for the nation 
importing tomatoes and exporting tractors. For this nation, which in the Prebisch-
Singer view would be a developed economy, the gains from trade would increase. No 
wonder some export pessimists called for a new international economic order, which 
would improve the benefits the developing nations received from global trade. Such 
concerns continue to be expressed by those both attending and protesting at meet-
ings of the WTO.
In the simple two-good, two-country model the impact of the terms of trade on 
the gains from trade is straightforward. The empirical record, in a world of multiple 
products and nations, is somewhat less so. We begin by looking at trends in com-
modity prices. Figure 18–10 presents the trend from 1960 to 2009, in an index of 
commodity prices compiled by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Devel-
opment (UNCTAD). The index refers to a broad range of commodities, excluding oil 
but including everything from coffee, cotton, timber, and tobacco to nickel and zinc. 
Food products account for about two thirds of the value of the index. Two trends are 
apparent. There has been a general secular decline in the price of non-fuel commod-
ities over the past 50 years. The fluctuation in commodity prices is an even more pro-
nounced trend.19
To capture movement in the terms of trade for primary product exporters, we need 
to know more than the trend in commodity prices. What about the price of imports? 
The terms of trade for these nations can be constructed by dividing a commodity 
price index, capturing the price of exports, by an index for the unit value of manu-
factures meant to reflect the price of imports. Trends in such a terms of trade index 
look similar to those depicted in Figure 18–10. Relative to manufactures, non-fuel 
19These trends are reinforced if one looks at even longer time periods. Paul Cashin and C. John McDer-
mont analyzed the behavior of commodity prices from 1862 to 1999, using a data set on industrial com-
modity prices compiled by The Economist. They found a downward trend in real commodity prices of 1 
percent per year over the 140-year period. What was more pronounced was the degree of price volatil-
ity that increased over time. They concluded that the downward trend in commodity prices was “of little 
practical policy relevance.” It was the variability in prices that had profound consequences for achieving 
macroeconomic stability. Paul Cashin and C. John McDermont, “The Long Run Behavior of Commodity 
Prices: Small Trends and Big Variability,” IMF Staff Working Papers 49, no. 2 (2002).

692   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
commodity prices have declined since the 1960s. Even more pronounced is the pat-
tern of relative commodity booms and busts. In the 1970s there was a brief but sharp 
upturn in commodity prices; another commodity price boom began after 2003 but 
ended, at least temporarily, with the global recession in 2008.
Although the Prebisch-Singer hypothesis is properly addressed by looking at 
commodity data, the overall terms of trade for a country (including all products) is 
what really matters for its development. A commonly used measure of relative prices 
of traded goods is the net barter terms of trade, Tn. The term Tn is the ratio of two 
indexes: the average price of a country’s exports (Pe), whether they are primary prod-
ucts or manufactures, and the average price of its imports (Pm). Figure 18–11 shows 
two different series of the net barter terms of trade since 1960. When oil exporters are 
included, the terms of trade of all developing countries rise dramatically after 1972 
and remain high, despite the fall of oil prices during the 1980s and early 1990s. But the 
terms of trade for non-oil-exporting developing countries decline over the period by 
almost 30 percent. Over these decades, there is support for the Prebisch-Singer hypoth-
esis about declining terms of trade facing non-oil exporting developing nations, though 
the experience of individual countries varies around this average trend.
More important, evidence on the poor long-run growth and development 
performance of most primary product exporters involves factors other than 
FIGURE 18–10 Nonfuel Commodity Price Trends, 1960–2009
Sources: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, UnctadStat http://unctadstat.unctad.org/
ReportFolders/reportFolders.aspx; International Monetary Fund, Primary Commodity Prices, Index of Non-Fuel 
Primary Commodities, available at www.imf.org/external/np/res/commod/index.aspx.
1960
50
100
150
200
250
300
1965
1970
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
1975
Nonfuel commodity price index (constant dollars; 2000 = 100)

E M P I R I C A L  E V I D E N C E  O N  P R I M A R Y  E X P O RT- L E D  G R O W T H   693
movements in the terms of trade. For oil exporters and non-oil exporters alike, 
commodity price trends alone do not account for the resource curse. Other expla-
nations are needed.
DUTCH DISEASE
Prebisch and Singer worried about declining terms of trade. But improvements in 
a nation’s terms of trade brought on by booming primary export prices may be even 
more perilous for an emerging economy. The problem has been labeled Dutch dis-
ease, named after the experience of the Netherlands after 1960, when major reserves 
of natural gas were discovered. The ensuing export boom and the balance-of-payments 
surplus promised new prosperity. Instead, during the 1970s, the Dutch economy suf-
fered from rising inflation, declining export of manufactures, lower rates of income 
growth, and rising unemployment. The oil boom of the 1970s and early 1980s produced 
similar paradoxes in a number of countries, including Mexico, Nigeria, and Saudi Ara-
bia. Coffee booms in some African economies have followed a similar path. It is too 
early to tell if the commodity boom of the 2000s will leave a similar legacy, although 
there are indications that some of the mistakes of the past are not being repeated.
Economists began to realize that Dutch disease might be a very general 
phenomenon, applicable to all countries that enjoy export booms of primary 
FIGURE 18–11 Net Barter Terms of Trade, 1961–2006
Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics Yearbook 1987 (Washington, DC: IMF, 1987); IMF, International 
Financial Statistics Yearbook 1996 (Washington, DC: IMF, 1996); and IMF, International Financial Statistics 
Yearbook 2007 (Washington, DC: IMF, 2007).
Net barter terms of trade (1961 = 100)
Non-oil exporting developing countries
1960
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
All developing countries

694   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
 commodities.20 Because the influx of foreign exchange itself causes the Dutch dis-
ease, the syndrome also can result from large inflows of foreign capital in any form. 
The import of gold and silver from the Americas, for example, may have helped 
retard Spain’s growth in the sixteenth century. Similarly, large foreign aid flows to 
developing countries can undermine exporting firms’ international competitive-
ness. How can this happen?
One key to this paradox is to understand how export booms affect a country’s 
real exchange rate and how the real exchange rate, in turn, affects other industries. 
The official or nominal exchange rate is the price at which anyone holding foreign 
exchange, such as dollars, can convert it into local currency whether pesos in Mex-
ico, naira in Nigeria, or rupiah in Indonesia. Most commonly, the nominal exchange 
rate is quoted in local currency per unit of foreign currency, say, pesos per dollar. 
When the exchange rate rises (that is, there are more pesos or naira or rupiah per 
dollar), the domestic currency is said to depreciate because it takes fewer dollars to 
buy the same amount of pesos, naira, or rupiah than before.21 When the exchange 
rate falls, the domestic currency appreciates because pesos are now worth more in 
dollars than before.
The real exchange rate starts with the nominal exchange rate then incorporates 
the prices of tradable goods and nontradable goods to analyze how changing prices 
and exchange rates affect the incentives for production and consumption. Econo-
mists call any good that is or could be imported or exported a tradable, whether 
apparel or automobiles, oil or soybeans. Prices for tradable goods generally are 
determined on world markets and, in most cases, are not affected by domestic condi-
tions in developing countries, each of which tends to be small relative to the size of 
the global market. Nontradables are goods produced domestically and not imported 
or exported. Prices for nontradables are determined by supply and demand condi-
tions in the domestic market. Examples include construction, electricity, local trans-
portation and personal services, the prices of which depend almost entirely on local 
conditions as these goods and services are not traded across borders. Even some 
manufactured goods or farm products, which are heavily protected and not subject 
to competition from imports, can be considered nontradables.
20Early theoretical work on the Dutch disease appears in W. Max Corden and S. Peter Neary, “Boom-
ing Sector and Deindustrialization in a Small Open Economy,” Economic Journal 92 (December 1982), 
825–48. Our late co-author, Michael Roemer, applied this theory to developing countries in “Dutch Dis-
ease in Developing Countries: Swallowing Bitter Medicine” (234–52), in Matts Lundahl, ed., The Primary 
Sector in Economic Development (London: Croom-Helms, 1985). A recent survey of the literature on Dutch 
disease and, more generally, the resource curse, is Frederick van der Ploeg, “Natural Resources: Curse or 
Blessing?” Journal of Economic Literature 49 (June 2011).
21The language on exchange rate changes sometimes is confusing. When the nominal exchange rate 
rises, it takes more domestic currency (naira) to buy foreign currency (dollars). Equivalently, this means 
that it takes fewer dollars to buy naira. In this latter sense, the naira is said to depreciate, or lose value, 
when the exchange rate rises.

E M P I R I C A L  E V I D E N C E  O N  P R I M A R Y  E X P O RT- L E D  G R O W T H   695
The real exchange rate most commonly is defined as,
 
RER = (Eo * PT)/PN 
[18–1]
where RER is an index of the real exchange rate, Eo is an index of the official (nomi-
nal) exchange rate, PT is an index of the prices of tradable goods expressed in for-
eign currency (such as, U.S. dollars), and PN is an index of the domestic price of 
nontradables expressed in local currency (such as, pesos.) Note that the RER is an 
index of prices, like the terms of trade, not a price itself. Also note that, because PT 
is expressed in foreign currency, by multiplying by Eo, the numerator (Eo * PT) 
becomes a domestic currency index of tradable’s prices. Therefore, the RER can 
be thought of as the ratio of the price of tradable goods to the price of nontradable 
goods, all expressed in domestic currency. An increase in the RER—because of either 
an increase in the nominal exchange rate (more pesos per dollar), a rise in the dol-
lar prices of tradable goods on world markets (more dollars per barrel of oil), or a 
fall in nontradables prices (fewer pesos for water, a haircut or school fees)—suggests 
that the relative price of tradables in domestic markets has risen. Such a shift should 
encourage firms to produce more tradable goods and discourage the consumption of 
tradable goods. Following the language of nominal exchange rates, a rise in the RER 
is referred to as a real depreciation of the peso, naira, or rupiah, and a decline in the 
RER is called a real appreciation. Official devaluations, which raise the peso price of 
dollars (Eo), cause the real rate to depreciate, at least initially. The same is true for an 
increase in world tradable prices. An increase in nontradables prices has the oppo-
site effect, causing the RER to appreciate.22 Thus while the nominal exchange rate 
tells you how many pesos you can buy with a dollar, the real exchange rate is an index 
describing the quantity of actual goods and services you can buy with a dollar when 
you trade with Mexico. When a country’s RER appreciates (depreciates) that country 
becomes less (more) competitive in international export markets.
The Dutch disease is a wolf in sheep’s clothing because it typically starts with 
what looks like a good thing: A boom in a country’s raw material exports. But the 
boom in exports can cause a sharp appreciation of the RER, in two ways. First, the 
influx of foreign exchange from higher export earnings creates a surplus of foreign 
currency. Unless the central bank tries to maintain the official exchange rate at its for-
mer level, this increase in the supply of foreign exchange causes the market exchange 
rate to fall and the currency to appreciate in value. This is because the export windfall 
of dollars entering the country must typically be converted into local currency, and 
this increase in the demand for pesos bids up the dollar price of pesos, lowering the 
nominal exchange (Eo), causing a real appreciation of the peso relative to the dol-
lar. Second, higher income from booming primary exports also spurs faster domes-
tic price inflation. It does this because the additional income creates greater demand 
22For a comprehensive discussion of the real exchange rate, see Sebastian Edwards, Real Exchange 
Rates, Devaluation and Adjustment: Exchange Rate Policy in Developing Countries (Cambridge: MIT Press, 
1991).

696   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
for all goods and services in the economy. To the extent that this demand spills over 
into more imports, there is an outflow of foreign exchange but no inflation, because 
the price of imports is not much affected by demand in a single country. But prices 
for nontradable goods and services are likely to increase. Due to a limited supply of 
nontradables, especially in the first months or years of the boom, the greater demand 
results in higher prices for nontradables. (By way of an example, think of how a com-
modity boom could lead to rising domestic land and real estate prices.) From equa-
tion 18–1 we know that both the appreciation of the domestic currency and the rise 
in nontradable prices cause the RER to appreciate.
To understand how the real exchange rate becomes the key to the Dutch disease 
paradox, consider the impact of the real exchange rate on export industries other 
than the booming primary export sector. Booming commodity prices, stimulate more 
rapid domestic inflation and cause the RER to appreciate, rendering other exports 
less competitive and hence less profitable. Therefore, the disease is the deleterious 
effect of a commodity boom on other export sectors. Producers of tradables, both 
nonprimary product exporters and import competitors, face rising costs in their 
purchases of nontradable goods and services, including the wages of their workers. 
But they cannot charge higher prices because they compete with foreign producers, 
either as exporters or as import competitors. These farmers and manufacturers face a 
profit squeeze that causes some of them to reduce production and employment. The 
boom in primary exports and nontradables is partly offset by a contraction in other 
tradable industries. If the contracting industries have more long-run potential for 
productivity growth, the short-run benefits of the commodity price boom will have 
negative long-term growth consequences.
If it is relatively easy to move capital and labor between the booming commodity 
sector and other activities, and the booming sector can employ all the factors of pro-
duction released from other, now less-profitable activities, then the commodity boom 
poses no major problem. As prices for the primary export product rise, labor and 
capital can move into the booming sector, and the economy is better off as a result. 
If the boom ends, the factors of production can move back to their previous activity. 
But this usually is not the case. If the booming sector is highly capital intensive (such 
as petroleum), few new jobs are created, so unemployment may go up (although the 
indirect employment effects of the boom in construction and other activities can mit-
igate this effect). More insidiously, when the boom ends (and booms always end), it 
is likely to be very difficult to move the factors of production back to their previous 
employment. Manufacturing activities cannot just restart overnight or, in many cases, 
can farming. In addition, the boom can lead to social or migratory shifts that are hard 
to unwind. Nigeria’s oil boom in the 1970s encouraged rural workers to migrate to 
urban areas to look for new, high-paying construction and civil service jobs. When 
the oil boom ended, few urban workers wanted to return to rural areas. Many other 
oil exporters suffered similar fates when petroleum prices fell. (Box 18–1 illustrates 
the sectoral shifts common to Dutch disease.)

E M P I R I C A L  E V I D E N C E  O N  P R I M A R Y  E X P O RT- L E D  G R O W T H   697
BOX 18–1 DUTCH DISEASE: A GEOMETRIC PRESENTATION
Dutch disease is best illustrated in an economy consisting of three sectors. Two
of these sectors are tradables, the booming sector (B) and the lagging sector
B
(L); the third sector is nontradables (
L
N). Output in each sector is produced using
a factor of production specific to that sector (for instance land in agriculture) and
labor. Workers are assumed to move freely between sectors, implying that the
equilibrium wage rate is the same in all three.
Suppose that the country experiences a positive trade shock, for example
the discovery of large reserves of offshore oil as occurred in Ghana in 2007.
We can understand the potential consequences of this shock by considering its
effects on supply and demand in each of the economy’s three sectors. The figure
“Booming Tradables” illustrates the initial shock as a rightward shift in the supply
curve in the booming tradables sector, from SB to
B
S’B
S . This results in an increase
in the quantity exported at the world price PB by 
B
Δ XB. (The positive trade shock
could also occur due to a sudden increase in the world price of the booming sec-
tor export good, PB, which would similarly increase the quantity of exports.) The
country enjoys a windfall of new income.
Most likely, some of this windfall will be spent on nontradables. This spend-
ing effect is illustrated by the rightward shift in the demand curve for nontrad-
ables, from DN to
N
D’N, in the figure “Nontadables.” (Remember, although this small
country takes the prices of tradable goods as given by world markets, the price
of its nontradable goods is determined exclusively by supply and demand within
the country.) This spending effect increases the price of nontradable goods from
P 0
N to
N
P 1
N, shifting the equilibrium from point a to
a
b. The spending effect gener-
b
ates inflation, and by increasing the price of nontradables relative to the price
of tradables also causes the real exchange rate to appreciate. Inflation and real
appreciation are the initial symptoms of Dutch disease.
Meeting the additional demand for nontradables requires that workers
migrate from the lagging tradables sector into nontradables. Additional work-
ers also migrate from the lagging tradables sector into the booming tradables
sector. This outflow of workers from the lagging sector is shown in “Lagging
Tradables” as a leftward shift in the supply curve from SL to
L
S’L, increasing the
L
quantity imported at the world price PL by
L
ΔML. Similarly, there may be a net out-
L
flow of workers from the nontradables sector into the booming sector, resulting
in a leftward shift in the supply curve for nontradables, illustrated in “Nontrad-
ables” as a shift from SN to
N
S’N. These shifts are called the “resource movement
effect.” This creates an excess demand for nontradables at equilibrium point b,
causing still more domestic price inflation and more appreciation of the real

698   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Booming Tradables 
P 
 
PB
Δ
QB
XB
DB
S'B
SB
Nontradables 
Spending
effect
Resource
movement
effect
P 
0
1
2
DN
PN
PN
PN
D'N
S'N
SN
QN
b
a
c

E M P I R I C A L  E V I D E N C E  O N  P R I M A R Y  E X P O RT- L E D  G R O W T H   699
exchange rate as the nontradables market reaches a new equilibrium at point c,
with the price of nontradables now increasing to P2
N.
While the net impact of these effects on the quantity of nontradables is
ambiguous, the quantity produced in the lagging sector falls. This is an important
part of why the Dutch disease is considered an illness. Once workers leave that
sector, they may never return, even after the boom ends. In practice, the lagging
sector in many episodes of Dutch disease in developing countries is agriculture.
Source: Based on W. M. Corden, “Booming Sector and Dutch Disease Economics: Survey and 
Consolidation,” Oxford Economic Papers 36, no. 3 (November 1984).
s
Lagging Tradables 
P 
Resource
movement
effect 
ΔML
QL
PL
DL
S'L
SL
Because mineral and other primary sectors typically pay high taxes, commod-
ity booms can lead to a swelling of government revenue. This fiscal linkage can be 
used to stimulate development, especially if the additional revenue is invested in 
public services, such as infrastructure, education, and health, or to promote efficient 
investment in tradable sectors, notably agriculture and manufacturing, that have 
been rendered less competitive by the primary export boom. Although some govern-
ments use their fiscal resources effectively during commodity booms, the record has 
often been dismal, with significant resources wasted on frivolous projects. Precisely 

700   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
when fiscal resources are generously available, finance ministers have the most diffi-
cult time resisting political and social pressures for higher expenditures. Once again, 
the big difficulties arise when the boom ends, and government must quickly reduce 
spending and reverse the commitments made during the good times. Some coun-
tries borrowed heavily from abroad during the commodity booms of the 1970s on 
the assumption that export prices would remain high and were left with large foreign 
debts and a significantly reduced capacity to pay when the boom ended.
The depredations of Dutch disease and other problems with primary product 
exports often are fatal to development aspirations, as the case study of Nigeria illus-
trates (Box 18–2). But this does not have to happen. Some countries have turned their 
resource windfalls into sustained development, including Botswana, Chile, Indo-
nesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and the United Arab Emirates. The negative relationship 
between primary product exports, commodity booms and economic growth is a 
tendency, not an absolute straightjacket. Determined governments can take several 
steps to avoid some of the most difficult problems associated with abundant natural 
resources and commodity price cycles.
BOX 18–2 NIGERIA: A BAD CASE OF DUTCH DISEASE
In 1973–74, the oil embargo imposed by Arab countries, followed by the acti-
vation of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) as an
effective cartel, quadrupled the price of petroleum on world markets. In 1979–
80, the price doubled again, so that by the end of 1980 the terms of trade for oil
exports, relative to the price of imports, was nearly seven times the level in 1972.
In Nigeria, higher export prices generated an oil windfall, which added 23 percent
to nonmining gross domestic product (GDP) in the middle 1970s and again in
the early 1980s. Looking back, Nigeria’s oil revenues did little to promote eco-
nomic development.
Nigeria’s political history has been marked by intense competition among eth-
nic groups, including the Biafran war of the late 1960s. One of the major battle-
grounds of this strife, which continues today, has been the incidence of taxation 
and government expenditure. Under this kind of pressure, the Nigerian govern-
ment spent its oil windfall. Public investment rose from 4 to 30 percent of non-
mining GDP, and the average pay for civil servants was doubled in 1975. Much of 
the newfound revenue was squandered on wasteful projects; some disappeared
into the offshore bank accounts of powerful members of the government and 
military. The second oil windfall only whetted fiscal appetites even more: From 
1981 to 1984, the budget deficit averaged 12 percent of nonmining GDP.

E M P I R I C A L  E V I D E N C E  O N  P R I M A R Y  E X P O RT- L E D  G R O W T H   701
Fiscal excesses exacerbated the tendency of export windfalls to create infla-
tion. Prices rose while the central bank kept the nominal exchange rate fixed,
so that, by 1984, the real exchange rate had appreciated to nearly three times
its level in 1970–72. Over the decade ending in 1984, Nigeria’s non-oil exports
fell almost 90 percent in nominal terms, a classic if extreme symptom of Dutch
disease. Agriculture suffered worst. Because rural constituencies were politically
weak, little of the oil windfall was invested in agriculture, while vast amounts were
spent, and wasted, on infrastructure and industry. From 1973 to 1984, the quan-
tity of agricultural exports fell by more than two thirds, while agriculture output
per capita and total caloric consumption per capita both declined. From 1972 to
1981, growth in nonmining GDP was a respectable 5.3 percent, but this was only
60 percent of the growth rate during the five years before the oil price boom.
Oil prices declined during the 1980s and did not rise significantly again until
the 2000s. Throughout this period, Nigeria oil revenues per capita kept growing
even as Nigeria’s population increased from almost 50 to 125 million people.
But despite rising oil revenues, Nigeria experienced little economic growth and
saw its poverty rate more than double and inequality soar. All these difficulties
cannot be explained by Dutch disease alone, although during some time periods
an appreciating real exchange rate contributed to the nation’s woes. It can be
argued that Nigeria might have been better off without oil.
Source: Henry Bienen, “Nigeria: From Windfall Gains to Welfare Losses?” (227–60), in Alan Gelb, ed.,
Oil Windfalls: Blessing or Curse? (New York: Oxford University Press for the World Bank, 1988);
Frederick van der Ploeg, “Natural Resources: Curse or Blessing?” Journal of Economic Literature 49,
no. 2 (June 2011).
The best prevention for Dutch disease effects is to avoid or reverse the initial 
real appreciation of the currency. In most cases, this requires a devaluation of the 
currency, accompanied by strong restraints on government spending and money 
creation by the central bank, both aimed at curbing inflation. The government 
needs to resist demands for expansion and save its newfound revenues until there 
is time to plan sensible, well-targeted projects with high returns. More-successful 
governments channel new investments into health, education, and infrastructure 
development that improve overall well-being, enhance productivity, and open up 
economic opportunities outside the primary goods sector. Such an investment pol-
icy accomplishes two things. First, it harnesses export windfalls to finance sound, 
long-term development. Second, by delaying the new expenditures, the govern-
ment acts countercyclically and so helps stabilize the economy by spending less 
during the most inflationary period of the export boom and more after the boom 
has faded. Indonesia pursued some of these strategies in the 1970s and 1980s 

702   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
and, facing the same increase in prices for oil exports as did Nigeria, had far bet-
ter growth and development outcomes (Box 18–3). Early evidence on the commod-
ity boom of the 2000s suggests that better macroeconomic management has been 
pursued by many primary product exporters as they attempt to minimize Dutch 
disease. On average, fiscal spending by resource dependent economies has been 
BOX 18–3 INDONESIA: FINDING A CURE
At first, the oil boom affected Indonesia much as it did Nigeria. The 1973–74 
boom added 16 percent to nonmining gross domestic product (GDP) and the 
1979–80 price surge raised the windfall to 23 percent. From the first wind-
fall, the government spent more than 60 percent. From 1974 to 1978, the real
exchange rate appreciated an average 33 percent over its preboom level, a bit 
more than in Nigeria at that time. Yet the outcome was very different in Indo-
nesia. Throughout the boom period, the government was required to balance 
its budget each year, and because all controls had been removed from foreign
exchange transfers, stringent management of the money supply was necessary
to protect foreign exchange reserves. These self-imposed restraints limited the 
impact of the windfalls on inflation.
The Indonesian government adopted two policies that took advantage of oil 
windfalls for national development goals. First, investment in agriculture had a high 
priority, especially the goal of achieving self-sufficiency in rice production. The gov-
ernment financed irrigation systems, encouraged the adoption of new rice variet-
ies, subsidized fertilizer and pesticide sales, provided credit to farmers, invested
in rural health and education facilities, and built roads and other infrastructure in 
rural areas. By 1982–83, Indonesia’s total food output per capita was a third above 
its 1970 level—a performance far above average for all developing and industrial
countries over the period. The second policy was to devalue the exchange rate 
enough to avoid real appreciation. Major devaluations were imposed in 1978, 
1983, and 1986, after which the rate was managed flexibly to maintain its real
value. At the end of the oil boom period in 1984, the Indonesian real exchange
rate had depreciated 8 percent from its 1970–72 average. Consequently, over the
period from 1971 to 1984, the quantity of non-oil exports grew by over 7 percent a
year, and from 1972 to 1981, nonmining GDP expanded by over 8 percent a year.
Shrewd policy played a major role in effecting an early cure for incipient Dutch
disease. The government also placed great stress on integrating the multitude 
of ethnic groups of this diverse country and avoided the conflicts over fiscal
resources that paralyzed Nigeria. It undertook a series of reforms that laid the

E M P I R I C A L  E V I D E N C E  O N  P R I M A R Y  E X P O RT- L E D  G R O W T H   703
basis for rapid growth. Import tariffs were substantially reduced, the banking sec-
tor was opened to foreign competition, and new regulations were set up to cre-
ate an active stock market. These reform measures served to align Indonesia
more closely to the global economy. The result was a period of rapid growth.
Between 1988 and 1996 GDP, measured at constant U.S. dollars, grew at
an annual rate of 6.8 percent, reducing poverty levels from the 1976 level of
54 million to 22.5 million by 1996. Indonesia, which at one time had been con-
sidered a laggard among the East Asian economies, was now considered a
development miracle. Part of its success was due to policies that avoided suc-
cumbing to Dutch disease.
Source: Bruce Glassburner, “Indonesia: Windfalls in a Poor Rural Economy,” in Alan Gelb, ed., Oil 
Windfalls: Blessing or Curse? (New York: Oxford University Press for the World Bank, 1988).
23World Bank, “Dealing with Changing Commodity Prices,” in World Bank, Global Economic Prospects
(Washington, DC: World Bank, 2009), discusses recent trends. It notes that countries experiencing a com-
modity boom for the first time, often because of newly discovered resources (Chad, Equatorial Guinea, 
Sudan, Yemen) or recent statehood (Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan), are showing the same kind of macroeco-
nomic volatility that characterized more established producers during earlier booms. Those developing 
economies with prior experience with commodity price cycles appear to be better managing the macro-
economic consequences of the current boom.
more prudent and the RERs of these countries have appreciated less than in past 
commodity booms.23
Still, primary commodity exporters tend to grow more slowly than more diver-
sified economies. Policies of restraint, essential to stabilization, are seldom popular 
and often vigorously opposed by political pressure groups. Although the judicious 
use of commodity revenues is easy to prescribe and essential for an economy’s 
health, the advice often is not taken in sufficient doses to affect a cure. The relation-
ship between primary commodities and governance is considered next.
THE RESOURCE TRAP
Indonesia and Nigeria are both populous countries that export oil. Oil represents both an 
opportunity and a challenge to these economies. As described in Boxes 18–2 and 18–3, 
Indonesia managed earlier resource booms well and prospered; Nigeria did not. The same 
can be observed when comparing Botswana and Sierra Leone, two countries that export 
diamonds or Chile and Zambia, two copper exporters. The populations of Botswana, 
Chile, and Indonesia have experienced economic development; those of Nigeria, Sierra 
Leone and Zambia have not. Clearly, governance and politics played a large role in these 
different outcomes. Managing Dutch disease and making productive use of export reve-
nues was not simply a technical matter but one of political will and effective governance.

704   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
To understand the relationship between primary product exports and gover-
nance, it is useful to turn to the work of British economist Paul Collier, who has writ-
ten extensively on commodity exports and economic development. Some of his early 
work was on the consequences of the coffee price boom of the late 1970s on Kenya’s 
economic development. In 2007, Collier published The Bottom Billion, the title of 
which refers to the populations of 58 countries, mostly in Africa, whose people are 
“living and dying in fourteenth century conditions.” What distinguishes these econo-
mies from other developing nations is their failure to grow over the past three to four 
decades. Some have experienced long-term economic stagnation; others have seen 
per capita incomes decline. Collier argues that these economies have fallen into one 
of several traps that have prevented them from growing. Dependence on natural 
resource exports is directly implicated in his analysis.
Collier specifically identifies a natural resource trap, which incorporates problems 
we already have discussed. Dutch disease and the appreciation of the RER can crowd 
out nonprimary product exports with more long-term growth potential. Price volatil-
ity during the boom often leads to public expenditures wasted on white elephant proj-
ects, expansions in civil service employment motivated more by political patronage 
than service delivery, or outright theft by corrupt officials. Commodity booms often 
are also associated with increased foreign borrowing and the accumulation of debt. 
If borrowed funds are spent wisely, this is a good strategy. If the borrowed funds are 
misspent, then during the inevitable and subsequent bust in commodity prices and 
government revenues, the economy faces a debt burden and must service its debt 
often by cutting essential development expenditures. Underlying these problems of 
commodity price cycles and macroeconomic mismanagement is poor governance, 
which according to Collier and others, is tied to the resource revenues themselves.
Simply stated, resource revenues worsen governance. Evidence for this is pro-
vided by the World Bank, which has developed indexes of corruption. Oil and min-
eral exporters, on average, have more corruption than agricultural exporters, who in 
turn are more corrupt than diversified exporters (the latter include economies that 
export a range of fuel, non-fuel primary commodities and manufactures).24 Corrup-
tion then acts as a tax, often a large one, on economic activity. It encourages rent-
seeking behavior rather than productive investment and growth suffers accordingly. 
Collier closes the circle among dependence on resource revenues, widespread cor-
ruption and poor governance, and a lack of economic growth by explaining why 
resource revenues breed corruption. Revenue from oil, diamonds, minerals, and 
certain other commodities reduce the need to tax citizens.25 The government secures 
revenues by nationalizing the resource industry or by making leasing arrangements 
24World Bank, “Dealing with Changing Commodity Prices,” p. 109.
25Not all primary commodities are equally vulnerable to these problems. The more concentrated pro-
duction and revenues, the easier it is for the state to appropriate resource revenues. This is what makes oil, 
diamonds, gold, silver, uranium and other minerals, and some plantation crops different from cotton, rice, 
fish, and livestock exports.

E M P I R I C A L  E V I D E N C E  O N  P R I M A R Y  E X P O RT- L E D  G R O W T H   705
with multinational extractors. Either way, the revenues bypass the population in a 
way that ordinary tax collection does not. If citizens are not directly taxed they may 
be less likely to hold public officials accountable.
When resource rents are available, political patronage often becomes the means of 
political competition, far more effective in garnering votes or remaining in power than 
by improving the provision of public services or fostering national development. Col-
lier argues that resource revenues can pollute governance in autocratic regimes and 
democracies alike, and can be inimical to development in both low-income countries 
(Congo, Sierra Leone) and middle-income nations (Russia, Venezuela.) He worries that 
when resource revenues worsen governance, the trap is hard to break free from.
In addition, Collier describes a conflict trap that ensnares the bottom billion. 
Civil wars have been endemic, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Collier argues that 
the existence of mineral wealth significantly increases the likelihood of civil war, 
as greed motivates many rebel groups and mineral wealth itself helps finance con-
flict. Competition over the control of valuable natural resources for export certainly 
played (and in some instances continues to play) a role in the civil wars in Angola, 
Congo, Sierra Leone, and Sudan. The expression blood diamonds, stems from some 
of these conflicts. In Fiji, Collier argues, control over the valuable mahogany and 
other tropical wood concessions, was central to the armed insurgency that took place 
in 2000 and temporarily overthrew the elected government. According to Collier, low 
income, slow growth, and dependence on primary commodity exports significantly 
increase the probability that a nation will experience a civil war.
BREAKING THE RESOURCE CURSE
Collier paints a bleak picture, far bleaker even than that of Prebisch and Singer, of the 
prospects for the resource-rich nations among the bottom billion. His critics agree 
that correlations between resource abundance and poor development outcomes are 
relatively robust, but find far less statistical support for the causal channels Collier 
identifies.26 And even if a resource trap exists, there are examples of nations that have 
escaped. If Botswana leveraged diamond revenues into rapid growth, so can Angola. 
If Indonesia, despite its own pervasive corruption, managed its oil revenues well, 
then so can Nigeria. The resource curse, if one exists, can be overcome. Some recent 
approaches include the use of sovereign wealth funds and wider adoption of the 
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) and similar international charters.
Sovereign wealth funds refer to the accumulation of foreign assets, usually financed 
by primary product export earnings. These funds are distinct from the foreign reserve 
holdings of central banks that are intended to help with short-term macroeconomic sta-
bilization. By keeping resource earnings in assets denominated in foreign currencies, RER 
26See William Easterly’s review of The Bottom Billion, “An Ivory Tower Analysis of Real World Poverty,” 
The Lancet 307 (October 27, 2007) 1475–76. 

706   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
appreciation and Dutch disease can be reduced. The funds also can be used countercycli-
cally and smooth the expenditure flows that follow from commodity price cycles and can 
provide a national nest egg for when non-renewable commodities are depleted. But they 
are not a substitute for good governance. Sovereign wealth funds can be mismanaged or 
abused just like any other source of government revenue. Venezuela, for example, has bor-
rowed heavily against its sovereign wealth fund minimizing its potential benefits.
EITI, launched in 2002 by the British government, is an attempt to impose some 
accountability on both international companies engaged in oil and mining and on 
governments who receive payments for these natural resources. Without an inter-
national charter like EITI, negotiations for drilling or mining rights are often held 
behind closed doors and beyond public scrutiny. As Collier puts it, such deals often 
are good for the companies and for the minister doing the negotiations but not for 
the country.27 EITI is an international coalition of governments, companies, multilat-
eral organizations, and civil society that creates a global standard for the verification 
and publication of both company payments and government revenues obtained from 
oil, gas, and mining. It requires firms in extractive industries to disclose payments for 
oil and mineral rights, governments to disclose receipt of payments, and indepen-
dent international audits of these transfers. The hope is that greater transparency will 
reduce corruption and make governments more accountable in their use of resource 
revenues. In 2009, oil-rich Azerbaijan became the first country validated as compli-
ant with all EITI requirements. More than two dozen other low- and middle-income 
nations are following Azerbaijan’s lead and 40 of the world’s largest oil, gas and min-
ing companies are participating in the EITI process.
EITI is one example of an international charter Collier recommends as a means 
of improving accountability and governance among the bottom billion. He also rec-
ommends the use of verifiable international auctions for granting mineral rights. 
This would complement EITI and further reduce the back-room deals that govern 
the award of many such contracts. On the expenditure side, there also needs to be 
transparency in how government revenues are spent. In Uganda, the ministry of 
finance reported how much money was released to a given locality. Local media out-
lets were informed and individual schools were sent a poster informing them of what 
they should expect to receive. One study found that these steps increased the flow of 
resources to their intended recipients from only 20 to 80 percent of the initial allo-
cation.28 Collier believes that a package of international standards and charters can 
27From, “Paul Collier on The Bottom Billion,” TED, May 2008, available at www.ted.com/talks/paul_
collier_shares_4_ways_to_help_the_bottom_billion.html.
28Ritva Reinikka and Jakob Svensson, “The Power of Information: Evidence from a Newspaper Cam-
paign to Reduce Capture,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3239, Washington, DC, March 
2004. See also Paul Hubbard, “Putting the Power of Transparency in Context: Information’s Role in Reduc-
ing Corruption in Uganda’s Education Sector,” Working Paper Number 136, Center for Global Develop-
ment, Washington, DC, December 2007, which argues that the improved flow of resources to intended 
beneficiaries was the product of many reforms in government practice, including but not solely the result 
of, more transparent information.

S U M M A R Y   707
impose some checks and balances on bad governance and help transform natural 
resource exports from a curse to a means for promoting economic development.
David Ricardo would probably recognize some contemporary debates about 
trade between nations. He would still argue on behalf of the potential benefits of 
trade for improving aggregate output and welfare. The gains from trade are as real 
today as they were in the early nineteenth century. But trade is not a panacea. As the 
discussion of primary product exports demonstrates, economic growth and develop-
ment entails far more than just the pursuit of comparative advantage.
SUMMARY
• World trade has grown rapidly in recent decades. Trade between high-
income economies still dominates world commerce, with developing 
nations (including China) accounting for about one quarter of the total. 
With imports and exports from low- and middle-income economies 
growing more quickly than their GDPs, trade has contributed to a rise in 
globalization and to the importance of trade for most nations.
• The share of trade in GDP tends to be higher the smaller the economy 
and the better its access to seaports and major world markets. Landlocked 
nations, of which there are 44, tend to trade less and grow more slowly 
than nations with coastlines. As economies grow, the composition of 
trade tends to change, with exports shifting from primary products toward 
manufactured goods.
• Comparative advantage, an idea developed by David Ricardo, allows two 
countries to gain from trade with each other, even when factor inputs are 
more productive for all products in one country than the other. By pursuing 
comparative advantage, countries experience gains from exchange and 
gains from specialization, and are able to raise national income.
• Beyond these gains, trade encourages competition and reduces the market 
power of domestic firms, facilitates the adoption of new technologies, can 
spur investment, and increases the quality and variety of goods available. 
But trade is not without costs; there are both winners and losers. In the 
short run, firms and their workers in the export sector see their business 
expand and in the import-competing sector contract. Trade tends to benefit 
a nation’s abundant factors of production with the gains of the winners 
surpassing the losses of the losers.
• Most world trade involves manufactured goods, but primary products 
continue to dominate the exports of many low- and middle-income 
economies. Unfortunately, many of these economies have suffered from a 
resource curse, by which a dependence on oil and other primary good exports 
often has been associated with economic stagnation and even decline.
SUMMARY

708   [CH. 18] TR A D E  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
• Pessimism about primary product exports and development has a long 
history. In the 1950s, economists such as Prebisch and Singer argued that 
the terms of trade steadily and systematically would turn against primary 
products. This, they argued, was because of structural features in the global 
economy, including that demand for these exports typically grow more 
slowly than for manufactures.
• Today, the arguments of Prebisch and Singer no longer are seen as 
explaining the resource curse. More often, the problem is not steadily 
declining terms of trade but the cycles of price booms and busts in some 
commodities. This can lead to the phenomenon known as Dutch disease, 
by which a country rich in natural resources suffers slower growth. 
Dutch disease most often is associated with an appreciation of a nation’s 
real exchange rate, which harms growth in other sectors, especially in 
nonprimary good exports.
• Beyond Dutch disease, lies an even more troubling explanation for the 
resource curse. Resource revenues tend to worsen governance in a way that 
export earnings from manufactured goods do not. In weak states lacking 
good institutions, resource rents can perpetuate civil wars, fuel endemic 
corruption, and undermine the necessary checks and balances required for 
good governance.
• Nations can and have overcome the resource curse by pursuing prudent 
macroeconomic policies and by taking the necessary steps to prevent 
waste and corruption in the use of primary export revenues. International 
charters like the EITI are a mechanism for supporting the improved 
governance of oil and other resource exporters.

709
Trade Policy
19
I
n 2009, the Pew Research Center, conducted a survey of global attitudes. It sam-
pled populations in 55 countries. One question asked, “What do you think about 
the growing trade and business ties between your country and other countries—
do you think it is a very good thing, somewhat good, somewhat bad or a very 
bad thing for our country?” Over 2,000 people were surveyed in India and 96 percent 
replied that trade was “very good” or “somewhat good.” In China and South Korea, 93 
and 92 percent, respectively, felt the same way. The percentages in Nigeria and Brazil 
were 90 and 87. Somewhat lower approval ratings of international trade were voiced 
in France (83 percent), Russia (80 percent), Japan (73 percent), and the United States 
(65 percent). In every country surveyed, a majority of respondents thought trade was 
“very” or “somewhat good.”
Given the benefits of international trade discussed in the previous chapter, it is 
not surprising that trade is positively viewed by the general population. It can raise 
national income, result in lower prices for many goods, and increase product qual-
ity and variety. In some nations, exports are perceived of as the engine of economic 
growth. But a favorable view toward trade is not the same as support for free trade. 
Trade may be viewed favorably at the same time that workers and firms call for pro-
tection from imports. Politicians in rich and poor countries often find it in their inter-
est to support trade protection. In many nations, policies that favor exports over 
imports are pursued, a strategy reminiscent of the mercantilism that Adam Smith 
and David Ricardo argued against hundreds of years ago.
World trade may today be more open than at any time in the past 50 or even 
100 years, but the trade strategies that nations adopt continue to mix openness with 

710   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
elements of protection or other forms of support for individual firms and sectors. The 
ideal trade strategy to promote economic growth and development remains a subject 
of continued debate, influenced by both economic theory and real world experience.
There exists a continuum of trade strategies a nation might pursue. At one end 
is economic isolationism, sometimes referred to as autarky, by which a nation elects 
to be self-sufficient. Japan pursued something close to this strategy before its open-
ing to the West in the 1850s after the arrival of Commodore Matthew Perry and the 
black ships of the U.S. Navy. More recent examples include Albania (1976–91) after 
the principles set forth by Communist leader Enver Hoxha, and Burma (1962–88) 
under the ideology of military ruler Ne Win. Today, North Korea comes closest to 
pursuing a strategy of autarky. Its official state ideology, juche, includes economic 
self-sufficiency as a key element. But even North Korea engages in some limited 
international trade, exporting minerals, animal products and, allegedly, illicit goods 
such as missiles, narcotics and counterfeit cigarettes to secure critical imports of 
fuel and food, as well as luxuries for the nation’s elite.
At the other end of the continuum from autarky is free trade. Free trade refers to the 
unfettered movement of goods and services across national borders. It implies that 
goods move as freely between nations as they do within nations. Once again, there 
are few examples. Hong Kong, especially before its return to Chinese sovereignty in 
1997, is cited as having been one of the world’s most open economies with few bar-
riers to trade or support of one industry over another. Today, free trade characterizes 
the internal trade among members of the European Union (EU). But trade between 
EU members and the rest of the world is subject to numerous barriers, including tar-
iffs, quantitative restrictions, and subsidies. Free trade agreements, such as the North 
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) between Canada, Mexico, and the United 
States, often include restrictions on the exchange of some goods between member 
nations. It took 15 years for NAFTA to eliminate restrictions on trade in corn, sugar, 
and other commodities. U.S. anti-dumping duties have been applied to cement from 
Mexico and softwood lumber from Canada, whereas Mexico has imposed similar 
duties on high fructose corn syrup from the United States. Trade between NAFTA 
members in these and other commodities has been less free than internal trade 
within each nation’s borders.
If autarky and free trade are rare and at opposite ends of the continuum of trade 
strategies, then most nations must adopt trade strategies that fall somewhere in 
between. The policy debate centers on how inward looking or how outward oriented 
an economy should be. The pendulum of which approach to follow has swung back 
and forth. The historical development of all advanced economies, whether Britain, 
Japan, or the United States, included periods of trade protection followed by a more 
open approach. A relaxation of restraints on trade characterized the early twentieth 
century only to be reversed after World War I and the Great Depression. The infamous 
Smoot-Hawley tariffs, passed into law in 1930 by the U.S. Congress, set off a round of 
retaliatory tariffs in other countries that contributed to a dramatic reduction in global 

I M P O RT  S U B S T IT UT I O N  711
commerce and a prolonged decline in world output. After World War II, many nations 
signed the 1947 Global Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), resulting in a reduc-
tion in tariffs and other trade barriers and an expansion in international trade.
In the developing world, Latin America’s primary export markets were severely 
disrupted by the Great Depression and by the scarcity of commercial shipping during 
World War II. Having built up domestic manufacturing capacity during this period, 
Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, and other countries systematically erected bar-
riers to keep out competing imports after the war. In Asia and Africa, most countries 
adopted inward-looking strategies in the 1950s and 1960s, as newly independent states 
wanted to develop their own industrial capacity and distance themselves from their 
former colonial rulers. By the 1960s, import substitution was the dominant strategy 
of economic development.1 But this strategy did not live up to its promise and by the 
1980s had generally been abandoned in favor of more outward-looking approaches. 
The early export-oriented emerging economies of East Asia (Hong Kong, Korea, Sin-
gapore, and Taiwan) had demonstrated the advantages of an export orientation.
Broadly speaking, governments in developing countries have employed two dif-
ferent trade strategies, import substitution and export orientation. Import substitution 
(IS) is the production of goods and services that replace (or substitute for) imports. 
Because new firms in developing countries often are unable, at least initially, to 
compete on world markets, import substitution protects domestic firms from inter-
national competition by erecting trade barriers that make imported products more 
expensive or more difficult to purchase, with the aim that over time firms will become 
more efficient and competitive. Export orientation shifts the focus to producing for 
global markets. This strategy is designed to make producers internationally competi-
tive by relying on market forces; strengthening key institutions; and, in some cases, 
using subsidies, managed exchange rates, and other policy instruments. The core 
idea behind import substitution is that newly developing industries cannot survive 
at first without some protection from imports, giving them the chance to learn and 
grow. In contrast, the core idea behind an outward-looking trade strategy is for firms 
to compete internationally to gain access to new technologies, increase efficiency, and 
enlarge the scope of their potential market. We consider each strategy in turn.
IMPORT SUBSTITUTION
The basic idea of IS is straightforward. For sustained economic development, coun-
tries need to shift from primary production to manufacturers to prevent prolonged 
specialization in low-productivity activities. Some early proponents saw IS as both 
IMPORT SUBSTITUTION
1Recall the arguments of Raul Prebisch and Hans Singer discussed in the previous chapter. Their con-
cerns and explanations for declining terms of trade facing developing nations provided some of the intel-
lectual support for the import substitution trade strategies that many governments pursued.

712   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
a trade strategy and as a way to structurally transform an economy and referred to 
it as import substitution industrialization (ISI). Proponents of IS argue that firms 
are unlikely to be able to compete in manufactures immediately and require gov-
ernment assistance to get started. Ideally, the first step is to identify products with 
large domestic markets, as indicated by substantial imports, and relatively simple 
production technologies that can be mastered quickly, rather than products requir-
ing advanced machinery and highly skilled labor. Governments then introduce 
either tariffs or quotas to increase the price of competing imports. Tariffs are taxes 
imposed on imports at the border; quotas are quantitative limits on specified cat-
egories of imports. These protective barriers by raising the price of imports, reduce 
the quantity of imports in the domestic market, and allow domestic manufacturers 
to charge higher prices, compensating them for higher production costs and mak-
ing their operations profitable. The strategy comes at a cost to consumers and other 
firms, who must pay the higher prices with commensurate welfare and profit losses 
as a result.
This stylized approach (focus on relatively simple products with large domestic 
markets) implies that consumer goods, such as processed foods, beverages, textiles, 
clothing, and footwear, should be the first targets. By contrast, capital goods should 
not be heavily protected because they require more sophisticated skills and raising 
their costs hurts all downstream industries and investors that buy capital goods. Nev-
ertheless, many developing countries have used IS to protect steel, machinery, and 
other capital goods, usually with little success.
Today, most economists are critical of the IS strategy, but there are valid argu-
ments in favor of this approach, the most compelling of which is the concept of an 
infant industry. Entrepreneurs opening new production facilities in a developing 
country must compete against firms from industrialized countries that have long 
experience and have mastered both production technologies and marketing. The 
managers and workers of the new, or infant, industry must learn to use these tech-
nologies efficiently to compete. This process of learning by doing can take several 
years. Advocates of IS argue that without some form of assistance these investments 
are unlikely to take place and developing countries will be unable to learn the skills 
needed eventually to compete with imports on equal footing. For this strategy to 
work, an infant industry must “grow up” to be capable of eventually competing with-
out protection against imports. This suggests that tariffs should be temporary and 
decline toward zero over time, as productivity increases and production costs fall. 
For this strategy to be economically worthwhile, the eventual (and discounted) ben-
efits to society of establishing the new industry should exceed the current costs to the 
economy of protection.
To more fully understand IS and trade strategies in general, we first explore the 
impact of tariffs, quotas, and subsidies on imports, production, and consumption. 
We then examine the relationship between exchange rate policy and trade, before 
returning to an overall evaluation of IS.

P R OT E CT I V E  TA R I F F S   713
PROTECTIVE TARIFFS
The most direct effect of a protective tariff, whether it is imposed by a developing or a 
developed economy, is to raise the domestic price of the good above the world price. For 
the importing country, the world price is the cost at the port of entry, usually called the 
c.i.f. price (including cost, insurance, and freight) or border price. If we assume the coun-
try is small relative to the world market and that the imported good is a perfect substitute 
for the good produced domestically, then the country faces a world supply curve that is 
perfectly elastic at the world price. We also assume that the domestic market is competi-
tive, permitting us to represent the domestic market using standard supply and demand 
curves. In Figure 19–1, at the world or border price, Pw, consumers demand Q1 and local 
producers produce Q2; the balance, M1 = Q1 - Q2, is imported. If an ad valorem (that 
is, percentage) tariff, t0, is placed on the good, the percentage increase in the domestic 
price, t0 = (Pd - Pw)/Pw, is referred to as the nominal rate of protection.2 The tariff 
reduces quantity demanded to Q3 and increases domestic production to Q4, the latter 
being the goal of import protection. Imports are reduced to M2 = Q3 - Q4.
PROTECTIVE TARIFFS
Pd
a
c
b
d
P'd
Pw
(1 +
Pd
t )0
= Pw
Price
Quantity
Domestic
demand
Domestic
supply
World supply
2Q
4Q
3Q
1Q
2
M
1
M
FIGURE 19–1 Nominal Tariff Protection
2Tariffs sometimes are applied not in percentage terms but as specific duties—for example, instead of, 
say, 25 percent of the c.i.f. price, 15 pesos or 75 rupees are added to the c.i.f. price. When a specific duty, td, 
is applied, the nominal rate of protection is td/Pw.

714   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
The increase in domestic output from Q2 to Q4 has two effects. First, it increases 
the producers’ surplus by an amount given by trapezoid a, which captures the extent 
to which producers receive a price, Pd, that exceeds their marginal cost of production, 
represented by the domestic supply curve. Second, the increase in production entails 
a resource cost, given by triangle b, because it uses labor, machinery, and raw materi-
als that could be used more efficiently to produce something else. The resource cost 
can best be understood by thinking about the opportunity cost of increased domestic 
production. Without the tariff, the nation can import an amount equal to Q2 to Q4 by 
paying the world price and costing, Pw(Q4 - Q2). To produce this added amount at 
home costs more. The cost equals the additional cost of all these units, which is the 
area under the supply curve from Q2 to Q4; an amount equal to: Pw(Q4 - Q2) + b. 
Because it costs more to produce at home than to import, the society is using its 
resources inefficiently. Society could have used its resources to import the same 
quantity of the good, Q2 to Q4, and applied the extra resources represented by tri-
angle b, to produce and consume something else.
Consumers pay for protection both by the higher price, Pd, they pay on all pur-
chases and by reducing consumption from Q1 to Q3. Part of what they pay is trans-
ferred to the government as tariff revenue that can be used by society for other 
purposes. This amount is a transfer within society rather than a loss. Tariff revenue 
is equal to the new quantity of imports, M2, multiplied by the increase in the import 
price resulting from the tariff, represented by rectangle c = (t0Pw) * M2. The total 
cost to consumers is represented by the loss of consumer surplus, the difference 
between consumer demand and the market price, equal to area a + b + c + d. The 
loss to consumers is only partially compensated by the gains to either producers (trap-
ezoid a) or the general public (through the tariff revenues represented by rectangle 
c). Area b + d, two triangles representing welfare losses not compensated by gains to 
anyone, called the deadweight loss, represents the efficiency loss to the economy.
We already identified area b as a loss resulting from the inefficiency of produc-
ing the good at home rather than importing it; area d is the inefficiency resulting from 
higher prices that reduce the choices available to consumers, sometimes referred to as 
the consumption cost of the tariff. Both these deadweight losses increase as the tariff 
rate rises. The maximum losses occur under a prohibitive tariff, which drives the world 
price all the way to the autarky price, Pd, and imports to zero. The protective effects 
of tariffs are really more complex than suggested by Figure 19–1 because the diagram 
focuses only on output markets. Much depends on the relationship between tariffs on 
both the final good and any imported inputs needed to produce that good (Box 19–1).
IMPORT QUOTAS
Industries also can be protected through quantitative restrictions on imports, usually 
in the form of quotas. With quotas, the government determines in advance the quan-
tity of imports it wants to allow, whereas with tariffs, the quantity of imports depends 

P R OT E CT I V E  TA R I F F S   715
BOX 19–1 EFFECTIVE RATES OF PROTECTION
How much do tariffs affect producer’s incentives to shift production? The tariff rate
on competing imports gives us a clue but does not tell the whole story. The tariff
rate determines the nominal rate of protection, which focuses on the effect of tar-
iffs on output prices. But producers also care about the effect of tariffs on
t
input
prices and, ultimately, on the margin between revenues and input costs. Whereas
a tariff on competing imports helps raise profits, tariffs on intermediate goods
reduces them.
The effective rate of protection (ERP) measures the protection afforded by
the entire structure of tariffs on inputs and outputs.a It focuses attention on the
a
impact of trade policies on value added, the difference between the selling price
d
of the good and the unit cost of intermediate goods.b Value added can be mea-
b
sured in domestic prices as the difference between the domestic price of the
product (Pd) and the domestic cost of material inputs per unit of output (
d
Cd),
while the value added at world prices is the difference between the world price
of the product (Pw) and the costs of inputs valued at world prices (
w
Cw). The ERP
w
is the ratio between the two:
The key difference between domestic prices and world prices is tariffs (and other
trade barriers such as quotas that can have similar effects on prices). The tariff on
competing imports (t0) raises the domestic price of the product above the world
price, Pd = Pw(1 + t0), while the average tariff on inputs (ti) raises the costs of
producing it, Cd = Cw(1
w
+ ti). Thus domestic prices and costs can be expressed 
in terms of world prices and tariffs:
ERP =
Value added (domestic prices)
Value added (world prices)
- 1 =
Pd - Cd
Pw - Cw
- 1
ERP =
Pw(1 + t0) - Cw(1 + ti)
Pw - Cw
- 1 or ERP =
Pwt0 - Cwti
Pw - Cw
aThe concept of the effective rate of protection is due to Max Corden, “The Structure of 
a Tariff System and the Effective Protection Rate,” Journal of Political Economy 74 (June 1966), 
221–37.
bWithin this margin, the manufacturer must pay all the factors of production: wages, rents, 
interest on borrowed capital, and profit. Together these payments are equal to the value added.

716   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
Because the denominator is the value added calculated at world prices, the ERP 
measures the impact of all tariffs on the value added, rather than on prices. The mea-
surement of ERP easily can be extended to include quotas, subsides, or other policies 
that influence output and input prices and thus the value added. To see the powerful 
insights from the ERP concept, suppose a producer manufactures a product that sells 
for $100 and costs $60 to produce on world markets, so that value added is $40. 
Consider the impact on value added of three stylistic cases of tariff policy:
• The tariff on output is exactly the same as the tariff on inputs. Say both 
t0 and ti equal 10 percent. You might think there would be no impact, but 
there is one. The sales price rises to $110 and domestic costs increase 
to $66, so value added increases by 10 percent to $44. A uniform tariff, 
10 percent in this case, provides effective protection on value added of 
10 percent, exactly equal to the nominal rate of protection.
• The tariff on output is higher than the tariff on inputs. If t0 = 10 percent 
but ti = 0, the domestic price rises to $110 and the valued added rises 
from $40 to $50. Thus the ERP = 25 percent, much higher than the 
nominal rate of protection of 10 percent. More generally, if t0 is greater 
than ti, the ERP exceeds the nominal rate of protection. Note the key 
point here: What seems like a small tariff can have a huge impact on the 
margin between costs and prices and thus a big impact on producers’ 
incentives to reallocate resources away from sectors with no protection 
to those with protection. Tariff structures in many countries tend to follow 
this pattern, escalating from relatively low rates on inputs to higher rates 
on finished products. Under these circumstances, ERPs of 100 percent 
are not uncommon.
• The tariff on output is lower than the tariff on inputs. If there is no 
tariff on competing imports but a 10 percent tariff on inputs (ti = 10 
percent), domestic costs rise to $66 but output prices remain at $100. 
Thus value added falls to $34 and the ERP is a negative 15 percent. 
Although a tariff structure that undermines investment incentives 
seems unlikely, it is actually fairly common, particularly for agriculture 
and export products. Governments like to keep food prices low to 
keep urban consumers happy and so are reluctant to impose duties 
on food imports. Therefore, protective tariffs on fertilizer, seeds, or 
irrigation equipment undermine the profitability of agriculture and switch 
investment out of agriculture. As for exports, governments cannot use 
tariffs to raise output prices because exporters sell on world markets. 
A tariff on inputs raises exporters’ costs and reduces incentives to 
invest in export industries. This pattern of protection is a critical problem 
undermining the international competitiveness of exporting firms in 
many developing countries.

P R OT E CT I V E  TA R I F F S   717
on the reactions of producers and consumers to higher prices, as captured by the elas-
ticities of supply and demand. A quota that limits imports to the same quantity as a tariff 
has many of the same effects. In Figure 19–1, a quota limiting imports to M2 forces the 
domestic price up to Pd, increases domestic production to Q4, and decreases consump-
tion to Q3, just as with the tariff. The quota permits M2 units of imports at every possible 
price, in essence, shifting the domestic supply to the right by an amount, M2. Equilib-
rium in the market occurs at the intersection of domestic demand and domestic supply 
augmented by the quota. In Figure 19–1 this occurs at price Pd and quantity Q3, identical 
to the effects of the tariff t0. The loss in consumer surplus, the deadweight losses, and the 
gain in producer surplus are also the same for quota, M2, as for ad valorem tariff, t0.
But in two critical respects import quotas have different effects from tariffs. First, 
the government does not necessarily collect revenue equal to area c. To enforce the 
quota it must issue licenses to a limited number of importers, giving them the right to 
purchase up to M2 of imports. If the government simply gives away the licenses with no 
fee (which many governments do, using the licenses as patronage for politically well-
connected importers), license holders earn a windfall profit equal to the area of rect-
angle c. This is because the importer can purchase the goods at price Pw on the world 
market and sell them at Pd domestically. This windfall, often called a quota rent, can 
be substantial, so importers expend a great deal of effort to obtain them, including pos-
sibly offering large bribes, in effect sharing the quota rent with the right government 
official. (Under a tariff, importers can also bribe customs officials to avoid collection of 
all of the required tariffs.) Alternatively, and preferably, the government could sell the 
import licenses at auction. Assume the government decides to auction 1,000 import 
licenses, each license entitling the holder to import M2/1,000 units of the good. Poten-
tial importers would be willing to pay up to an amount c/1,000 for each of these licenses 
because that is the amount of the potential revenue windfall they could earn. A well-
functioning auction could yield the government the same revenues as a tariff, although 
the distribution of quotas often is seen as more costly to administer than tariffs.3
Second, market dynamics that shift the domestic supply and demand curves or 
the world price have very different impacts with tariffs and quotas. Consider a fall 
in the world price Pw. With a tariff, both Pw and Pd fall, giving consumers the benefit of 
the lower price. Consumption increases, domestic production declines, and imports 
rise to fill the gap. Under a quota, however, imports cannot rise unless the quota is 
increased. Domestic production and consumption remain unchanged, and the 
domestic price remains at Pd. The lower world price simply increases the quota rent, 
with the benefit going directly to import license holders. Put more generally, under 
3Distributing quota rents can be complex. The U.S. government uses quotas as both an instrument of pro-
tection for the U.S. sugar industry and as a tool of foreign policy. The United States has protected its domestic 
sugar industry since the 1930s, resulting most years in much higher prices for sugar in the domestic mar-
ket than in the world market. U.S. quotas are allocated to sugar-exporting nations, with Brazil, Dominican 
Republic, and Philippines receiving the largest amounts. The governments of these nations then decide how 
to allocate the valuable quota rents. In essence, the U.S. government, through its use of quotas, takes some of 
the money U.S. consumers pay for higher-priced sugar and gives that money to other nations.

718   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
most (but not all) circumstances because tariffs allow changes in imports on the 
margin, domestic producers and consumers react on the margin to market changes 
as they would in an open economy; with quotas, they react on the margin as they 
would in a closed economy. Because of these consequences of quotas, economists 
prefer tariffs, and trade reforms and international trade agreements often start with 
the elimination of quotas or at least conversion to their equivalent tariffs.
TRADE PROTECTION AND POLITICS
From the partial equilibrium model of a tariff (or quota) developed in Figure 19–1, 
it seems almost illogical for trade protection ever to be used. Consumers lose con-
sumer surplus equal to a + b + c + d because of the tariff but producers and 
government gain only a + c. A general equilibrium approach reaches similar con-
clusions. (Box 19–2). If the costs of protection outweigh the benefits, why would a 
government employ such measures?
The infant industry argument acknowledges that domestic costs of production, 
captured by the domestic supply curve, are higher than production costs elsewhere. 
That is precisely why trade protection is needed. It enables the new industry to gain 
experience, bringing costs down, causing the domestic supply curve to fall, and even-
tually making the domestic industry competitive. Short-run costs, according to this 
line of reasoning, are worth paying for expected productivity growth and any positive 
spillover effects once the infant industry matures.
Another and in some ways better explanation for the widespread use and persis-
tence of trade protection involves its distributional consequences and the incentives 
such protection creates. Consider Thailand’s 60 percent tariff on imported beer. With the 
tariff, domestic producers can sell more beer and can sell it at a higher price. The tar-
iff keeps lower-priced beer from Laos and Vietnam out of Thailand. Domestic breweries 
earn more revenue and greater producer surplus. They employ more workers because 
the tariff expands production beyond the level comparative advantage warrants. But con-
sumers lose. They face fewer alternatives and pay a higher price for beer. In the aggregate, 
according to our models, consumers lose more than producers gain. To explain the per-
sistence of the tariff, what may really matter is the extent of individual gains and losses.
With the tariff, individual consumers have to pay a few more baht (the Thai cur-
rency) for a bottle of beer. They would prefer to pay less, but the amounts involved for 
consumers are small relative to their total expenditures. It is hard to imagine mobiliz-
ing the public to protest over the beer tariff. For Thai beer producers the incentives 
are different. They are relatively few in number and the potential gains from a tariff 
are large. Millions of Thai beer drinkers each pay a bit more for beer, but these losses 
when aggregated become the gains shared by only a few firms. It is easy to imagine 
these firms mobilizing to seek political support or the favor of influential government 
TRADE PROTECTION AND POLITICS

T R A D E  P R OT E CT I O N A N D P O L IT I C S   719
BOX 19–2 THE TWO-COUNTRY MODEL WITH A TARIFF
We can also examine the impact of a tariff using the two-country, two-good, two-
factor model developed in Chapter 18. Mexico is again trading tomatoes and
tractors with the United States (or with the rest of the world.) Mexico has com-
parative advantage in tomatoes and imports tractors. If Mexico engages in no
trade, it consumes and produces at A; with free trade it produces at
A
B and con-
B
sumes at C. Trade increases utility from the level at
C
IC1 to that at IC3.
Assume Mexico embarks on an import substitution strategy and decides to
protect its tractor industry with a tariff, t0. The tariff changes the slope of the
price line facing domestic producers. Before the tariff, the slope is, Px/
x Py; after
y
the tariff it is, Px/[
x Py(1 +
y
t0)]. This causes the price line to rotate and become
flatter. Because of the tariff, it becomes more profitable to produce tractors in
Mexico and resources move out of tomatoes. Production moves from B to
B
D. If
D
the tariff is high enough, a so-called prohibitive tariff, the price line will rotate by
even more and relative prices will be the same as under autarky. The economy
will neither import nor export and will produce and consume at A with a corre-
A
sponding loss in utility.
B
D
Agricultural goods (e.g., tomatoes)
Relative price with
import tariff
Relative price
before trade
Production
frontier
Farm equipment (e.g., tractors)
International
terms of trade
IC1
IC3
IC2
A
E
C

720   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
officials to maintain the tariff and the trade protection of their industry. The more 
concentrated the industry, the fewer the firms who share in the benefits of protec-
tion. Some of the resulting profits may then be spent supporting the government in 
power, which, in return, maintains the trade protection.
The political economy of trade protection applies not only to developing nations. It 
also helps explain the use and persistence of tariffs, quotas, and subsidies in developed 
nations. The political calculations rather than the economic merits explain Japan’s pro-
tection of its rice farmers and the European Union’s protection of its dairy industry. 
Politics in the United States explains trade protection for everything from steel to sugar. 
Because of domestic political interests, it often is difficult to remove trade protections 
once they are introduced. One solution is to include tariff reductions as part of multi-
lateral treaties. In the case of the Thai beer tariff, it expired in 2010 as part of the ASEAN 
Free Trade Area, a regional trade treaty among nations in Southeast Asia.
PRODUCTION SUBSIDIES
Direct subsidies are an alternative to tariffs or quotas as a means of protecting domes-
tic manufacturers. Many high-income economies use large subsidies to support agri-
cultural production and protect it from global competitors, often at the expense of 
Assuming the tariff is not prohibitive and Mexico’s trading partner does 
not retaliate with a tariff on tomato imports, how much will Mexico import and 
export, and where will it consume? Assuming Mexico is a small economy and 
a price taker on world markets, then the international terms of trade remain 
unchanged and are now drawn through point D. To find consumption, recognize 
that Mexican consumers, like Mexico’s producers, no longer face international 
prices; they now face relative prices, which include the tariff the government 
placed on tractors. The economy consumes at E, a point on the international 
terms of trade line that is also at the tangency between the price line including 
the tariff and IC2 . In the figure, both imports and exports, identified by the differ-
ence between production and consumption at points D and E, are lower with the 
tariff than under free trade.
The model predicts that Mexico is worse off with a tariff, consuming at a lower 
level of utility, IC2, than under free trade, IC3. This is because it has lost some of 
the potential gains from exchange and specialization. The loss in utility is analo-
gous to the findings of the partial equilibrium model of the tariff in Figure 19–1, 
which identifies deadweight losses and lost consumer surplus resulting from the 
tariff.

T R A D E  P R OT E CT I O N A N D P O L IT I C S   721
potential competitors from developing countries. Emerging economies use subsidies 
as well, often to shelter more capital-intensive manufacturing from import competi-
tion. The impact of subsidies is similar to tariffs in some ways: A 20 percent protective 
tariff on imports and a 20 percent subsidy on output have identical effects on pro-
ducer surplus. But the effects on consumers and the government budget can be quite 
different.
A subsidy of s0 percent, equal to the earlier tariff of t0, effectively moves the sup-
ply curve from S to S, as shown in Figure 19–2. Production shifts out from Q2 to Q4, 
but prices do not change, so consumers still purchase Q1 at the original price Pw. 
Thus a big advantage of using subsidies is that there is no loss of consumer surplus. 
The total cost of the subsidy is a + b, but in this case, the funds come from the govern-
ment budget rather than being imposed only on consumers of the particular good. 
Producers are equally happy with a subsidy or an equivalent tariff. As with the tariff, 
they gain producer surplus a, with a resource loss of b. Thus the deadweight loss is 
only triangle b, which is smaller than the amount b + d with a tariff or quota.
If protection is to be employed, economists generally prefer subsidies over tariffs 
(and tariffs over quotas) because consumers are able to purchase more of the good 
while society pays no more for production than under an equivalent tariff. The cost is 
borne by taxpayers as a whole, not just the consumers of the product. Subsidies usu-
ally appear as an expenditure item in the government’s budget, so there is an annual 
accounting for the costs of protection. Unfortunately, government officials tend to 
prefer quotas or tariffs over subsidies, precisely because the costs do not appear on 
Pd
S
S'
Pw
Price
Quantity
Domestic supply
Domestic demand
World supply
a
b
d
c
4Q
2Q
1Q
3Q
0t
0s
FIGURE 19–2 The Impact of Subsidies on Firms Competing with Imports

722   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
the budget and are less obvious to society as a whole. Subsidies also suffer from the 
same problem facing tariffs and quotas. What sectors warrant protection, whatever 
the form? How does a government decide which industry to support? How long must 
the subsidy last? While there are examples of governments identifying and support-
ing industries that went on to be successful, there are even more examples of when 
this approach failed. “Picking winners” is never easy.
EXCHANGE-RATE MANAGEMENT
Tariffs, quotas, and subsidies are only some of the tools policy makers can use 
to influence trade. One of the most powerful instruments they can employ is the 
exchange rate, which often affects more transactions than any other single price in an 
economy and directly affects the domestic prices of everything traded. Tariffs, quo-
tas, and subsidies are used to support very specific products and sectors by chang-
ing the relative price between those products and all other products. The exchange 
rate, by contrast, has a uniform effect on the prices of all tradable goods but alters the 
price between tradables and nontradables.4
Figure 19–3 illustrates the market for foreign exchange, in which exporters sup-
ply and importers demand foreign currencies. The vertical axis is the exchange rate 
measured in local currency; for example, pesos per dollar. With a floating exchange 
rate system, a rate of ee is an equilibrium rate that clears the market. IS strategies 
have a tendency to cause the domestic currency to appreciate. Tariffs and quotas on 
imports reduce the demand for foreign exchange at every possible exchange rate. 
In Figure 19–3, this leads to a shift in the demand curve and to a new equilibrium 
exchange rate, ee. The new exchange rate acts like a tax on exports because it now 
costs more foreign exchange to buy a unit of domestic currency or, equivalently, a 
dollar’s worth of exports now returns fewer pesos. This is an important insight. Any-
time a government uses trade protection it affects both imports and exports. Many IS 
strategies were designed to foster industrial development but at the same time often 
hurt traditional exports, including agricultural goods, which often are produced by 
poorer households.
In formulating trade strategies, governments also often intervene directly to fix 
their exchange rate, causing it to be either overvalued or undervalued. Historically, 
many governments have overvalued their currency and intervened to hold the offi-
cial exchange rate below ee at a rate like e0. Such a policy can directly harm domestic 
producers of goods that compete with imports. For instance, suppose that a ton of 
corn can be imported for $150. At an (equilibrium) exchange rate of 10 pesos to the 
dollar, a ton of imported corn would cost 1,500 pesos. Yet, if the peso was overvalued 
4As discussed in the previous chapter, tradable goods include exports, imports, and all goods and ser-
vices that could be exported or imported, with prices determined on world markets. Nontradable goods 
are produced locally and not subject to competing imports, with prices determined by local supply and 
demand conditions.

T R A D E  P R OT E CT I O N A N D P O L IT I C S   723
relative to its equilibrium, say at the rate of 8 peso per dollar, that same ton of 
imported corn would cost only 1,200 pesos. This might make consumers happy, but 
local corn farmers would have to compete against artificially cheap imports, resulting 
in a 20 percent decrease in their earnings. At the same time, anything exported and 
sold in dollars earns fewer pesos. The result is an increase in import demand and a 
fall in exports. As contradictory as it might at first seem, IS strategies often employed 
overvalued exchange rates as a policy instrument. The goal was not to make all 
imports cheaper because the intent of IS is to protect domestic industries. Overval-
ued exchange rates were used to make capital goods and other critical imports, such 
as food or fuel, cheaper in terms of domestic currency. Nonessential imports are 
kept out of the domestic market via high tariffs and quantitative barriers. Ironically, 
there can even be a vicious circle in which tariffs lead to overvalued exchange rates, 
which reduce the cost of imports and thus create a need for even higher tariff rates to 
compensate.
A quick look at Figure 19–3 identifies some of the problems associated with 
employing overvalued exchange rates. Like any price ceiling, it creates excess demand. 
At e0 the excess demand for foreign exchange equals, M0 — E0. Because the foreign 
exchange market now fails to clear, it becomes necessary to ration foreign exchange, 
requiring licenses and the administrative controls to oversee them. Such licenses eas-
ily become a source of rent seeking and corruption. Overvalued exchange rates also 
give rise to black markets for foreign exchange.5 This is because overvaluation creates 
chronic excess demand for foreign currencies. Incentives are created to deal foreign 
Supply
(exporters)
Foreign exchange (dollars)
Foreign exchange rate (pesos per dollar)
M0
E0
e0
ee
eu
e'e
Demand
(importers)
Demand
(with tariff)
FIGURE 19–3 Overvalued and Undervalued 
Exchange Rates
5In the 1970s and 1980s, travelers to many developing nations, including the authors of this text, invari-
ably were asked by taxi drivers from the airport if they wanted to exchange money, a sure sign of an over-
valued exchange rate and the black markets they encouraged.

724   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
exchange at rates higher than the official one and in so doing may frustrate the 
intended goals of the IS and exchange rate policy, and generate more rent seeking.
As recently as the 1970s and 1980s, the combination of overvalued exchange 
rates and pervasive tariffs and quotas was quite common. Some of this was because 
of IS strategies. But in many other cases, governments overvalued their exchange 
rates primarily to lower the price of imported goods for those who were politically 
well connected, including the political elite, urban consumers, and the military. 
Today, following one of the core precepts of the Washington Consensus discussed in 
Chapter 5, official exchange rates set at overvalued levels are relatively uncommon.
Some governments follow the opposite strategy and intervene to hold the 
exchange rate above ee at a rate like eu. They undervalue their currency. This approach 
makes all imports more expensive and, at the same time, makes exports more profit-
able by increasing their price in domestic currency. Undervalued exchange rates help 
stimulate exports and provide protection to firms competing with imports by raising 
the price of competitive products. They have been used in some East Asia economies, 
most notably China, as part of more outward-looking strategies. We evaluate their use 
later in the chapter.
OUTCOMES OF IMPORT SUBSTITUTION
Import substitution has the potential to be an effective strategy for certain sectors over 
a limited period of time. Almost all countries have tried it at one stage or another, and 
many have achieved some success. Even Latin America, which is often cited for the 
failures of IS, had more rapid growth in the 1960s and 1970s under IS regimes than 
it did for the next 20 years as it moved in the direction of more liberal trade. But in 
Latin America and elsewhere, all too often, the basic conditions for prolonged suc-
cess are not met. In many countries, IS protected too many activities and remained 
in place for too long. Developing countries are littered with infants that never grew up 
and were never able to compete internationally, such as the petrochemical industry 
of Colombia, the automobile industry of Malaysia, and the textile industry of Kenya. 
Firms in these industries have tended to require protection indefinitely, at continuous 
cost to the rest of society. Sometimes IS fails because of an initially poor choice to pro-
tect the wrong kinds of activities (the microcomputer industry in Brazil); often it stems 
from the reluctance of governments to remove the protection given to politically well-
connected industrialists.
Most developing countries have relatively small internal markets, either because 
per capita incomes are low or populations are relatively small. This makes them 
poor candidates for IS because the domestic market quickly becomes saturated. The 
next step, expansion to export markets, may never happen because of low productiv-
ity growth which may itself be the result of the trade protection intended to help the 
industry. Facing a small domestic market there may be little domestic competition and 
few incentives to innovate. A limited market means that firms cannot take advantage of 

E X P O RT  O R I E NTAT I O N   725
economies of scale and may produce at less than their minimum efficient size. And by 
reducing their commercial links with the rest of the world, import-substituting coun-
tries limit their exposure to new technology and ideas.
IS has had some limited success in bigger economies with large internal markets, 
at least for a short period of time. But even the very large economies of China and 
India had more success when they stopped looking only inward—for the Chinese 
economy after the reforms that began in 1978 and for India after 1991. Of course, 
these reforms entailed more than a change in trade strategies, and it is difficult to 
pinpoint the specific contribution of the change in trade policy.
Ironically, many countries that try IS run into balance-of-payments problems 
from growing trade deficits. Even though the strategy is designed to replace imports 
with domestic production, not all imports can be replaced (especially capital goods). 
Because the strategy effectively discourages exports, foreign exchange earnings lag, 
especially because IS often is accompanied by an overvalued exchange rate. There-
fore, many countries following this strategy have had to borrow heavily and found 
it difficult to meet their debt service requirements. Better macroeconomic manage-
ment could have avoided these problems, but the instruments of IS did not help.
Underlying the protective regime also is a set of incentives that reward political lob-
bying, corruption, and bribery more than economic efficiency and competitiveness. 
When higher domestic costs, reduced import prices, or better-quality foreign goods 
erode the competitive position of domestic firms, a natural reaction is for these firms 
to turn to the government for enhanced protection. This option blunts the competitive 
instincts of entrepreneurs, who normally would have to cut costs, improve quality, and 
thus raise productivity. In this environment, the most successful managers are those 
who have the political skills or connections with which to bargain effectively, or simply 
bribe, officials who determine tariff rates, administer import quotas or distribute foreign 
exchange. The pursuit of such unearned benefits is known as rent-seeking behavior. Rent 
seeking also hurts economies by diverting real resources from productive uses.
EXPORT ORIENTATION
Since the late 1980s, many countries have shifted the balance of their trade policies 
away from IS toward more export-oriented trade policies, in which firms compete on 
global markets. This strategy has many names, including outward orientation, open-
ness, export promotion, and export orientation.6 The idea is to introduce policies that 
EXPORT ORIENTATION
6Joining a free trade area, as Mexico did with Canada and the United States under the North America 
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) can also be seen as a move toward greater outward orientation. However, 
some free-trade areas or other types of economic integration can be more like import substitution if the 
combined economies are small and members build tariff walls around themselves, reducing trade with 
nonmembers.

726   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
encourage firms to produce products that are competitive on world markets, espe-
cially labor-intensive manufactured exports and agricultural products but also com-
petitive substitutes for imports. The key difference with IS is that this strategy uses 
global competition to encourage investment, productivity gains, learning, and new 
technology to support growth.7
In the typical pattern, in the early stages, firms manufacture and export relatively 
simple labor-intensive products, such as textiles, clothing, shoes, toys, electronic 
equipment, and furniture. Some countries also export agricultural products and 
labor-intensive agroprocessing goods, such as fresh vegetables, fruit juices, or cut 
flowers, and increasingly certain services including data entry, basic accounting, and 
call centers. Then, over time, as workers learn new skills and gain access to improved 
technology, firms begin to shift to more-sophisticated products (which pay higher 
wages to match greater productivity and skills). As the country’s comparative advan-
tage gradually shifts, the mix of exports changes as well to include more-advanced 
electronic devices, automobile parts, higher-end clothing, steel, and many other con-
sumer and capital goods.
The shift toward more outward-oriented policies among developing countries 
began in the 1960s with the Four East Asian Tigers: Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, 
and Taiwan. They demonstrated that developing countries could compete on world 
markets by carving out niche markets in producing labor-intensive manufactured 
products. Their rapid growth in trade was accompanied by accelerating economic 
growth, reductions in poverty, and other advancements. Following their example, 
most of the very rapidly growing developing countries in recent decades have intro-
duced some form of this strategy, including Chile, China, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mau-
ritius, Poland, Thailand, Tunisia, and Vietnam. India’s growth rate also accelerated in 
the 1990s as it shifted to a more outward-oriented strategy.
But not all countries that have shifted to policies that are more outward oriented 
achieved the success they had hoped for. Bolivia introduced many steps to open its 
economy, and while growth has recovered from the negative rates that prevailed in 
the early 1980s, it has averaged only about 1.5 percent since the late 1980s. Many 
of the countries formed by the breakup of the Soviet Union pursued more open 
trade strategies but realized little growth in either trade or output, especially dur-
ing the 1990s. Without the other elements that encourage investment and entrepre-
neurship, including institutions that protect property rights and enforce the rule of 
law, trade reforms alone had minimal impact. In the 1990s, Zambia implemented 
reforms that resulted in one of the most liberal trade regimes in all of Africa. But 
the hoped for growth in exports did not follow. Part of the problem was macroeco-
nomic instability, including high inflation and a volatile real exchange rate. Under 
7For an overview of the shift in thinking about trade policy and development between the 1960s 
and 1990s, see Anne O. Krueger’s presidential address to the American Economic Association: “Trade 
Policy and Economic Development: How We Learn,” American Economic Review 1, no. 87 (March 
1997).

E X P O RT  O R I E NTAT I O N   727
such conditions, firms were reluctant to invest in new ventures whether in exports 
or import-competing sectors.8
REMOVING THE BIAS AGAINST EXPORTS
Policies that favor imports, including tariffs and overvalued exchange rates, implicitly 
are biased against exports. Recent decades have seen a retreat from such policies. As 
shown in Figure 19–4, there has been a clear global trend to reduce average tariffs. 
In South Asia, average tariffs fell from over 50 percent in 1987 to under 15 percent 
by 2007. Tariffs in all regions fell. Some changes in individual countries have been 
dramatic. In Costa Rica, the average statutory tariff was 55 percent in 1980 and only 
6.2 percent in 2007; in Turkey it fell from 44 to 1.9 percent over the same time period. 
Currencies officially set at overvalued rates once common are also now rare.
FIGURE 19–4 Average Unweighted Tariff Rates by Region
EAP, East Asia and the Pacific; ECA, Europe and central Asia; LAC, Latin America and the Caribbean; 
MNA, Mideast and North Africa; S A, South Asia; SSA, sub-Saharan Africa.
Source: World Bank, “Trends in Average Applied Tariff Rates in Developing and Industrial Countries, 
1981–2007,” available at http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/
0,,contentMDK:21051044~pagePK:64214825~piPK:64214943~theSitePK:469382,00.html.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
MNA
SA
SSA
LAC
EAP
ECA
High income 
Tariff rates (percent)
1987
1997
2007
8World Bank, “Trade Liberalization: Why So Much Controversy?” in Economic Growth in the 1990s: 
Learning from a Decade of Reform (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2005).

728   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
The basic steps toward full-fledged liberalization aimed at removing the bias against 
exports will sound familiar:
• Remove quotas and tariffs and other forms of protection, especially on 
capital and intermediate goods.
• Allow the currency to float with a market-determined exchange rate, and 
ensure macroeconomic stability through prudent monetary and fiscal 
policies.
• Reduce unnecessary regulatory burdens, bureaucratic costs, and red tape 
that add to business costs.
• Keep factor markets flexible, especially for labor and credit, with market 
determined wages and interest rates.
In a full liberalization strategy, these steps are augmented with general approaches 
to strengthen infrastructure (especially roads, ports, electricity supplies, and telecom-
munications to connect firms with the rest of the world and reduce production costs), 
invest in education and public health (to ensure a well-educated, healthy, and produc-
tive workforce), and improve governance (so that property rights are respected).
These basic policies will not surprise any student of neoclassical economics or 
simply someone who has been reading this textbook. Outward orientation is often 
seen as synonymous with broader market-based and liberalized economic policies. 
The neoclassical approach does not prescribe a bias toward exports but rather a 
regime that is neutral in its treatment of exports, import substitutes, and nontraded 
goods. In this view, the strategy is not aimed at exports per se, but export growth is 
likely to follow because the distortions that inhibited exports and favored other activ-
ities are removed.
FAVORING EXPORTS
While liberalization has theoretical appeal, few countries actually have followed a pure 
neoclassical strategy, and some of the most successful countries were far from it in 
some respects. Hong Kong, at least before its return to China in 1997, was the closest, 
where the economy was very open, with few government interventions and distortions. 
Singapore also followed a fairly liberalized model but nevertheless diverged from the 
neoclassical norm in that many of its largest export industries are government-owned 
service firms in telecommunications, port services (including one of the world’s best-
run airports), and air transport (the world-renowned Singapore Airlines).9 Korea was 
much more interventionist. It erected stiff protective barriers against many imports, 
9Hong Kong and Singapore often are compared. They are both city-state, island economies that have 
transitioned to high-income status and relied heavily on trade to do so. Hong Kong, however, has come 
considerably closer to free trade than more interventionist Singapore. See Lawrence Krause, “Hong Kong 
and Singapore: Twins or Kissing Cousins?” Economic Development and Cultural Change 36, no. 3 (April 
1988).

E X P O RT  O R I E NTAT I O N   729
especially consumer goods. A visitor could literally see the effect. In the 1980s one 
could stand for hours at one of the busiest street corners in Seoul, where many lanes of 
traffic intersect, and not see a single imported car. The streets were choked with auto-
mobiles, but only those produced by Daewoo, Hyundai and a few other large Korean 
conglomerates. Tariff and other barriers kept Fords, Toyotas, VWs and every other 
international brand out of the domestic market.
Korea’s government also controlled interest rates at below-market levels, direct-
ing cheap credit to favored industries and firms, including exporters. What made 
the approach outward-looking is that interventions were used to induce, and some-
times force, firms to meet ambitious export targets. Success or failure was dictated 
to a large degree by the ability to compete on world markets, rather than domesti-
cally.10 Korea went beyond simple outward orientation and neutrality and introduced 
a bias toward exports. In contrast to an inward-looking regime, a Korean firm could 
not take advantage of protection or other preferential treatment unless it met strin-
gent export targets. Korean car manufacturers, for example, became competitive on 
global markets and began to export while selling to a protected local market. Some 
of the tools of protection were used to help fledgling exporters who were learning 
by doing: adopting new technologies, learning how to master them, reducing costs 
of production, finding and entering markets overseas, and eventually competing on 
equal terms with foreign firms.11 But not all firms succeeded. Korea’s drive to expand 
its heavy and chemical industries in the 1980s met with more limited success.
The strong bias and intervention to support exporters followed in Korea was not 
the rule for all the Asian exporters. Indonesia, Malaysia, Taiwan, and Thailand used 
a more mixed approach.12 Heavily protectionist and interventionist in certain areas, 
some of the industries explicitly supported never became internationally competi-
tive, such as Malaysia’s Proton automobiles and Indonesia’s IPTN aircraft. What was 
more successful were the policies that insulated export industries from the distor-
tions of the home market and permitted firms to buy inputs and sell output at close 
to world market prices, as the neoclassical strategy dictates, permitting a wide range 
of exporting firms to become competitive in international markets.
China has been more interventionist and pursued outward-oriented policies far 
from free trade and the full-fledged liberalization described earlier. As economist Dani 
10See Marcus Noland and Howard Pack, Industrial Policy in an Era of Globalization: Lessons From Asia 
(Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, March 2003).
11For a wonderful description of how Korean firms implemented “learning by doing” read Ira Maga-
ziner and Mark Patinkin, “Fast Heat: How Korea Won the Microwave War,” Harvard Business Review 67 
(January–February 1989).
12The revisionist school on Korea, questioning the neoclassical approach, was led by Alice Amsden, 
Asia’s New Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989). Tai-
wan’s interventionist strategy is documented by Robert Wade, Governing the Market: Economic Theory 
and the Role of Government in East Asian Industrialization (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1990). The World Bank attempted to reconcile neoclassical and revisionist thinking in its much-discussed 
book, The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1993).

730   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
Rodrik has put it, “China’s policies resemble more those of a country that messed up 
big time than those of a country that became a formidable competitive threat in world 
markets to rich and poor countries alike.”13 In 1993 after a decade and a half of rapid 
export and economic growth, average tariffs still remained at 40 percent, the sixth 
highest level in the world at that time. (By 2007, six years after joining the World Trade 
Organization [WTO], Chinese tariffs had fallen below 10 percent.) But even more than 
its prior tariff regime, China, along with Korea and Taiwan in earlier years, used and 
still uses exchange rate policy to favor exporters by undervaluing its currency.
By pegging the exchange rate above the market-clearing rate, imports become 
more expensive and exports more profitable. This policy contributed to China’s 
rapid export growth, its large trade surplus, and the resulting accumulation of for-
eign exchange reserves. An undervalued currency acts as an indirect subsidy 
for Chinese exporters. Like all subsidies, it comes at a cost, making imports more 
expensive and thus reducing consumption and consumer welfare for the average 
Chinese. Reserve accumulation can be helpful to a point, but reserves, by definition, 
are resources that a society puts aside and does not use for current consumption 
or investment. They are subject to exchange rate and other risks and may lose their 
value, as demonstrated during the financial crisis of 2008.
The costs of China’s exchange rate policy also have external ramifications. China 
frequently is cited as engaging in unfair trade practices because of the way it man-
ages its exchange rate. Legislation has been proposed in the U.S. Senate to impose 
tariffs on Chinese goods equal to the extent of undervaluation of its currency, a quan-
tity that is subject to some debate. Some, including Ben Bernanke, chairman of the 
U.S. Federal Reserve Bank, have a different concern. They argue that China’s huge 
foreign reserves, a consequence of its exchange rate policy, were part of the under-
lying causes of the 2008 global financial crisis. These reserves, Bernanke suggests, 
contributed to the global economic imbalances that drove interest rates down and 
created the conditions that encouraged the huge risk taking and subsequent collapse 
of financial institutions in search of higher returns. Continuation of such policies also 
is seen as an impediment to restoring the global imbalances that remain today and 
that may limit global economic recovery (Box 19–3).
BUILDING EXPORT PLATFORMS
Another approach taken in almost all of the countries that have achieved rapid export 
growth was to establish specialized export platform institutions that enabled exporters 
to import and sell at close to world market prices, even in the presence of more wide-
spread distortions. The platforms took a variety of forms, including export process-
ing zones (EPZs), bonded warehouses, duty exemption programs, and  science and 
13Dani Rodrik, “What’s So Special About China’s Exports?” China in the World Economy 14, no. 5 
(September–October 2006).

E X P O RT  O R I E NTAT I O N   731
BOX 19–3 IS CHINA’S EXCHANGE-RATE POLICY UNFAIR?
China has been criticized by some for maintaining an undervalued exchange
rate that makes its exports more profitable; others argue that the currency is not
seriously misaligned. China for a decade kept its currency, the renminbi (RMB),
fixed against the U.S. dollar at a rate of 8.28 yuan to $1. Then in 2005 China
introduced a managed float. and the yuan rose in value to 6.83 to $1. As the
world moved into recession in 2007 and 2008, China again fixed its exchange 
rate ending further revaluation. Despite fixing the exchange rate, however, Chi-
nese exports fell sharply in 2009 due to declining world demand for Chinese 
manufactures. With the beginning of recovery from the world recession in 2010,
China’s exports recovered rapidly and it announced in June of that year that
it would allow its currency to float; it was expected that the Chinese currency 
would appreciate in value.
Several pieces of evidence suggest that the RMB was still undervalued in mid-
2010—that is, kept at above the market clearing rate, as with exchange rate, eu,
in Figure 19–3. China’s current account surplus (exports minus imports of both
goods and services) had grown to 8 percent of gross domestic product (GDP)
in 2008 and remained at a very high level of 4 percent in 2009, as predicted
by Figure 19–3. Normally, a current account surplus is matched by an outflow
of foreign capital, as countries invest the proceeds abroad. But China attracted
net capital inflows of an additional 1.7 percent of GDP in 2009. Because this
s
current account surplus has existed for many years (since 1994) China accumu-
lated very large foreign exchange reserves of US$2.45 trillion as of the end of 
the second quarter of 2010, equivalent to roughly two years of imports.
China’s exchange rate is not the only policy that affects these balances. The
government maintains an array of restrictions on capital flows, which tend to 
discourage outflows of capital. In the absence of these controls, the surpluses 
would not be so large. Even taking these arguments into account, many econo-
mists still conclude that the RMB is undervalued, perhaps by 15 to 25 percent.a
An undervalued RMB makes Chinese exports more profitable, and indeed
exports rose fourfold between 2000 and 2009, much of it through importing 
components from other countries in the region and assembling finished prod-
ucts for export. This export growth is a key reason for China’s overall economic
growth and its impressive reduction in poverty, as many unskilled workers have
found jobs in the special economic zones (SEZs; much like export processing 
aMorris Goldstein and Nicholas Lardy, The Future of China’s Exchange Rate Policy: Policy Analy-
ses in International Economics 87 (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 2009).

732   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
zones, discussed later in this chapter). Moreover, the buildup in reserves also 
allows China to maintain macroeconomic stability, as it is unlikely to face the 
kind of capital account crisis many of its neighbors faced in the late 1990s, as 
described in Chapters 12 and 13. China’s buildup in reserves is partly a defen-
sive move in response to these crises.
But the policy of maintaining an undervalued exchange rate has its costs, 
especially the longer it is in place. Restraining consumption reduces the welfare 
of ordinary Chinese by making imports of consumer goods more expensive. For-
eign exchange reserves equivalent to two years of imports are also far greater than 
China requires to defend against a future run on its currency as happened else-
where in Asia in 1997 and 1998. These large reserves are also mainly invested 
in government bonds (one third of China’s reserves are invested in U.S. Treasury 
bonds), which in recent years have paid a low rate of interest.
But perhaps most important the undervalued exchange rate brings threats of 
protectionism from trading partners: Individual U.S. senators have proposed put-
ting a high tariff on all Chinese imports unless China revalues the RMB substan-
tially. China’s exchange rate policy has become a convenient scapegoat for the 
U.S. trade deficit, even though China’s exchange rate contributes relatively little 
to the U.S. deficit compared to other factors more in the control of the United 
States, particularly its budget deficit and low personal saving rate. Undervalued 
exchange rates and a rapid growth of exports do not usually lead to threats of 
retaliation when a country’s total foreign trade is small as was the case in China 
in the 1970s when its total exports were under US$10 billion a year. In those 
years, threats of protection were made against the much larger exports of Japan, 
which was also believed to have an undervalued currency. But in 2009 China 
passed Germany to become the largest exporting country in the world and hence 
the focus of all those concerned about the impact of rising imports on their 
domestic industries.
China’s exchange rate policy has contributed to its rapid economic growth 
and poverty reduction in recent years, and its large reserve holdings help sta-
bilize the economy and reduce the chances of a major capital account cri-
sis. An undervalued exchange rate also helped China postpone the date when 
exporters of products depending on cheap labor, because of rising Chinese 
wages, would have to give way to exporters in other countries where wages 
are lower. But, over the longer run, there will be little extra benefit for China to 
continue to accumulate reserves at the expense of consumption and possible 
protectionist retaliation. China, like Japan and the other East Asian exporters 
of manufactures who depended for a time on undervalued exchange rates, is 
likely to let its exchange rate rise to a point at which the renminbi no longer is 
undervalued.

E X P O RT  O R I E NTAT I O N   733
 technology parks. These institutions are designed to create an enclave for fledgling 
export industries, where they can be insulated from the controls and price distortions 
of the protected domestic market and be better able to compete on world markets.14
EPZs are located physically or administratively outside a country’s customs’ bar-
rier, typically as fenced-in areas near a port, that provide exporters access to duty-free 
imports, reduced business regulations, expedited customs clearance, and reason-
able infrastructure. Bonded warehouses essentially are single-factory EPZs that can 
be located anywhere, yet still have many of the other advantages of EPZs. These fac-
tories are called bonded warehouses because firms usually post a bond as a guaran-
tee against any duties that might be applicable to imports diverted to the domestic 
market, and if they sell output locally instead of export it, they are liable to pay the 
import duties. Duty exemption systems allow qualifying firms to import their inputs 
duty free. Science and technology parks are like EPZs, but with infrastructure spe-
cially suited for electronics, pharmaceuticals, biomedical products, or other products 
related to science and technology.
The basic idea is straightforward. Potential exporters face a variety of challenges, 
including high tariffs or quotas on their inputs, poor infrastructure, and red tape. 
The neoclassical solution is to remove all import tariffs and quotas, improve infra-
structure, and reduce red tape. The problem is that, for a variety of institutional and 
political reasons, no country realistically can implement all these steps quickly. Most 
governments lack the large number of trained personnel to take on so many issues 
at once, and political forces are likely to fight certain steps, like reducing tariffs. It 
can take many years for a country to build the infrastructure and introduce all the 
policy changes needed for firms throughout the economy to become competitive. 
The export platform approach is to allow one part of the economy to be competi-
tive, while steps are taken over time to introduce economywide changes. Providing 
an enclave allows some firms, mainly producing labor-intensive manufacturers, to 
become competitive on world markets before all the required steps are in place for 
the economy as a whole.
Most of the successful exporting countries established at least one, and in most 
cases more than one, of these programs. Malaysia relied mainly on EPZs that pro-
vided reliable infrastructure and allowed exporters (mainly in electronics) to import 
and export without being taxed; the government also established bonded warehouses 
and a duty exemption system for other exporters. Indonesia established an agency in 
the Ministry of Finance that granted exemptions from import licensing restrictions 
and drawbacks (rebates) for duties paid on imported inputs. The vast majority of 
Tunisia’s manufactured exporters operate as bonded warehouses, whereas Mauritian 
exporters are located mainly in export processing zones. China’s special enterprise 
14See David L. Lindauer and Michael Roemer, eds., Asia and Africa: Legacies and Opportunities in 
Development (San Francisco: ICS Press, 1994), esp. chaps. 1 and 11. Also see Steven Radelet, “Manufac-
tured Exports, Export Platforms and Economic Growth,” CAER Discussion Paper No. 42, Harvard Institute 
for International Development, Cambridge, MA, September 1999.

734   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
zones, located up and down the coast, have been the source of most of its manufac-
tured exports. In the Dominican Republic, exports from EPZs increased by a factor of 
five during the 1990s, and by the end of the decade accounted for over 80 percent of 
all exports. EPZ employment reached nearly 200,000 people by the end of the 1990s, 
about 17 percent of the Dominican workforce. About 60 percent of employees are 
women, a pattern that is typical of many EPZs.15
Export platforms have not always been successful. When they are located far 
from ports in an attempt to spur development in isolated areas, production costs usu-
ally are too high for firms to compete. If firms in export platforms still face high regu-
latory costs or must wait long periods of time for goods to clear customs, they will not 
be successful on global markets. And export platforms cannot overcome poor macro-
economic management that leads to high inflation, overvalued or volatile exchange 
rates. Egypt’s EPZs have not spurred faster export growth because they still face high 
production costs. Kenya’s bonded warehouses began to expand in the 1980s, but 
when macroeconomic policies deteriorated and the currency became overvalued 
in the 1990s, 60 of 70 bonded warehouses closed. Export platforms, whatever their 
forms, are no silver bullet, but they provide examples of how innovative institutions 
shaped to a country’s specific needs can help support market-based growth.
TRADE STRATEGY AND INDUSTRIAL POLICY
Almost all nations recognize the importance of increased integration into the global 
economy and the need to look outward. But an outward orientation is not the same as 
free trade or laissez-faire. Policy neutrality regarding production for exports versus the 
domestic market has been the exception rather than the rule. The debate revolves less 
around inward versus outward orientation and more around the use of industrial policy, 
a broad set of interventions including, but not limited to, undervalued exchange rates and 
EPZs, which governments may use to favor one set of economic activities over another.
Most economists remain wary of industrial policies. They recognize the various 
and pervasive market failures that constrain the growth of new firms and activities, 
from credit markets unwilling to finance new products to the lack of complementary 
inputs to service export initiatives, but are unsure governments are up to the chal-
lenge of improving the situation. Governments tend not to have the knowledge and 
information to figure out what firms really need, and more often than not industrial 
policies breed corruption or promote inefficiency. Such economists recognize that 
there are examples of success with industrial policy. POSCO, a Korean steel producer, 
was formerly a state-owned enterprise that grew behind high trade barriers into one 
TRADE STRATEGY AND INDUSTRIAL POLICY
15Staci Warden, “A Profile of Free Trade Zones in the Dominican Republic,” Harvard Institute for Intern-
ational Development, Cambridge, MA, 1999.

TR A D E  S T R AT E G Y  A N D  I N D U S TR I A L  P O L I C Y   735
of the world’s largest and most efficient private steel corporations. Farmed salmon in 
Chile, today a highly successful industry, was initiated and fostered by a quasi-public 
agency. But for each of these positive examples, there are many more where indus-
trial policy has failed from airplanes in Indonesia to tanneries in Ethiopia.
Harvard University economist Rodrik, takes the opposite view. He acknowledges 
the failures of past strategies. Import substitution, planning, and state ownership of 
enterprises were tried and, in some cases, succeeded for a while but in the end failed 
to generate sustained economic growth and development. But liberalization and full 
reliance on market forces also delivered less than what was hoped for, especially in 
Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa. Even where there has been success, cursory 
examination of the economic miracles of past decades reveals how far they were from 
the neoclassical ideal and how central a role government played in favoring exports, 
specific sectors, and even specific industries and firms. In East Asia and Latin Amer-
ica it was the combination of private initiative and public interventions to support 
exports that characterized most cases of successful trade and development strategies.
Rodrik and others see the role of government as extending beyond the traditional 
areas of ensuring macro stability, providing public goods, and resolving externalities 
(such as pollution). Government also has a coordinating role to play in facilitating 
the structural change inherent in the development process. Economies need to move 
away from traditional products and to diversify their economies, but this is not easy to 
do. As Rodrik puts it, the problem is one of “self-discovery.” Comparative advantage 
and factor endowment theory offer important insights into the benefits and direction 
of trade, but they alone are insufficient to explain the specific goods different nations 
export. Labor abundant economies may all export labor-intensive goods, but why did 
entrepreneurs in Bangladesh specialize in T-shirts and in Pakistan in soccer balls? 
Why is Korea the dominant exporter of microwaves while Taiwan, an economy with 
similar factor endowments, exports none but dominates in bicycles? In each of these 
examples individual entrepreneurs figured out that they could succeed in a particu-
lar product. Their success was then imitated by others and the industry expanded.
Rodrik argues that in most developing countries, governments need to do some-
thing to encourage this process of self-discovery.16 Entrepreneurs need to determine 
which existing goods and technologies from abroad can be adapted to local condi-
tions and successfully exported in global markets. But they may be reluctant to do so 
for many reasons. For one, the gains of their individual efforts may be undercut by 
the inevitable imitation that will follow their success. In this instance, self-discovery 
presents a classic public good problem: Information on what products a firm might 
successfully export is both nonexcludable and nonrival; therefore, not enough of 
this information will be forthcoming. Government intervention can help. Some form 
of protection or subsidy must accrue to the initial investor, and not the copycats, to 
16Dani Rodrik, One Economics, Many Recipes: Globalization, Institutions, and Economic Growth 
(Prince ton, NJ: Princeton, 2007), 4.

736   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
encourage the self-discovery that may be absent on its own. Other coordination prob-
lems may be resolved by government action, for example, in the setting of product 
standards for exports or relieving infrastructure constraints.
Rodrik is not alone in his support of industrial policy as part of a developing 
nation’s trade policy. In their exhaustive review of the literature on trade and industrial 
policy for a recent volume of the Handbook of Development Economics, economists 
Ann Harrison and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare do not go as far as Rodrik does in support-
ing hard industrial policies, including trade protection in the form of tariffs, quotas, 
and subsidies. But they do see a need for soft industrial policies aimed at resolving the 
coordination problems that nations face trying to break into established export mar-
kets. They argue for partnerships between the public and the private sectors in identi-
fying and resolving the binding constraints facing entry into in new markets.17
TRADE, GROWTH, AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION
The promotion of exports and the use of industrial policy is not the only area where 
there is disagreement among development economists over trade policy. A lively 
debate remains over the centrality of trade in generating economic growth and of the 
consequences of increased trade for alleviating poverty. This may seem surprising 
given the many theoretical reasons discussed in the previous chapter for how trade 
can improve factor productivity and encourage economic growth and for why trade 
favors a nation’s abundant factor and, in the case of poor labor abundant economies, 
is expected to reduce poverty. The empirical evidence, however, is less straightfor-
ward. We begin by discussing the empirical evidence on trade and growth; in the 
next section, we turn to the evidence on trade and poverty alleviation.
Hundreds of academic papers have been written examining the relationship 
between trade and growth. It is important to understand why it is so difficult to estab-
lish an empirical pattern linking trade, trade policy, and economic growth. Problems 
of reverse causality, omitted variable bias and the measurement of trade policy con-
front the economist trying to sort out the underlying relationship. (If you have taken 
a course in econometrics some of these common problems may be familiar to you.)
Economists Jeffrey Frankel and David Romer tackle the difficult issues of the 
direction of causality and omitted variable bias in a paper aptly titled, “Does Trade 
Cause Growth?”18 A strong positive relationship between trade and per capita 
income does not prove that the former is the cause of the latter. It is entirely plausible 
TRADE, GROWTH, AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION
17Ann Harrison and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, “Trade, Foreign Investment, and Industrial Policy for 
Developing Countries,” in Dani Rodrik and M. R. Rosenzweig, eds., Handbook of Development Economics, 
vol. 5 (Amsterdam: North Holland, 2009).
18Jeffrey Frankel and David Romer, “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic Review 89, no. 3 
(June 1999).

T R A D E ,  G R O W T H,  A N D P O V E RT Y  A L L E V I AT I O N   737
that the causation runs the other way: Income and productivity growth, by increas-
ing productive capacity and reducing costs, can make a country more competitive 
in world markets and lead to faster growth of manufactured exports. Also possible is 
that both export growth and economic growth are simultaneously caused by some-
thing else, such as improved macroeconomic policies, more stable political systems, 
reduced corruption, or increased savings. If one does not fully account for these fac-
tors (the omitted variables) it is possible that trade statistically is picking up their 
influence even if it is not the causal determinant of higher income levels.
Frankel and Romer address these issues by tracing the portion of trade due to geo-
graphical characteristics (such as a country’s size, its location relative to its trading part-
ners, and whether it is landlocked), which tend to be weakly correlated or uncorrelated 
with other possible determinants of growth. They show that this geographical compo-
nent of trade has a large and positive effect on income. The study supports the direction 
of causality running from trade to growth but acknowledges the result is not highly sig-
nificant; a finding echoed in subsequent studies. Causality is hard to untangle because, 
to a large extent, export growth and economic growth probably support each other in a 
virtuous circle: Exporting countries have greater access to new machinery and technol-
ogy that support growth, while faster economic growth provides the means to finance 
investments in the new machinery, technology, and infrastructure that support exports.
The study by Frankel and Romer uses the ratio of exports plus imports to gross 
domestic product (GDP) as their measure of trade. This is a common way of mea-
suring trade volumes. In the survey article by Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare cited 
earlier, the authors reviewed hundreds of articles, many that relate trade volumes to 
either income levels or growth rates while adjusting for other possible determinants 
of growth and employing a wide range of econometric specifications. They conclude 
that there is a strong correlation between increasing trade shares and country per-
formance, ceteris paribus. This is not a surprising finding. Although trade may not 
be a panacea, one would be hard pressed to think of any successful low- or middle-
income nation where trade has not become a large part of its economy.
Trade volumes, however, are not the same as trade policies. Trade policies, 
whether reducing tariffs, managing the exchange rate, or creating EPZs, are the instru-
ments governments have at their disposal. Trade volumes are a consequence of these 
and other policies. For the policy maker, understanding the impact of alternative trade 
policies on growth would be of great value. But this is not easy to determine. Harri-
son and Rodríguez-Clare’s exhaustive survey finds no significant correlation between 
lower tariff levels on final goods and country performance. Does this suggest that 
trade liberalization is a bad idea? Certainly not.
The problem is what alternative measures of trade policy can tell us. Measuring 
the links between specific trade policies and growth is complex because a range of 
policies affect trade and countries often employ instruments of import protection 
combined with policies for export promotion. Looking at any one policy in isola-
tion from others can provide ambiguous results, as no single policy can fully reflect 

738   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
a country’s range of trade policies. Consider import tariffs: China, Korea, Malaysia, 
and other countries kept tariffs high on many products, while some other countries 
that reduced average tariff rates were not rewarded with rapid export growth. But the 
most successful countries did more than just lower average tariffs. The exact policy 
combination differed, although they all had the common element of zero tariffs on 
imported inputs and capital goods for exporters, and they took other steps to reduce 
costs for exporters and to integrate firms with the global economy. Because the pol-
icy mix differed, it is that much harder to measure for research purposes and to pre-
scribe the precise steps that other countries might want to take.19
An alternative approach is to examine combinations of trade policies. An often 
cited example is a study by Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner.20 They consider the 
economic growth performance of 79 countries around the world during the period 
1970–89 and find that countries with more open policies and less-biased exchange 
rates grew about 2 percentage points faster than did closed economies. As we have 
highlighted throughout the text, 2 percentage points added to the growth rate is a 
huge amount with the potential to rapidly alleviate poverty and transform a soci-
ety. Can greater openness to trade deliver this much? The Sachs-Warner measure of 
trade policy considered a country to be “open” if it passed five criteria: (1) its aver-
age tariff rate was less than 40 percent, (2) its nontariff barriers (such as, quotas) 
covered less than 40 percent of imports, (3) the premium on the unofficial parallel 
market exchange rate did not exceed 20 percent, (4) there were no state monopolies 
on major exports, and (5) it was not a socialist economy. This is a broad interpreta-
tion of what openness entails and goes well beyond trade policy.
It is not surprising that the Sachs and Warner study has been subjected to a lot of 
scrutiny and debate. One of the key criticisms concerns their index of openness and 
their conclusions about trade policy. Poor management of the exchange rate (item 3) 
is more likely a call to improve macroeconomic policy than to liberalize trade. Simi-
larly, reliance on state monopolies (item 4) and the socialist economy criteria (item 5) 
may have more to do with governance than with trade per se. Several researchers 
have found that it is precisely these items (items 3, 4, and 5) in the Sachs-Warner 
openness index that explain most of the difference in growth performance during 
the 1970s and 1980s. Reducing trade barriers (items 1 and 2) had little independent 
explanatory power.21 Today, socialism, state monopolies over exports, and gross 
19Lant Pritchett, “Measuring Outward Orientation in LDCs: Can It Be Done?” Journal of Development 
Economics 49, no. 2 (1996), 307–35.
20Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner, “Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration,” Brook-
ings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (1995), 1–118.
21The seminal articles in this debate are Ann Harrison and Gordon Hanson, “Who Gains from Trade 
Reform? Some Remaining Puzzles,” Journal of Development Economics 59, (1999), 125–54; Francisco 
Rodríguez and Dani Rodrik, “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to the Cross-National 
Evidence,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000 (Cambridge: 
NBER, 2001). An updated version of the Sachs and Warner approach covering a much longer time period, 
1950–98, finds results confirming the original study. See Romain Wacziarg and Karen Welch, “Trade Liber-
alization and Growth: New Evidence,” World Bank Economic Review 22 (2008), 187–231.

T R A D E ,  G R O W T H,  A N D P O V E RT Y  A L L E V I AT I O N   739
 overvaluation of exchange rates have generally disappeared. The Sachs and Warner 
findings appear to offer little guidance on how to conduct trade policy.
A skeptical reader might conclude that economists know little about the impact 
of trade and trade policy on economic growth and that it does not matter what strat-
egy a nation pursues. This is the wrong conclusion to draw. Economists believe 
that increased trade confers benefits but that the steps necessary to stimulate eco-
nomic growth and increased trade go beyond simply reducing tariffs and quotas 
and include strong macroeconomic management (such as a sensible exchange rate 
policy), steps to strengthen key economic and governance institutions, and policies 
that more broadly improve the environment for investment and productivity growth. 
The institutional innovations needed to spark both trade and growth may be differ-
ent from those prescribed by a pure neoclassical model, and innovations that work 
in one country may not be easily replicable in others. Different paths to trade reform 
have been successful in different settings. One approach is not suited to all nations. 
But even those who are most skeptical about the relationship between trade and 
growth do not suggest that openness to trade is an ill-advised strategy or that broad 
trade barriers are conducive to long-run growth.
TRADE REFORMS AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION
Once again it will be useful to distinguish between trade volumes and trade policies 
and their respective impacts on the poor. We know from the previous section that 
increases in the share of exports (or of exports plus imports) out of GDP are well cor-
related with economic growth. In Chapter 6 we presented evidence that growth gen-
erally is good for the poor. If average incomes rise, as long as income inequality does 
not increase by too much, the incomes of the poor will also rise, lifting many above 
the poverty line. Taken together, this suggests that increasing trade is associated with 
poverty alleviation. The expansion of exports and increased foreign direct investment 
has brought a decline in poverty in many countries across all continents. This is most 
apparent in Asia’s success stories of development. Over the past two decades, China, 
India, Indonesia, and Thailand have experienced rapid growth in exports and a 
decline in poverty. Simulations conducted in the early 2000s concluded that a global 
move toward freer trade could lift more than 300 million people out of poverty within 
10–20 years through trade’s impact on income growth.22
The mechanisms by which increased trade can reduce poverty are relatively 
straightforward. A more outward orientation reduces poverty by increasing the 
demand for labor. Trade in unskilled labor-intensive products, whether in agricul-
ture or manufacturing, has the potential to create substantial employment oppor-
tunities for members of households living below or near the poverty line. Many of 
22William Cline, Trade Policy and Global Poverty (Washington, DC: Center for Global Development, 
2004); World Bank, “Market Access and the World’s Poor,” in Global Economic Prospects and the Develop-
ing Countries 2002: Making Trade Work for the World’s Poor (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2002).

740   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
these workers tend to be young women in their late teens and 20s. This is what hap-
pened in many of the more outward-oriented economies in East Asia and elsewhere. 
New job opportunities increased the wage income of poor households and reduced 
the number of individuals living in poverty. Many of the poor also benefited as con-
sumers. Trade reduces the price of imports, including that of necessities, and can 
increase the real incomes of poor households. Trade can also raise government rev-
enues and improve social spending directed at the poor.
But trade has other impacts as well. In Chapter 18 we discussed how trade pro-
duces both winners and losers. Trade creates new employment opportunities in the 
expanding export sector but also eliminates jobs as some domestic firms find them-
selves unable to compete with cheaper imports. Trade can lower the prices of goods; 
this is beneficial to the consumer of the good but can harm the producer. After the 
NAFTA agreement between Canada, Mexico, and the United States, corn exports 
from the United States to Mexico increased, helping poor, often urban households 
who now faced lower food prices but hurting some small-scale Mexican corn pro-
ducers who now received lower prices for their crops. Because of these varied effects, 
the impact of trade, especially of trade reforms, on the poor is varied and complex.
Recent case studies on a number of countries help identify the ways in which 
trade policy impacts poverty.23 After Colombia joined the WTO in 1981, the nation’s 
policy makers drastically lowered tariff and nontariff barriers in manufacturing. In 
1984, the average tariff on Colombian manufactured good was 50 percent; by 1998 it 
had fallen to 13 percent. Workers in import-competing sectors, where tariffs tended 
to be the highest, suddenly faced significant price competition. These workers 
started to experience rising levels of unemployment and/or of informal employment, 
falling incomes and increasing poverty. But other Colombians had the opposite 
experience. Those working in the expanding export sector gained more formal sector 
jobs, increased incomes, and lowered rates of poverty. Something similar happened 
in India. After the trade reforms of the early 1990s, the rural poor gained less than 
the urban poor, and the more dependent a rural district was on trade the smaller the 
decline in poverty. What the results from Colombia and India demonstrate is that not 
all poor people are the same and that one set of policies may affect different groups of 
poor households differently, even within the same country.
The results also seem to contradict the basic theoretical arguments for why trade 
should help the poor in developing nations. Theories that identify factor endow-
ments as the basis of comparative advantage, discussed in Chapter 18, predict that 
opening to trade favors a nation’s abundant factor. If poor nations are abundant in 
unskilled labor, poor households should gain from trade as the economy moves to 
export more labor-intensive goods. This has happened throughout much of East 
23Ann Harrison, ed., Globalization and Poverty (Cambridge: NBER, 2007). See in particular the chapters 
on Colombia by Pinelopi Goldberg and Nina Pavenik, on India by Petia Topalova, and on Mexico by Gor-
don Hanson.

K E Y  I S S U E S  O N  T H E  G L O B A L  T R A D E  A G E N D A   741
Asia. Why are the findings different in Colombia and India? One reason is that fac-
tor endowment models assume that labor is mobile between sectors. If workers can 
easily move out of the contracting import-competing sector and into the expand-
ing export sector, they should experience the gains from trade. What the studies on 
Colombia and India reveal is that if workers cannot easily relocate, often because of 
labor regulations that constrain the expansion of new jobs, then the gains from trade 
may not be transmitted in the ways the factor endowment model predicts.24 Whether 
this is a short-run outcome or a long-run one is something not yet understood. Par-
ents may be unable to take advantage of new opportunities, but maybe when their 
children grow up they will be better able to respond to the new opportunities trade 
provides.
The studies on Colombia and India do not suggest that trade reform in these 
economies was a bad idea. What they do suggest is that trade reforms alone often 
cannot be relied on to reduce poverty. Complementary policies have to be pur-
sued. In Colombia and India, policy reforms were needed to improve worker mobil-
ity across sectors and regions. In Zambia, trade reforms were not enough to help 
farmers exploit new export opportunities. They also needed help accessing credit 
and obtaining extension services to aid them in growing nontraditional crops. Also 
needed are social safety nets to catch those who are hurt by trade reforms because 
they are unable to adjust to new market opportunities. In rich and poor settings alike, 
increased integration with the global economy produces winners and losers. Most 
economists argue that the gains of globalization far outweigh the losses, but that does 
not mean everyone gains. Some will be worse off, sometimes requiring safety nets to 
help them as their nation transitions to a more integrated global economy.
KEY ISSUES ON THE GLOBAL TRADE AGENDA
INCREASED GLOBAL COMPETITION AND THE RISE OF CHINA 
(AND INDIA)
The benefits for an individual developing country from greater outward orientation 
may be smaller in the future than those achieved by the original Four East Asian Tigers. 
When Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan began to compete on global markets, 
there was little competition from other developing countries, so their firms were able 
to expand and multiply quickly. Today, many more developing countries have adopted 
this strategy, including the population giants China and India, generating concerns 
KEY ISSUES ON THE GLOBAL TRADE AGENDA
24Trade models that assume that factors are not perfectly mobile between sectors are referred to as 
specific-factor models and are an alternative to the Heckscher-Ohlin model discussed in the previous 
chapter.

742   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
about tougher competition and falling prices for export products. As new highly effi-
cient producers enter a market, prices often fall in the short run, as new entrants create 
overcapacity and drive out higher cost producers. Examples include semiconductors 
when prices fell in the mid-1990s as world productive capacity grew rapidly and coffee 
when prices dropped after Vietnam started producing, hurting some traditional coffee 
exporters such as Ethiopia and Honduras. After the expiration of global agreements to 
manage world trade in clothing, China’s expansion into garment exports put pressure 
on firms as far away as tiny Lesotho in southern Africa. There is no question that some 
firms and some nations lose while others gain in a world of globalized trade.
The long-term evidence, however, suggests that world trade can expand very 
quickly and accommodate many new firms. Since 1950, world exports grew much 
more quickly than world output, and exports of manufactured products grew most 
quickly of all. The United States was a huge force in world markets, accounting for 
25 percent of world output after World War II, much larger than China today, and 
there was concern that U.S. firms would dominate all trade. But while the reduction 
of trade barriers by the United States and its European allies put pressure on some 
firms as world prices dropped, the changes created many new opportunities for other 
firms. Similarly, in today’s world, as more countries trade and transport and telecom-
munication costs continue to drop, the opportunity for firms to specialize increases. 
Global production networks allow firms from many different countries to contribute 
to the production of one finished good, with each firm specializing in a particular 
phase of the production process. Many exports from China are assembled and fin-
ished products built with components imported from other countries. A computer 
from China might include a screen made in Malaysia, a circuit board from Singapore, 
and a keyboard made in the Philippines.
As developing countries open to world markets, they also become consumers 
for other country’s exports, not just competitors. Trade is a two-way process. China 
and India are rapidly increasing their imports as well as their exports and are becom-
ing two of the largest markets in the world for other countries. China is now one of 
Indonesia’s top five export markets importing oil and gas, timber, fish, and even some 
electronics products. China recently edged out the United States as Brazil’s major 
trading partner. China is also aggressively establishing trade with nations throughout 
sub-Saharan Africa and today runs an overall trade deficit (imports exceed exports) 
with the region.
Still many nations worry that with the expansion of China’s trade, and to a lesser 
extent India’s, that there is little room for their exports of labor-intensive goods in the 
global economy. Low-income economies believe they cannot match the combina-
tion of low wages and high productivity in China’s factories. There is more than a lit-
tle truth to such fears. The explosion of Chinese garment exports has driven firms in 
many nations, previously operating behind the protection afforded by the 1995 global 
Agreement on Textiles and Clothing, out of business. But this is also a static view of 
trading opportunities. Wages in China are increasing as the average productivity of 

K E Y  I S S U E S  O N  T H E  G L O B A L  T R A D E  A G E N D A   743
Chinese workers rises. News stories increasingly report labor shortages, rising wages, 
and growing numbers of strikes by Chinese workers. These are all signs of a growing 
scarcity of labor, a result fully expected and hoped for as China develops. This also 
means that China’s comparative advantage is changing, creating new opportunities 
for lower wage economies. Reebok, New Balance, and other manufacturers of running 
shoes, for example, are expanding in Indonesia in response to rising wages in China.
Some middle-income nations, like Mexico, face similar problems that may be more 
challenging. Relative to the United States, Mexico’s factory endowment is unskilled 
labor. But Mexican wages are too high relative to those of China, and its relative pro-
ductivity level not high enough, to compete with China in many goods destined for the 
U.S. market. Its comparative advantage, in part, lies with its locational advantage. Prox-
imity to U.S. markets means goods from Mexico can get to the United States in a frac-
tion of the three weeks typically needed to ship goods across the Pacific. This especially 
favors heavier products such as auto parts for which shipping costs are higher. Mexico’s 
gains from trade certainly are limited by China’s export drive but comparative advan-
tage still works and the basic rationale for an outward-oriented strategy remains.
DOES OUTWARD ORIENTATION CREATE SWEATSHOPS?
Some critics argue that outward orientation leads to a global sweatshop economy, in 
which corporations pit workers around the world against each other in a race to the 
bottom to see who will accept the lowest wages, benefits, and environmental stan-
dards. It is understandable how someone looking at the factories that produce shoes 
and textiles in low-income countries could reach this conclusion. By rich world stan-
dards, the wages are very low, often only a few dollars a day or less. Workers labor 
for long hours in repetitive tasks, often with only limited breaks. In many cases, the 
conditions are deplorable. This is also true for firms producing for local markets, for 
agricultural workers, and others.
Low wages are a reflection of the extent of poverty in low-income countries. 
Wages are set not by what firms pay in other countries but by the productivity of local 
workers (which establishes the demand for labor) and the wages paid to workers’ 
next-best opportunity (which determines the supply of labor). As we have seen, bil-
lions of the world’s population live on less than $2 a day. Many toil in backbreaking 
work in agriculture to try to feed their families, and others work in market stalls, as 
servants, dock laborers, or in other difficult positions. Many have no job and little or 
no income at all. A 25-year-old woman machine operator in a textile firm in Nairobi 
earns about one 13th of what her counterpart earns in Amsterdam or Taipei.25 This 
huge gap in pay is not because the Kenyan worker is exploited by her employer or 
because the Dutch or Taiwanese workers are 13 times more skilled. It is because pay 
differences across countries reflect differences in the average level of economywide 
25Union Bank of Switzerland, Prices and Earnings (Zurich: UBS AG, 2009).

744   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
productivity. Workers in Kenya have less physical and human capital to work with 
and, on average, output per worker is low. Therefore, the market-determined wage is 
going to be substantially lower than in high-productivity Taiwan or the Netherlands.
For many people, the opportunity to work in a steady factory job for a few dol-
lars a day is a big improvement over other options and can represent an important 
first step in rising above subsistence living and out of poverty. Without such options, 
poverty could be worse, rather than better. Efforts to substantially and immediately 
raise wages to industrialized-country standards could backfire. Firms forced to pay 
well above the marginal product of labor hire fewer workers, substitute machines for 
workers, or simply decide to relocate their operations, making workers even worse 
off. No one advocates that factory jobs with relatively low wages (by global standards) 
should be seen as the end goal. Rather, it should be seen as the first step on what ide-
ally will be a dynamic path on which job skills, wages, and standards of living can 
grow steadily over time. The United States, Japan, and the nations in the European 
Union all went through a phase of very low wages and difficult working conditions 
during their transition from agrarian economies to industrialized nations. This is not 
meant to glorify this phase. It suggests only that there are no shortcuts to achieve eco-
nomic development. Wages rise as the average productivity of the economy rises, the 
result of productive investments in both capital and people. Success stories in recent 
years are those nations that grew rapidly and were able to get through the very low 
wage and difficult working conditions phase quickly.
The image of a race to the bottom suggests that wages steadily fall in countries that 
compete to attract foreign firms that export to world markets. Sometimes wages fall at 
first for some workers, as uncompetitive protected firms close down and where wages 
effectively were subsidized by consumers who paid a higher price for protected prod-
ucts. But the typical pattern in countries that shift to outward orientation is not a steady 
fall in wages; instead, wages rise over time as workers gain new skills and factories 
become more productive. Evidence suggests that, in countries that attract foreign direct 
investment, multinational corporations tend to pay higher average wages and have bet-
ter average working conditions than do domestic firms engaged in the same activities. 
Nike subcontractors in Indonesia paid nearly three times the average annual minimum 
wage, and workers in foreign-owned apparel and footwear factories in Vietnam rank in 
the top 20 percent of the population by household expenditure. In Mexico, export-ori-
ented firms pay upward of 50 percent higher wages than similar nonexporting firms. Pay 
for workers in EPZs generally is higher than for similar activities outside of zones.26
The concern about the race to the bottom goes beyond wages and includes 
working conditions and labor standards. Advocates of stronger labor standards argue 
26Drusilla Brown, Alan Deardorff, and Robert Stern, “The Effects of Multinational Production on Wages 
and Working Conditions in Developing Countries,” Working Paper No. 9669, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA, April 2003; Theodore H. Moran, Beyond Sweatshops: Foreign Direct Invest-
ment and Globalization in Developing Countries (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2002), p. 7; 
Edward Graham, Fighting the Wrong Enemy: Antiglobal Activists and Multinational Enterprises (Washing-
ton, DC: Institute for International Economics, 2000), chap. 4.

K E Y  I S S U E S  O N  T H E  G L O B A L  T R A D E  A G E N D A   745
that they are necessary to guard against corporations imposing poor working condi-
tions, such as excessively long hours, short breaks, gender discrimination, and poor 
ventilation and other health and safety hazards. Opponents argue that the imposi-
tion of stricter standards raises producer costs and discourages investment, thereby 
hurting workers by costing them their jobs. Despite the sometimes polemic debate, 
there is ample middle ground. Some standards are widely shared. The International 
Labour Organization (ILO) refers to these as core standards: abolishing forced labor; 
ending discrimination based on gender, race, ethnicity, and religion; eliminating 
child labor where it is harmful to the child; and permitting freedom of association 
of workers and the right to collective bargaining. For other improvements in condi-
tions, which often are referred to as cash standards, the costs to producers are often 
small, including providing reasonable work breaks and improving safety conditions 
(such as unlocking doors, supplying fire extinguishers, and improving ventilation). In 
other words, some working conditions can be improved without adding significantly 
to costs and discouraging investment.
There is no question that working conditions are worse in low-income countries 
than in richer countries, and this is the case not just for firms engaged in trade but 
for those selling in protected domestic markets and for agriculture. The goal is to 
improve those conditions over time. Does outward orientation and greater trade make 
these conditions worse or better? The evidence is not complete, but overall it suggests 
that working conditions generally improve as economic growth proceeds in outward-
oriented countries.27 This outcome is not always the case. There are situations in which 
investors threaten to go elsewhere if workers are allowed to unionize or individual 
workers advocating for better conditions lose their jobs, as is the case with nonexport-
ing firms. But in countries that expanded trade over a sustained period of time, such as 
Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Mauritius, working conditions improved and are much 
better than they were in the late 1980s and early 1990s.28 There is evidence that working 
conditions are improving across China as factories increasingly compete for workers.
In countries where there is little investment and growth, worker conditions tend 
to stagnate. Export-oriented firms tend to include a large share of foreign investors, 
and most studies show that worker conditions tend to be better in foreign-owned fac-
tories compared to similar domestically owned factories. This hardly suggests that 
advocacy efforts are misplaced. Better conditions in foreign-owned firms are partly 
in response to advocacy: Multinational firms respond to adverse publicity about poor 
worker conditions and attempt to bring about improvements (Box 19–4). But it is 
hard to find systematic evidence of a decline in worker standards and a race to the 
bottom as countries become more open and expand trade.
27Kimberley Ann Elliot and Richard B. Freeman, Can Labor Standards Improve under Globalization? 
(Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 2003); Brown et al., “The Effects of Multinational 
Production.”
28The evolution of wages and working conditions in Korea is discussed in David L. Lindauer et al., The 
Strains of Economic Growth: Labor Unrest and Social Dissatisfaction in Korea (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
Institute of International Development, 1997).

746   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
BOX 19–4 LABOR ACTIVISTS AND LABOR OUTCOMES IN INDONESIA
Anti-sweatshop campaigns and other forms of labor activism pressure firms in
developing nations to improve working conditions, especially firms producing
brand name goods for export. No company wants their subcontractors exposed
as operating sweatshops because consumers in advanced economies may 
respond to such negative publicity by buying fewer products. Public relations 
campaigns targeting Nike, the Gap, and others have been effective in getting
these corporations to impose codes of conduct on the factories that produce 
their footwear and apparel. But are the workers in these factories always helped
by such actions? By raising labor costs are jobs lost? How often do firms close 
down in the face of labor activism? Are such firms foot-loose and able to relo-
cate to countries where there is less activism and attention to labor standards?
Whether labor activists wind up helping or hurting the workers they intend
to aid is an empirical question. Ann Harrison and Jason Scorse investigated 
this question using econometrics for Indonesia during the 1990s. They employ
a “difference in difference” approach, which permits the researcher to separate 
out underlying trends from the behavior of a treatment versus a control group.
Harrison and Scorse were interested in how wages and employment changed 
over time in districts where there was a concentration of firms exporting tex-
tiles, footwear, and apparel (TFA). They compare these changes with districts in
which there was a concentration of firms producing for the domestic market or 
engaged in products other than TFA.
Indonesia provided an excellent opportunity to study the impact of labor activ-
ists because of Jeff Ballinger, a U.S. labor activist, who in the 1990s exposed 
the harsh working conditions and poor pay of workers in Indonesia’s footwear
industry. Ballinger targeted plants that produced running shoes for Nike, reason-
ing that by drawing attention to Nike, pressure could be brought to bear on other 
footwear and clothing producers. In a 1992 article in Harper’s magazine, Ball-
inger published the pay stub of Sadisah, an Indonesian worker in a Nike subcon-
tractor. In one week she worked 63 hours and earned 76,120 ruppiah ($37.46
at the market exchange rate.) Ballinger noted that it would take Sadisah 44,492 
years to earn the $20 million Michael Jordan earned for his endorsement of Nike 
products. Ballinger’s story and subsequent exposés were reported by many U.S. 
newspapers, magazines, and television networks.
Harrison and Scorse concluded that Ballinger’s efforts were successful: 
“wages increased systematically more for exporting and foreign TFA plants in
districts where activists concentrated their efforts.” Equally important, they found
no adverse total employment effects—that is, employment growth in targeted

K E Y  I S S U E S  O N  T H E  G L O B A L  T R A D E  A G E N D A   747
TFA districts was not hurt relative to employment growth in non-TFA districts.
This somewhat counterintuitive finding is explained, in part, by the very low share
of Indonesian labor costs, around 5 percent, of the final retail sales price of a
Nike shoe. It is also explained by the very low wages that TFA workers received
at the start of the period. Mostly young women worked in these factories, and
they received wages well below those of other manufacturing workers, making 
it easier for Nike and its contractors to absorb the increases in their pay. The
evidence on labor activism in Indonesia appears to be win–win: Low-paid work-
ers received higher wages and did not suffer any job loss. But the authors of
the study are quick to point out that these results may be temporary, not perma-
nent, because Nike shifted some of its outsourcing to other low-cost producers, 
including Cambodia and Vietnam. High-end running shoes are also a somewhat
unique product and labor activism on goods with less brand name identity and
smaller profit margins may not have the same effects.
Sources: Ann Harrison and Jason Scorse, “Improving the Conditions of Workers?: Minimum 
Wage Legislation and Anti-Sweatshop Activism,” California Management Review 48, no. 2 (2006);
w
Ann Harrison and Jason Scorse, “Multinationals and Anti-Sweatshop Activism,” American Economic 
Review 100, no. 1 (March 2010); Kimberly Ann Elliott and Richard B. Freeman, “White Hats or Don
Quixotes?: Human Rights Vigilantes in the Global Economy,” in Richard Freeman, Joni Hersch and
Lawrence Mishel, eds., Emerging Labor Market Institutions for the Twenty-First Century (Chicago:
y
University of Chicago Press, 2004).
EXPANDING MARKET ACCESS
Implementing a more-open trade strategy is successful only if there are markets in 
which developing country exporters can sell their products, and the most important 
markets remain those in the European Union, Japan, and the United States. Gener-
ally speaking, these countries have low trade barriers, with relatively low average 
tariffs and quotas by world standards. But their largest trade barriers and greatest 
protection are precisely on the products in which low-income countries have a com-
parative advantage: textiles, apparel, and agriculture. Although the world’s richest 
countries advocate for free markets and recommend that poor countries shift toward 
greater outward orientation, they also maintain trade barriers that impede that pro-
cess. A key question is whether industrialized countries will react to their own mac-
roeconomic problems and to the greater competition on world markets from China, 
India, and many other developing countries by maintaining protectionist measures 
or by imposing new ones. Or will the advanced economies allow even greater market 
access to goods produced in developing countries.
Limits on market access are reflected in tariff revenues. In most years, the 
United States collects more tariff revenue on exports from poor countries than rich 

748   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
countries. Consider U.S. imports from Bangladesh and France. In 2009, Bangladesh 
paid $563 million in tariffs to the United States, whereas France paid half as much, 
$285 million. This alone is regressive, with the poorer nation paying more than the 
richer one. But the implicit tax rate of these tariffs is even more striking. Bangladesh 
exported only $3.7 billion worth of goods to the United States, including underwear 
and towels; France exported nearly 10 times as much, $34 billion, including wine and 
airplanes. The implied average tariff on French products is under 1 percent; on Ban-
gladesh over 15 percent.29
Tariff peaks refer to relatively high tariffs amid generally low tariff levels. For 
industrialized countries, tariffs of 15 percent and above are generally recognized as 
tariff peaks and often are applied to imports from developing nations. The United 
States charges a 32 percent tariff on acrylic sweaters, a Bangladeshi export, but no 
tariff on artwork imported from France. Tariff escalation refers to having no or low 
import duties on raw materials and higher duties on the finished goods that use these 
raw materials. For example, the United States does not charge a tariff on cocoa beans, 
but charges more than 25 cents a pound on imports of certain kinds of chocolate. Tar-
iff escalation makes it harder for firms in developing countries to compete in the mar-
kets for some finished goods. Such mercantilist practices were denounced by Adam 
Smith over 200 years ago but remain features of developed nation trade policies.
High-income nations have worked to reduce protection on most manufactured 
goods, including imports of textiles and apparel. For decades, textile and clothing 
imports were restricted via a complex system of quotas and tariffs under an agree-
ment imposed by the industrialized countries called the Multi-Fiber Agreement 
(MFA), later amended as the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (ATC). Under these 
arrangements, each industrialized country allowed only a certain amount of imports 
of textiles and clothing from each developing country. Some exporters, like China, 
Indonesia, and Thailand, easily filled their quota and were not allowed to export 
more. This helped other developing countries, as investors began to look at coun-
tries like Bangladesh, Lesotho, Mauritius, and Sri Lanka to locate production facili-
ties and export to the industrialized countries.30 But, because of the quotas, the rich 
countries imported far less overall than they would have with open markets, which 
drove up domestic prices, hurting domestic consumers while protecting domestic 
textile and apparel makers (and their workers) at the expense of firms and workers 
in developing countries. Most of these multilateral arrangements expired during the 
29Edward Gresser, “U.S. Trade Preference Programs: Options for Reform,” Senate Committee on 
Finance, March 9, 2010.
30Cambodia is another country that benefited from the quota system. But it adopted a unique position, 
in part, because of pressure from the U.S. government. Cambodian garment exporters agreed to follow 
strict guidelines on worker rights, hoping that the United States and other developed nation consumers 
would be willing to pay more for garments certified to have been produced in factories complying with a 
number of nonwage labor standards. With the end of the system of managed trade in garments, it remains 
uncertain whether consumers in industrialized countries will pay more for Cambodian products or simply 
shop for the lowest-priced goods available.

K E Y  I S S U E S  O N  T H E  G L O B A L  T R A D E  A G E N D A   749
past decade but national tariff and nontariff barriers on textiles and apparel imports 
remain, leaving firms in developing countries at a significant disadvantage.
Agriculture is another heavily protected sector, in rich and poor nations alike, 
and one that probably raises more controversy than any other economic sector. Can-
ada, the EU, Japan and the United States provide substantial protection to their agri-
cultural producers through both tariff and nontariff barriers and direct subsidies to 
producers. As shown in Table 19–1, the estimated magnitude of protection is quite 
large, ranging from a tariff equivalent of about 20 percent in the United States to over 
80 percent in Japan. According to this analysis, in Canada, the EU, and Japan high 
trade barriers on agriculture are much more significant than production subsidies; 
the opposite holds in the United States.
A wide range of products is protected, including cotton, dairy products, maize, 
peanuts, rice, soybeans, sugar, and wheat. Sugar is among the most distorted markets 
in the world, with the industrialized countries subsidizing domestic producers and 
imposing strict quotas to limit imports. In recent years, U.S. consumers have paid as 
much as three times the world price of sugar because of U.S. sugar quotas, subse-
quently affecting the price of everything from candy to processed foods to soft drinks 
produced in the United States. But it is not only U.S. consumers who are supporting 
domestic sugar producers, growers of sugar cane in the Caribbean, Central America, 
and elsewhere are deprived from earning more by the limits placed on exports to the 
United States and other developed nation markets.
Trade protection provides farmers in industrialized countries with a significant 
advantage over potential competitors, and weakens the incentives for increased pro-
duction in developing countries. Production and export subsidies also encourage 
increased production in the industrialized countries, which adds to world supply put-
ting downward pressure on world prices. One World Bank estimate suggests that the 
protection by the developed economies depresses world rice prices by 33 to 50 per-
cent, and for sugar and dairy products, by 20 to 40 percent.31 When farmers in devel-
oping countries receive lower prices, they produce less and earn less for the amount 
they produce, reducing their total income.
 TABLE 19–1 Overall Protection in Agriculture (percent tariff equivalent)
 TYPE OF PROTECTION
UNITED STATES
CANADA
EUROPEAN UNION
JAPAN
 Tariffs
8.8
30.4
32.6
76.4
Subsidies
10.2
16.8
10.4
3.2
Total
19.9
52.3
46.4
82.1
Source: William Cline, Trade Policy and Global Poverty (Washington, DC: Center for Global Development, 
2004).
31World Bank, Global Economic Prospects and the Developing Countries 2002.

750   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
Large agricultural interests in the industrialized countries lobby hard to maintain 
their protection. Rural states and provinces often have considerable political power, 
far greater than their share of total population might warrant. The outcome is con-
tinued protection of agriculture even though trade barriers and production subsidies 
are costly to consumers and taxpayers. In 2006, according to a study by the Organi-
zation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD), government policies 
in rich countries that supported agriculture transferred close to $300 billion worth 
of income to farmers, amounting to almost one third of all farm earnings. In one 
often-cited calculation, the average Japanese cow gets $7.50 a day from various gov-
ernment subsidies and other forms of protection, whereas a cow in Europe receives 
$2.50 a day.32 This is at a time when over 1 billion people in the developing world live 
on less than $1 a day.
The combined impact of industrial country tariffs, quotas, and subsidies is sig-
nificant. The elimination of industrialized country barriers would likely add more to 
the GDP of poor countries than they receive in foreign aid. Two studies find that the 
elimination of these barriers would lift an additional 300 million or more people out 
of poverty.33 It is unlikely that the industrialized countries will reduce these barriers 
on their own. The hope has long been that they would do so in the context of multi-
lateral trade negotiations.
MULTILATERAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS AND THE WTO
With the outbreak of World War I, a long epoch of globalization came to an end as 
the industrialized countries began to erect high trade barriers, a trend reinforced by 
the onset of the Great Depression. With the end of World War II, this pattern began 
to change. Industrialized country leaders began to reduce tariffs, and they looked for 
ways to accelerate and consolidate the process. The result was a shift toward mul-
tilateral trade negotiations, involving many nations simultaneously negotiating 
reductions in tariffs. The idea was that, with a large international effort in which par-
ticipants would pledge to reduce their tariffs if other countries did the same, each 
individual country would be better able to overcome narrow interest groups at home 
that opposed trade liberalization. These discussions led to a proposal in 1948 to 
establish the International Trade Organization (ITO) as a sister organization to the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank. Although the ITO was never 
established, in large part because of the opposition of the U.S. Congress, multilateral 
trade negotiations expanded and flourished in the ensuing decades through a less-
formal institution known as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). 
Between 1947 and 1994, eight rounds of multilateral trade negotiations took place 
32Nicholas Stern, “Dynamic Development: Innovation and Inclusion,” Munich Lectures in Economics, 
Center for Economic Studies, Ludwig Maximilian University, November 19, 2002.
33World Bank, Global Economic Prospects and the Developing Countries 2002; Cline, Trade Policy and 
Global Poverty.

K E Y  I S S U E S  O N  T H E  G L O B A L  T R A D E  A G E N D A   751
through the GATT, covering mostly tariffs but later including nontariff barriers and 
other trade related issues.
The Uruguay Round of trade negotiations (so named because its initial meeting 
took place in Punta del Este, Uruguay, in September 1986) was completed in 1994. 
It was by far the largest trade negotiation ever held, with 123 countries taking part. 
Developing countries had high hopes at the outset of the Uruguay Round because it 
was the first in which a large number of them were allowed to participate and it was 
the first in which industrialized countries, with great reluctance, agreed to include 
agricultural subsides. Discussions led to what later was called the grand bargain 
between rich countries and low- and middle-income ones. This approach repre-
sented a significant shift from the traditional GATT approach on reciprocity. Instead 
of each country agreeing to open its markets on certain goods if the others did the 
same, the Uruguay Round featured an implicit deal in which the richer countries 
agreed to certain steps in some areas in return for the developing countries agreeing 
to steps in other areas, many of which went way beyond traditional border barriers.
The industrialized countries promised (1) significant reduction in tariffs on 
manufactured goods, (2) the end of the Multi-Fiber Agreement that had restricted 
trade in textiles and garments, and (3) reductions in agricultural protection with a 
commitment to even larger reductions in the next round. For their part, developing 
countries promised (1) reductions in their own tariffs; (2) agreement on new rules on 
investment, trade in services, and trade-related intellectual property rights (TRIPs; 
intended to prevent the use of patented material and the production of generic copy-
cat products without permission); and (3) support of a new organization, the World 
Trade Organization (WTO), to replace the GATT. The WTO, established on Janu-
ary 1, 1995, would serve as a central institution for global trade negotiations aimed 
at establishing a system of rules for fair, open, and undistorted competition and as a 
forum for settling disputes among members.
Despite increased access in some industrialized country markets, many devel-
oping countries eventually were deeply disappointed in the Uruguay Round. There 
were three broad concerns. First, the industrialized countries’ pledge to reduce sub-
sidies for agriculture generally did not materialize. Second, the new agreements on 
investment, services, and TRIPs were much more complicated than simply reduc-
ing tariffs or quotas, and as a result, the developing countries had to build domestic 
institutional and legal expertise, which required significant time and money. These 
changes were a large burden on many low-income countries that had a scarcity of 
highly skilled legal and administrative expertise. The industrialized countries prom-
ised to provide technical assistance to help with the transition but often did not fully 
follow through. Third, the TRIPs agreement resulted in developing countries paying 
higher prices for medicines and pharmaceutical products covered by patents. For 
many goods and services, protecting property rights and rewarding those that invest 
in research and development makes sense, but paying high market prices and pre-
venting the sale of cheaper generic brands became a particularly contentious issue 

752   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
around medicines, particularly those used for treating HIV/AIDS. Only 10 years later 
was there the beginnings of serious discussion about how to make these drugs more 
affordable for low-income countries, as discussed in Chapter 9.
For many, the Uruguay Round came to be considered a bum deal rather than a 
grand bargain,34 and the unhappiness contributed to the raucous demonstrations 
against the WTO in Seattle in 1999 and at other subsequent WTO meetings. A new 
round of trade negotiations under the WTO began in 2001. Called the Doha Round 
because the first meetings were held in Doha, Qatar, they also were referred to as “the 
development round” intended to serve the needs of the developing nations. Negotia-
tions were difficult from the start and collapsed in 2008, although attempts to restart 
the talks continue.
The Doha Round began with an ambitious agenda, not uncommon in any round 
of trade negotiations. Agricultural trade protection and subsidies once again were on 
the table and remained one of the major reasons for the failure to reach an agreement. 
Under discussion was an opening up of international trade in services, everything 
from accounting to banking to shipping—activities that often are highly regulated 
and closed to foreign firms. Developed nations are particularly interested in liberal-
izing trade in these sectors where they often have comparative advantage. Nonagri-
cultural market access (NAMA), covering manufactures and some primary goods, 
was intended to deal with problems of tariff peaks and escalation. Rich nations also 
wanted more discussion of trade facilitation, in essence, improved customs practices, 
which are an ongoing source of corruption and delay in many developing nations. 
More transparency in government procurement and new rules on competition policy, 
a form of global antitrust policy, were also part of the list of items to be discussed.
Many high-level meetings were held not only in Doha but in Cancun, Hong 
Kong, and often in Geneva, home to the WTO. The agenda progressively narrowed, 
and while progress was made, including on licenses for cheaper generic drugs, most 
meetings ended badly without agreement on major issues. The collapse in 2008 had 
much to do with where the trade round started: agricultural protection. There were 
divisions among the developing nations. Big agricultural exporters like Brazil had 
different interests than India, with its large and still relatively protected rural sector. 
But the real divide remained between rich nations and poor ones. The final straw 
was a dispute among the United States, China, and India. Developing nations rightly 
complain about the production and export subsidies farmers in rich nations receive, 
but developing nations, including China and India, also protect their farmers, rely-
ing mostly on trade barriers. WTO rules permit developing nations to impose tariffs, 
in this case on agricultural goods to protect their farmers, in the event of an import 
surge or sharp fall in crop prices. Disagreement over the use of this special safeguard 
mechanism could not be resolved. The United States wanted the trigger for when the 
34Sylvia Ostry, “Why Has Globalization Become a Bad Word?,” the Alcoa-Intalco Works Distinguished 
Lecture, Western Washington University, October 25, 2001.

K E Y  I S S U E S  O N  T H E  G L O B A L  T R A D E  A G E N D A   753
safeguard kicked in to be set high; China and India wanted it to be set low. More fun-
damental, the Doha Round collapsed because many of the developing nations felt 
it was time for the rich nations to make large concessions, especially in agriculture, 
and for the poor nations to give little in return. To many economists this was a disap-
pointing outcome because developing nations stood to gain a lot from dismantling 
their own trade barriers.
Earlier trade rounds collapsed only to start up again. This may happen with the 
Doha Round too. In the meantime, trade negotiations have not stood still. Nations 
have turned away from multilateral talks and entered into bilateral and regional 
agreements. In 2001, there were only 49 such agreements in place; by 2009 there were 
167. The disadvantage of such agreements is that they do not permit the forces of 
global comparative advantage to work and can promote inefficient firms protected 
by a bilateral or regional agreement. Such agreements also create a confusing mix 
of rules and administrative requirements firms must comply with because nations 
sign different agreements with different trading partners. This diverts the attention 
of scarce managerial capacity and can impede productive investment. Bilateral and 
regional deals also take the pressure off of governments to compromise on multilat-
eral agreements, like the Doha Round. To their credit, however, regional trade pacts 
may be better than no trade pact at all. Despite the failures to date in concluding 
the Doha Round, the world appears to be moving in the direction of greater market 
access and expanded trade, but there is no guarantee that this trend will continue.
TEMPORARY MIGRATION: ANOTHER DIMENSION OF 
INTERNATIONAL TRADE
The General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) establishes rules for WTO 
member nations on trade involving services such as banking, telecommunications, 
and tourism. Mode IV of the GATS refers to the temporary movement of people 
from one country to another to perform a service, which in principle could involve 
an actor, accountant, construction worker, or many others. The abiding principle is 
nondiscrimination: WTO member nations do not restrict trade, in this case of a ser-
vice, based on country of origin. What is unique about Mode IV is that it involves not 
the movement of goods but of people, and controlling immigration is probably where 
nations are most protectionist. The freer movement of people across national bor-
ders is not on the agenda of most nations, especially the developed ones.
Agreements on Mode IV are highly limited but raise a critical issue: What role 
should increased immigration between rich and poor nations play in promoting eco-
nomic development? The argument is a compelling one. There is no easier way of 
improving the lives of poor people than to permit them to migrate to a developed 
nation where wages are higher and employment opportunities better. It is far easier 
for a poor person to migrate to a rich nation than it is to bring economic develop-
ment to where the poor person lives.

754   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
Harvard economist Lant Pritchett argues that there is no tool in the arsenal of 
economic development that has more potential to alleviate poverty than a significant 
increase in the amount of migration between developing and developed nations. The 
gains from further trade liberalization, or from increases in foreign aid, pale in com-
parison to those of even modest increases in the flow of labor between nations. One 
set of estimates suggests that complete trade liberalization would increase develop-
ing nation GDP by around $100 billion annually; an increase in temporary migration 
equal to 3 percent of the labor force of the OECD nations (about 18 million people) 
would raise the welfare of those moving by much more: $170 billion per year. Pritch-
ett offers another compelling calculation, comparing the benefits of microfinance 
to temporary migration. The average annual microloan in Bangladesh is about $360 
and the average lender receives his or her first loan at age 23. If one further assumes 
a generous 18 percent return to such loans, a lifetime of such borrowing yields about 
$700 in net present value.35 If a low-skilled Bangladeshi man were permitted to work 
in the United States, he would earn this amount in only four weeks! Imagine the ben-
efits if he were able to work one or more years. Think of the remittances thousands of 
such workers would send back home.
The benefits of migration should be obvious. The wage gap between workers in 
rich and poor nations is enormous. Pritchett provides a conservative estimate: Low-
skilled workers across 42 low- and middle-income nations working in the United States 
would, on average, increase their annual earnings by $13,000 (purchasing power parity; 
PPP). They would be employed in activities in which many immigrants, both legal and 
illegal, already are employed, as laborers in construction and on farms, kitchen workers 
in restaurants, gardeners, providers of daycare or care for the elderly, and in other jobs 
that many natives often find too “dirty, dangerous, or difficult.” A focus on increased 
global labor mobility among relatively unskilled workers also deflects concerns about 
brain drain and its potential impact on the migrant’s country of origin.36
The benefits of permitting more temporary migration are clear but so is the 
opposition. Some of this opposition can be muted by calling for an increase in tem-
porary not permanent migration. Temporary migrants would not be on a path to 
citizenship with all the implications that entails. They would be limited mostly to 
economic opportunities. Citizens of rich nations still worry that immigrants will 
lower native wages and take away native jobs; engage in criminal activity; and be a 
35The calculation is from Lant Pritchett, “The Cliff at the Border,” in R. Kanbur and M. Spence, eds., 
Equity and Growth in a Globalizing World (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2010). Pritchett fully develops 
the economic and moral argument for greater global labor mobility in Let Their People Come: Breaking the 
Deadlock in International Labor Mobility (Washington, DC: Center for Global Development, 2006). Esti-
mates of the potential benefits of temporary migration are presented in World Bank, “Labor Mobility and 
the WTO: Liberalizing Temporary Movement,” in Global Economic Prospects 2004: Realizing the Develop-
ment Promise of the Doha Agenda (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2004).
36Brain drain itself is a controversial idea. The problem of brain drain is disputed in a case study of 
health workers from West Africa in Michael Clemens, “Do Visas Kill?: Health Effects of African Health Pro-
fessional Emigration,” Center for Global Development Working Paper 114, Washington, DC, 2007.

S U M M A R Y   755
burden to taxpayers, contributing little in taxes while using public services such as 
schools, hospital emergency rooms, and state-provided welfare payments. There is 
an element of truth in each of these concerns but careful analysis tends to show that 
these costs, if they exist at all, tend to be small, especially relative to the huge gain 
in the well-being of the immigrant himself or herself. Unskilled immigrants tend to 
depress the wages of unskilled natives by only a few percentage points and do not 
increase the unemployment of natives with similar skills. Immigrants are less likely 
to commit crimes because the costs are greater; they face not only jail sentences but 
also deportation. Immigrants pay taxes and tend not to be a net fiscal drain in aggre-
gate terms although they can be on local communities. Much of the opposition to 
increased immigration is based on misperceptions of its costs to natives and on mat-
ters of culture. Throughout the world, in rich and poor nations alike, people often 
have a visceral and negative response to those who are foreign. Overcoming this 
response, even in the name of reducing global poverty, is a formidable challenge.
SUMMARY
• There exists a continuum of approaches toward international trade that 
nations can adopt. At one end is autarky or economic isolation; at the 
other is free trade. In practice, most nations fall somewhere along this 
continuum, exercising some degree of inward-looking versus outward-
oriented policies.
• Almost all countries have used import substitution at various times. 
Implementing this approach often meant using trade barriers, including 
tariffs and quotas, and overvalued currencies. Such interventions can 
prove costly to an economy. In theory, IS can allow domestic firms to learn 
production techniques, improve efficiency, and eventually compete on 
world markets. However, despite some exceptions, this strategy often leads 
to weak technology, low efficiency, and slower growth.
• Many developing countries began to shift to more outward-oriented 
trade strategies in the 1980s. Outward orientation allows firms to become 
more specialized, sell to larger global markets, and import leading 
technologies. Most countries that follow this strategy begin with labor-
intensive manufacturing and agriculture, with the goal of moving to more-
sophisticated products over time. Concerns that this strategy leads to a race 
to the bottom in wages and labor standards are generally not supported by 
the evidence.
• Outward orientation often is associated with policies that favor exports. 
This might include production subsidies such as access to cheap credit for 
exporters, undervalued exchange rates, or EPZs. Nations like China and Korea 
SUMMARY

756   [CH. 19] TR A D E  P O L I CY
that have pursued outward-looking strategies have also protected domestic 
firms from import competition, often conditional on export success.
• A lively debate remains over the use of both trade and industrial policy 
to foster rapid economic growth. Full liberalization of markets does 
not characterize the experience of some of the world’s most successful 
economies, whereas many attempts at trade liberalization have delivered 
less than expected. At the same time, it is easy to point to both successes 
and failures when governments intervene to pick firms or sectors to 
support. Some partnership between the public and private sector is 
probably needed to alleviate the binding constraints on economic growth.
• Evidence suggests a strong positive relationship between trade and growth. 
Countries with larger amounts of trade tend to record faster growth. But the 
direction of causality is not certain. The evidence is even less clear relating 
trade policies and growth. This, in part, is due to difficulty in measuring 
trade policy. Some critics suggest that trade may be less important than 
other factors, such as strong institutions and an overall climate that 
supports investments, in explaining rapid growth. But few suggest that a 
lack of openness is conducive to growth.
• Economies that have experienced rapid growth in exports, especially of 
labor-intensive products, have witnessed decreases in poverty. But trade 
liberalization alone may have a differential impact on the poor. As import 
prices fall and export prices rise, some of the poor may be hurt by a more 
open economy, often because their mobility from contracting to expanding 
sectors of the economy is impeded.
• Many issues remain on the global trade agenda. Some worry about the 
impact of China and India, the two most populous nations in the world, on 
the opportunities for other economies. Most evidence suggests that there is 
room in the global economy for all nations.
• Protectionist policies in the industrialized countries continue to impede 
exports from developing countries, especially in textiles, apparel, and 
agriculture. It remains to be seen whether the industrialized countries will 
maintain these barriers or even erect new ones as competition from developing 
countries increases or whether multilateral negotiations will lead to reductions 
in these barriers and increased opportunities for developing countries.
• While multilateral negotiations surrounding trade issues continue, including 
the ill-fated Doha Round, nations are seeking bilateral and regional 
agreements to increase their access to markets. One dimension of trade 
negotiations that has received relatively little attention is to increase the 
movement of people across borders. Some economists believe that an 
increase in temporary migration between rich and poor nations could be one 
of the most effective instruments available for addressing global poverty.

757
Sustainable 
Development
20
T
he path to development followed by today’s advanced economies was fueled 
by technologies intensive in their use of energy and natural resources and pro-
digious in their production of environmental pollutants. Is this the same path 
today’s poor countries must follow? What are the potential conflicts between 
development and the environment? According to scientist Jared Diamond, the 
potential consequences of such a conflict include nothing short of societal collapse.1 
Citing both ancient and recent examples, Diamond argues that unintended eco-
logical suicide (“ecocide”) was a primary cause of the demise of major civilizations 
throughout history, ranging from the Maya to the Vikings to modern-day states like 
Somalia and Rwanda. Diamond elaborates,
The processes through which past societies have undermined themselves by 
damaging their environments fall into eight categories, whose relative importance 
differs from case to case: deforestation and habitat destruction, soil problems 
(erosion, salinization, and soil fertility losses), water management problems, 
overhunting, overfishing, effects of introduced species on native species, 
human population growth, and increased per capita impact of people. . . .  The 
environmental problems facing us today include the same eight that undermined 
past societies, plus four new ones: human-caused climate change, build up of 
1Jared Diamond, Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Survive (London: Penguin Books, 2005). Dia-
mond defines collapse as “a drastic decrease in human population size and/or political/economic/social 
complexity, over a considerable area, for an extended time” (p. 3).

758   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
toxic chemicals in the environment, energy shortages, and full human utilization 
of the Earth’s photosynthetic capacity.2
Concerns about the Earth’s ability to support continued human development 
date back at least to the eighteenth century. In 1798, British economist and demog-
rapher Thomas Malthus, in his famous Essay on the Principle of Population, pre-
dicted that continued population growth would bring the world to disaster. Malthus 
based his analysis on two premises: “That food is necessary to the existence of man,” 
to which Malthus applied the assumption that the production of food would grow 
arithmetically, and “That the passion between the sexes is necessary and will likely 
remain nearly in its present state,” from which Malthus extrapolated that population 
would grow geometrically.3 He concluded “The power of population is so superior to 
the power of the Earth to produce subsistence for man, that premature death must in 
some shape or other visit the human race.”
Some recent thinking has echoed Malthus. In 1972, the Club of Rome published 
The Limits to Growth, a report by a team of analysts based at the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology. This study predicts that “If the present growth trends in world 
population, industrialization, pollution, food production, and resource depletion 
continue unchanged, the limits to growth on this planet will be reached sometime 
within the next 100 years.” Among other projections, the report suggests that, based 
on then-current reserves, the world would exhaust its supply of oil by 1992.
While these and other dire predictions have so far proved false, the question of 
whether today’s developing countries can (or should) follow a historical develop-
ment path similar to that followed by today’s advanced countries, with potentially 
serious environmental impacts, remains valid. The depletion of both renewable and 
nonrenewable resources, especially fossil fuels, and the threat of environmental dam-
age pose challenges on a scale unimaginable in the time of Malthus. Concern over 
the sustainability of economic development and growth has expanded to emphasize 
global climate change. Scientists point to increasing atmospheric concentrations of 
greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2), which may dangerously raise global 
surface temperatures by trapping solar radiation in the earth’s atmosphere. As we dis-
cuss in the final section of this chapter, the potential negative consequences of global 
warming for development are immense. Various forecasts indicate potential reduc-
tions of grain yields of up to 50 percent in Africa, extinction of valuable plant and ani-
mal species, increased disease and water stress, and the displacement of millions of 
poor residents of low-lying coastal zones as the melting polar ice caps cause sea levels 
to rise. There are even widely expressed fears that the entire nation of the Maldives, a 
2Diamond, Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Survive, pp. 6–7. By “photosynthetic capacity,” 
Diamond is referring to the limited capacity of Earth to support crop growth. He cites calculations that by 
the late 1980s, humankind had either used, wasted, or diverted about half of the Earth’s capacity to pro-
duce crops.
3An arithmetic progression is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; a geometric progression is 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32.

W I L L E C O N O M I C G R O W T H  S A V E  O R  D E S T R OY  T H E  E N V I R O N M E NT ?   759
collection of 1,200 coral islands in the Indian Ocean, 80 percent of which rise no more 
than one meter above sea level, could simply disappear by the year 2100.
WILL ECONOMIC GROWTH SAVE OR DESTROY THE 
ENVIRONMENT?
The relationship between economic growth and the environment is complex and 
dynamic. One important mediating variable is technology. When Malthus foretold 
of “premature death” for the human race, he excluded the possibility that technical 
change in agriculture would boost productivity, permitting food supplies to outpace 
population growth.4 Technical change also affects the efficiency with which we use 
renewable and nonrenewable resources as well as the level of environmental dam-
age caused. Increased automobile fuel efficiency and the more recent development 
of electric cars are only two among many examples of how technical change can help 
reduce environmental impacts. Our assumptions about the role and pace of techni-
cal change are critical in shaping our conclusions about whether economic growth is 
good or bad for the environment.
The relationship between levels of pollution and levels of income is generally 
thought to follow an inverted-U shape, with pollution rising as income increases 
from low levels but falling once income passes some intermediate level. Because 
this inverted-U pattern is similar to the relationship between inequality and national 
income famously posited by economist Simon Kuznets (introduced in Chapter 6), 
this empirical relationship between pollution and national income is called the envi-
ronmental Kuznets curve. This relationship is depicted in Figure 20–1 as the “con-
ventional EKC.” Economist Susmita Dasgupta and colleagues describe the basic 
intuition underlying this relationship,
In the first stage of industrialization, pollution in the . . .  world grows rapidly 
because people are more interested in jobs and income than clean air and water, 
communities are too poor to pay for abatement, and environmental regulation 
is correspondingly weak. The balance shifts as income rises. Leading industrial 
sectors become cleaner, people value the environment more highly, and 
regulatory institutions become more effective.5
Statistical estimations of this relationship have suggested that pollution peaks at 
levels of income per capita between $5,000 and $8,000, and declines as income grows 
above that range.
WILL ECONOMIC GROWTH SAVE OR DESTROY THE
ENVIRONMENT?
4The Club of Rome’s Limits to Growth (New York: Universe Books, 1972) study recognized the potential 
impact of technical change but assumed that its pace would be insufficient to overcome ensuing environ-
mental constraints.
5Susmita Dasgupta, Benoit Laplante, Hua Wang, and David Wheeler, “Confronting the Environmental 
Kuznets Curve,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 16, no. 1 (winter 2002), 147.

760   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
Dasgupta notes, however, that estimates of the conventional environmental 
Kuznets curve have been criticized as misleading snapshots of a dynamic process. 
If, for example, free trade and globalization create a “race to the bottom”, as coun-
tries compete by lowering their environmental standards, then the curve may sim-
ply flatten out (as depicted in Figure 20–1). Or if income growth and industrialization 
merely create new environmental hazards, it’s possible that the environmental 
Kuznets curve could rise over time (the “new toxics” path). Conversely, Dasgupta and 
colleagues cite recent and more optimistic evidence that the environmental Kuznets 
curve has been shifting downward as growth becomes less polluting and the turn-
ing point occurs at increasingly lower levels of income (the “revised EKC”). Thus the 
relationship between pollution and economic growth remains a subject of debate, 
one with high stakes, given that current income levels in most of the developing 
world remain far below the turning point of even the “revised” EKC.
Moreover, we cannot simply infer that increasing levels of income cause pollution 
to first rise and then fall. Alternative explanations for the inverted-U pattern include 
the natural progression from clean agrarian to polluting industrial to clean service 
sector domination of the economy, the beneficial effects of greater institutional 
development and better public policies in advanced economies, and advances due 
to technical change. It has also been suggested that wealthier countries have reduced 
their pollution levels by exporting their pollution-intensive production activities to 
developing countries. If true, this would call into question the ability of today’s poor 
countries to follow the inverted-U pattern, suggesting a path similar to the “race to 
the bottom” or even the “new toxics.” If it were simply the case that economic growth 
Revised EKC
Income per capita
Conventional EKC
Race to the bottom
Pollution
New toxics
$5000
$8000
FIGURE 20–1 Potential Paths for the Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC)
Source: “Confronting the Environmental Kuznets Curve,” by Smita Dasgupta, Benoit Laplante, Hua Wang, and 
David Wheeler. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 16, No. 1, Winter 2002: 147–168, p. 148. Reprinted by 
permission of the American Economic Association.

C O N C E P T  A N D  M E A S U R E M E NT  O F  S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E NT   761
automatically reduced pollution, we would have little else to worry about in the long 
run, and policy makers could focus exclusively on promoting growth. This is not the 
case. The fact that earlier predictions of environmental catastrophe proved overly 
dire is no guarantee against future environmental catastrophes.
Diamond (along with many economists), skeptical about the environmental 
Kuznets curve, poses this choice more starkly, asserting, 
because we are rapidly advancing along this non-sustainable course, the world’s 
environmental problems will get resolved, in one way or another, within the 
lifetimes of the children and young adults alive today. The only question is 
whether they will become resolved in pleasant ways of our own choice, or in 
unpleasant ways not of our choice, such as warfare, genocide, starvation, disease 
epidemics, and collapse of societies.6
The first step in assessing the sustainability of development lies in defining what 
we mean by sustainability and thinking about how to measure it. How will we rec-
ognize sustainable development when we see it? What is it in particular that is to be 
sustained?
CONCEPT AND MEASUREMENT OF SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT
Among the myriad academic and popular definitions of sustainable development, 
the most widely cited is that of the World Commission on Environment and Develop-
ment (commonly known as the Brundtland Commission, 1987), which defined it as 
“development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the abil-
ity of future generations to meet their own needs.”7 While highlighting the notion of 
intergenerational equity, the Brundtland Commission’s concept of sustainable devel-
opment remains vague, and in particular fails to define “needs.” For instance, “needs” 
might be interpreted to require the maintenance of only a bare minimum standard 
of living, though most of us might hope for more than such a low standard for our 
children. The Brundtland Commission’s definition is also vague with respect to the 
question of what it means for future generations to meet their needs. This concept 
could imply that the well-being of future generations remains above some (unde-
fined) minimum standard, that future well-being be equal to present well-being, or 
that each generation’s well-being be equal to or greater than the well-being of the 
previous generation. Recent discussions of sustainable development by economists 
CONCEPT AND MEASUREMENT OF SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
6Diamond, Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Survive, 498.
7World Commission on Environment and Development. Our Common Future (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1987), p. 43 (also known as the Brundtland report).

762   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
have tended to define a sustainable path as one along which intergenerational well-
being does not decline.
Operationalizing the standard that the well-being of future generations not 
decline requires a clear definition of well-being and some means of measuring it. 
For instance, in Chapter 2 we addressed the question of happiness as a measure of 
well-being, with the paradoxical finding that happiness is not monotonically tied to 
income. In practice, economists often use income as a proxy for the level of develop-
ment. For the purpose of measuring the potential well-being of future generations, 
however, we need to expand that concept to equate well-being with the economy’s 
wealth. Economists have shown that the only way for intergenerational well-being 
not to decline is for per capita wealth not to decline. Non-declining wealth per capita 
requires that the growth rate of wealth be greater than or equal to the growth rate of 
population.8 But what do we mean by wealth?
This concept of sustainable development requires a broad concept of wealth. 
Economics Nobel Laureate Kenneth Arrow and colleagues define wealth as “the social 
worth of an economy’s entire productive base. Because the productive base consists 
of the entire range of factors that determine intergenerational well-being, we . . .  refer 
to wealth as comprehensive wealth.”9 Comprehensive wealth (also referred to as total 
wealth) is made up of produced capital (buildings, roads, machinery and equip-
ment), natural capital (minerals and fossil fuels, forests, agricultural land, and pro-
tected areas), and intangible capital (a broad category that includes human, social, 
and institutional capital).10 Comprehensive wealth differs from the more familiar 
 concept of gross domestic product (GDP) in a critical way that highlights the con-
cept of sustainability: GDP includes, besides the production of goods and services, 
the value of asset liquidation as part of national output. When Chile or Zambia mine 
and export copper, the depletion of this natural resource counts toward each nation’s 
GDP, but growth based on the depletion of natural resources may not be sustainable. 
This type of resource use diminishes comprehensive wealth.
Measuring the different categories of capital is a challenge. The value of each 
type of capital is a function of its price, yet we observe prices only for goods and ser-
vices that are traded in markets. This is a special problem in the case of natural capi-
tal for which markets are often missing. Water is an example of a vital and limited 
natural resource, the majority of which is used as an input for agriculture. Often there 
8The growth rate of any ratio is the growth rate of the numerator minus the growth rate of the denomi-
nator. Wealth per capita is the ratio (wealth to population). Thus the growth rate of wealth per capita is 
the growth rate of wealth minus the growth rate of population. If the population growth rate exceeds the 
growth rate of wealth, then wealth per capita declines.
9Kenneth J. Arrow, Partha Dasgupta, Lawrence H. Goulder, Kevin J. Mumford, and Kirsten Oleson, 
“Sustainability and the Measurement of Wealth,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 
16599, Cambridge, MA: NBER, December 2010, p. 2.
10This discussion draws on World Bank, The Changing Wealth of Nations, Measuring Sustainable Devel-
opment in the New Millennium (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011).

C O N C E P T  A N D  M E A S U R E M E NT  O F  S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E NT   763
is no well-defined market for water use. Yet, depletion of water resources is a major 
concern, and the failure to price water to reflect its opportunity cost may exacerbate 
this depletion. The damage caused by air and water pollution, including the damage 
to human health, is also difficult to value precisely. Various ecosystem services (such 
as the supply of wild foods, cultural and recreational uses, and the aesthetic value 
of natural landscapes) also often lack market prices and are difficult to incorporate 
explicitly in wealth accounting. The same is true for such public goods as biodiver-
sity and carbon storage. In part because of even more severe challenges to measure-
ment, intangible capital is typically measured as a residual, the difference between 
total wealth and the sum of produced and natural capital. Total wealth is calculated 
as the present value of future consumption that is sustainable. In making these esti-
mates, the World Bank applies a discount rate of 1.5 percent over a period of 25 years. 
This calculation of total wealth is thus independent of the value of the three forms of 
capital, allowing intangible capital to be calculated as the residual.
Table 20–1 provides wealth and per capita wealth data for different country 
groups in 1995 and 2005. Global wealth between these years increased by 34 per-
cent. Over that same period, global population increased by 17 percent, resulting in 
a 17 percent increase in global wealth per capita. The largest absolute increases in 
per capita wealth were in the high-income nations, but every income group expe-
rienced gains. Table 20–1 also provides insights into both the composition of total 
wealth and changes in that composition as a function of income level. Intangible 
capital makes up the largest category of wealth at all levels of income and in both 
years. Yet there is a clear pattern of change in the composition of total wealth: low-
income countries rely substantially on natural capital compared with high-income 
countries, with most of the difference lying in the relative proportions of intangible 
capital. This cross-sectional pattern is also apparent over time, as increased wealth in 
the low-income countries is associated with a shift in the composition of total wealth 
from natural capital to intangible capital. This decreasing reliance on natural capital 
as a component of total wealth is consistent with the structural transformation intro-
duced in Chapter 16. Thus, notes a World Bank study, “For countries dependent on 
nonrenewable natural capital, transforming natural capital to other forms of wealth 
is the path to sustainable development.”11
For many developing countries fortunate enough to have large endowments of 
natural resources, it is precisely the failure to make this transformation that threat-
ens the sustainability of their development paths. Nigeria provides a prime example 
of this problem. Oil has dominated Nigeria’s economy since the discovery in the late 
1950s of the country’s enormous reserves, accounting for nearly all of its export rev-
enue and over one third of GDP. The government of Nigeria has financed much of its 
operations with oil revenue, continually drawing down this nonrenewable resource. 
Yet, Nigeria remains poor and underdeveloped relative to its potential because it has 
11The World Bank, The Changing Wealth of Nations, p. 6.

764   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
TABLE 20–1 Wealth and Per Capita Wealth by Type of Capital and Income Group, 1995 and 2005 (constant 2005 US$)
1995
2005
INCOME GROUP
TOTAL 
WEALTH (US$ 
BILLIONS)
PER CAPITA 
WEALTH 
(US$)
INTANGIBLE 
CAPITAL 
(%)
PRODUCED 
CAPITAL 
(%)
NATURAL 
CAPITAL 
(%)
TOTAL 
WEALTH (US$ 
BILLIONS)
PER 
CAPITA 
WEALTH 
(US$)
INTANGIBLE 
CAPITAL 
(%)
PRODUCED 
CAPITAL 
(%)
NATURAL 
CAPITAL 
(%)
Low income
2,447
5,290
48
12
41
 3,597
 6,138
57
13
30
Lower middle income
33,950
11,330
45
21
34
58,023
16,903
51
24
25
Upper middle income
36,794
73,540
68
17
15
47,183
81,354
69
16
15
High income OECD
421,641
478,445
80
18
2
551,964
588,315
81
17
 2
World
504,548
103,311
76
18
6
673,593
120,475
77
18
 5
OECD, Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development.
Source: Table 1.1 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank: The Changing Wealth of Nations: Measuring Sustainable Development 
in the New Millennium, 2011. Reprinted with permission.

C O N C E P T  A N D  M E A S U R E M E NT  O F  S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E NT   765
failed to transform its natural capital into either manufactured or intangible capital 
(such as a more highly educated labor force). Indeed, there is a simple rule of thumb 
(known as the Hartwick rule) that suggests that a sustainable development path 
for countries that depend on nonrenewable resources requires the rents from those 
resources to be continually invested rather than consumed.12 Nigeria is hardly alone 
among developing countries in having depleted its endowment of natural resource 
abundance while failing to develop accordingly. In addition to other oil exporters, 
such countries as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Zambia, and Zimbabwe 
have all failed to develop to the potential available through their natural resource 
endowments.13 In contrast, diamond-rich Botswana has been among the world’s 
 fastest-growing economies. Mexico and Peru have also succeeded in transforming 
natural capital into manufactured capital.
The tradeoffs are somewhat more complicated for countries in which the natu-
ral capital endowment is based on renewable resources, such as forest land. In these 
cases, property rights and other supporting institutions can play important roles in 
limiting harvests to sustainable levels. Deforestation in the Amazon exemplifies the 
overexploitation of a renewable natural resource. In this, and many other cases, the 
overutilization of renewable resources happens because the lack of market prices for 
such resources often leads them to be undervalued and threatened. The reliance of 
low-income countries on natural capital comes with the risk that the depletion of nat-
ural capital may cause permanent losses of biodiversity and other ecosystem services.
SAVING FOR A SUSTAINABLE FUTURE
Comprehensive wealth defines the current generation’s well-being and constrains 
the well-being of future generations. A sustainable path of development (a path along 
which the well-being of each generation is at least equal to that of the previous gen-
eration) requires the creation of wealth at a rate at least equal to the rate of popula-
tion growth. Wealth creation results from savings and investment over time. From 
one period to the next, the increase in comprehensive wealth equals adjusted net 
saving (ANS), sometimes called genuine saving, defined as “gross national savings 
adjusted for the annual changes in the volume of all forms of capital.”14 We can mea-
sure countries’ ANS by starting with the familiar concept of gross saving (S), which 
is simply total income minus total consumption. Maintaining wealth requires saving 
12Specifically, the portion of the rents that should be invested under the Hartwick rule is equivalent to 
the depreciation of the capital stock, a proportion that approaches the full rent as the resource becomes 
progressively depleted.
13Chapter 18 discusses the pitfalls associated with countries’ reliance on natural resource exports for 
their trade strategy.
14The World Bank, The Changing Wealth of Nations, p. 37. The only theoretical difference between 
the increase in comprehensive wealth and adjusted net savings is that the former includes capital gains 
(which arise from changes in the real price of assets).

766   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
sufficiently to offset depreciation of existing assets. In standard national accounting, 
this idea is captured by measuring net saving (NS), defined as gross saving minus 
the depreciation of made capital (Dm):
 
NS  S  Dm 
[20–1]
But focusing on depreciation of only made capital is too limited, and in principle the 
concept should be expanded to include depreciation of natural capital (Dn), includ-
ing the depletion of energy stocks, dwindling mineral assets, and damage from air 
pollution. This gives rise to the measurement of ANS:
 
ANS  S  Dm  Dn 
[20–2]
This corrected definition of net saving suggests that, if enough is saved each year to 
cover the depreciation of both made and natural capital, the economy can sustain 
its wealth and its level of consumption. In principle, this idea could be extended to 
include other assets as well, including human capital, knowledge, and social assets. 
However, measurement difficulties and lack of data make this extension difficult in 
practice, so we restrict our discussion here to made and natural capital. We can inter-
pret ANS as an indicator of sustainability of an economy’s development path. If ANS 
is declining (particularly if it is declining over consecutive years), this indicates that 
the economy’s path is unsustainable, that it’s depleting the productive base on which 
the welfare of future generations depends. Because some forms of capital are inevi-
tably excluded from the calculation of ANS, its interpretation in practice requires 
caution and judgment. Research by economists Susana Ferreira, Kirk Hamilton, and 
Jeffrey Vincent has shown that ANS does predict future economic performance in a 
cross section of countries, but only if ANS is adjusted to account for the depletion of 
natural resources.15
Figure 20–2 illustrates ANS trends by developing region since 1970. While the 
data indicate substantial variability, several broad observations stand out. Both East 
Asia and South Asia have high and increasing rates of ANS compared with Latin 
America (for which the rate of ANS has been relatively low but positive over time) 
and sub-Saharan Africa (for which the rate of ANS has been low, trending downward, 
and negative after 2005). The unsustainable path reflected for sub-Saharan Africa is 
dominated by large oil-exporting countries, such as Nigeria, which (as noted above) 
fuels its economy through the gradual depletion of its oil reserves without converting 
that natural capital into other forms of capital. The positive trends in East and South 
Asia are dominated by the large and rapidly growing economies of China and India, 
which by comparison have relied less on the depletion of natural resources and more 
on the expansion of their stocks of physical and human capital. Box 20–1 extends the 
15Susana Ferreira, Kirk Hamilton, and Jeffrey Vincent, “Comprehensive Wealth and Future Consump-
tion: Accounting for Population Growth,” World Bank Economic Review 22, no. 2 (2008), 233–48.

C O N C E P T  A N D  M E A S U R E M E NT  O F  S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E NT   767
analysis of ANS as an indicator of sustainability to incorporate the effects of popula-
tion growth, illustrating these concepts with the case of Ghana, where ANS was posi-
tive while ANS per capita was negative.
To summarize, the concept of sustainable development has been defined in 
numerous ways; yet the most popular definition, that of the Brundtland Commission, 
highlights the requirement that consumption by today’s generation must be accom-
panied by sufficient conservation of resources so as not to reduce the consump-
tion potential of future generations. Knowing whether we are meeting this standard 
requires clear definitions and specific metrics. Economists’ efforts to measure the 
sustainability of development have focused on net saving as an indicator of whether 
resource use by the current generation is expanding or contracting the potential cre-
ation of wealth by future generations. Experience to date is mixed. While some coun-
tries and regions have succeeded in rapidly expanding the potential wealth of future 
generations, others have been consuming rather than investing their resource base. 
These latter regions thus appear to be following unsustainable development trajec-
tories. In many cases, the unsustainable depletion of natural resources and environ-
mental damage through pollution are a result of market failure. The following section 
defines and illustrates this concept.
East Asia
South Asia
Latin America
and Caribbean
Middle East
and North Africa
Sub-Saharan
Africa
—20
—10
0
10
20
30
Gross national income (percent)
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Year
FIGURE 20–2 Adjusted Net Saving for Developing Regions, 1970–2008
Data exclude particulate emission damage.
Source: World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://databank.worldbank.org.

768   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
BOX 20–1 THE MALTHUSIAN EFFECT OF POPULATION GROWTH ON
ADJUSTED NET SAVINGS IN GHANA
Adjusted net savings (ANS) is a concept that we can use to measure sustainabil-
ity. As developed in the text, ANS tracks changes in a country’s comprehensive
wealth. Sustainability requires that wealth be nondecreasing from one generation
to the next; yet from a welfare perspective, wealth must be measured per capita.
If the population is growing, then maintaining per capita wealth at a constant
level requires that comprehensive wealth grows at the same rate as population.
From this perspective, it is entirely possible that development would not be sus-
tainable in the per capita sense, even if comprehensive wealth is increasing. In
other words, a negative rate of ANS reduces both total and per capita wealth; 
yet the converse is not necessarily true—a positive rate of ANS need not imply
increases in wealth per capita. Some countries may add to their total wealth but
not enough to compensate for population growth. To determine whether the
rate of ANS is sufficient to increase wealth per capita, we must adjust that rate 
to take account of population growth. This requires subtracting from ANS the
amount by which ANS must increase each year simply to keep up with popula-
tion growth—the so-called Malthusian term. If the remaining difference is posi-
tive, then wealth per capita increases. If the remaining difference between actual
ANS and the amount of ANS needed to maintain per capita wealth is negative, 
then wealth per capita decreases. This difference is the adjusted net saving 
gap. As a percent of gross national income, this saving gap tells us how much
the rate of ANS would need to increase to keep wealth per capita constant over
time.
Ghana provides an example of a country in which comprehensive wealth grew 
absolutely but fell per capita. Measuring saving and wealth in per capita terms 
requires a small modification to the accounting framework developed in the
chapter. Because most of what we termed intangible capital consists of human
capital (and is thus reflected in the population itself), we must exclude intangible
capital from our calculation of comprehensive wealth per capita to avoid double 
counting (now that population enters the formula directly). For lack of data, we
also exclude the value of carbon emissions per capita from our calculation of 
ΔANS.
The table on the following page details the calculation of changes in wealth
per capita in Ghana for the year 2000, when Ghana’s population grew by 1.7 per-
cent. The left-hand column of the table decomposes tangible wealth per capita 
into its subcategories. The right-hand column shows the composition of adjusted 
net savings, subtracting the consumption of fixed capital and resource depletion

M A R K E T  FA I L U R E S   769
MARKET FAILURES
The term market failure describes situations in which market prices deviate from 
scarcity values and individuals and companies make decisions that maximize their 
own profits but cause losses for others and society as a whole. A central theme of this 
chapter is that, within a single country, correcting those market failures and estab-
lishing properly working, efficient markets can be among the most powerful and 
effective mechanisms to promote efficient resource use, reduce environmental deg-
radation, and generate sustainable development. At first blush, that proposition may 
seem counterintuitive. The point, however, is that environmental degradation often 
occurs because market participants do not take into account the full costs of their 
actions on the environment. For example, prices of goods produced in a factory may 
not include the costs to society of the air pollution generated by that factory. Govern-
ment policies and interventions aimed at incorporating these costs into market deci-
sions help improve environmental outcomes, make markets work better, and bring 
broader benefits to society.
MARKET FAILURES
from the sum of gross national saving and educational expenditures. Ghana’s
ANS per capita was $16. The Malthusian term equals the population growth rate
times comprehensive wealth per capita, or 0.017  $2022  $34. Even though
 Ghana’s ANS per capita was positive, the country’s per capita wealth fell by $16 
$34  $18. Stated differently, the growth rate of Ghana’s total wealth was
$16/$2022  0.8 percent which was less than the 1.7 percent rate of popula-
tion growth. This suggests an unsustainable long-run trajectory for Ghana.
Tangible wealth ($ per capita) 
 
Adjusted net saving
Subsoil assets 
65 
Gross national saving 
40
Timber resources 
290 
Education expenditure 
7
Non-timber forest resources 
76 
Consumption of fixed capital 
19
Protected areas 
7 
Energy depletion 
0
Cropland 
855 
Mineral depletion 
4
Pastureland 
43 
Net forest depletion 
8
Produced capital 
686
Total tangible wealth 
2,022 
Adjusted net saving 
16
Population growth 
1.7% 
¢ Wealth per capita
18
Source: Table 5.1 from The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The World
Bank: Where is the Wealth of Nations? Measuring Capital for the 21st Century, 2006. Reprinted with
y
permission.

770   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
Prominent among the market failures affecting resources are externalities—costs 
borne by the population at large but not by individual producers and benefits that 
accrue to society but cannot be captured by producers (see also Box 5–1). The most 
important externalities are those caused by the depletion or degradation of natural 
resources, including the environment. If resources are depleted at rates faster than 
they can be replenished or substituted by human-made capital, development will be 
unsustainable, either nationally or globally. If markets fail in this fundamental way, 
how can they promote sustainable development? To resolve this apparent conflict, 
we first need to analyze in greater depth the reason that markets fail to allocate natu-
ral resources efficiently.
EXTERNALITIES AND THE COMMONS
During the eighteenth century, as the Industrial Revolution began in England, cows 
still grazed on the commons of many villages in England and its American colonies. 
The essence of a village commons was open access, free of charge, to any member 
of the village. The first villagers to take advantage of open access had ample grazing 
for their livestock; their only cost was the time it would take to herd their animals to 
the commons, allow them to graze, and herd them home. But the amount of land was 
fixed and soil fertility and climate limited the quantity of grass. As more villagers used 
the commons, the grass became sparse, so the animals took longer to feed or, in the 
case of open rangeland, herders were forced to travel farther to find forage, so that 
everyone’s costs rose. The rising average cost to each herder eventually discouraged 
grazing on the commons. But the new entrants did not have to pay compensation 
for the rising costs imposed on each of the previous entrants and more grazing took 
place than was in the interests of the village as a whole. Eventually, because no one 
incorporated the full cost of their grazing into their decisions, overgrazing destroyed 
the commons as a useful source of feed for everyone.
The dilemma of the commons is a widespread phenomenon, applicable to any 
limited resource to which access is unlimited. Grazing on open range, whether in the 
U.S. West or the African savanna, has the same outcome. Open access to timberlands 
or access at fees well below the social cost results in overlogging and the destruction 
of native forests in Brazil, Ghana, Indonesia, and many other tropical countries. Open 
access to fishing grounds in the North Atlantic, in Peru’s Pacific waters, and in some 
inland lakes in Africa has already depleted fish stocks beyond their ability to regener-
ate. Free use of water from a stream benefits upland farmers, who have first access 
to the water, at the expense of downstream farmers, who get less water. Even traffic 
congestion in cities like Bangkok, Mexico City, and New York fits the description of 
a common property: City streets, to which access is free, are the common resource; 
each new vehicle causes worse traffic jams, forcing all previous entrants into longer, 
more costly commutes.

M A R K E T  FA I L U R E S   771
The earth’s environment is composed of several common resources: air and the 
atmosphere, fresh water and the oceans, the earth’s soils, and the diverse plant and 
animal species that live in this biosphere. Access to the environment typically is free. 
When manufacturers and farmers vent their waste into the air or water or create 
toxic dumps in the ground, they create health problems for the affected population, 
reduce the value of land in the affected area, destroy recreational potential, and gen-
erally reduce the welfare of people who value a clean environment. When lumber 
companies cut down a rain forest, they destroy the habitat of plant and animal spe-
cies that are of value to others, including local populations that may harvest them 
or citizens or tourists who simply like to see them. Deforestation in the tropics signif-
icantly reduces biodiversity, perhaps eliminating potential new sources of pharma-
ceuticals or industrial products as well. They also may alter local climates, change 
patterns of water availability to surrounding farmers, and cause soil erosion. When 
we include the environment as a common resource, then much private activity gen-
erates external costs and market failure becomes a very general phenomenon. On 
a grand scale, we might think of the earth’s entire atmosphere as a commons beset 
by the negative externality of greenhouse gas emissions, resulting in global climate 
change.
External costs and benefits are at the core of the common resource problem. A 
new producer creates higher costs for all previous entrants or all producers impose 
external costs on the general population. In either case, in the absence of regulation, 
taxes, or property rights for environmental quality, external costs are not borne by the 
producers who cause them and the prices of their products do not reflect the social 
costs of production. Thus more of these resource-depleting or -polluting goods and 
services are produced and consumed than would be the case if prices reflected exter-
nal costs. Hence societies pollute more than their people would choose if markets 
reflected all social costs.
Figure 20–3 shows this process. In a market with competitive producers, the sup-
ply curve S represents private marginal costs, PMC. Market equilibrium occurs at 
price P1 with output Q1. But, if this is a polluting industry, the external costs make 
the social marginal cost, SMC, higher. If these costs were reflected in the market, the 
price would jump to P2 and demand, and therefore output, would be reduced to Q2. 
As less of the offending product is grown or manufactured, there would be less envi-
ronmental degradation.
Designing responses to problems of the commons requires a closer look at what 
we mean by the commons, more formally referred to as common-pool resources 
(CPRs). CPRs have two characteristics: It is difficult to exclude anyone from using 
them, and use by one person reduces the availability of that resource for use by oth-
ers. Potential solutions to the types of problems noted earlier depend more specif-
ically on the nature of property rights governing the CPR. Most of the problems of 
CPRs arise when property rights are defined as open access regimes, where there 

772   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
are no property rights at all. Yet, other CPRs may be characterized by the existence 
of group property rights, individual (or firm) property rights, or government prop-
erty rights. In such settings, tragedies of the commons are not inevitable. Economics 
Nobel Prize winner Elinor Ostrom shows that a wide range of institutions for govern-
ing and managing CPRs can, and have, evolved for CPRs that are not simply open 
access resources. Farmer-managed irrigation systems in Nepal are one among many 
examples of locally determined rules for conserving natural resources. Ostrom and 
colleagues find that particular settings are most conducive to the evolution of suc-
cessful informal rules for managing CPRs. These settings are environments where the 
resource degradation is not yet too severe and where users have good information 
about conditions, situations in which users depend on the resource as a main source 
of their livelihoods and are interested in sustainability of the resource, and settings 
in which national governments facilitate local organization (rather than attempt to 
impose rules from outside the community).16
SMC
External
costs
S
D
= PMC
Quantity
Price
2Q
1Q
2P
1P
FIGURE 20–3 External Diseconomies
Polluters impose costs on others. If these external costs were reflected in the firms’ costs, the 
social marginal cost curve (SMC) would prevail, the market price would be P2, and output 
would be Q2. But because the firms do not bear these costs, their private marginal cost curve 
(PMC) is lower, so more of the polluting product (Q1) is produced and consumed.
16Elinor Ostrom, Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1990). See also Joanna Burger, Christopher B. Field, Richard B. Norgaard, 
Elinor Ostrom, and David Policansky, “Revisiting the Commons: Local Lessons, Global Challenges,” 
Science 284, no. 5412 (April 1999), 278.

P O L I C Y  S O L UT I O N S   773
POLICY SOLUTIONS
The market failures that lead to overexploitation of natural resources stem from 
external costs that are not borne by producers. Even in a well-functioning market 
economy, externalities require government intervention to make markets work bet-
ter and to reach efficient market outcomes. Governments can bestow property rights 
on private users, regulate access to common resources, impose taxes (or pay subsi-
dies) that reflect external costs (or benefits), and issue tradable access rights. There is 
also recent experience with informal regulation by local communities in the absence 
of formal government regulation. We discuss each of these options in turn.
PROPERTY RIGHTS
Common properties generate external costs because no one owns or controls the 
right to exploit them. For some resources, a simple solution would be to confer own-
ership, which economists call property rights, on a single individual or company. 
As long as the owner is a profit-maximizer and sells output in a competitive market, 
the socially optimal outcome is achieved without further government intervention. 
Property rights, to be effective, must be exclusive and well defined, leaving no doubt 
to the owners and possible competing claimants about what has been conferred and 
to whom. Rights need to be secure, so that the risk of loss through legal challenge 
or expropriation is reduced and enforceable through the judicial system. Ownership 
must be valid over a long-enough horizon that the owners have a stake in the long-
term, sustainable exploitation of the resource. Longevity converts the resource into 
an asset for the producer, who can reap the benefits from investments in improving 
and sustaining its productivity. And the rights must be transferable, so the owner can 
realize the benefits of the resource asset by selling the property at any time.
The implications of clearly assigned property rights for market-based pollution 
abatement were formalized in 1960 by Nobel economist Ronald Coase. The Coase 
theorem posits that under certain circumstances (in particular, zero transaction 
costs), clear assignment of property rights leads bargaining in free markets to attain 
optimal levels of externalities. It is important that the Coase theorem also suggests 
that this result is independent of the specific allocation of those property rights.17 A 
stylized example of the Coase theorem could be a situation in which an upstream 
factory dumps effluent waste into a river, which then flows downstream and destroys 
a fishery. When the river itself belongs to neither the factory nor the fisherman, this 
negative externality persists. The Coase theorem suggests that if either the factory or 
the fisherman is assigned property rights to the river, free bargaining between the 
two parties will result in the optimal level of pollution.
POLICY SOLUTIONS
17R. H. Coase, “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics 3 (1960), 1–44.

774   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
GOVERNMENT REGULATION
As an alternative to conveying private property rights, governments themselves can 
act as the owners of common resources and directly regulate their use. Governments 
can limit the quantity of a hunter’s kill, a fisher’s catch, a logger’s haul, a rancher’s 
herd, or a polluter’s emissions. And they can regulate the kinds of equipment that 
can or must be used: Some kinds of fishing nets, boats, or navigation equipment have 
been banned; hunters may be restricted in their choice of weapons; polluters are 
required to install equipment that scrubs gas emissions and treats wastewater.
Quantity regulations raise two issues. First, how do the regulators know the opti-
mal levels of access and output? If property rights can be conveyed, efficient outcomes 
are approached through market forces and no government judgments are needed. 
But if regulation replaces the market, regulators need to estimate the characteristics 
of both producers’ costs and users’ demand for the products of a common resource. 
To get a sense of these information requirements, consider the regulation of air pol-
lution. The external costs of pollution are manifest in the reduced welfare of others: 
poor health, unsightly environment, lower property values, fewer and more expensive 
recreational possibilities, and possibly reduced productivity and income. If these costs 
could be measured, they would be depicted by a curve such as marginal external cost 
(MEC) in Figure 20–4, which shows the marginal external cost of pollution (measured 
along the horizontal axis). Those who believe that the costs of pollution are higher 
than normally recognized or who put a high premium on reducing pollution argue, 
MAC
MEC
G
A
E
D
B
C
E
Costs or benefits ($)
Level of pollution
*
C
*
Q
2
Q
1
Q
3
Q
FIGURE 20–4 Optimal Level of Pollution
The marginal external cost of pollutants, borne by the population, is given by MEC; the 
marginal cost of abatement, borne by the firm, is MAC. The total cost to society (area E 	 A) is 
minimized and pollution is optimal at Q*, where MEC  MAC.

P O L I C Y  S O L UT I O N S   775
in effect, that the MEC curve should be shifted up. Wherever it is located, any reduc-
tion in pollution (a movement to the left on the horizontal axis) means a reduction in 
the cost to society from pollution or, equivalently, an increase in the marginal external 
benefit of abatement.
However, there is a cost to abating pollution. The polluting firm, say, a petro-
chemical plant, can reduce its effluents either by changing its production process, 
installing abatement equipment such as gas scrubbers and water treatment plants, 
or reducing output. The marginal cost of abatement (MAC) function traces these 
marginal abatement costs. At any point along MAC, the cost shown is that of the low-
est-cost method of abatement. Moving from right (high pollution) to left (lower pol-
lution), MAC rises because it becomes increasingly costly to clean up air or water the 
stricter are the standards or the lower the level of contamination. It is important to 
recognize that these costs of abatement, although borne by the petrochemical firm, 
also are costs to society because they involve either less consumption of petrochemi-
cals or savings spent on abatement that otherwise might have been spent on invest-
ment in other goods or services people want. These abatement costs thus have equal 
weight to the benefits gained by reducing pollution.
Society’s (and government’s) aim should be to minimize the combined costs of 
pollution and its abatement. This is achieved at Q* in Figure 20–4, where MEC  MAC. 
At this point Q3  Q* of pollution has been abated (assuming for convenience that 
Q3 is the maximum amount of pollution), and Q* of pollution remains. Because these 
are marginal cost curves, the total external cost of pollution is the area E under MEC 
from 0 to Q*. And the total cost of abatement is given by the shaded area A under 
the MAC curve between Q* and Q3. With less pollution, such as Q1, the marginal 
abatement cost exceeds the marginal external cost of pollution and the total cost of 
additional abatement, the area of the trapezoid Q1Q*BC, exceeds the net gain from 
reduced pollution, Q1Q*BD. If more pollution is permitted, such as Q2, the additional 
external cost, Q*Q2EB, exceeds the reduced cost of abatement, Q*Q2GB.
Therefore, society is better off with some pollution than with none, because abat-
ing the last unit of pollution is expensive relative to its benefits. Similarly, society 
gains from some exploitation of natural resources, even nonrenewable ones. But how 
do the regulators, who wish to achieve this optimal level of pollution, know what it 
is? To find Q*, they have to know all the external costs of pollution, as a function of 
the levels of contaminants in the air, water, and soil. In addition to these estimates of 
direct economic costs, finding Q* requires having a method for estimating the values 
people place on environmental amenities such as clean air, water, and soil. The costs 
in some cases are substantial. A recent collection of studies from the World Bank esti-
mate the costs of environmental degradation in the Middle East and North Africa.18 
As summarized by country and by resource category in Table 20–2, these costs are 
18Leila Croitoru and Maria Sarraf, eds., The Cost of Environmental Degradation: Case Studies from the 
Middle East and North Africa (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2010).

776   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
estimated to range from approximately 3 percent to 5 percent of GDP. Various studies 
of the cost of environmental degradation in China suggest a figure up to 13 percent of 
GDP. Such studies, however, confront a range of limitations (data in particular), and 
their results are generally not directly comparable (due to the use of differing meth-
odologies). Their results are best interpreted as providing orders of magnitude.
In the absence of precise cost estimates, regulators must set somewhat arbitrary 
standards based on studies estimating the impact of pollutants on human health, 
animal survival, forest die back (from acid rain) and regeneration, and presumed cli-
mate changes.
TAXES, SUBSIDIES, AND PAYMENTS FOR 
ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES
A third option is that, in principle, the government also could achieve optimal rates 
of resource use by imposing taxes that reduce the incentive for producers to use com-
mon properties or manufacture polluting products. A tax might be imposed on out-
put that represents the external costs of production, so that the private marginal cost 
schedule shifts up to equal the social marginal cost schedule.19 This might take the 
19In Figure 20–3, the tax would shift the PMC schedule up to coincide with the SMC schedule.
TABLE 20–2  Cost of Environmental Degradation in the Middle East and North  
    Africa (percent GDP)
ALGERIA
EGYPT
LEBANON
MOROCCO
SYRIA
TUNISIA
Air pollution
1.0
2.1
1.0
1.0
1.3
0.6
Lack of access to 
water supply and 
sanitation
0.8
1.0
1.1
1.2
0.9
0.6
Land degradation
1.2
1.2
0.6
0.4
1.0
0.5
Coastal zone 
degradation
0.6
0.3
0.7
0.5
0.1
0.3
Waste manage-
ment
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.1
Subtotal
3.6
4.8
3.4
3.7
3.3
2.1
Global environ-
ment (CO2 
emissions)
1.2
0.6
0.5
0.9
1.3
0.6
Total
4.8
5.4
3.9
4.6
4.6
2.7
GPD, gross domestic product.
Source: Leila Croitoru and Maria Sarraf, eds., The Cost of Environmental Degradation: Case Studies 
from the Middle East and North Africa (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2010).
ALGERIA
EGYPT
LEBANON
MOROCCO
SYRIA
TUNISIA

P O L I C Y  S O L UT I O N S   777
form of a tax on each ton of steel or petrochemicals at a rate representing the external 
cost of pollution or a tax on gasoline to cover the costs of both pollution and traffic 
congestion. If the tax is on output or level of effort, the incentive is to reduce produc-
tion of the good with external costs. If the tax can be levied on the externality itself, 
there is an additional incentive to invest in reducing external costs. For example, a tax 
on the quantity of pollutants would give petrochemical plants an incentive to abate 
pollution, because the tax then is reduced. In general, attempts to tax pollutants have 
had limited success (and even less success in high-income countries than in devel-
oping and transitional economies). Monitoring is difficult (and expensive), charge 
rates generally are set too low, and tax avoidance can be relatively easy. Malaysia 
began to implement pollution taxes in the 1970s, and China now operates the world’s 
largest pollution tax system, though its effectiveness is disputed.20 Box 20–2 describes 
efforts to tax water pollution in Colombia.
20Jeffrey R. Vincent and Rozali Mohamed Ali, Managing Natural Wealth: Environment and Develop-
ment in Malaysia (Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, 2005).
Until the mid-1990s, Colombia’s efforts to curb water pollution had relied
exclusively on a traditional command-and-control approach in which regional
environmental regulatory authorities were responsible for issuing permits for
the discharge of wastewater. These permits were intended to limit the quan-
tity of discharges and to require that they meet specific effluent standards. 
These regional regulatory authorities, known as CARs (which stands for Cor-
poraciónes Autónomas Regionales), had issued permits to less than one third
of all discharges by 2002 and were lax in their monitoring and enforcement of
discharge standards.
Beginning in 1997, Colombia tried a new approach to reducing water pollu-
tion based on economic incentives, a per unit tax of pollution emitted. The imple-
mentation of this tax was specified in Decree 901, which directed that CARs 
first produce inventories of all facilities discharging wastewater and then set five-
year pollution reduction goals for each water basin in their jurisdiction. The CARs 
would then set tax rates per unit of effluent based on a minimum fee determined
by the Ministry of Environment, and then monitor the facilities’ discharges on a
regular basis.
Implementation of this water pollution tax encountered several barriers. Imple-
mentation was uneven across CARs, with only nine of Colombia’s 33 CARs
BOX 20–2 TAXING WATER POLLUTION IN COLOMBIA

778   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
Taxes that internalize external costs have two important advantages over regu-
lation. First, they allow the producer to choose the method of reducing access to a 
common resource so that rents are not dissipated in wasteful expenditures forced by 
regulators. The cost savings with this flexibility can be substantial. Second, taxes can 
generate substantial revenues for the government. These kinds of revenues can be 
used to fund environmental programs or in other ways to compensate citizens for the 
harm caused by pollution and other environmental degradation.
The inverse of this discussion is also true. Some externalities are positive. Positive 
externalities exist when an activity creates social benefits that are external to the firm. 
Examples might include the invention of new technologies that spill over into other 
firms or sectors, or the provision of improved health or training for workers, or the pol-
lination of neighboring orchards by bees from an apiary. Because these benefits are 
external to the firm, marginal social benefits exceed marginal private benefits, and 
fulfilling all of the program requirements by 2003. In addition, less than half the 
polluting facilities were actually charged the tax, and collection rates from those 
facilities averaged only 27 percent between 1997 and 2002. Municipal sewage 
authorities were particularly reluctant to pay their taxes, sparking complaints of 
unfairness by private firms. Implementation of the pollution tax was also hindered 
by confusion surrounding the continued existence of the previous command-
and-control system of permits.
Despite these impediments, a number of Colombia’s water basins achieved 
significant reductions in wastewater discharges. The extent to which this 
achievement can be attributed to the discharge fee program is difficult to assess. 
The confusion lies in the fact that before 1997, nearly all of the CARs lacked 
the regulatory and enforcement capacity necessary to effectively implement any
pollution reduction program. Once charged with the added responsibilities of cre-
ating inventories of polluting facilities and developing monitoring systems (with 
substantial technical support from the Ministry of Environment), the CARs’ abil-
ity to enforce the old emissions standards was also enhanced. The discharge 
fee system was more transparent than the previous approach, requiring regular 
reporting by the CARs. In addition, the new fee system created economic incen-
tives for better performance by the CARs themselves, which were allowed to 
keep fee revenues.
Source: Allen Blackman, “Incentives to Control Water Pollution in Developing Countries, How Well 
Has Colombia’s Wastewater Discharge Fee Program Worked and Why?,” Resources (Spring 2006) 
[Resources for the Future, Washington, DC].

P O L I C Y  S O L UT I O N S   779
markets undersupply them. In such cases, subsidies (which are simply negative taxes) 
may be justified to encourage optimal production of positive externalities. Such pro-
grams, however, run the risk of subsidizing activities that might have happened even 
in the absence of the subsidy.
Payments for environmental services (PES) are an extension of the idea of subsi-
dizing the production of positive externalities. Economist Sven Wunder has defined 
PES as a voluntary transaction by which a well-defined environmental service is pur-
chased by a buyer of that service from a provider conditional on the provision of the 
service.21 Such arrangements effectively create markets that had been missing for 
external environmental benefits. For instance, forest conservation may provide little 
direct benefit to farmers, whose private costs and benefits might then favor cutting 
down forests to expand their fields. Yet, downstream populations must then forego 
the benefits created by forests, such as biodiversity and carbon storage. PES systems 
create markets through which potential beneficiaries of environmental services pay 
potential providers of those services. In this example, PES could be made to farmers to 
induce them not to destroy forest land for agricultural expansion. The buyers of envi-
ronmental services might be the actual users of the services (for instance, a producer 
of hydroelectric power might pay upstream land users to conserve water). In other 
instances, governments (or even international financial institutions such as the World 
Bank) might pay providers for environmental services on behalf of users of those 
services.22 Examples of user-financed PES programs are payments for watershed ser-
vices in Pimampiro, Ecuador; payments for biodiversity and watershed services in 
Los Negros, Bolivia; and payments for carbon sequestration in Ecuador. Examples of 
government-financed PES programs are China’s Sloping Land Conservation Program, 
Mexico’s Payments for Hydrological Environmental Services program, and South Afri-
ca’s Working for Water program.23 PES programs exemplify practical efforts to imple-
ment the Coase theorem, as do the idea of marketable permits to pollute.
MARKETABLE PERMITS
A fourth intervention is to create a property right where none exists by issuing mar-
ketable permits, granting the holders the right to harvest a common resource up to 
a given limit or giving producers a license to pollute the environment up to speci-
fied amounts. Although environmentalists sometimes scoff at the notion of a right 
to pollute or exploit resources, this idea recognizes that zero pollution is usually not 
optimal because of the costs involved in achieving that goal. These permits may be 
21Cited in Stefanie Engel, Stefano Pagiola, and Sven Wunder, “Designing Payments for Environmental 
Services in Theory and Practice: An Overview of the Issues,” Ecological Economics 65 (2008), 663–74.
22Engel et al., Designing Payments for Environmental Services in Theory and Practice,” p. 666.
23These programs are reviewed in Sven Wunder, Stefanie Engel, and Stefano Pagiola, “Payments for 
Environmental Services in Developing and Developed Countries,” Ecological Economics [Special ed.] 65, 
no. 4 (May 2008), 663–852.

780   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
the most efficient way to reduce pollution and resource overuse, and this approach 
has been a major innovation of the past decade. The U.S. sulfur dioxide reduction 
scheme relies on tradable rights, and both Iceland and New Zealand revived fishing 
stocks by assigning fishing rights at a sustainable level and allowing fishers to trade 
their quotas freely.
Figure 20–5 shows how a pollution permit works.24 The MAC and MEC curves are 
copied from Figure 20–4. Say that the government knows the optimal level of pollution 
and auctions off emissions permits totaling Q *. Any firm polluting without a permit, 
if detected, would be fined or shut down. (Thus permits have the same enforcement 
requirements as regulations or taxes.) If MAC represents the cost of pollution abate-
ment for all firms in the market, they would bid up the price of permits to P *. The 
MAC schedule (moving from right to left) shows that firms can reduce pollution from 
Q3 to Q * at costs less than P *. Additional reductions in pollution would cost more than 
P *. Therefore, the MAC schedule is the demand curve for permits. Either the govern-
ment can issue a given number and observe the auction price paid for them or it can 
set a price and issue whatever number of permits is demanded by polluters.
MAC
Costs or benefits ($)
Level of pollution
MEC
2
Q
3
Q
*
Q
P2'
2P
*
P
FIGURE 20–5 Marketable Permits to Pollute 
The marginal cost of abatement (MAC) schedule shows the demand for pollution rights. If 
rights are issued to pollute up to Q2, these are worth P2 to polluters, but the public places a 
value of P2 on reducing pollution. This could be the basis for a bargain to reduce pollution to 
the optimal level, Q*.
MEC, marginal external cost.
24This figure is adapted from David W. Pearce and R. Kerry Turner, Economics of Natural Resources and 
the Environment (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1990), 319–20.

P O L I C Y  S O L UT I O N S   781
In developing and transitional economies, where policy dependence on market 
forces is a more recent phenomenon, marketable permits have been less common, 
though are increasing in frequency. Examples are transferable quotas for fisheries 
in Chile (beginning in 1991) and South Africa (beginning in 1997). Chile also imple-
mented an auctioning system for bus permits in its capital city, Santiago, starting in 
1991, and a system of tradable quotas for the emission of total suspended particu-
lates (TSP) from stationary sources in Santiago the following year. A review of Chile’s 
TSP trading program found it to have had limited success due to several problems 
with its implementation.25 One problem was that the enabling law itself was vague 
in regard to the way that permits would be allocated across firms. The program 
also initially overestimated the emissions target, which was subsequently reduced. 
By issuing permits totaling too high a level of emissions, effectiveness was limited. 
Effectiveness was further limited by the long period of time acquired for approval by 
the government for the sale of pollution permits between firms. These technical and 
institutional impediments to implementing Chile’s marketable permit program indi-
cate the challenges facing countries that choose this approach.
INFORMAL REGULATION
Informal regulation of pollution does not rely on traditional government-generated 
regulation. In place of formal regulation, such programs often rely on the public 
disclosure of information about firms’ and factories’ environmental performance 
to local stake holders (for instance people living near a factory or a firm’s custom-
ers). Potential benefits of informal regulation are its low cost and its lack of reliance 
on formal regulatory institutions. These characteristics make informal regulation of 
pollution especially attractive in developing countries, which are typically short of 
both funds and highly evolved regulatory institutions. Public disclosure potentially 
empowers communities to pressure polluters to improve their environmental perfor-
mance. The effects of such pressure might operate directly on the firm or indirectly 
if increased community awareness of the problem and its source leads to greater 
demand for formal intervention. In some circumstances, public disclosure can even 
bring pressure from capital markets for firms to alter their behavior. Public disclo-
sure programs take one of two forms: registries of plants’ emissions (without rating 
environmental performance), and programs that use plants’ emissions data to rate 
environmental performance.26 Chile and Mexico are among at least 20 countries with 
pollution registries, and performance ratings programs exist in China, Ghana, India, 
and several other developing countries.
25Jessica Coria and Thomas Sterner, “Tradable Permits in Developing Countries: Evidence from Air 
Pollution in Chile,” Journal of Environment & Development 19, no. 2 (2010), 145–70.
26For an excellent survey, see Allen Blackman, “Alternative Pollution Control Policies in Developing 
Countries,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 4, no. 2, (Summer 2010), 234–53.

782   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
The effectiveness of public disclosure types of informal environmental regula-
tion, in practice, may depend on characteristics that may or may not be present in 
developing countries. For instance, in the absence of a credible threat of more strin-
gent formal regulation, informal regulation may have less traction. In addition, capi-
tal markets may have little leverage in settings dominated by small firms with little 
reliance on outside investors. Further, information does not always flow freely in 
every country. Despite these contingencies, reviews of the effectiveness of public dis-
closure programs have found them to be effective in reducing pollution. These effects 
tend to be greater in cases in which the initial violations were the most flagrant. Yet, 
to date, rigorous evidence of successful ratings programs comes only from Indonesia, 
the Philippines, Vietnam, and China.27
POLICY FAILURES
Although some government intervention is necessary to correct for the market fail-
ures associated with natural resources, it is equally true that, all over the world, 
government policies frequently contribute to wasteful use of resources and the deg-
radation of the environment. Too much intervention or intervention of the wrong 
kind can be just as costly as too little intervention. We have seen that, when produc-
tion has external costs, one approach is to internalize those costs by raising produc-
tion costs through taxing output or granting marketable property rights. But, instead, 
governments commonly subsidize or otherwise reduce the costs the production of 
commodities that degrade natural resources and often compromise property rights 
in ways that encourage rapacious exploitation. Examples are not hard to find.
Forestry policy has been especially destructive in many tropical countries. For 
many years Brazil subsidized ranching and other activities that encroached on the 
Amazon rain forest. Through at least the first five years of the twenty-first century, the 
area deforested each year in the Brazilian Amazon was equivalent in size to the state 
of New Jersey. Approximately two thirds of the deforested land in Brazil in recent 
decades has been used for cattle ranches, and most of the remaining third has been 
cleared for subsistence farming. More recently, commercial agriculture has also been 
an important source of deforestation in Brazil. Tax policies favorable to pasture land 
encouraged deforestation. Brazil has reformed some of these environmentally harm-
ful tax incentives and stepped up efforts to regulate deforestation. At the end of 2010, 
the government of Brazil announced that the rate of deforestation in the Amazon 
for the previous year was 67 percent lower than the average rate of deforestation for 
the period 1996–2005. Time will tell if this improved trend proves durable. Box 20–3 
describes the policy failures underlying the rapid rate of deforestation in Indonesia.
POLICY FAILURES
27Blackman, “Alternative Pollution Control Policies in Developing Countries,” pp. 241–42.

P O L I C Y  FA I L U R E S   783
BOX 20–3 POLICY FAILURES AND DEFORESTATION IN INDONESIA
Over the course of the twentieth century, Indonesia’s forested area was cut by
nearly 50 percent, mostly the result of commercial logging. In May 2010, the
government of Indonesia introduced a moratorium on new logging contracts. Yet,
for decades before 2010, Indonesia’s rapid rate of deforestation was in some
measure the result of government policy, more specifically, the failure of govern-
ment policy. Four main categories of policy failure are to blame: policies support-
ing the buildup of excess capacity in the wood processing industry, conversion of
forested areas into agricultural land, inefficient collection and use of rents col-
lected from the forestry sector, and the absence of effective property rights in
many forested areas.
Beginning in the 1970s, government policy in Indonesia supported the expan-
sion of the timber processing industry by restricting the export of raw timber.
This depressed domestic timber prices, thus subsidizing timber processors. The
resulting overcapacity stimulated the demand for raw timber, much of it logged
illegally. Government-subsidized loans to the timber processing industry height-
ened these incentives.
Substantial tracts of forest were also clearcut to create space for large oil
palm plantations. This process accelerated during the 1990s and is cited as
having contributed to the massive forest fires of 1997–98. In addition, the gov-
ernment was promoting migration from densely populated Java to the outer
islands and cleared additional forest land to accommodate the migrants’ farming
activities.
The government was also inefficient in its collection of rents from the forestry
sector. By law, the government was supposed to levy fees based on both forest
area harvested and the number of units harvested. These fees were to be used
for replanting the harvested areas. In practice, rent collection was limited, esti-
mated to be between 24 and 36 percent of total economic rents in 1997–98,
resulting in substantial windfall profits for the logging industry.
All of these problems have been made worse by the absence of secure
property rights. By law, the state controls all forest areas. This means that the
actual users of those lands have minimal incentive to invest in the long-term
maintenance of that resource. Accelerated deforestation is one symptom of this
problem.
Source: Raymond Atje and Kurnya Roesad, “Who Should Own Indonesia’s Forests? Exploring the
Links between Economic Incentives, Property Rights and Sustainable Forest Management,” Econom-
ics Working Paper Series 76, Center for Strategic and International Studies, Jakarta, 2004.

784   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
Trade policy has been equally destructive. Ghana, Indonesia, and Malaysia, 
for example, placed bans on log exports as a means of promoting wood-processing 
industries. Export bans drive down the domestic price of tropical hardwood and so 
make it very profitable for sawmills and plywood mills to purchase logs and export 
semifinished products. But these industries are usually inefficient and consume 
resource rents through higher production costs. Because timber companies cannot 
export tropical hardwoods, such as ebony and mahogany, as logs, these valuable spe-
cies are used along with low-value timber to make inexpensive products, such as ply-
wood sent to Japan to make forms for pouring cement. The role of self-imposed log 
export bans in destroying rain forests should be a warning to northern countries that 
want to preserve tropical forests by imposing their own import bans on these logs.28
Energy pricing is another common policy failure. In oil-rich countries like Nige-
ria and Venezuela, energy has been kept cheap in an attempt to stimulate industrial-
ization and diversification, and Indonesia subsidized kerosene ostensibly to help the 
rural poor. This policy has multiple adverse effects. It encourages wasteful domestic 
consumption and reduces the country’s petroleum and gas reserves and its export-
earning potential. It encourages the use of cars and minibuses and so adds to conges-
tion. Cheap energy promotes industry ill-suited to the country’s endowments. Firms 
and consumers have little incentive to adopt energy-saving technology. Because 
burning oil is an important source of air pollution, all these overuses contribute to 
environmental degradation. Similarly, some oil importers, such as Argentina, China, 
Egypt, and India, have subsidized petroleum products by as much as 50 percent of 
the world price and so encouraged imports they cannot afford, industries that can-
not compete in world markets, and environmental degradation that market pricing 
would have discouraged.29
Infrastructure investment is a third area of widespread policy failure. In forestry 
and energy pricing, governments typically underprice the resource and fail to force 
private operators to account for external costs. In infrastructure investment, govern-
ments often create new external costs and fail to account for them in project plan-
ning. Environmental groups have focused much of their ire on investments in power 
dams, irrigation and flood control systems, roads, and power plants that damage 
their environments. Dams that flood their upstream areas displace local populations, 
who sometimes do not fare as well in new locations, and destroy natural habitat. 
Egypt’s huge Aswan Dam controls the floodwaters of the Nile. But before the dam, 
those floodwaters had beneficial effects, replenishing soil and leaching out unwanted 
salts, so the dam may have reduced agricultural productivity over the long run. This 
28On forest policies, see Robert Repetto and Malcolm Gillis, eds., Public Policies and the Misuse of For-
est Resources (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988); Jeffrey Vincent, “The Tropical Timber Trade 
and Sustainable Development,” Science 256 (1992), 1651–55.
29Bjorn Larsen and Anwar Shah, “World Fossil Fuel Subsidies in Global Carbon Emissions,” Working 
Paper WPS 1002, World Bank, Washington, DC, October 1992, esp. chart 1.

P O L I C Y  FA I L U R E S   785
does not mean that dams are necessarily bad ideas but rather the full costs are not 
always recognized up front and incorporated into prices.
The problem of common pool resources, policy responses to externalities, and 
policy failures are particularly important for the poor. The world’s poor are dispro-
portionately concentrated in fragile environments, and their livelihoods depend 
disproportionately on natural resources (especially open access and other forms 
of common property resources). The interactions between poverty and the envi-
ronment are complex, yet they are central to an understanding of sustainable 
development.
POVERTY-ENVIRONMENT LINKAGES
Economic growth, poverty alleviation, and environmental sustainability are three 
primary goals for development. As Figure 20–6 suggests, these goals are intrinsically 
linked to one another through a complex set of interactions. In characterizing this 
Poverty
alleviation
Growth
Sustainability
FIGURE 20–6 The Critical Triangle of Development Goals
Source: Vosti, S. A. and T. Reardon. 1997. Sustainability, Growth, and Poverty Alleviation: A Policy And 
Agroecological Perspective, Figure 1.1. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.

786   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
“critical triangle of development goals,” economists Stephen Vosti and Thomas Rear-
don note that these goals are highly compatible with one another in the long run. It is 
easy to see that a robust and healthy natural resource base will better support growth 
in agricultural productivity, which in turn can play a critical role in poverty allevia-
tion and economic growth. However, in the short run countries may confront difficult 
tradeoffs among these goals. If activities of the poor contribute to the degradation of 
the commons, efforts to preserve the environment by limiting access to the commons 
might aggravate poverty. The nature and severity of these tradeoffs may vary widely 
across different combinations of circumstances, though institutional failures and 
resulting externalities of the types discussed earlier provide a unifying theme.30 This 
section focuses on the bidirectional linkages between poverty alleviation and envi-
ronmental sustainability.
The complex relationship between poverty and environmental degradation 
arises because severe poverty in the world is disproportionately rural, and rural live-
lihoods depend heavily on natural resources, especially land and water. The reliance 
of the poor on natural resources centers on agriculture but also includes livestock, 
fisheries, and forest resources. Degradation of these resources directly threatens live-
lihood strategies of many of the world’s poor. The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 
Board, in its 2005 report Ecosystems and Human Well-Being, notes that “Over the past 
50 years, humans have changed ecosystems more rapidly and more extensively than 
in any comparable period of time in human history, largely to meet rapidly growing 
demands for food, fresh water, timber, fiber, and fuel. This has resulted in a substan-
tial and largely irreversible loss of the diversity of life on earth.” The report further 
suggests that
The changes that have been made to ecosystems have contributed to substantial 
net gains in human well-being and economic development, but these gains 
have been achieved at growing costs in the form of the degradation of many 
ecosystem services . . .  and the exacerbation of poverty for some groups of 
people. These problems, unless addressed, will substantially diminish the 
benefits that future generations obtain from ecosystems. The degradation of 
ecosystem services could grow significantly worse during the first half of this 
century and is a barrier to achieving the Millennium Development Goals.31
The problems of natural resource degradation particularly threaten the poor 
because the poor are concentrated in fragile environments, which are more vulner-
30A deeper discussion of institutional failures and externalities, including the causes and consequences 
of rapid population growth among the poor, as links between poverty and environmental degradation 
appears in Partha Dasgupta, “Population, Poverty, and the Natural Environment,” in Karl-Goran Mäler and 
Jeffrey Vincent, eds., Handbook of Environmental Economics, vol. 1 (Amsterdam: North Holland, 2003), 
chap. 5. 
31Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: Synthesis. (Washington, DC: 
Island Press, 2005), p. 1.

P O L I C Y  FA I L U R E S   787
able to degradation. Examples of fragile environments are areas with thin soil cover 
that are vulnerable to erosion, tropical forests, and coastal estuaries. About one quar-
ter of the world’s population lives on fragile land, yet the distribution of this popu-
lation varies widely by region. While only 11 percent of the population of wealthy 
countries (Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development; OECD) live 
on fragile lands, this proportion increases to about 25 percent in South and East Asia, 
and jumps to nearly 40 percent in sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East. These 
percentages increase substantially when we consider the rural poor in particular. 
About 66 percent of the world’s rural poor live on fragile lands, with the proportion 
rising to approximately 75 percent of the rural poor in sub-Saharan Africa, West Asia 
and North Africa.32
There are numerous examples of the value of environmental services in the 
livelihood strategies of the poor. Environmental services include such diverse 
functions as the supply of water and food, carbon sequestration, crop pollina-
tion, and recreation. Mangroves, coral reefs, forests and forested watersheds, and 
flood plains are among the key environmental features that figure prominently 
in the livelihood strategies of poor people around the world. Coastal mangroves, 
for instance, can be a valuable source of forest and fishery products. Economists 
Saudamini Das and Jeffrey Vincent have shown that mangroves buffered coastal 
villages in Orissa, India, from a super cyclone in 1999. The storm surge from that 
cyclone killed 10,000 people, but deaths were significantly reduced in villages pro-
tected by mangrove forests.33
Tropical rain forests are a prominent example of a diminishing natural resource 
of substantial economic value. Rain forests provide benefits that are both local and 
global in scope. The global environmental benefits of tropical rain forests include 
carbon sequestration (discussed later in the chapter), rainfall recycling, and flood 
control. Conversely, the loss of rain forests can impose important negative externali-
ties, including increased buildup of carbon dioxide, increased smoke, and reduced 
rainfall, a particular concern in the Amazon. While these effects are quite broad, even 
global, the effect of tropical rain forests on the poor depend more on rain forests’ 
local impact.
Direct harvesting of timber products is the most obvious local service and also 
the most problematic. The challenge with timber is to limit harvesting to sustainable 
yields. Overharvesting of timber resources, both legal and illegal, contributes signifi-
cantly to deforestation, though deforestation for agricultural expansion may be even 
greater (whether by large commercial farms in Brazil and Indonesia or by small-
32Edward Barbier, “Poverty, Development, Environment,” Environment and Development Economics 15 
(2010), 635–60, tab. 1(b).
33Saudamini Das and Jeffrey Vincent, “Mangroves Protected Villages and Reduced Death Toll during 
Indian Super Cyclone,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 106 no. 18 (2009), 7357–60.

788   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
holder farmers in Africa and mainland Southeast Asia).34 In doing so, it also reduces 
the value of other local rain forest services. The World Bank estimates that nontimber 
forest products directly support the livelihoods of approximately 400 million people 
and indirectly support the livelihoods of approximately 1 billion people.35 Nontimber 
forest products include food, fibers, dyes, minerals, and latex and have a total value 
in international trade of at least $9 billion per year (excluding medicinal products, 
which are valued at greater than 10 times that figure). Fuel wood is also a critical for-
est service, particularly for the poor; although it provides less than 7 percent of world 
energy use, fuel wood accounts for 40 percent of energy use in sub-Saharan Africa 
(and 90 percent of the use of wood in Africa).36 Tropical forests are also critical to 
managing watersheds, helping regulate water flows, cleaning and filtering the water, 
and preventing the deterioration of soil quality. Tropical rain forests have also been 
an important component of tourism (ecotourism in developing countries is growing 
rapidly), are a vital source of biodiversity, and are thought to contain more than half 
of the land-based species on the planet.
The value of such services is particularly important to the world’s poor. Econo-
mists have identified three different functions of forest income in rural livelihoods: 
(1) safety nets because forest products might help to compensate for other produc-
tion shortfalls, (2) support for current consumption such as food and fuels as noted 
earlier, and (3) a source of income growth and potential pathway out of poverty. In a 
review of 51 case studies from 17 developing countries, economist Paul Vedeld and 
colleagues found that forest environmental income made up an average of 22 percent 
of total income, with an average absolute value of $678 per household. The propor-
tion of forest income in total income was greatest among the poor, with fuel woods 
and wild foods together accounting for 70 percent of total forest income.37 Yet, the 
ability to derive livelihoods from natural resources also depends on the quality of 
those resources themselves. Barbier cites evidence from India that poor households 
in villages near high-quality forests derived up to 40 percent of their income from 
forest resources, whereas similar households in villages near poor-quality forests 
derived closer to 10 percent of their income from forest products.38
While these data and examples demonstrate the broad association between pov-
erty and the quality of environmental resources, the challenge lies in understanding 
the mechanisms through which poverty and the environment interact. Early studies, 
such as the Brundtland Commission, depicted a simple vicious circle in which “poor 
34Kenneth M. Chomitz et. al., At Loggerheads? Agricultural Expansion, Poverty Reduction, and Environ-
ment in the Tropical Forests (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2007).
35World Bank. Sustaining Forests: A Development Strategy (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2004).
36Mandar Trevedi, Stavros Papageorgiou, and Dominic Moran, What Are Rainforests Worth? Forest 
Foresight Report Number 4, Global Canopy Program, Oxford, UK, 2008.
37Paul Vedeld et al., “Forest Environmental Incomes and the Rural Poor,” Forest Policy and Economics 9 
(2007), 869–79.
38Barbier, “Poverty, Development, Environment,” p. 645.

P O L I C Y  FA I L U R E S   789
people are forced to overuse environmental resources to survive from day to day, 
and their impoverishment of their environment further impoverishes them, making 
their survival ever more uncertain and difficult.”39 Subsequent studies suggest a more 
nuanced view.
Reardon and Vosti provide a useful framework for understanding poverty- 
environment links in rural areas.40 Reardon and Vosti summarize their conceptual 
framework with the flowchart presented in Figure 20–7. Their approach relates four 
blocks of variables: asset categories of the rural poor, income-generating activi-
ties and land use at the household and village levels, categories of natural resources 
(including soil and water), and conditioning factors such as markets, prices, and 
infrastructure (or more broadly, institutions) that mediate interactions between the 
first three blocks of variables.
In this framework, each category of assets represents a potential form of poverty. 
Asset categories include natural resources that are both privately and commonly 
held (soil, water, biodiversity), human resources (health, education, labor), on-farm 
resources (physical and financial), off-farm resources (physical and financial), and 
community-owned resources (roads, common pasture lands) as well as social and 
political capital (political power). Households can be poor in any of these catego-
ries. Reardon and Vosti emphasize that asset-specific poverty can spill over in vari-
ous ways to result in environmental degradation. If, for example, land ownership is 
required to obtain credit, then a household that is poor in land may be precluded 
from making investments to improve their farm and nonfarm capital (including 
soil protection). As a consequence, such households may be unable to intensify 
their farming activities or work away from the farm, perhaps forcing them to rely 
on expanding their farming activities into fragile lands. Even though a given house-
hold may not be poor in the conventional welfare sense, it may still lack sufficient 
resources to invest in improving the resource base.
The Reardon-Vosti conceptual framework also distinguishes between categories 
of environmental resources. Soil, water, biodiversity, and air may be either helped or 
harmed by household activities, depending in part on the value of those resources to 
rural households. Yet, a potential problem arises when the value of such resources to 
society at large differs from their value to poor rural households. Reardon and Vosti 
illustrate this point with the example of a large tree that society may value as a carbon 
sink but which a poor rural household may see as either timber for sale or a source of 
ash to enhance soils. As in many such cases of negative environmental externalities, 
39World Commission on Environment and Development, Our Common Future (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1987), p. 27 as cited by Barbier, “Poverty, Development, Environment.”
40Thomas Reardon and Stephen A. Vosti, “Poverty-Environment Links in Rural Areas of Developing 
Countries,” in T. Reardon and S A. Vosti, eds., Sustainability, Growth, and Poverty Alleviation, A Policy Per-
spective (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, for the International Food Policy Research Institute, 
1997).

790   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
the issue is one of missing markets. In this case there may be no market for the ser-
vice of the tree as a carbon sink.
Figure 20–7 illustrates how these four blocks of variables interact with one 
another. Households pursue their food security and livelihood goals based initially 
Conditioning factors
Household and
village behavior
Asset components
of poverty
Natural resoures
(private and commonly held)
Soil
Water
Biodiversity
•Flora
•Fauna
Components of
the environment
Soil
Water
Biodiversity
•Flora
•Fauna
Air
Income generation
Consumption
Investments in assets
Migration
Human fertility
Markets
Prices
Village and regional infrastructure
Production and conservation
Technologies
Village-level asset poverty
Population pressure
Human resources
On-farm resources
Off-farm resources
Community-owned
resources
Health
Education labor
Nutrition
Skills
Physical (e.g., cattle)
Financial
Physical (e.g., real estate)
Financial
Roads and dams
Commons
Social and political capital
Political power
FIGURE 20–7 Conceptual Framework for Poverty–Environment Links
Source: Vosti, S. A. and T. Reardon. 1997. Sustainability, Growth, and Poverty Alleviation: A Policy And 
Agroecological Perspective, Figure 4.1. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.

P O L I C Y  FA I L U R E S   791
on their stock of assets. Their ability to use these assets in pursuing their objectives 
depends on a variety of conditioning factors, including accessibility of markets, 
prices, infrastructure, available technologies, and population pressure. For the poor, 
community assets and the availability of common pool resources may also play a 
large role. These factors shape household decisions regarding how to allocate their 
assets in pursuing their livelihood objectives. For example, the incentives for house-
holds to allocate their labor between agricultural and nonagricultural activities (such 
as working on others’ farms) may depend on the relative prices of agricultural out-
put versus local wage rates. Technological choices available to the rural poor may 
also be limited. Thus subsistence-oriented farmers may be unable to adopt mod-
ern inputs to increase yields, forcing them to expand the area cultivated onto fragile 
lands to increase their agricultural output. Each of these choices has environmental 
implications. Area expansion might require cutting trees. Working in off-farm activi-
ties might reduce pressure on the land, yet might also create incentives to reallocate 
investment funds away from on-farm land conservation. Diversification of farming 
activities to include livestock husbandry also has environmental implications, par-
ticularly because grazing is often done on public land, where overgrazing is common 
and can lead to soil erosion and degradation. It does not necessarily follow, however, 
that it is the poor who contribute the most to this type of environmental degradation. 
Reardon and Vosti note that it is typically wealthier households that own larger herds 
and potentially cause greater harm to the environment. The sum total of these envi-
ronmental effects of household income-earning and investment activities, both posi-
tive and negative effects, in turn define the natural resource and asset base available 
to households in the future.
Reardon and Vosti provide several examples of the complex interactions between 
poverty and the environment, stressing in particular the dependence of these inter-
actions on the specific type of asset poverty and the specific environmental context. 
Rwanda is one of the most densely populated countries in Africa. Most of the poor 
are farmers with little land and few animals. Their primary asset is their own labor. 
Lacking capital and credit, they are often prevented from investing in soil conserva-
tion and unable to intensify their farming practices by purchasing chemical fertilizers 
and other modern inputs. In such circumstances farmers’ main strategy for increas-
ing agricultural output may be simply to increase their own labor input. Yet, in the 
absence of complementary inputs, potential yield increases are limited, with the 
likely consequence that the limited land resources of poor farmers in Rwanda quickly 
become depleted. The result may be a vicious circle in which resource-constrained 
farmers have little choice but to exhaust their own land, thus increasing their own 
poverty.
Reardon and Vosti provide a quite different example from the Brazilian rain for-
est, where the poor may be rich in biodiversity but poor in terms of soil quality and 
access to capital and labor. Once again, the problem is one of missing markets, in 
this case a market for biodiversity. The broad range of asset poverty confronting poor 

792   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
farmers in the Brazilian rain forest may constrain them to cut down trees to expand 
their farmland and to burn those trees to generate nutrients for the poor-quality soil. 
Farmers thus substitute biophysical processes for markets to meet their needs. Break-
ing this cycle may require new agricultural technologies to increase the productivity 
of existing farmland, improved off-farm opportunities, and the creation of markets 
for forest cover and biodiversity. Reardon and Vosti note that much of the alarming 
deforestation of the Brazilian Amazon has been not the result of poverty but rather 
the response by large landowners to fiscal and other incentives.
The links between poverty and the environment are thus strongly conditional 
on given circumstances, in particular the specific nature of poverty; the range of 
available environmental resources; and the institutional, technological, and market 
conditions governing the choices and activities of households, both poor and rich. 
Reducing poverty may protect the environment when poverty is driving unsustain-
able mining of resources. Yet poverty alleviation might contribute to other sources 
of environmental degradation, such as overuse of agricultural chemicals. At the 
same time, environmental improvements might reduce poverty that results from 
the dependence of poor farmers on a depleted resource base. Yet environmen-
tal improvement achieved by barring the poor from common pool resources could 
increase poverty. The conceptual framework presented in this section suggests that 
a nuanced understanding of the categories of asset poverty and local conditioning 
variables is necessary to simultaneously reduce poverty and protect the environ-
ment. These challenges are writ large in the case of global climate change.
GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE
Global climate change may represent the greatest single challenge to sustainable 
development. While its causes are a subject of debate and predictions of its conse-
quences are uncertain, there is broad scientific consensus regarding the existence of 
global climate change. As summarized by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) in its fourth assessment report, “Warming of the climate system is 
unequivocal, as is now evident from observations of increases in global average air 
and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice and rising global aver-
age sea level.”41 The IPCC report notes that the last years of the twentieth century and 
the first years of the twenty-first century include 11 of the 12 warmest years since 
1850 (when systematic recording of global surface temperatures began). Changes in 
sea level and snow cover are consistent with the evidence of increasing global surface 
temperatures. Figure 20–8 illustrates long-term changes in global mean surface air 
temperatures, underscoring the rapid temperature increases since the mid-1970s.
41IPCC, 2007: Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to 
the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, 
Pachauri, R.K and Reisinger, A. (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, p. 104.

P O L I C Y  FA I L U R E S   793
The current effects of climate change are apparent from observations of a broad 
range of natural systems. The IPCC reports major impacts on hydrological systems, 
such as increased runoff from glacier- and snow-fed rivers and warming of lakes and 
rivers. They also cite the impact of climate change on biological systems—for exam-
ple, earlier timing of spring events such as bird migration and reproduction and geo-
graphic (poleward) shifts in the ranges of plants and animals in addition to the effects 
changing aquatic biological systems have on fish migrations and changes in algal, 
plankton, and fish abundance as well as the health of coral reefs.
Global climate change is driven primarily by the accumulation of greenhouse 
gases (GHGs) in the earth’s atmosphere, where they trap heat. The main GHGs are 
carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and halocarbons. Global 
concentrations of GHGs have increased substantially since 1750, a result of human 
activities, according to the IPCC. Agriculture and fossil fuels use have been the lead-
ing contributors.42 Climate change is a central concern for sustainable development 
owing to the role of human economic activity in the emission of GHGs and the ensu-
ing physical and economic implications of potential changes in the earth’s natural 
resource base.
1880
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1900
1920
1940
Temperature anomaly (°C)
1960
Annual mean
5–year running mean
1980
2000
FIGURE 20–8 Changes in Global Annual Mean Surface Air Temperature
Source: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Goddard Institute for Space Studies, available at 
http://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/graphs_v3/Fig.A.gif.
42Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2007, p. 37.

794   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
The developed world has been the major source of GHG emissions. Average per 
capita carbon emissions in developing countries are approximately one third the 
level produced by developed countries. Figure 20–9 illustrates per capita levels of 
CO2 emissions as a function of countries’ relative population sizes. The height of each 
bar in Figure 20–9 indicates per capita emissions, and the width indicates population 
(so the area of each country’s bar indicates total emissions). The top 10 countries in 
terms of CO2 emissions account for over two thirds of the global total. It is interest-
ing to compare emissions in the United States and China. As of 2006, China over-
took the United States as the world’s leading source of CO2 emissions, contributing 
just over 22 percent of the global total compared with just under 20 percent from the 
United States. Per capita emissions in the U.S. are approximately four times greater 
than those in China, yet China compensates for this difference by having a popula-
tion just over four times greater. International arguments about how to address the 
problem often start with this observation. There is no simple answer to the question 
of how efforts to limit climate change should be divided between lifestyle changes in 
the heavily carbon-emitting rich countries versus creating and paying for the means 
for poor countries to grow and develop without replicating the carbon dependence 
of the development path followed by the rich countries. Carbon emissions clearly 
0
0.30 0.19
0.13
0.22
0.10
1.32
Population, 2005 (billions)
0.15
0.13
0.16 0.16
5
10
15
20
25
30 Australia
Canada
United States
Brazil
Russian Federation
Germany
Japan
United Kingdom
Ukraine
Italy
Indonesia
South Africa
France
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Mexico
Turkey
Thailand
China
Peru
High-income country
Middle-income country
Low-income country
Myanmar
Iraq, Colombia
Ghana
Vietnam
Pakistan
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Bangladesh
Sudan
Chad, Kenya,
Nigeria, Rwanda
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Algeria
Nigeria
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
Philippines
Uganda
India
Carbon dioxide emissions per person (tons)
FIGURE 20–9 Per Capita Carbon Dioxide Emissions As a Function of Population Size
The width of each column depicts population and the height depicts per capita emissions, so the area represents 
total emissions. Per capita emissions of Qatar (55.5 tons of carbon dioxide equivalent per capita), UAW (38.8), 
and Bahrain (25.4)—greater than the heights of the y-axis—are not shown. Among the larger countries, Brazil, 
Indonesia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and Nigeria have low energy-related emissions.
Source: World Bank, World Development Report 2010: Development and Climate Change. (Washington, DC: 
World Bank, 2009), fig. 1.1.

P O L I C Y  FA I L U R E S   795
increase with national income. While technological change has the potential to 
reduce this association, continued income growth around the world seems likely to 
result in substantial momentum in global emission trends.
While there is growing evidence that some negative impacts of climate change 
have already occurred, much of the concern about global climate change and its 
threats to development and human welfare lies in the possible future effects of cli-
mate change.43 Unfortunately, as noted by sportsman Yogi Berra, “It’s tough to make 
predictions, especially about the future.” Predictions regarding the future course of 
global climate change and its effects on human activity are highly uncertain, and sce-
narios vary widely. The IPCC itself presents six alternative scenarios for temperature 
change (in °C at 2090–99 relative to 1980–99) ranging from 1.8 to 4.0.
The severity of these impacts varies widely by region as well as within regions. 
As a general matter, the poor are the most vulnerable; their lives are more exposed 
to nature and their livelihoods more dependent on it. Africa is particularly at risk. 
According to the IPCC, global warming of only 1.5°C could increase the number of 
Africans exposed to water stress by 75 to 250 million; a 2.5°C increase could add 350 
to 600 million Africans exposed to water stress and reduce yields from rain-fed agri-
culture by up to 50 percent. Effects within Africa will vary. For instance, the IPCC 
predicts that by 2080, arid and semiarid land in Africa will increase between 5 and 
8 percent. In Asia, the IPCC projects decreased availability of fresh water in central, 
south, east, and southeast regions. A 1.5°C increase in average temperatures could 
decrease wheat and maize production in India by 2 to 5 percent, while an increase of 
3°C could decrease China’s rice production by 5 to 12 percent. The densely populated 
river delta regions of South, East, and Southeast Asia are predicted to suffer increased 
flooding, which will then increase morbidity and mortality from waterborne dis-
eases. In Latin America, global warming greater than about 2.5°C could increase 
the number of people suffering water stress by 80 to 180 million. Tropical areas of 
Latin America face the loss of significant biodiversity; indeed, the IPCC suggests that 
global warming on the order of 4°C could lead to the extinction of up to 45 percent 
of Amazonian tree species. Increases in temperature and decreases in soil water are 
projected to transform tropical forest areas in eastern Amazonia into savannas. While 
soybean yields in the temperate zones of Latin America may increase with global 
warming, the IPCC predicts increased food insecurity and decreased water availabil-
ity throughout the region.44 Global climate change thus poses a direct and fundamen-
tal challenge to development. This challenge is complicated by the overarching need 
43For instance, evidence that climate change resulting from greenhouse gases and other forms of air 
pollution have significantly reduced the growth rates of rice harvests in India since the mid-1980s is pre-
sented in Maximilian Auffhammer, V. Ramanathan, and Jeffrey Vincent, “From the Cover: Integrated 
Model Shows That Atmospheric Brown Clouds and Greenhouse Gases Have Reduced Rice Harvests in 
India,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (2006), 19668–72.
44Auffhammer et al., “From the Cover,” p. 50.

796   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
to reduce poverty and hunger while avoiding doing so at the expense of continued 
environmental degradation that might ultimately undermine development itself.
There is great momentum in climate change. The current stocks of GHG emis-
sions in the atmosphere are sufficient to drive continued climate change for decades, 
even if all future emissions were to cease immediately. According to the World Bank,
Immediate action is needed to keep warming as close as possible to 2°C. That 
amount of warming is not desirable, but it is likely to be the best we can do. . . .  
From the perspective of development, warming much above 2°C is simply 
unacceptable. But stabilizing at 2°C will require major shifts in lifestyle, a veritable 
energy revolution, and a transformation in how we manage land and forests.45
While estimates vary in their magnitude, there is no doubt that substantial reduc-
tions in global carbon emissions relative to the steep trajectory based on business as 
usual will be required to limit global warming to 2°C.
From an economic perspective, the emission of GHGs into the atmosphere is an 
example of a negative externality, “the biggest market failure the world has seen,” in 
the words of economist Nicholas Stern.46 The key distinctions, in Stern’s view, between 
more common externalities and GHG emissions are that GHG emissions are global in 
both impact and origin, some of the effects may be quite long term, the scientific under-
standing of the process of global warming and its long-term future impacts is uncertain, 
and the impacts are potentially immense and irreversible.
Even without agreeing on the details, most analysts agree that responding to the 
potential threats from global climate change requires simultaneous action on two fronts: 
mitigation and adaptation. Mitigation refers to the actions taken to reduce the extent 
of future climate change, and adaptation refers to the actions required to adjust human 
activities to the environmental changes that occur. Greater expenditures on mitigation 
tend to be associated with lower expenditures required for adaptation, and vice versa. 
Evaluating the tradeoffs between economic growth and environmental protection is a 
complex and highly controversial exercise. Issues to be resolved with respect to mitiga-
tion include choice of a stabilization target for surface temperature increases, when to 
begin changing behaviors and economic activities to attain that target, whose behaviors 
and activities to change, the cost of mitigation, and critically, who pays those costs.
Estimates by economists that weigh the costs against the benefits of mitigat-
ing climate change vary substantially and have a big impact on conclusions regard-
ing the optimal timing and degree of mitigation. Such calculations are sensitive to a 
45World Bank, World Development Report 2010: Development and Climate Change (Washington, DC: 
World Bank, 2009),p. 3.
46Nicholas Stern, “The Economics of Climate Change [Richard T. Ely Lecture],” American Economic 
Review: Papers and Proceedings 98, no. 2 (2008), p. 1. Stern is also the lead author of a major international 
study of the economics of climate change, The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007).

P O L I C Y  FA I L U R E S   797
variety of necessary assumptions and choices by analysts. Key parameters are the 
time horizon covered by the analysis, the sensitivity of global climate increases to 
given changes in CO2 concentration, the costs of mitigation, likely damages from 
climate change, and the choice of the discount rate (important for comparing pres-
ent versus future costs or benefits). Strong assumptions are required for all of these 
parameters in order to calculate the optimal target for CO2 concentrations. Optimal 
in this context refers to the concentration level that would result in the least reduc-
tion in the present value of global consumption.
Cost–benefit analysis is an essential tool in efforts to design policy responses 
to global climate change, yet cost–benefit analysis alone cannot resolve the debate. 
Even if all scientists agreed on the sensitivity of global climate increases to given 
changes in CO2 and all economists agreed on the costs of mitigating the associated 
damages, cost–benefit analysis would still be limited by its inability to assign values 
to nonmarket environmental goods and services. In addition, choosing the appropri-
ate discount rate to apply to future costs and benefits is a particularly critical compo-
nent of cost–benefit analysis. Policy prescriptions arising from cost–benefit analyses 
are highly sensitive to the choice of discount rate, yet there has been little agreement 
about what rate to apply or even how to choose one. The higher the discount rate, 
the lower the weight given to the future in comparison with the present. The sensi-
tivity of cost–benefit analysis of climate change mitigation to the choice of discount 
rate arises because the costs of mitigation occur in the short run while the benefits 
occur primarily in the long run. One complicating factor is that if incomes grow over 
time, then future generations would be better able to pay the costs of climate dam-
age, potentially justifying the choice of a lower discount rate today. Ethical concerns 
are even more complicated, as the discussion is essentially about tradeoffs between 
the welfare of present and future generations. Is it right to place less importance on 
the welfare of future generations (as discounting implies)? Conversely, what level of 
mitigation cost is ethically assigned to the current generation when the benefits are 
both uncertain and in the distant future?
Two prominent economic studies of climate change have reached quite different 
conclusions in regard to the optimal timing and extent of mitigation actions, largely 
owing to their divergent choices of discount rates. The Stern Review, which assumes 
a low discount rate (along with a high sensitivity of climate change to CO2 emissions 
and low mitigation costs), concludes that large-scale and immediate interventions 
to mitigate climate change are essential.47 In contrast, a study by economist William 
Nordhaus, which assumes a higher discount rate (along with a lower sensitivity of cli-
mate change to CO2 emissions and higher mitigation costs), argues for more limited 
and more gradual efforts to mitigate climate change.48 We can interpret these differing 
47The Stern Review.
48William Nordhaus, A Question of Balance: Waiting the Options on Global Warming Policies. (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008).

798   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
approaches in terms of their targets for future global climate change. While the more 
aggressive efforts at mitigation tend to target a 2°C increase in average global temper-
ature, the more gradual approach implies a target closer to 3°C increase. The incre-
mental cost of achieving the lower target (a form of climate insurance) is estimated 
to be only about 0.5 percent of global GDP.49 Part of the reason the incremental cost 
of achieving the lower target is not greater is that the lower mitigation cost associated 
with the higher limit on climate change is partially offset by the greater future costs 
of adaptation required to address the greater future damage resulting from increased 
temperatures.
Much of this debate over the urgency and appropriate extent of mitigation 
hinges on the analysts’ choice of discount rates. Critics have assailed the Stern Review 
as having stacked the deck in favor of urgent and substantial mitigation by its choice 
of a low discount rate. In reviewing this debate, economist Martin Weitzman sug-
gests that the Stern Review might be “right for the wrong reasons.” For Weitzman, 
the primary argument in favor of more aggressive mitigation of climate change is not 
about consumption smoothing and discount rates. He argues that our fundamental 
uncertainty regarding future impacts of climate change is paramount and that even 
if utter catastrophe is a low-probability event, mitigation provides an important form 
of insurance.50
Adaptation to climate change refers to deliberate actions taken to reduce the 
impacts of climate change. In its fourth assessment report, the IPCC summarizes 
planned adaptation measures by sector. In response to expected water shortages 
resulting from climate change, potential adaptation measures include expanded 
rainwater harvesting, improved water storage and conservation techniques, and 
desalination. The primary constraint to these types of adaptations is financial. Agri-
cultural systems might adapt to climate change by adjusting planting dates, altering 
crop varieties and the mix of crops produced, and by improving the control of soil 
erosion by planting more trees. These changes will require both training and tech-
nological support for farmers. As discussed in Chapter 17, institutional support for 
farmers in the form of improved land tenure arrangements may also be necessary to 
create incentives for improved soil management. Protecting coastal zones from the 
effects of rising sea levels is another important dimension of adaptation to climate 
change. The construction of seawalls and storm surge barriers, and the creation of 
marshlands and wetlands as coastal buffer zones may be critical to protect vulner-
able populations in low-lying coastal areas. In this case, land availability and financ-
ing may be the primary constraints. Additional measures, such as improved energy 
49This difference, as summarized in World Bank, World Development Report 2010, p. 8, is calculated 
as the difference between each model’s predicted net present value of global GDP versus the net present 
value of global GDP, assuming no climate change.
50Martin Weitzman, “The Stern Review of the Economics of Climate Change [Review],” Journal of Eco-
nomic Literature 45, no. 3 (2007), 703–24.

P O L I C Y  FA I L U R E S   799
efficiency and increased use of renewable energy resources are also important 
planned forms of adaptation to climate change.
The costs and benefits of adaptation at the global level are difficult to estimate 
precisely, in part owing to the uncertainties noted in this chapter. Two dimensions 
of the cost are clear. The capacity for adaptation depends significantly on a country’s 
level of development. Adaptive capacity is thus highly unequally distributed around 
the world. It is also clear that lesser efforts at mitigation in the short run will result in 
higher costs of adaptation in the long run.
The wide-ranging assumptions (especially regarding the ceiling for global tem-
perature increase) required to estimate the cost of either mitigation or adaptation 
produce widely ranging results. The estimates for annual mitigation costs in the year 
2030 range from $139 to $175 billion (in 2005 US$).51 The financing requirements 
can be substantially greater because of the high up-front capital costs of mitigation 
projects, a potential barrier to participation by developing countries. The range esti-
mated for annual adaptation costs is wider. Estimates for the short term (2010–15) 
range from $4 billion to greater than $100 billion, and estimates for the medium term 
(2030) range from $15 billion to $100 billion. At the high end, this funding require-
ment is less than 0.2 percent of the world’s GDP. As of 2010, donor funding commit-
ments for adaptation and mitigation totaled only $9 billion, far short of the estimated 
requirements.
Global progress in efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate change requires inter-
national cooperation. Fears of reduced rates of economic growth and questions of 
fairness between countries and of how to share the substantial costs have impeded 
international cooperation to date. Since 1992, international climate negotiations have 
taken place within the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC), which sets targets for stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of GHGs. 
The Kyoto Protocol, adopted in 1997 and implemented in 2005, supplemented the 
original convention. Difficult negotiations failed to secure U.S. participation. Subse-
quent efforts, such as the Bali Action Plan, adopted in 2007 through the UNFCCC, the 
2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference held in Copenhagen (the 15th con-
ference of parties to the Kyoto Protocol), the 2010 United Nations Climate Change 
Conference held in Cancun, Mexico (the 16th conference of parties to the Kyoto 
Protocol), and the 2011 United Nations Climate Change Conference held in Bonn, 
Germany, reflect the continuing difficulties associated with organizing international 
cooperation in this vital area.
The issues at stake in international climate negotiations are central to the topic 
of sustainable development. This chapter began by raising the question of whether 
today’s developing countries have the option of following the same energy- and 
resource-intensive development path previously established by today’s wealthy 
51These estimates are drawn from World Bank, World Development Report 2010, table 6.2.

800   [CH. 20] S U S TA I N A B L E  D E V E L O P M E N T
economies. The argument that this path is not sustainable is manifest largely in its 
implications for the continued atmospheric accumulation of GHGs and climate 
change. In the context of global climate negotiations, the specific questions revolve 
around who should pay to fix this problem. Specifically, the Kyoto Protocol set targets 
for reducing global GHG emissions. These targets are binding only on the relatively 
wealthy countries (the so-called Annex I countries under the UNFCCC). Unfortu-
nately, 13 years after adoption of the Kyoto Protocol (and 5 years after it came into 
force), official pledges of emissions reductions offered at Cancun amounted to only 
60 percent of the reductions required to limit the rise in global temperature to 2°C.
The position taken by developing countries (ironically led by China, the world’s 
leading emitter of CO2) is that they should continue to be exempt from commitments 
to reduce emissions. For the developing countries it is a matter of fairness. After all, 
they argue, it was the developed countries that largely created the problem over a 
period of many decades, while the developing countries are both most at risk and 
least capable of bearing the costs of mitigation and adaptation. On their side, devel-
oped countries (the United States in particular) continued to push back, contend-
ing that developing countries too should be bound by emissions reduction targets. 
Despite its signature by President Clinton, the U.S. Senate never ratified the Kyoto 
Protocol (a legal requirement for U.S. accession to the treaty). This refusal to ratify 
was based on “the disparity of treatment between the Annex I Parties and Develop-
ing Countries,” and the fear that a legally binding commitment to reduce GHG emis-
sions would undermine the U.S. economy’s international competitiveness. China in 
particular, with its large trade surplus with the United States, became a focus of U.S. 
dissatisfaction with the Kyoto Protocol. In essence, the U.S. position rests on the lack 
of requirement for China to reduce its total emissions, despite the much greater level 
of per capita emissions in the United States. Ultimately, these issues are highly politi-
cized within both the developed and developing countries, and therein lies a central 
and continuing impediment to international negotiations on climate change.
SUMMARY
• Natural resource constraints and the cumulative effect of negative 
environmental externalities raise the possibility that the energy- and 
resource-intensive path toward development followed by today’s advanced 
economies may no longer be available for today’s developing countries. 
Long-term development must be environmentally sustainable.
• There is a general consensus, based on historical data, that economic 
growth from a low starting point is associated with increasing levels of 
pollution; yet beyond some intermediate level of income, economic growth 
is associated with decreasing levels of pollution. This inverted-U pattern is 
SUMMARY

S U M M A R Y   801
known as the environmental Kuznets curve. (The association may not be 
causal.)
• Sustainable development has been defined as “development that meets the 
needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations 
to meet their own needs.”
• Comprehensive wealth (as distinct from GDP) is an accounting approach 
that incorporates the use of both natural resources and human capital. 
Changes over time in comprehensive wealth are measured by adjusted net 
saving. One economic indicator of sustainability is that comprehensive 
wealth not decline from one generation to the next. This requires that 
adjusted net saving grows more rapidly than population.
• Much of the negative environmental effect of economic activity results from 
externalities, social costs not included in private firms’ profit-maximizing 
decisions. Such externalities are particularly prevalent in settings with 
common property resources.
• Categories of policy solutions to the problem of negative externalities 
include the creation of property rights where none previously existed, 
government regulation, taxation of the polluting activity, the creation of 
marketable permits to pollute, and informal regulation.
• The relationship between poverty and environmental degradation is 
complex. Most people living in fragile environments are poor, and poor 
people more frequently rely on the environment for their livelihood. 
A nuanced understanding of the categories of asset poverty and local 
conditioning variables is necessary to simultaneously reduce poverty and 
protect the environment.
• Global climate change may represent the greatest single challenge to 
sustainable development. We can think of the accumulation of greenhouse 
gases as a negative externality, and the earth’s atmosphere as a global 
commons.
• Though details of the potential consequences of global climate change are 
shrouded in uncertainty, it seems clear that concerted international efforts 
to mitigate climate change are urgent if future economic development is to 
be sustainable.


Index
Abdullah, Rachmina, 3–5, 8, 10
Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL), 
MIT, 286, 451b, 543
ability to pay, measuring, 411
abortion, sex-selective, 251b
Abramovitz, Moses, 70
absolute advantage, 675
absolute disadvantage, 675
absolute poverty, 181, 182, 187, 213, 214, 215, 218
in Bangladesh, 185f
determining extent of, 185, 186
dissenting opinions on, 191
reducing, 190
by region, 1981-2005, 190t
absorption, 552–53, 558, 560, 561, 562f, 564, 
568, 570, 577
absorptive capacity, 527
access to world markets, 367
accumulation, population and, 237–38
Acemoglu, Daron, 59n, 82n
achievement distribution, 623
acute infl ation, 428, 447
among developing countries, 1948-2008, 
429–30t
adaptation, global climate change and, 796, 
798–99
Adelman, Irma, 74n
adjustable peg, 434, 434f, 435
adjusted net saving gap, 768b
adjusted net savings (ANS),
 765–67,767f, 801
defi ned, 765
for developing regions, 767f
in Ghana, 768–69b
ad valorem tariff , 713, 717
advance market commitment (AMC), 331b
“advantages of backwardness,” 38, 317
adverse selection problem, 134b
Afghanistan, 26, 241n, 338, 401, 506, 512, 
516, 640
Africa, 12, 20, 55, 137, 144, 157, 242, 402, 435, 
441, 567, 685, 686, 693
adjusted net savings in, 766
agriculture in, 586, 608, 612, 618, 619, 621, 
629, 630, 632, 633, 634, 635, 638, 650, 
651, 653, 663, 791
average rank in doing business, Sub-Saharan 
Africa, 157t
average TFP growth in, 71, 72t, 73
Berg Report and, 146
cereal yields and poverty in, 612f
child mortality rate in, 48
civil wars in, 705
climate change and, 795
economic growth in, 36, 59–60b, 118–19b, 135
education in, 261, 262f, 276–77, 284, 285, 287
emerging countries and income growth in, 
1996-2008, 156t
famines in, 311
foreign aid in, 500, 512, 514, 543
foreign debt in, 473
foreign direct investment in, 365
fragile environments in, 787
guinea worm control in, 335
head-count index in, 192
health in, 310, 321
HIV/AIDS in, 6, 9, 48, 56, 58, 59b, 60b, 245, 
308, 311t, 320, 321, 325, 326, 327, 328, 
342, 344
incomes in, 15
inequality in, 173
infl ation in, 430, 432
informal credit markets in, 449
levels of GDP per capita in, 1820-2008, 35f
life expectancy in, 308, 344
malaria in, 329
market reforms in, 155–57
micro credit in, 449
population of, 224, 227, 231
poverty in, 189, 190, 200, 213
rural vs. urban poor in, 611
state owned enterprises in, 396
sustainable development and, 770
total fertility rate in, 225b, 226b
trade and, 669, 673, 726, 735, 742
transport costs in, 86
Note: Figures are noted with f; tables are noted with t; boxed topics are noted with b.
803

804   I N D E X
Africa (continued)
under-fi ve mortality rate in, 302
wars in, 76, 77f
Washington Consensus and, 148, 
160, 161
African Development Bank, 474, 478, 479b, 
504, 511
African National Congress, 658
age dependency ratio, gross domestic saving 
and, 379f
age-earnings profi les, 267
age pyramids, 299, 300f
aggregate capital fl ows, 495
aggregate production functions, 91–92, 94
Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (ATC), 
742, 748
agricultural production function, 592, 592f
agriculture, agricultural sector:
agricultural inputs, by region, 639f
cell phones and development of, 651–52b
climate change and, 798
constraints to development of, 622–27
decollectivization of, 82, 189, 655–56
early, 218
economic ceiling and, 623, 624, 624f, 625, 
637–45, 647–51
economic growth and, 34–35b, 82, 585, 587, 
591, 601, 604–10
in Ethiopia, 5, 9n
exports and, 726
food crisis of 2005-08, 659–63
food production analysis, 638–45, 647–51
foreign aid and, 521, 535
global climate change and, 793
health and, 310, 321
HIV/AIDS and, 327
industry and, 591–97, 601
inequality and, 174, 178
institutions for development of, 653–56
labor in, 591–97, 642, 643
in Malaysia, 4
model of induced technical change in, 
635–37b
modern product of labor in, 594f
percent of households participating in, 
deriving income from, 616f
population and, 219, 241–42
poverty alleviation and, 610–17
production functions of, 585–86, 592, 592f, 
596f, 600f, 643
productivity trends in, 632–35
returns to schooling and technological 
change in, 279b
settled, 621, 622, 663
slash and burn, 621
structural transformation in, 587–90, 588f, 
605, 617
sustainable development and, 759, 782, 791
systems of, 621–22
technical ceiling and, 623, 624, 624f, 625, 
627–35
technology and, 586, 627, 630, 633, 635–37b, 
651–52b, 663
in Th ailand, 101b
trade in, 605, 678f, 683
trade protection in, 749–50, 749t
traditional, 619, 620–22, 663
in tropical countries, 85
uniqueness of, 584–87, 663
see also land
Ahluwalia, Montek S., 138n, 175n
Ahmed, Akhter U., 197n
Aitken, Brian, 369n
Aker, Jerry, 652b
Alam, Mahmudul, 266n
Albania, 710
albendazole, 290
Alcoa, 685, 685n
Alesina, Alberto, 180n, 516n, 518
Algeria, tax rates in, 412
Ali, Rozali Mohamed, 777n
Allende, Salvadore, 559b
Alwang, Jeff rey, 620n, 621
American Economic Association, 172, 191, 257
American International Group (AIG), 391
Amin, Idi, 479b
Amsden, Alice, 729n
Anaconda, 685, 685n
Angola, 45, 412, 430, 432, 687, 705
distinction between GNP and GDP in, 
25, 26
education in, 282
annual compound growth, formula for, 32n
Ansu, Yaw, 428n
anti-natalists, 237
antiretroviral (ARV) therapy, 16, 324b, 326, 
328, 342
Apartheid regime, collapse of, 658
Argentina, 84, 122f, 124n, 135, 432, 435, 556, 
573, 574, 665, 711, 784
average farm size in, 653
currency board arrangement in, 154
education in, 181
fi nancial crisis in, 397, 457, 480, 481, 488, 
491, 493
fi nancial policy in, 447

I N D E X   805
Gini coeffi  cients for, 172
infl ation in, 428, 430, 558
Washington Consensus and, 148
Aristotle, 39, 40
arithmetic mean, HDI and, 42
Armelagos, George J., 309n
Armendariz, Beatriz, 453
Arrow, Kenneth J., 762, 762n
Aruba, 12
ASEAN Free Trade Area, 720
Asia, 12, 157, 174, 326
adjusted net savings in, 766
agriculture in, 612, 619, 628, 629, 631, 633, 
635, 651, 653, 655
climate change and, 795
customs tariff s in, 414
economic growth in, 15, 118–19b, 210
education in, 261, 263–64
fi nancial crises in, 9n, 101b, 204, 386, 391, 
427, 442, 457, 480–81, 480t, 488, 489, 
491, 496
fi nancial policy in, 441
fragile environments in, 787
head-count index in, 192
HIV/AIDS in, 344
infl ation in, 432
levels of GDP per capita in, 1820-2008, 35f
micro credit in, 449
multinational corporations in, 364
rural vs. urban poor in, 611
total fertility rate in, 225b
trade and, 668, 669, 670, 671
see also East Asian tigers
Asian Development Bank, 474, 511
Atje, Raymond, 783n
Auff hammer, Maximilian, 795n
Australia, 226, 516, 660, 685
top marginal tax rate cut in, 408
Australian model, 546, 546n, 547, 549, 552, 553, 
564–65, 567–71, 573–75, 576
equilibrium under, 547–48, 548f
Greek debt crisis and, 572–73b
Austria, 86, 673
autarky, 710, 755
autarky prices, 675, 677, 691
average product, of farm labor, 593
Azerbaijan, 703n, 706
Aztec Empire, 34
backward linkages, 134, 686
Baird, Sarah, 291n
Baker, James, 472
Baker Plan, 472, 473
balance of payments:
balance of payments identity, 579
fi nancial policy and, 442
import substitution and, 725
national income accounting and, 577–79
savings and, 578–79
balance of payments defi cit, 579
balance of trade, 549, 568
Bali Action Plan, 799
Balk, Deborah, 227n
Ballinger, Jeff , 746b
banana producers, cell phone use and, 652b
Banco Bradesco (Brazil), 380
Banerjee, Abhijit, 96, 196n, 317, 319, 319n, 452n
Bangladesh, 12, 138, 180, 181, 504, 524, 620, 748
absolute poverty in, 165, 166, 184–85, 185f
distinction between GNP and GDP in, 25, 26
education in, 266, 288
family planning programs in, 248
food riots in, 583
foreign direct investment in, 366
health in, 335
import duties in, 401
income distribution in, 167, 168f
microfi nance in, 450, 451, 754
oral rehydration therapy in, 340, 341, 342
population of, 231
poverty lines in, 165n, 182, 183–84b, 184–85, 
187, 201
shape of frequency distribution for, 169
size distributions of consumption or income 
in, 170–71, 170t
under-fi ve mortality rate in, 302
Bank Rakyat Indonesia (BRI), 450–51, 453
banks, banking systems, 18
foreign aid and, 511
foreign debt in, 459, 468, 469, 472, 473, 474. 
482, 483, 486, 488–89, 491–93, 494, 496
see also savings, saving rates; World Bank
Barbier, Edward, 787n, 788n
Barder, Owen, 332n
Barrett, Ronald, 309n
Barro, Robert, 74, 74n, 76n, 383, 383n
barter economy, 423
base, of logarithm, 43b
base e, 43b
basic growth model, 91–94
Bauer, Peter, 500, 500n
Bazzi, Samuel, 521n
Bear Stearns, 391
Becker, Gary S., 235, 235n, 308n
bed nets, malaria control and, 317, 330
Behrman, Jere, 278, 278n

806   I N D E X
Belgium, 516
Belize, 112b
Bell, Clive, 138n, 607n, 608n
bell curve, 169
benefi t-cost ratio. see cost-benefi t analysis
Bennell, Paul, 277n
Berg, Eliot, 146
Berg Report, 146
Berlin Wall, fall of, 33, 148, 149
Bernanke, Ben, 730, 738n
Berra, Yogi, 795
Bhagwati, Jagdish, 10
Bhavnani, Rikhil, 521n
Bhutan, 86
Bienen, Henry, 701n
big bang approach to reform, 151, 158
Big Mac index, 30n
big push theory, 132, 134–35
Bihar, 260
bilateral aid, 503–4, 517, 535
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, 343, 502
biodiversity, 242, 763, 765, 771, 791, 795
biofuels, food crisis and demand for, 659, 660
biological systems, climate change and, 793
Bird, Richard M., 406b
Birdsall, Nancy, 148n, 236n, 238n, 466n, 477n
birth control, 244
birth rate
decline in, 233–36
methods for reduction of, 233
population and, 220, 221, 222, 245
births, unwanted, 247
black death (bubonic plague), 219
Blackman, Alan, 781n
Blalock, Garrick, 368n
bliss point, 556
Block, Steven, 608, 608n
Blomstrom, Magnus, 368n, 369n
blood diamonds, 705
Bloom, David, 241n
Bluír, Ales, 532n
Bolivia, 397, 401, 511, 573–74
infl ation in, 428, 430, 573
land reform in, 657
registering property in, 361
tax administration in, 405, 406b
tax reform in, 408n, 409
trade and, 726
Bolsa Familia Program (Brazil), 207, 215, 
288, 290
bonded warehouses, 733, 734
bond markets, 448, 454
Bongaarts, John, 228n, 247
Boone, Peter, 533n
border price, 713
Borensztein, E., 369n
Borlaug, Norman, 628, 632
Boserup, Ester, 242n
Boskin, Michael, 418n
Bosti, Stephen, 786
Bosworth, Barry, 71, 71n, 73
Botswana, 58, 82, 122f, 123, 124n, 325, 326, 328, 
402, 500, 517, 520, 673, 687, 700, 703, 
705, 765
economic growth in, 15, 39, 58, 59–60b, 
86, 87
education in, 277
natural resources in, 370
Bottom Billion, Th e (Collier), 704
Brady, Nicholas, 472
Brady bonds, 473, 497
Brady Plan, 472, 473
Braga de Macedo, J., 464n
Brainard, L., 502n
brain drain, 754n
Brazil, 84, 135, 342, 397, 434, 473, 546, 556, 560, 
561, 573, 589, 709, 711
agriculture in, 620
chronic infl ation in, 428
defi cits in state enterprises in, 396
deforestation in, 770, 782, 791–92
education in, 259, 259f, 260, 285, 288
fi nancial crisis in, 457, 480, 488, 491, 493
fi nancial policy in, 448
fi scal policy in, 441
foreign direct investment in, 365
health in, 320
inequality in, 209
infl ation in, 558
land distribution in, 653
multinational corporations in, 364, 380
poverty in, 194
reining in fi scal decentralization in, 398–99b
trade and, 742, 752
Washington Consensus and, 148, 155
bribery, 362, 406b, 412, 446, 483, 725
British East India Company, 129
British Fabian socialists, 153
British Labour government, 132
British Petroleum, 685
broad money, 424, 425, 425t
Brown, Drusilla, 744n
Brown, Lester, 242n
Brumberg, R., 377n
Brundtland Commission, 761, 767, 788
Brunei, 12, 360, 435

I N D E X   807
Bruno, Michael, 175n, 560n
Bulgaria, 435
Burger, Joanna, 772n
Burger, Kees, 650n
Burkina Faso, 87, 112b, 583, 589, 608, 683
Burma. see Myanmar (Burma)
Burnside, Craig, 534, 534n
Burundi, 241n
business, barriers to, 359–63
business environment, global, 360t
buybacks, 471
Byerlee, Derek, 647b
Cairo International Conference on Population 
and Development, 249
caloric intake
population and, 241, 241n
see also food; nutrition
Calvo, G., 464n
Cambodia, 26, 328
education in, 282, 288
quota system and, 748n
total fertility rates by mother’s 
education in, 246f
Cameroon, 583
Canada, 226, 415, 685
NAFTA and, 710, 740
trade and, 667
Canadian International Development Agency 
(CIDA), 503
Canning, David, 241n
“capability deprivation,” alleviating sources 
of, 40
capital:
agriculture and, 592, 606, 642
diminishing marginal product of, 105
economic growth and, 63–64, 90, 131
intangible, 762, 764t, 765
mobilization of, in developing countries, 71
natural, 762, 763, 764t, 765, 766
ownership of, 167
produced, 762, 764t
shadow prices and, 355
trade and, 679, 683, 685, 696
capital account, 577, 579, 579n
capital accumulation, 88
economic growth and, 66, 69, 71
growth models and, 64
life expectancy and, 77
capital-augmenting technological change, 
114n
capital deepening, 107, 237, 237n
capital fl ows, 31, 546
capital gains, 415
capital gains taxes, 417
capital-intensive products, 97
capital investment expenditures, 394
capitalism, 132
capital-labor ratio, 95
capital-output ratio, 96
Harrod-Domar framework and, 96–98, 99
capital per eff ective worker, 115
capital per worker, 67, 67f, 104, 105, 106
capital stock, 94
changes in, 93, 97
investment and, 65
capital-to-labor ratios, 99, 100
capital-to-output ratios, 99, 100, 104
capital widening, 107, 237, 237n
carbon dioxide emissions, 793, 794–95, 
794f, 800
carbon sequestration, 787
Cardoso, Jaime, 495n
Care, 502
CARs, in Colombia, 776–79
Carson, Rachel, 333
Casanegra de Jantscher, Milka, 406b
Cashin, Paul, 691n
cash standards, 745
Caves, Richard E., 546n
cell phones, 10, 684
trade and, 681–82
Center for Global Development, 523
Central African Republic, 361, 362
Central America, 685
Central Asia, 36, 174
mean levels of life satisfaction in, 53
rate of GDP per population growth 
(percent/year), 37
central banks, 421
central planning, 152
cereals, 623, 632
growth rates of yields, 634f
trends in nominal prices of, 659f
yields by region, 633f
ceteris paribus, convergence debate and, 121
Ceylon, 172
Chad, 87, 360, 703n
education in, 282
Chávez, Hugo, 665
checking deposits, 424
Chen, Shaohua, 176n, 187n, 188, 189n
Chenery, Hollis, 131, 138n, 378
childbearing, as economic decision, 234
child labor, 745
child mortality, income and, 313, 313f

808   I N D E X
children
death rates of, 299, 300, 302, 329, 499, 524
education of, 260–61, 263–64, 267, 287–90
population and, 234
underweight, 301, 344
Chile, 84, 135, 397, 413, 432, 564, 573, 684, 685, 
700, 703
chronic infl ation in, 428
credit ceilings in, 439
economic growth in, 15, 39
fi nancial policy in, 447
foreign debt and, 495
Gini coeffi  cient for, 175, 176f
interest rates in, 445
pension system in, 254
personal income taxes in, 412
pollution registry in, 781
sales taxes in, 417
stabilization in, 559–60t
tax reform in, 406, 408n
TPS trading program in, 781
trade and, 726
China, 12, 144, 153, 157, 159, 176n, 187, 188, 
209, 214, 247, 326, 405, 501, 510, 555, 
589, 613, 659, 660, 666, 707, 709, 735, 
752, 766, 781, 782, 784
agriculture in, 82, 189, 203, 655–56
carbon dioxide emissions and, 794, 800
climate change and, 795
Communist revolution in, 141
corruption in, 362
cost of environmental degradation in, 776
credit ceilings in, 439, 440
economic growth in, 12n, 15, 20, 32, 33, 50, 
58, 59b, 87, 193, 202, 205, 211, 212, 
392, 546
education in, 259
epidemiologic transition in, 310
EPZs in, 371
exchange rate policy in, 729–30, 731–32b
fi nancial policy in, 441
foreign aid and, 515–16b
foreign debt in, 496
foreign direct investment in, 365
foreign exchange reserves in, 387
global competition and rise of, 741–43, 756
head-count index in, 189, 192
health in, 317
income growth in, 211
land reform in, 206
life expectancy in, 307
market reforms in, 152, 160
multinational corporations in, 364, 380
nonfarm rural economy in, 615, 617
one child campaign in, 245, 250–51, 253
one child policy in, 379
PES program in, 779
“planned births” campaign in, 249–50
pollution taxes in, 777
population of, 224, 231
poverty gap lowered in, 190
price system in, 145, 146
reining in fi scal decentralization in, 398–99b
reserve requirements in, 439
sales taxes in, 403
savings rate in, 92, 374
son preference in, 251–52b
sources of growth in, 71, 73
Soviet model and, 135, 137
state owned enterprises in, 396
subsidies in, 396
surplus labor in, 598–99b
trade and, 666, 667, 671, 676, 681, 725, 726, 
738, 739, 748
tuberculosis control in, 336–37
undervalued exchange rates and, 724
China National Petroleum, 364
cholera, 312, 340, 341
Chollet, D., 502n
Chomitz, Kenneth M., 788n
Christophe-Kolm, Serge, 539n
chronic infl ation, 428
among developing countries, 1948-2008, 
429–30t
CIMMYT (International Maize and Wheat 
Improvement Center), 628
civil war, GDP per capita before and after, 
76, 77f
Clemens, Michael, 50n, 517, 521n, 533n, 
534n, 754n
climate, 85
climate change, 21, 758, 792–800, 801
climate insurance, 798
Cline, William, 467, 739n
Clinton, Bill, 665, 800
closed economies, savings in, 92
Club of Rome, 758, 759n
Coale, Ansley J., 237, 237n, 238, 377n
Coase, Ronald H., 773, 773n
Coase theorem, 773
cocoa, 139b, 146, 402
coff ee, 402
cold war, 9, 151, 514, 516, 518
Collier, Paul, 76, 76n, 534n, 540, 540n, 704, 705, 
706, 706n
Collins, Susan, 71, 71n, 73, 467

I N D E X   809
Colombia, 135, 402, 434, 711, 724
education in, 266, 285
fi nancial policy in, 448
personal income taxes in, 412
taxing water pollution in, 777–78b
tax reform in, 408n, 409
total fertility rates by mother’s 
education in, 246f
trade and, 740, 741
colonialism, 132
Columbus, Christopher, 10, 129
commercial banking system, 421, 422
commercial bank lending, 386, 445, 484
commercial evaluation, 388
commercial project appraisal, 356
Commitment to Development Index, 507–8b
commodity prices, 703n
nonfuel trends, 1960-2009, 692f
trends in, 691–93
commodity taxes, excess burden of, 419f
common-pool resources (CPRs), 771–72
common property resources, 655
commons, externalities and, 770–72
Communist revolution, 384
comparative advantage, 674–83, 680, 690, 707, 
726, 735
core insight of, 677, 681, 682
production costs and, 675t
understanding, 676
comparative trade theory, 683
competition:
global, and rise of China and India, 
741–43
market failure and, 133b
markets and, 149–50
resource traps and, 705
trade and, 680, 707
completion point, 478
compound growth, formula for, 61b
comprehensive wealth, 762, 765, 801
concessional assistance, 502
concessional terms, 386
conditional cash transfers (CCTs), 206–7, 215, 
288, 288b, 289–90
conditional convergence, 123–25, 128
conditionality, 537–40, 543
Congo, Democratic Republic of, 45, 75–76, 77f, 
156, 241n, 360, 430, 432, 475, 500, 527, 
653, 684, 705, 765
natural resources in, 370
population of, 231
constant prices, 352
constant returns to scale, 96, 126
constant-returns-to-scale production function, 
96n
Consultative Group on International Agricultural 
Research (CGIAR), 628, 632
consumer price index (CPI), 25n
consumers, consumption:
food prices and, 611–12
foreign aid and, 529–30, 529f
government saving and, 382
household, measuring, 166
household saving and consumption, 376–79
savings and, 65–66
trade and, 669–71, 680–81, 683–86, 694, 710, 
726, 740, 742
consumer subsidies, 395
consumer surplus, 714
consumption cost of the tariff , 714
consumption per capita, 186
continuous compounding, basic equation 
for, 62b
contraception, 248
failure in market for, 244
family planning and, 246–49
convergence
conditional, 123–25, 128
of income, 121–25, 209
unconditional, 121, 125
Cooper, Richard, 495n
Corbo, Vittorio, 560n
Corden, W. Max, 546n, 564, 564n, 694n, 699n, 
716b
Corla, Jessica, 781n
corporate income taxes:
fi scal policy and, 411
incidence problem and, 414–16
rate increases and, 404
corporate saving, 379–80
corruption, 82, 140, 142, 145, 155, 156, 159, 207, 
358, 361–62, 388, 527, 539, 706, 723, 725
Cortés, Hernán, 34
Costa Rica, 396, 473, 727
mean levels of life satisfaction in, 53
cost-benefi t analysis, 351, 388
eff ects of shadow pricing on, 357t
crawling peg exchange rates, 434, 434f, 435, 
560–61
credit ceilings, 439–40, 454
credit default swaps, 422
creditor panics, 486–87b, 488–89
Croatia, 328
Croitoru, Leila, 775n
crude birth rate, 220, 222, 224, 233
crude death rate, 220, 222, 224

810   I N D E X
Cuba, 76, 326, 328, 514, 546
tax rates in, 412
Cull, Robert, 453
curb (or kerb) market, 449
currency, 424
currency boards, 154, 434–35, 495, 495n
current account, 577, 580
current account defi cit, fi nancing, 579
current account surplus, in China, 731b
Cutler, David, 316, 316n
Dalgaard, Carl-Hohan, 522n
dams, 784–85
Das, Saudamini, 787, 787n
Dasgupta, Partha, 762n, 786n
Dasgupta, Susmita, 759, 759n, 760
Das Kapital (Marx), 130
Datt, Gaurav, 205n
Daud, Fatimah, 3n
Dawe, David, 610, 610n
DDT, 333
deadweight loss, 714, 721
Deardorff , Alan, 744n
deaths, death rates:
diarrheal disease and, 340–42
health and, 299, 300, 300f, 302, 304, 306, 310
malaria and, 329
population and, 220, 221, 222, 224
Deaton, Angus, 31n, 51n, 191, 191n, 241n, 316, 
316n, 378
debt crises, 395, 423, 576
in Greece, 2010-2012, 571–73b
see also foreign debt
debt crisis of 1980s, 466–73, 497
causes of, 467–69
escape from, for some countries, 470–73
impact of, on borrowers, 469–70
debt-equity swaps, 472
debt/export ratio, 462
debt/exports, 461, 462
debt forgiveness, 17
debt/GDP ratio, 460, 462, 463
debt indicators, 460–63
debt overhang, 464
debt ratios, 471–72, 471t
debt repayment crisis, 567–68, 569f
debt restructuring, 493–94
debt/revenue (or NPV debt/revenue), 461
debt service, 460
debt service/exports, 461, 462
debt service/revenue, 461, 462
debt sustainability, 459–60
decision point, 478
decline in the terms of trade, 567–68, 569f
deep fi nancial strategy, 447–48
Deese, Brian, 466n, 477n
defaults, 463–73
defensive lending, 477
defi cits, 203, 388, 394–95, 396, 437
deforestation, 765, 771, 791–92
DeGregorio, J., 369n
Deininger, Klaus, 176n, 655, 655n, 657, 657n
de Janvry, Alain, 611, 611n, 613n, 615
de la Torre, Augusto, 148n
de Lesseps, Ferdinand, 322b
Delgado, C., 607n, 608n
demand deposits, 424
demand elasticities, price, 403
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, 453
democracy, foreign aid and, 518
demographic dividend (or bonus), 238, 
241, 241n
demographic gift, 112b
demographic transition, 220–24, 232, 238, 241, 
254, 389
for less-developed regions, 223f
stages in, 377–78
Denison, Edward, 70
Denmark, 505, 507b
health in, 299–302, 300f, 301t, 306, 310
Department for International Development 
(DFID), 503
dependency ratio, 238, 378
depreciation:
changes in capital stock and, 93
investment and, 65
reduction of capital per worker, 106
deregulation, Washington Consensus and, 147
de Soto, Hernando, 83, 83n
devaluations, 571, 695, 701, 702b
trade and, 547
Devarajan, Shantayanan, 91n, 546n
developed countries. see industrialized 
countries
developing countries, 3–13, 20, 70, 71
adjusted net savings for, 767f
agriculture in, 622
capital fl ows to, 386
capital infl ows to, 387
climate change and, 800
debt fl ows to, 456–57, 457t
debt ratios in, 471–72, 471t
diminishing marginal product of capital and, 
120–21
disease in, 323
economic recovery programs in, 139b

I N D E X   811
fertility decisions of families in, 236
fi nancial fl ows from and to, 387t
fi scal policy and, 392
foreign debt in, 463–64
foreign direct investment in, 365
global trade and, 742
health in, 317
import duties in, 401
infl ation in, 429–30t, 432
long-term debt in, 467t
malaria in, 329–20
multinational corporations in, 364, 380
new growth models and, 127
open economies in, 546
population of, 220, 224, 227, 228
scarcity of education in, 259–60, 259f
sustainable development in, 758
tax systems in, 416
technological innovation and, 113
technology transfers and, 373
trade in, 83, 84, 135–36
development, economic, 20, 54, 545, 685
approaches to, 16–17, 40
commodity exports and, 704
continuum of, 13–14
critical triangle of goals in, 785f, 786
debate over role of government in, 137–40
defi nition of, 14, 39
diversity in, 15–16
economic growth vs., 13–14, 23–24, 38–39
education and, 257, 293
fertility outcomes and, 246
foreign aid and, 518–35, 543
globalization and, 8–10
government and, 129–30, 142, 735
industrialization and, 11
measuring, 40–44
natural resource exports and, 707
population and, 236–38, 240–41, 255
post-World War II, 130–32, 134–37
poverty and, 202b
study of, 15–16, 18–19
temporary migration and, 753–55, 756
two-sector models of, 590–602
what is meant by, 38–40
see also growth, economic
Development Assistance Committee (DAC), 
502, 508b
development expenditures, 394
Diamond, Jared, 34–35b, 35n, 757, 757n, 758, 
758n, 761
diamonds, 402
diarrheal disease, 340–42, 345, 524
diet, health and, 323. see also food; nutrition
digital provide, 652b
diminishing marginal product of capital 
(MPK), 117, 120–21, 120f
diminishing marginal returns, 643
diminishing returns
agricultural production and, 591
production function and, 117–21
diminishing returns to capital, Solow’s model 
and, 105, 522
directly observed treatment, short course 
(DOTS), 334, 336, 337, 343
direct taxes, 399
Dirksen, Everett, 499
disability, 306, 309
discounting, discount rates, 352
shadow discount rates and, 356
sustainable development and, 797–98
discounting future benefi ts, of education, 
270, 270n
disease (morbidity), 309, 310, 312, 344
double burden of, 344
population growth and control of, 220
disequilibrium, 562f, 576
equilibrium and, 556–60
four combinations of conditions tied to, 556f, 
557–60, 576
in open economies, 556–60
disguised unemployment, 591
disposable income, 561
dividends, 415
Diwan, Ishac, 467
Djibouti, 77f, 435, 673
Doha Round, 752–53, 756
Dollar, David, 83, 84n, 198n, 516n, 518, 534, 
534n, 540, 540n
dollarization, 435, 495
Domar, Evsey, 96, 96n, 103, 103n
see also Harrod-Domar growth model
domestic content requirements, 373
domestic prices, 715b
domestic savings, 374–75, 376, 389
Dominica, 209
Dominican Republic, 371, 396, 734
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 462n, 470n
double burden of disease, 344
doubling time, 222
calculating, 62–63b
drought, macroeconomic refl ection of, 
574, 575f
Due, John F., 403n, 411n
Dufl o, Esther, 96, 196n, 277, 278, 278n, 294b, 
317, 319, 319n, 452n, 525, 525n

812   I N D E X
Duloy, John H., 138n
Dutch disease, 527, 527n, 564–65, 565f, 567, 
693–703, 704, 708
avoiding in Indonesia, 702–3b
geometric presentation about, 697–99b
in Nigeria, 700–701b
preventing, 701–3
duty exemption systems, 733
Duvalier, Jean-Claude, 476b, 520
earnings. see wages
earthquakes, macroeconomic refl ection of, 574
East Asia, 36, 55, 58, 160, 711
economic growth in, 117
education in, 262, 262f
land reforms in, 205–6
outward-oriented trade policies and, 83
population of, 224
rate of GDP per population growth (percent/
year), 37n
sources of growth in, 72t–73t
total fertility rate in, 226–27
Washington Consensus and, 148
East Asian tigers, 153, 741
government and development of, 142
infl uence of, 144
rise of, 141
trade and, 726
see also Hong Kong; Singapore; South Korea; 
Taiwan
Easterlin, Richard, 51, 318b
Easterlin paradox, 51
Easterly, William, 45n, 102, 102n, 244n, 280n, 
500n, 533n, 539n
Eastern Europe, 149, 150, 151, 160, 173, 
326, 546
economic growth in, 33
inequality in, 177, 178
levels of GDP per capita in, 1820-2008, 35f
poverty in, 189, 194
Eastern Europe and Central Asia (ECA), 
poverty in, 189
ecocide, 757
economic ceiling:
in Mosher framework, 623, 624, 624f, 625
raising, 637–45, 647–51
Economic Commission for Latin America 
(ECLA), 136
economic effi  ciency, 639
budget and, 417–20
economic evaluation, 388
economic globalization, defi ned, 10
economic growth. see growth, economic
economic institutions, 80b
economic isolationsim, 710
economic miracle, 37
economic opportunity costs, 355
economic project appraisal, 356
economics, important questions in study of, 55
Ecosystems and Human Well-Being, 786
ecotourism, 788
Ecuador, 396, 473, 687
fi nancial crisis in, 480, 493
sales taxes in, 417
education, 257–98
absenteeism and, 288b, 291, 293–94, 
294–96b, 298
accountability in, 293–94, 296–97, 298
attainment in, adult population and, 
259f, 262f
benefi ts of, 257–58, 267
class size and, 287, 291–92, 292n
controversies of, 278–80
costs related to, 270, 277, 282, 287, 291
deworming and, 290–91
discounting future benefi ts of, 270, 270n
dropout rates and, 287
economic growth and, 42, 56, 257, 258, 
267–69, 274–76, 280, 298
enrollment rates and, 259
in Equatorial Guinea, 14
estimated rates of return for, 272–73, 298
in Ethiopia, 5
externalities of, 271
fi rst-generation estimates in, 272–76
fl ows in, 259
foreign aid and, 522–26, 525–26, 543
gender distribution in, 263–64, 263t, 
276, 289b
for girls, fertility and, 245
government and, 296–97
gross enrollment rates and, 260–61, 260t
health and, 312, 320, 345
in Hungary, 14
improvement of, 286
ineffi  cient use of resources for, 290–93
internal rates of return and, 271, 276
investment in, 77–79, 88, 90, 117, 126, 127, 
257, 267–69
learning outcomes, 264–67, 265f
in low-income countries, 15
macroeconomic puzzles and, 280
in Malaysia, 4
microeconomic puzzles and, 278–79
misallocation of resources in, 282, 284–85
poverty and, 205, 206

I N D E X   813
productivity and, 281, 298
public spending on, 282, 283f
rate of return in, 269–71, 272, 298
reducing costs related to, 287–90
resources for, 288–89b, 290
returns to schooling and income 
opportunities, 279–80b
returns to schooling by level and country 
income group, 273t
schooling vs., 264–67
second-generation estimates and, 276–78
social returns of, 271, 272f, 273t
sources of growth in East Asia and other 
regions, 1960-2000, 72t
stocks in, 259
student retention, 287, 288
teacher absences and, 293–94, 294–96b, 298
textbooks in, 292–93
total fertility rates and, 246f
trends and patterns in, 258–59
in Ukraine, 6–7
underinvestment in, 282
Educo program (El Salvador), 297
Edwards, Alejandra Cox, 254n
Edwards, Sebastian, 378, 384, 495n, 695n
eff ective rates of protection (ERP), 715–16b
eff ective taxes, 412
eff ective units of labor, 114
effi  ciency, 133b, 138
productivity and, 64
effi  cient tax system, 418–19
Egypt, 187, 396, 564, 784
economic growth in, 58, 89
education in, 181
food riots in, 583
oral rehydration therapy in, 340, 341, 342
polio in, 338
total fertility rates by mother’s education 
in, 246f
trade and, 733, 734
Eichengreen, Barry, 496n
elasticities:
of demand, 441
demand, taxation and effi  ciency, 419f
fi scal policy and, 418–419, 419f
of isoquants, 636n
perfect, 594, 594n
rice production and, 649
“elementary functionings,” 39
Elliot, Kimberley Ann, 745n, 747n
el Rafi e, M., 341n
El Salvador, 77f
civil war in, 297
education in, 42, 297
HDI of, 44
life expectancy in, 41–42
emergency relief, foreign aid and, 526
emerging economies, 11
subsidies and, 721
emerging market fi nancial crises, 480–96
creditor panic and, 486–89
domestic economic weaknesses and, 482–84
fi ve Asian economies: private external 
fi nancing before/after, 480t
foreign debt and, 480–82
GDP growth before/after, 481t
international fi nancing for selected crisis 
countries, 492t
lessons from, 494–96
short-term capital fl ows, 484–86
short-term foreign debt and reserves, 485t
stopping panics, 489–91, 493–94
employment, 204
generation of, FDI and
shallow fi nance and, 447
trade and, 740
see also labor; unemployment
Employment Guarantee Scheme (EGS), 208, 215
Encina, Francisco, 411
End of Poverty, Th e (Sachs), 213
endogeneity, class size and, 292n
endogenous growth models, 126–27, 128
endogenous to the model, nontradable prices 
and, 547
energy pricing, policy failure and, 784
Engel, Ernst, 587, 689
Engel, Stefanie, 779n
Engel’s law, 587, 617, 689
England, 172
Enos, John, 533, 533n
enterprise funds, 504
environment, 16
common resources and, 771
dams and, 784–85
economic growth and, 759–61
foreign aid and, 522–26
fragile lands and, 787, 789
global climate change and, 792–800
marketable permits and, 779–81
poverty and, 785–92, 790f, 801
sustainable development and, 757–59, 
775–76, 782–84
taxes, subsidies and, 776–79
technology and, 759
environmental Kuznets curve (EKC), 
759–61, 760f

814   I N D E X
epidemics, pandemics vs., 323n
epidemiologic transitions, 309–10, 344
Equatorial Guinea, 14, 687, 703n
equilibrium, 576
disequilibrium and, 556–60
in open economies, 546–63, 556–60, 562, 
565, 567
equity, fi scal policy and, 411, 419, 420
Eritrea, 5, 241n, 519, 672
Essay on the Principle of Population (Malthus), 
232, 758
estimated rates of return, for education, 272–73
Estonia, 435
economic growth in, 15, 39
Eswaran, Mukesh, 601, 601n
Ethiopia, 8, 9n, 71, 87, 325, 509, 525, 574, 651, 
672–73
agricultural growth multiplier in, 608
average farm size in, 653
land reform in, 657
population of, 231
poverty in, 5–6
total fertility rates by mother’s education 
in, 246f
ethnicity, poverty and, 194
Eurasians, historical dominance of, 34–35b
Europe, 36, 84, 151, 226, 387
education in, 262f
fi nancial crisis of 2008 and, 422, 494, 545
foreign borrowing in, 458
Marshall Plan and, 131
mean levels of life satisfaction in, 53
rate of GDP per population growth (percent/
year) in, 37, 37n
recession of 2008 and, 391
total fertility rate in, 225b
European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development, 511n
European Commission, 508
European Union (EU), 402, 511, 646b, 681, 
720, 747
fi nancial crisis in, 455
free trade in, 710
Greek debt crisis and, 571b
Evenson, Robert, 628
excess burden, 403–4, 417, 418
exchange-rate anchor, 559, 559b, 573–74
exchange-rate regimes, 560
exchange rates, 453
in China, 731–32b
continuum of prototypes with, 434f
conversion problems and, 27–32
determining, 28
domestic currency and, 694
management of, 722–24
monetary policy and, 433–35
nominal, see nominal exchange rates
overvalued and undervalued, 722, 723, 
723f, 724
real, see real exchange rates
trade and, 738
undervaluation of, 557
see also foreign exchange
excise taxes, 402–3
exogenous to the model, world market prices 
and, 547
Expanded Program on Immunization, 337
expenditures, government. see government 
expenditures
explicit costs, children and, 234
export credits, 386
export orientation, 711, 725–30, 733–34
export pessimism, 688–90, 708
export-processing zones (EPZs), 4, 371, 730, 
733–34, 755
export promotion, 725
see also outward orientation
exports, 667, 668, 669, 670, 671, 674, 676, 
679, 685, 686, 687, 691, 694, 695, 
703, 711, 724
favoring, 728–30
manufactured, importance by region, 670f
removing bias against, 727–28
world, growth by region, 1974-2008, 668f
export taxes, 402
external balance (EB), 548, 555f, 556f, 557f, 558, 
561, 562, 570, 576
external diseconomies, 772f
externalities, 778, 779, 801
commons and, 770–72
of education, 271
external transfer problems, 460
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative 
(EITI), 705, 706, 708
factor accumulation, 87, 116, 117, 127
defi nition of, 64
economic growth and, 66, 67–68, 67f, 74, 87
Falcon, Walter, 584, 584n, 623n
Fallon, Peter, 532n
family planning, 246–49, 255
famine, 310, 311
Fan, S., 659n, 660, 662
farm-gate price, 650
farming, mixed, 622
farming systems, 621. see also agriculture

I N D E X   815
favelas, 194n
FDI. see foreign direct investment
Feder, Gershon, 655, 655n 657, 657n
Federal Reserve System, 18, 141, 422, 438n
Feed the Future (USAID), 541
Feenstra, Robert C., 577n
Fei, John, 592, 592n
Fei-Ranis model, 597, 603b, 605, 618
Feldstein, Martin, 491n, 496n
feminization of poverty, 195
Fenwick, A., 319n
Ferreira, Susana, 766, 766n
fertility, 308
authoritarian approaches and, 249–51, 
253, 255
microeconomic model of, 243
modern theories related to, 235–36
negative relation to income, 235
population and, 224–27, 227, 233, 234, 
240–41, 245–46, 255
total rates of, by mother’s education, 246f
fertilizer subsidies, in Malawi, 645–47b
feudalism, 14
Feyzioglu, Tarhan, 531n
fi at money, 423
Field, Christopher B., 772n
Fields, Gary, 172n
Figenschou, B. M., 319n
Fiji, 705
Finance and Development, 202b
fi nancial account, 577, 579, 579n
fi nancial assets, 424
fi nancial crises, Washington Consensus 
and, 148
fi nancial crisis of 1997-1998, 391
fi nancial crisis of 2008, 386, 391, 421, 422, 427, 
442, 455, 494, 666, 692
foreign reserves in China and, 730
India and, 153
poverty and, 193
fi nancial deepening, 443, 454
fi nancial development, 442–53
fi nancial intermediation, 423, 426
fi nancial panics, 454
fi nancial policy, 422, 423
exchange rates in, 722–24
foreign debt in, 458–64
infl ation in, 435–38, 442–51
prices in, 546–49, 552–56, 558–59
fi nancial system, 421
fi nancial intermediation, 426
functions of, 423–27
money and money supply in, 423–26
stabilization and, 427
transformation and distribution of risk in, 
426–27
Findlay, R., 464n
Finland, 224n, 233
demographic transition in, 220–22, 221f
education in, 264
Firestone, 685, 685n
fi scal austerity, 561, 562, 573, 574
fi scal equity, 411
fi scal linkage, 686, 699
fi scal policy, 18, 391–420
changes in tax administration, 405
corporate income taxes, 404, 414–16
economic effi  ciency and the budget, 417–20
fundamental tax reform, 405–11
government expenditures, 393–97, 399–401
income distribution in, 411–16
international trade, taxes and, 401–2
luxury consumption taxes, 413–14
macroeconomic equilibrium and, 576
new sources of tax revenues, 404–5
in open economies, 549, 561, 567, 663
personal income taxes, 404, 412
property taxes, 414–16
purpose of, 392
sales and excise taxes, 402–4
stabilization and, 560, 561
taxes in, 399–414
Fischer, Hannah, 516n
Fischer, Stanley, 491n
fi sheries, 652b, 770, 781
Fishlow, Albert, 462n
Fiszbein, Ariel, 207n
fi xed-coeffi  cient production function, 
94–96, 106
fi xed-coeffi  cient production technology, 
isoquants for, 95f
fi xed exchange rates, 434f, 435, 436, 438, 453, 
495, 497, 560, 568
fi xed-exchange-rate system, 433
fi xed nominal exchange rate, 559
fi xed rent schemes, 655
fi xed-rent tenancy, 655
fl exible-exchange rates, 438
fl oating exchange rates, 434f, 436–37, 454, 495, 
560, 568
fl ows, in education, 259
fl ypaper eff ect, 530
Fogel, Robert, 241, 320, 320n, 608–9b
food, 232, 517, 759
contribution of modern varieties of, 631t
exemption from sales taxes, 413, 420

816   I N D E X
food (continued)
income elasticity of demand for, 689
population and, 220, 241n, 242–43
poverty and, 182, 183–84b, 196, 196n
projecting future demand for, 622n
trade in, 683
see also agriculture, agricultural sector; 
nutrition
food aid, food production and, 527, 528b
Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO), 
524b, 584, 662
food crisis of 2005-08, 659–63
causes of, 659–61
consequences of, 661–63
Food for Schooling program (Bangladesh), 288
food insecurity, climate change and, 795–96
food prices, 605, 611, 612, 663–64
farmers’ incentives and, 620, 663
increases in, 583–84
industrial labor supply and, 597
national investment and, 609–10
food production analysis, 638–45, 647–51
factor-factor decision, 641–43, 641f
factor-product decision, 643–45, 643f, 647–50
market access, 651
product-product decision, 638–40, 639f
food riots of 2008, 583, 609
food stamps, 395
Forbes, Kristin, 180n
Ford, Henry, 126
Ford Foundation, 136
Ford Motor Company, 126
foreclosures, 391
foreign aid, 11n, 499–544
agriculture and, 521, 535
commercial ties and, 517–18
Commitment to Development Index and, 
507–8b
conditionality in, 537–40, 544
coordination in, 541–42
country selectivity in, 534, 540–41
country size and, 517, 543
democracy and, 518, 543
dependency and, 531–33
description of, 501–2
diversity of opinions on, 499–500
donor relationships and, 535–43, 544
donors of, 503–4, 508–12
Dutch disease and, 694
economic growth and, 518–35, 519f, 
523f, 543
foreign policy objectives and political 
alliances, 514, 516
fungible, 520–31, 543
harmonization in, 541–42
health and, 341, 343, 522–26, 543
historical role of, 503
income levels, poverty and, 516–17
major offi  cial development aid recipients, 
2009, 513t
motivations for, 514, 516–18
net offi  cial development assistance, 2009, 
505f
objectives of, 518
offi  cial development aid receipts by region 
and income, 514t
recipients of, 512–13, 541, 544
results-based management and, 542–43, 544
savings and, 374, 529–31, 543
tradables and, 553
types of, 534–35
foreign assets, sovereign wealth funds, 705–6
foreign assistance, 501
foreign debt, 457
advantages and disadvantages of, 458–59
default in, 463–73
emerging market fi nancial crises and, 
480–82
1980s debt crisis and, 141, 466–73
short-term, 485, 485t
sustainability of, 459–60
foreign direct investment (FDI), 363–74, 369n, 
374, 384, 386, 388, 458
access to world markets and, 367
attracting, policies aimed at, 371–73
benefi ts and drawbacks of, 365–69
categories of, 365
controversy tied to, 364
defi ned, 363
in electronics industry in, 367
generation of employment and, 366
growth and, 369–70
patterns and products relative to, 364–65
policies toward, 370–74
requirements and restrictions on, 373–74
transfer of technology and, 367
Washington Consensus and, 147
foreign exchange, 694
Dutch disease and, 695–96
gap in, 131
reserves, 387–88
shadow prices and, 355
windfalls, 564, 565n, 567
foreign income tax credit, 410
foreign investment
in China, 152

I N D E X   817
tradables and, 553
trade and, 685–86
foreign policy, foreign aid and, 514, 516
foreign savings, 374, 384–88, 385, 389, 462, 579
forestry, forests:
climate change and, 795
mangroves, 787
policy failure in, 782–84
sustainable development and, 765, 770, 
771, 788
tropical rainforests, 787–88
forward linkages, 686
fossil fuels, 758, 793
Foster, Andrew, 279b
Fox, Vicente, 665
France, 12, 113, 372, 510, 514, 516, 709, 748
education in, 259, 284
foreign aid through, 504–5
Frankel, Jeff rey A., 83, 83n, 
546n, 736, 736n, 737
Frankenberger, Tim, 197n
freely fl oating exchange rates, 434f
Freeman, Richard B., 745n, 747n
free trade, 681, 710
Free Trade Area of the Americas, 665
frequency distribution, 167, 169
Friedman, Milton, 142n, 376n, 500
fundamental tax reform, 405–6, 408–11
fungible aid, 520–31
Furman, Jason, 491n
futures markets, 150
Gabon, 378, 412
gains from exchange, 679, 680
gains from specialization, 680
gains from trade, 679
Gallup, John, 85n, 198n, 332
Gambia, 401, 402, 686
Gandhi, Indira, 249
Gang, Ira N., 406b
Gardner, B., 608n
Gardner, Gary, 242n
Gates, Bill, 499, 499n
GDP defl ator, 25n
Geary-Khamis (GK) dollars, 33n
Gelb, Alan, 701n
gender, poverty and, 194–95, 214
gendercide, 252b
General Agreement on Tariff s and Trade 
(GATT), 136, 510n, 750–51
General Agreement on Trade in Services 
(GATS), 753
genuine saving, 765
geography:
agricultural production and, 586
economic growth and, 84–87, 88, 90,117,119b
GDP and, 86f
income levels and, 85f
trade and, 671–74, 737
geometric mean, HDI and, 42, 44–45
Georgia, Republic of, 45, 77f, 92, 360, 430
education in, 282
Germany, 113, 135, 172, 222, 510, 514, 555
fall of Berlin wall, 148, 149
foreign aid through, 505
total fertility rate in, 226
trade and, 667
Gerschenkron, Alexander, 38, 129n, 317
Gersovitz, M., 378
Gertler, Paul, 248, 248n, 368n
Getachew, 5–6, 8, 10
Ghana, 137, 138, 375, 402, 432, 448, 478, 500, 
511, 527, 558, 564, 589, 656, 781
acute infl ation in, 428
deforestation in, 770
education in, 259, 286
independence in, 139–40b
informal credit markets in, 449
log export bans in, 784
Malthusian eff ect of population growth on 
ANS in, 768–69b
recovering from mismanagement in, 566b
Ghana Cocoa Board, 146
Gillis, Malcolm, 402n, 403n, 408n, 784n
Gini, Corrado, 171
Gini coeffi  cient, 171–72, 171n, 175, 176, 181, 
209, 214, 215, 653
for Chile and Taiwan, 175, 176f
by country and region, 173f
global, estimates of, 211
for South Africa, 177
girl’s education, fertility and, 245, 255
Glennerster, Rachel, 332n, 452n
Glewwe, Paul, 261n, 281n, 292
Global Agreement on Tariff s and Trade 
(GATT), 711
Global Alliance for Vaccines and 
Immunisations, 332b
global annual mean surface air temperature, 
changes in, 793f
global climate change, 792–800, 801
cost-benefi t analysis of, 797
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and 
Malaria, 343, 541
global inequality, 215
end of poverty and, 208–14

818   I N D E X
globalism, globalization, 116, 681, 741
backlash against, 153
controversy over, 665–66
defi ned, 10
development and, 8–10
industrial policy and, 734–36
global offi  cial development assistance, 
1975-2008, 509f
Global Polio Eradication Initiative, 338
global trade, rapid growth in, 9
global trade agenda:
expanding market access, 747–50
multilateral trade negotiations and WTO, 
750–53
rise of China and India, 741–43
sweatshops and, 743–45
temporary migration and, 753–55
global warming, 16, 133b, 758
Goldstein, Morris, 496n, 731n
Gollin, Douglas, 589, 589n, 628
Gomez-Granger, Julissa, 516n
goods and services:
nontradable, see nontradable goods and 
services
tradable, see tradable goods and services
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 149
Gorgas, William, 322b
Goswami, Omkar, 406b
Goulder, Lawrence H., 762n
governance:
economic growth and, 79, 80b–81b, 82, 88, 
90, 117, 138
investments and, 358
primary product exports and, 704–5
government, 686
agriculture and, 645
default by, 465b
disaster response and, 574
economic development and, 142
economic growth and, 39
economic progress and, debate over, 
129–30, 140
education and, 284, 296–97
expenditures of, see government 
expenditures
hard, 158
health and, 321
import licenses and, 717
investment and, 350, 354, 356, 371
Korea, declining eff ectiveness of 
intervention by, 143–44b
revenue, consumption, and saving, 
1990–2002, 382f
self-discovery and, 735–36
soft, 158
stopping panics and, 489–90
sustainable development and, 774–76, 782
trade and, 136, 673–74, 718
welfare weights and, 356–57
government expenditures, 393–411, 568
categories of, 394–97, 399
commodity booms and, 699–700
equity and, 420
in fi scal policy, 392–93
foreign aid and, 531, 532
intergovernmental transfers and, 400–401
preventing Dutch disease and, 701
recurrent, 394–95, 397
SOEs and, 396, 399
taxes and, 399–401
government failure, 134b
Washington Consensus and, 148
government policy, inequality and, 178
government revenues. see taxation, taxes
government savings, 380–84, 385, 389
grade survival rates, 261
Graham, Edward, 368n, 369n
Grameen Bank, 449, 450, 451b, 504
grand bargain, 751
grants, 386
Greaney, Vincent, 266n
Great Depression, 132, 136, 159, 391, 456, 465b, 
490, 710, 711, 750
Great Recession (2008), 8, 9
Greece:
debt crisis of 2010-12, 571–73b
doing business in, 360
fi nancial crisis in, 455, 458, 464, 511
greenhouse gases (GHGs), 133b, 758, 771, 
793–94, 796, 800, 801
Green Revolution, 500, 521, 619, 627, 628–32, 
631t, 635b, 663
Gresser, Edward, 748n
Gribble, James, 248n
Griff en, Keith, 533, 533n
Griliches, Zvi, 70
gross domestic expenditure, 552
gross domestic product (GDP), 32, 62b, 131, 280
agriculture and, 584, 587, 604, 618, 633
in Angola, 25
in Bangladesh, 25
broad money as percentage of, 425–26, 425t
central government expenditure as share 
of, 393t
comparing levels in two economies, 
28–30, 29t

I N D E X   819
comparing per capita using market exchange 
rates and PPP in 2009 (US$), 31t
debt sustainability and, 460
defi cits in state enterprises and, 396
defi ned, 24, 577
fi nancial crises and, 481t
fl aws and benefi ts of, 26–27
foreign debt and, 470
geography and, 86f
government saving and, 381
growth, conditional on population growth 
and, 124f
index number problem and, 32
investments and, 357
levels per capita by region: 1820-2008, 35f
in open economies, 552
per capita, 36, 38, 53, 77f
population growth and, 237
poverty and, 199
primary product exports and, 687
production functions and, 91
rate of, per population growth, 37t
share of agriculture in, and rural population 
share, 585t
sustainable development and, 762
trade and, 83, 667–69, 737
unconditional growth and, 122f
gross domestic savings, 65
age dependency ratio and, 379f
gross enrollment rates, 260–61
gross national expenditure, 577
gross national income (GNI), 12, 13, 13t, 42, 42n, 
209n, 501, 505, 512, 513, 517, 543, 578
education and, 284
net offi  cial development assistance as 
percentage of donor GNI, 2009, 506f
per capita by country, HDI vs., 46f
gross national product (GNP), 11–12
in Angola, 25
in Bangladesh, 25
defi ned, 24
gross savings, 765, 766
growth, economic, 8, 12, 15, 20, 54
in Africa, 36
agriculture and, 585, 587, 591, 601, 604–10
capital and, 131
in China, 12n, 32, 33
climate change and, 799
deep fi nance and, 448
desirability of, 50–51, 53, 54
divergent patterns of, 56–60
domesticated agriculture and, 34–35b
as dynamic process, 682–83
in Eastern Europe, 33
economic development vs., 13–14, 23–24, 
38–39
education and, 42, 56, 257, 258, 267–69, 
274–76, 280, 298
eff ective governance and institutions and, 
79–82
environment and, 759–61
factor accumulation and, 60, 64, 66, 87
favorable environment for private enterprise 
and, 82–83, 88, 90, 117
foreign aid and, 518–35, 519f, 523f, 543
foreign debt and, 469–70
foreign direct investment and, 369–70
geography and, 84–87, 88, 90, 117
health and, 319–20
in India, 12n, 33
inequality and, 174, 180
infl ation and, 76, 76n
investment and, 65, 66, 90, 349, 388
investment in health and education and, 
77–79, 88, 90, 117
labor and, 90
landlocked nations and, 673
in Latin America, 33, 36, 154t
macroeconomic stability and, 75–76
MDGs and, 50
measuring, 24–25
modern, 14
natural resource abundance and, 687, 688f
new approaches to, 125–27, 128
1970-2010, 36–38
nutrition linkage to, 608–9b
openness and, 83–84
political stability and, 75–76, 88, 90, 117
population growth and, 112b
poverty and, 166, 197–98, 197–201, 203
primary exports and, 687–88
problems with, 198
productivity and, 60, 64, 66, 68, 87–88, 90
savings and, 65–66, 90, 126
Solow model and, see Solow growth model
sources of analysis of, 66–74, 67f
strong governance and institutions in, 88, 
90, 117
sustainable, 66, 74
sustainable development and, 758
theories of, 89–128
trade and, 83–84, 707, 736–39, 756
in various countries, 1960-2009, 57t
world-wide, 32–33, 36–38
growth accounting, 68
growth multipliers, 607

820   I N D E X
growth rate of output, 97–98
growth rates
of any variable, 237n
calculating, 61b–62b
explaining diff erences in, 118b–119b
Solow growth model and, 111, 113
growth theory, 89–128
Guan Zhong, 257, 258
Guatemala, 375
Guerin, Bill, 401In
Gugerty, Mary Kay, 198n
Guinea-Bissau, 92, 191
Guriev, Sergei, 53n
Guyana, 328, 671
Haberger, Arnold C., 428n
hacienda systems, 657
Hae, Lee Kyang, 665
Haiti, 12, 244, 500, 527, 574, 583, 681
Hall, Robert, 85n
halocarbons, 793
Halweil, Brian, 242n
Hamann, Javier, 532n
Hamilton, Kirk, 766, 766n
Hansen, Henrik, 522n
Hanson, Gordon, 738n
Hanushek, Eric, 292, 292n
happiness, incomes and, 51–53, 762
Haq, Mahbub ul, 40, 539, 539n
Harberger, Arnold C., 418n, 435n
hard governments, 158
Hardin, Garret, 243n
hard loans, 386
Harrison, Ann E., 369n, 736, 736n, 737, 738n, 
740, 746b, 747n
Harrod, Roy, 96, 96n
Harrod-Domar growth model, 94–100, 102–3, 
107, 109, 110, 116, 127, 128, 130, 159, 
457, 520, 520n
basis of, 96
capital-output ratio and, 96–98
economic growth in Th ailand and, 102b
fi xed-coeffi  cient production function and, 
94–96, 102, 106
rigid production function in, 99, 103
shallow fi nancial strategies and, 447
strengths and weaknesses of, 98–100, 102–3
Hartwick rule, 765
Harvard Development Advisory Service, 136
Harvard Institute for International 
Development, 136
Hayami, Yujiro, 635b 637n
Hazell, Peter, 607n, 608n
head-count index, 185, 186, 189
Headey, Derek, 659n, 660, 662
Heady, Derek, 157n
health, health conditions, 299–345
aff ordability and, 342–43
causes of disease and death, 309, 311t
challenges in, 343–44
critical diseases and, 321–34
defi nitions of, 302–3
determinants of, 310–12
economic growth and, 316–17, 319–20
education and, 312, 320, 345
epidemiologic transitions and, 308–10, 344
foreign aid and, 341, 343, 522–26, 543
global, transitions in, 307–8
income and, 314–17, 319, 344
investment in, 77–79, 88, 90, 117, 127, 320–21
leadership and, 342
lessons learned for, 342–43
life expectancy and, 304, 305–6b
in low-income countries, 15
medical services and, 301–2, 315
poverty and, 205, 206, 313–14, 344
productivity and, 319–20
successes in, 335–43
in Ukraine, 7
health-adjusted life expectancy (HALE), 306
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) 
Initiative, 477, 479b
Heckscher, Eli, 677, 682
Heckscher-Ohlin model, 677
hedge funds, 421
Hee, Park Chung, 143b
Heller, Peter, 531n
Helms, Jesse, 499, 499n
Hersch, Joni, 747n
Hicks, Joan Hamory, 291n
Hicks-neutral technological change, 114n
high-income countries, 11, 12, 13t, 20
central government expenditure as share of 
GDP in, 393t
composition of tax systems in, 400t
consumer subsidies in, 395
consumption habits in, 212
doing business in, 360
education in, 262f, 264, 265
government saving in, 381
health in, 309
population of, 224
tertiary education enrollment rates in, 259
trade and, 671
high-powered money, 437
high-yielding crop varieties, 628

I N D E X   821
Hill, Ruth Vargas, 197n
Hinkle, Lawrence, 552, 552n
Hirschman, Albert O., 132, 134, 134n, 605, 
686, 686n
HIV/AIDS, 9, 16, 48, 205, 212, 276, 304, 309, 
311t, 323, 324–25b, 327f, 330b, 332, 344, 
345, 474, 752
in Africa, 6, 9, 48, 56, 58, 59b, 60b, 245, 308, 
320, 321, 325, 326, 327, 328, 342, 344
preventing in Th ailand, 336
in tropical countries, 85
Hobbes, Th omas, 411
home country, 677, 679
Honduras, education in, 277
H1N1 swine fl u, 309
Hong Kong, 141, 160, 435, 711
fi nancial policy in, 448
foreign direct investment in, 365
free trade in, 710
government’s role in development of, 142
liberalization and, 728, 728n
semiconductor industry in, 4
trade and, 668, 726, 741
see also East Asian tigers
Hoover, Edgar M., 237, 237n, 238, 377n
Hoover Institution, 292
Hopkins, J., 607n, 608n
horizontal spillovers, 368
household consumption, measuring, 166
Hoxha, Enver, 710
human capital, 114
human capital investments, 257, 258
human development, defi ned, 41b
Human Development Index (HDI), 40–42, 42n, 
43b, 44–46, 46f, 54, 79, 181
Human Development Report, Th e, 41, 197n, 198
humanitarian aid, 526, 534
Hungary, life expectancy in, 14
hunger-gatherers, 218
hurricanes, 574
Husain, Ishrat, 467
Hussein, Saddam, 476b
Hutterites, 233
hyperinfl ation (runaway infl ation), 154, 427, 
428, 430, 573
in Peru, 430, 431b
identifi cation, empirical studies and, 273, 277
Iglesias, Augusto, 254n
illiquid borrowers, 461, 486b
illiquid economies, 484
immigration, population growth attributable 
to, 224, 226, 231
immiserizing growth, 200
implicit costs, children and, 234
import controls, 436n
import duties, 401
import quotas, 714, 717–18
imports, 667, 668, 669, 671, 673, 674, 676, 681, 
686, 691, 724, 725, 727, 740
import substituting industrialization, 134, 
135, 140
import substitution (IS), 17, 414, 674, 711–12, 
723, 726, 735, 755
defi nition for, 674
ERPs and, 715–16b
exchange rates in, 722–24
import quotas and, 712, 714, 717–18
outcomes of, 724–25
subsidies and, 720–22
inactivated polio vaccine (IPV), 339
incidence problem, corporate income and 
property taxes, 414–16
income distribution, 14, 199, 214, 416
in Bangladesh, 167, 168f
Gini coeffi  cient and, 171–72
Lorenz curve and, 170–71, 170f
luxury consumption taxes, 413–14
measurement of, 166–67, 169–72
in Mexico, 166, 167, 168f
taxes and, 411–16
in United States, 167, 168f
income growth:
per capita, 61b
shallow fi nance and, 447
income redistribution, progressive income 
taxes and, 412
incomes, 15
in agriculture, 588, 615
child mortality and, 313, 313f
converting into “capability to live minimally 
acceptable life,” 40
diff erential rates of economic growth and 
divergence in, 36
economic growth and, 39, 55, 58, 800
education and, 278, 279b
fertility negatively related to, 235
foreign aid and, 516–17
GNI and, 45
happiness and, 51–53, 762
health and, 312, 314–17, 319, 344
HIV/AIDS and, 327
inequality and, 166–72
per capita, 43b
pollution and, 759–60
sources of, 616f

822   I N D E X
incomes (continued)
tax collection and, 400–401
transfers of, 206–7
war and, 76, 77f
see also wages
incomes, per capita, 14, 24
exchange rates and, 27
expressing in logarithms, 33n
growth in, 61b
worldwide, 32–33, 36–38
income taxes:
corporate, see corporate income taxes
countries reducing highest rates of, 
1984-2009, 409t
fi scal policy and, 411–16
personal, 412
increasing returns to scale, 126
incremental capital-output ratio (ICOR), 97, 98, 
100, 102, 127
India, 12, 27, 89, 129, 159, 172, 176, 187, 188, 
211, 326, 342, 360, 509, 510, 659, 660, 
673, 687, 752, 766, 781, 784
agricultural growth multiplier in, 608
climate change and, 795
economic growth in, 12n, 15, 20, 33, 58, 193
education in, 259, 260, 293–94, 294–96b, 297
foreign aid in, 512
foreign direct investment in, 365
forest resources in, 788
global competition and rise of, 741–43, 756
health in, 317
impact of schooling on farm profi tability 
in, 279b
income growth in, 211
informal credit markets in, 449
land reform in, 657
market exchange rate vs. purchasing power 
parity methods of converting GDP in, 
28–30, 29t
market reforms in, 153, 160
multinational corporations in, 364, 380
national family program in, 247
nonfarm rural economy in, 615
oral rehydration therapy in, 340
polio in, 338
population of, 224, 231
poverty in, 189, 194, 196
poverty line in, 191
sales taxes in, 403
sex-selective abortions in, 252b
smallpox in, 338
sources of growth in, 71, 73
sterilization campaign in, 249
tax administration in, 405, 406b
tax reform in, 408n
trade and, 681, 725, 726, 739, 740, 741
under-fi ve mortality rate in, 302
Indian Congress Party, 132
indirect taxes, 399
Indonesia, 20, 82, 137, 138, 158, 187, 189, 396, 
397, 401, 405, 413, 432, 434, 468, 500, 
564, 567, 568, 589, 687, 700, 703, 
705, 782
credit ceilings in, 439, 440
deforestation in, 770, 782
Dutch disease in, 702–3b
economic growth in, 15, 89
education in, 259f, 266, 277, 294
fi nancial crisis in, 386, 457, 480, 481, 488, 
489, 491, 494
fi nancial policy in, 440, 448
ICOR in, 98, 100
infl ation in, 445
labor activists and labor outcomes in, 
746–47b
log export bans in, 784
micro credit in, 451
natural resources in, 370
personal income taxes in, 412
policy failures and reforestation in, 783b
population of, 218
reserve requirements in, 439
rice price stabilization in, 610
tax reform in, 406, 407–8b, 408n, 409
trade and, 726, 729, 739, 742, 748
under-fi ve mortality rate in, 302
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, 380
industrialization:
development and, 11
environment and, 759, 760
health and, 323
inequality and, 174
Soviet approach to, 135
through import substitution, 17
industrialized countries, 11, 20, 70, 71
agricultural interests in, 749–50
climate change and, 800
greenhouse gas emissions and, 794
multilateral trade agreements and, 751, 756
multinational corporations in, 364
industrial labor, supply and demand for, 595f
industrial policy, trade strategy and, 734–36
Industrial Revolution, 232, 770
population and, 219, 220
industry, industrial sector
agriculture and, 591–97, 601

I N D E X   823
backward linkages and, 134
inequality and, 174
infant, see infant industries
linkages and, 132, 134
population and, 220
sustainable development and, 759, 779–81
trade and, 689, 720–22, 726, 728, 734–36
ineffi  ciencies, sources of, 417–18
inelastic demand, taxation and effi  ciency 
and, 419f
inequality, 138
economic growth and, 166, 174–77, 180
importance of, 178–80
international, 209, 210f
intrahousehold, 167
Lorenz curve and, 170–71, 170f
measuring, 166–67, 167n, 169–72
patterns of, 172–74
poverty and, 180, 203
infant industries
trade and, 712
trade protection and, 718
infant mortality rate, 304, 308, 317
in Botswana, 59b
economic growth and, 56
in Ethiopia, 6
gender and, 251b
in low-income countries, 15
in Malaysia, 4
poverty and, 192b
in Th ailand, 101b, 102b
infectious disease, 16, 34, 318b, 321, 323, 
344, 345
infl ation, 145, 150, 392, 423, 427–32, 453, 
555, 558
credit ceilings and, 439–40
deep fi nance and, 448
economic growth and, 76, 76n
episodes of, 428, 429–30t, 430–32
foreign aid and, 527
in Latin America, 154t
macroeconomic stabilization and, 563
monetary policy and, 141
nonmonetary causes and, 438
poverty and, 203–4
rate of, 12n
reserve requirements and, 439
sources of, 435–38
stabilization and, 569, 570–71, 570f, 573–74
transition to market economy and, 151
Washington Consensus and, 442
informal credit markets, 449, 454
information, to investors, 371
information asymmetries, market failures and, 
133b, 134b
information revolution, 16
infrastructure:
capital investments and, 394–95
corruption and, 361, 362
foreign aid and, 520, 535
investment, policy failure and, 784–85
liberalization strategy and, 728
market access and, 650, 651
opportunity costs and, 355
population and, 242
poverty reduction and, 205
infrastructure linkages, 686
innovation possibility curve, 636b
input prices, eff ect of tariff s on, 715b
insolvent borrowers, 461, 486b
insolvent debtors, 461–62
institutionally fi xed wages, 593
institutions, 19
defi nition for, 653
economic growth and, 88, 90, 117
eff ective governance, institutions, and role 
of, 79, 80–81b, 82
investments and, 358
insurance, 422
insurance markets, information asymmetries 
and, 134b
intangible capital, 762, 764t, 765
Intel, 367
intellectual property rights, 751
intensive annual crops, 622
Inter-American Development Bank, 508, 511
intercropping, 638
interest, interest rates, 145
crisis economies and, 491
defi cits and, 394–95
in fi nancial policy, 444, 445
foreign debt and, 462, 463, 468
infl ation and, 141
recessions and, 442
soft loans and, 386
Washington Consensus and, 147
see also discounting, discount rates
intergenerational equity, 761–62
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC), 792, 793, 795, 798
intermediate goods, 24
internal balance (IB), 548, 555f, 556f, 557f, 558, 
561, 562, 570, 576
internal rates of return (IRR), 271, 352
internal transfer problems, 460
international agricultural research (IARCs), 628

824   I N D E X
International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (IBRD), 11n, 508, 510
see also World Bank
International Centre for Settlement of 
Investment Disputes (ICSID), 508
International Commission on the Measurement 
of Economic Performance and Social 
Progress, 26n
International Comparison Program (ICP), 30, 
31, 32, 187
international debt, combating recessions and, 
441–42
international debt crises, fi rst wave of, 1980s, 36
International Development Association (IDA), 
459, 508, 509, 515b
International Finance Corporation (IFC), 508
International Food Policy Research Institute 
(IFPRI), 196, 632
international inequality, 209, 210
population-weighted measure of, 211
trends in, 1961-2008, 210f
International Institute for Applied Systems 
Analysis (Austria), 227n
International Labour Organization (ILO), 745
International Maize and Wheat Improvement 
Center (CIMMYT), 628
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 25, 30, 
139b, 146, 202b, 206, 351, 374, 395, 474, 
477, 491, 503, 508, 511, 512, 526, 537, 
538, 540, 541, 545, 566b, 646b, 750
credit ceilings and, 440
establishment of, 490
foreign debt and, 472, 479b
founding of, 510
in Greece, 2010-2012, 571–73b
stabilization program, 570, 571
international prices, deriving, 30
international reserves, 433, 436
International Rice Institute (IRRI), 628
international trade, 83–84, 88
taxes on, 401–2
terms of, 677
International Trade Organization (ITO), 
510n, 750
Internet, 10, 16
intersectoral linkages, 605, 606, 618
intestinal worms, school children and, 290–91
inverse elasticity rule, 419
investment, investing
barriers to doing business and, 359–63
deep fi nance and, 448
domestic savings and, 385
economic growth and, 65, 66, 90, 350, 388
in education, 77–79, 88, 90, 127, 257, 
267–69
foreign, see foreign investment
foreign aid and, 529–30, 529f
foreign direct investment, 363–74
governance, institutions and, 82
government and, 354, 356, 371
in Harrod-Domar framework, 99
in health, 77–79, 88, 90, 127, 320–21
inequality and, 179
opportunity costs and, 355
present value and, 351–54
preventing Dutch disease and, 701
price infl ation and, 204
productive public and private, barriers to, 
357–59
productivity of, 351–57
in research and development, 126
savings and, 374–88, 389
shadow prices and, 355–56
stability of food prices and, 609–10
sustainable economic growth and, 74
technology adoption and, 116
trade and, 9, 666, 701, 745
inward-oriented trade policies, slow growth 
and, 83
Iran, 137, 360, 657, 685
Iraq, 475, 506, 516
Ireland, fi nancial crisis in, 458, 511
Irwin, Douglas, 681n
Isham, Jonathan, 534n
Islamic Development Bank, 511
Isle of Man, 12
isocost line, 637b, 642
isolationism, economic, 710
isoquants, 95, 96, 100, 103, 104f
for fi xed-coeffi  cient production 
technology, 95f
output in, 94
isorevenue line, 638, 639, 640
Israel, 564
Italy, 222
doing business in, 360
fi nancial crisis in, 455
total fertility rate in, 226
Ivanic, Maros, 662, 662n
Ivory Coast, 195, 401, 589
Jakarta, 440
Jamaica, 76, 413, 685, 687
education in, 292
tax reform in, 408n, 409
James, Estelle, 254n

I N D E X   825
Japan, 12, 141, 160, 177, 226, 384, 387, 491, 
508b, 510, 555, 666, 709, 710, 720, 747
convergence debate and, 121–22
economic growth in, 131
foreign aid and, 504, 517
land reform in, 657
life expectancy in, 41
population of, 231
sales taxes in, 417
semiconductor industry in, 4
total fertility rate in, 226
trade and, 671, 681
Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction, 288
Japan International Cooperation Agency 
(JICA), 503
Java, 85
jawbone control, 441
Jayachandran, Seema, 477b
Jensen, Robert, 652b
Johnson, Rachel, 404n
Johnson, Simon, 59n, 82n
Johnston-Mellor linkages, 606–7, 608, 618
joint ventures, 373
Jolly, Richard, 138n
Jones, Charles I., 85n, 103n
Jones, Christine, 406b
Jones, Ronald W., 546n
Jordan, 222, 516
Jorgenson, Dale, 70, 599, 599n
jute, 402
Kagame, Paul, 651–52b
Kanbur, Ravi, 539, 539n, 542n, 754n
Kapur, Ishan, 566n
Kauff mann, Dani, 81b
Kaufmann, Daniel, 82n, 534, 534n
Kazakhstan, 366, 703n
Keefer, Philip, 82n
Kelley, Allen, 45n, 236n
Kelly, V., 607n, 608n
Kenny, Charles, 50n, 308n
Kenya, 76, 187, 404, 426, 448, 650, 673, 744
doing business in, 361
education in, 259, 287, 291, 292, 297, 320
Gini coeffi  cients for, 172
savings rate in, 107
textile industry in, 724
trade and, 733, 734
Khandker, Shahidur, 266n
Kharas, Homi, 5n, 502n
Kinder, Molly, 335n, 524n
King, Elizabeth, 276n
Kinnan, Cynthia, 452n
Klasen, Stephan, 252n
Klein, Michael W., 495n
Knack, Stephen, 82n
knife-edge problem, 99–100
Koch, Robert, 312
Korea, 176n, 362, 405, 500, 568, 687, 711
economic growth in, 15, 39, 59b, 205
education in, 264
EPZs in, 371
fi nancial crisis in, 386, 457, 480, 481, 488, 563
land reform in, 657
mean levels of life satisfaction in, 53
revisionist school on, 729n
tax reform in, 405
trade and, 668, 671, 726, 728–29, 730, 
738, 741
Kotwal, Ashok, 601, 601n
Kouri, P., 464n
Kraay, Aart, 81b, 82n, 198n
Kraft, Joseph, 467
Kremer, Michael, 261n, 281n, 287, 291n, 292, 
293n, 294, 332n, 477b
Krueger, Anne O., 434n, 726n
Krugman, Paul, 464n, 676, 676n
Kuala Lumpur, 78
Kurihara, K., 377n
Kuvyenhoven, Arie, 650n
Kuzawa, Christopher W., 309n
Kuznets, Simon, 14, 172, 172n, 174, 175, 236, 
236n, 759
Kuznets curve, 175, 176, 177, 177n
Kyoto Protocol, 799, 800
Kyrgyz Republic, education in, 266
labor, labor sector, 88
activism in Indonesia, 746–47b
agriculture and, 588–89, 589n, 591–97, 606, 
642, 643
in Cambodia, 26
change in, 93
economic growth and, 63–64, 90
eff ective units of, 114
FDI and, 366
health and, 319–20, 321
inequality and, 174
land reform and, 657
poverty and, 196
productivity of, 115–16, 119
in rural areas, 585, 588, 591, 593
in semiconductor industry, 4–5
shadow prices and, 355
taxes and, 18
temporary migration and, 753–55, 756

826   I N D E X
labor, labor sector (continued)
trade and, 676, 683, 685, 686, 696, 742–47, 
753–55
see also employment; marginal product of 
labor; wages
labor accumulation, economic growth and, 
66, 69
labor augmenting technology, 114
labor-intensive products, 97
labor-output ratio, 96
labor-saving technologies, 635b
labor supply, 94
labor surplus, 591
labor surplus model, 591–97
labor-to-output ratios, 99, 100
land, 683, 685
economic growth and, 90
markets and, 614–15, 614t
ownership of, 167
shadow prices and, 355
sustainable development and, 787, 789, 798
see also agriculture, agricultural sector; 
property rights
Landberg, Hans, 241n
land distribution, equity of, 653
land holdings, farm size and equity of, in 
selected countries, 654t
landlocked nations, 707
trade and, 671–73, 673f
land ownership, Gini coeffi  cient for, 653
land reforms, 177, 664
in East Asia, 205–6
forms of, 656–57
redistributive, 657–58
land rights, forms of, 654–55
land-saving technology, 635b
land titling, 656
land to the tiller with compensation, 656–57
land to the tiller without compensation, 657
land valuations, taxes and, 415
Lane, Timothy, 491n
Laos, 58, 360, 681, 718
Laplante, Benoit, 759n
Lardy, Nicholas, 731n
Larraín, Felipe P., 495n
Larsen, Bjorn, 784n
latifundia, 653
Latin America, 137, 144, 157, 441
adjusted net savings in, 766
agriculture in, 588, 619, 621, 628, 629, 631, 663
average TFP growth in, 71, 72t
climate change and, 795
customs tariff s in, 414
debt crisis in, 141, 474
defaults in, 464, 465b
economic growth and infl ation in, 154, 154t
economic growth in, 33, 36, 118–19b
education in, 261, 262f, 263, 284, 285, 289b
favelas in, 194n
fi nancial crisis in, 497
fi nancial policy in, 440
head-count index in, 189, 192
health in, 310
immiserizing growth in, 200
import substitution in, 724
inequality in, 173, 177, 178
infl ation in, 154, 154t, 428, 432, 445, 558
land distribution in, 653
land reform in, 657
levels of GDP per capita in, 1820-2008, 35f
life expectancy in, 307
“lost decade” in, 36, 37n, 148, 152, 160, 210
micro credit in, 449
polio elimination in, 338–40
population of, 227
poverty in, 200, 201
primary export markets in, 711
stamp taxes in, 417
total fertility rate in, 225b, 226b
trade and, 670, 735
Washington Consensus and, 146, 154–55, 
160, 161
Latvia, 360
Laurens, Bernard, 495n
law of one price, 29n
lean season, 621
least-developed countries, 11
least-squares regression, estimating average 
growth rates by, 62b
Lee, Dwight R., 410n
Lee, Jong-Wha, 118n, 369n, 378
Lehman Brothers, 391
Leith, Clark, 59n
Leland, Anne, 516n
Lensink, Robert, 522n
Lesotho, 58, 401, 742, 748
less-developed countries (LDCs), 11
Leuthold, Steven C., 444n
level of output per unit of land, 663
Levine, Ross, 75n, 533n
Levine, Ruth, 332n, 335, 335n, 524n
Lewis, Jeff rey D., 321n
Lewis, W. Arthur, 53, 53n, 174, 174n, 175, 592, 
605, 618
liabilities, 424
liberalization, 728, 735, 738, 756

I N D E X   827
Liberia, 112b, 402, 504, 658
education in, 277
Liechtenstein, 12
life-cycle model, of household savings, 377–79
life expectancy, 14, 344
in Botswana, 59b
computing, 304, 305–6b
economic development and, 41–42
economic growth and, 77–78, 78f, 319–20
in Equatorial Guinea, 14
in Ethiopia, 6
health-adjusted, 306
health and, 304
HIV-aff ected countries and, 327f
in Hungary, 14
income and, 312, 315, 316f, 317
increases in, 307, 307t, 310, 318b
in Malaysia, 4
poverty and, 314, 314f
in Th ailand, 56, 101b, 102b
in Ukraine, 7
in Zambia, 56
life satisfaction
happiness vs., 51
as measure of well-being, 52f
Ligon, Ethan, 613
limited markets, 724–25
Limits to Growth, Th e (Club of Rome), 758, 759n
Lindahl-Kiessling, Kerstin, 241n
Lindauer, David L., 75n, 532n, 733n, 745n
linkages, 132
backward, see backward linkages
fi scal, 686, 699
forward, 686
intersectoral, 605, 606, 618
poverty-environment, 785–92
primary products and, 686
Lipsey, Robert, 369n
liquid fi nancial assets, 424, 425, 437
liquidity crisis, 486b
Lister, Joseph, 312
literacy, 4
in Th ailand, 102b
in Ukraine, 8
Lithuania, 360, 435
livestock systems, 622
Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS), 
195
Lleras-Muney, Adrianna, 316, 316n
Loayza, Norman, 378, 384
logarithms:
natural, 43b
use of, 43–44b
log export bans, 784
lognormal distribution, 169
Lomborg, Bjorn, 242n
long run, 109
long-term capital fl ows, 495
Lorenz, Max, 170
Lorenz curve, 170–71, 171f, 171n, 172, 214
lower-middle-income countries, 11, 12, 13t
central government expenditure as share of 
GDP in, 393t
composition of tax systems in, 400t
education in, 283f
see also middle-income countries
low-income countries, 11, 12, 13t, 20
central government expenditure as share of 
GDP in, 393t
composition of tax systems in, 400t
debt crisis in, 473–80
debt reduction in, 474–75
economic development achievements 
in, 15
education in, 260, 264, 282, 283f, 298
government saving in, 381
health in, 315
life expectancy in, 307, 307t, 312, 344
population in, 218, 224
private capital fl ows in, 387, 389
savings rate and, 375
tertiary education enrollment rates in, 259
working conditions in, 745
Lsotho, 325
Lucas, Robert, 89, 89n, 125n
Lum, Th omas, 516n
Luxembourg, 89, 505
luxury consumption taxes, 413–14
macroeconomic equilibrium, defi ned, 553
macroeconomic instability, 545
investments and, 358
macroeconomic policy, objective of, 556
macroeconomics, 18
macroeconomic stability, 149, 203, 204
economic growth and, 75–76
Madagascar, 56, 87, 122f, 123, 124n, 222
Maddison, Angus, 32–33, 32n, 36, 36n, 54, 
58, 218n
Magaziner, Ira, 729n
Magellan, Ferdinand, 10
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 208
maize, 633
trends in prices of, 659, 659f
yield gap in Africa, 634f

828   I N D E X
Majeed, Hamdan, 5n
Maki, Sara, 244n
malaria, 9, 78, 78n, 85, 180, 205, 306, 317, 321, 
323, 324b, 329–30, 330b, 332–33, 342, 345
Panama Canal and, 322b
Malawi, 511, 613, 650
fertilizer subsidies in, 645–47b
tax reform in, 408n
Malaysia, 8, 9n, 137, 176n, 189, 397, 402, 686, 
687, 700, 724
agricultural growth multiplier in, 608
business regulations in, 359
credit ceilings in, 439, 441
doing business in, 360
economic growth in, 15
electronics industry in, 367
EPZs in, 371
fi nancial crisis in, 457, 481, 488, 489
life expectancy in, 304, 305–6b
log export bans in, 784
malaria control in, 78
natural resources in, 370
pollution taxes in, 777
reserve requirements in, 439
semiconductor industry in, 3–4
trade and, 726, 729, 733, 738
Mäler, Karl-Goran, 786n
Mali, 87
malnutrition, 241n, 311
Malthus, Th omas R., 232–33, 235, 241, 242, 
758, 759
Malthusian term, 768b
managed fl oat, 434, 434f
Mandela, Nelson, 342
mangrove forests, 787
manufacturers:
economic growth and, 83
foreign direct investment and, 365
trade and, 670, 689
maquiladoras, 681
March of Dimes, 339
Marco Polo, 10
Marcos, Ferdinand, 362, 476b, 520, 527
marginal cost of abatement (MAC), 775, 780f
marginal external cost (MEC), 774–75, 780f
marginal product, of fertilizer, 644
marginal product of labor (MPL), 593, 595
marginal rate of technical substitution, 638
marginal revenue product, 355
marginal social benefi ts, 133b
marginal social costs, 133b
marketable permits, sustainable development 
and, 779–81
market access:
expanding, 747–50
for farmers, 651
market-creating institutions, 80b
market equilibrium, 133b
market exchange rates:
comparing GDP per capita using PPP, in 
2009 (US$), 31t
purchasing power parity methods of 
converting GDP vs., 29t
market failures, 133–34b, 143b
defi ned, 243
infectious disease and, 318b
population and, 243–44
prevalence of, 132
sustainable development and, 769–72
marketing margin, 650
market-legitimizing institutions, 80b–81b
market-regulating institutions, 80b
markets, market economies
agriculture and, 614–15, 614t, 658–63
competition and, 149–50
Dutch disease and, 564–65, 567
export processing zones and, 730, 733–34
functioning, elements in, 149–50, 152
globalized trade and, 741–55
import substitution and, 724–25
investment and, 355, 356, 359–70, 374
macroeconomic stability and, 149
in open economies, 558
sustainable development and, 769–72
trade and, 553–56, 554f, 555, 
666–67, 673, 674–76, 679–81, 726–27, 
750–53, 755–56
transition from Soviet command model to, 
148–53
market-stabilizing institutions, 80b
Marshall, George, 503b, 504b
Marshall Plan, 131, 131n, 499, 503–4b, 518, 520
Martens, Bertin, 536, 536n, 537
Martin, Will, 662, 662n
Marx, Karl, 135, 159
Mason, Edward S., 137n
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 758
Masson, Paul R., 378, 384
Masters, William A., 620n, 621
Mauritius, 15, 58, 360, 368, 371, 670, 671, 687, 
726, 733, 748
Mbeki, Th abo, 342
McDade, Th omas, 309n
McDermont, C. John, 691n
McEwan, Patrick, 277n
McGillvary, Mark, 531n

I N D E X   829
McKay, Andrew, 650n
McKenzie, Richard B., 410n
McLure, Charles E., Jr., 418n
McNamara, Robert, 217, 218, 219, 224, 236, 
253, 342
measles, 34
medical services, 522
in Denmark vs. in Sierra Leone, 302
Medicare, 399, 400, 404
medium of exchange, 423
Meijer, Siet, 622n
merchant capitalism, 14
Merck & Co., 524b
Mercosur, 402
methane, 793
Mexico, 180, 181, 426, 473, 564, 589, 693, 
711, 765
agriculture in, 628
debt crisis in (1982), 469–70, 470t
education in, 284, 285, 288–89b
fi nancial crisis in, 455–57, 467, 480, 481, 491, 
493, 567
fi nancial policy in, 448
income distribution in, 167, 168f
maquiladoras in, 371
NAFTA and, 710, 740
PES program in, 779
pollution registry in, 781
poverty in, 166, 201
poverty lines in, 183–84b
size distributions of consumption or income 
in, 170–71, 170t
trade and, 674, 675, 676, 677, 681–82, 
719–20b, 744
Washington Consensus and, 148
micro credit, 449–53, 454, 478
poverty and, 451–52b, 452, 454
micro-credit institutions, 422, 449
microeconomics, 18
microfi nance, 449, 453
temporary migration vs., 754
Middle East, 174, 516, 543, 651, 671
average TFP growth in, 71, 73t
fragile environments in, 787
population of, 227
rate of GDP per population growth (percent/
year), 37, 37n
total fertility rate in, 226b
Middle East and North Africa (MENA)
cost of environmental degradation in, 
775, 776t
education in, 262, 262f
poverty in, 189
middle-income countries, 20
doing business in, 360
education in, 260, 264, 265, 266, 282, 298
government saving in, 381
health in, 309
life expectancy in, 307, 307t, 312, 344
population in, 218, 224
private capital fl ows in, 387, 389
tertiary education enrollment rates in, 259
migrants, migration
agricultural growth and, 613, 617, 618
temporary, international trade and, 753–55
Miguel, Edward, 291n
Mikesell, Raymond, 403n
Milanovic, Branko, 210n
military expenditures, 399
Mill, John Stuart, 411
Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC), 
503–4, 540, 541
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 46–50, 
54, 181, 201, 218
economic growth and, 50
for education, 260, 261, 263, 276, 287
environment and, 786
improving maternal and child health, 249, 343
targets of, 47–48b
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment Board, 786
Millions Saved: Proven Successes in Global 
Health (Levine), 335, 342
Minah Karan: Th e Truth about Malaysian
Factory Girls (Daud), 3n
mineral rights, verifi able international auctions 
and, 706
mineral wealth, 178
civil war and, 705
minifundia, 653
minimum wages, minimum wage laws, 593
Mishel, Lawrence, 747n
mitigation, global climate change and, 796, 
797–98, 799
modern crop varieties (MVs), 628, 629, 629f, 
631, 631t, 632
modern economic growth, 14
modern growth theory, 90
Modigliani, Franco, 377, 377n
Moldova, 26, 27
Molyneaux, John, 248, 248n
monetary policy, 18, 392, 422, 423, 437
credit ceilings, 439–40
exchange-rate regimes and, 433–35
infl ation controlled through, 438–39
interest-rate regulation and, 440–41
macroeconomic equilibrium and, 576

830   I N D E X
monetary policy (continued)
moral suasion and, 440–41
open economies and, 561, 563, 567
price stability and, 432–42
recession of 2008 and, 391
reserve requirements and, 439
stabilization and, 560, 561
see also fi nancial policy
money, money supply and, 423–26
money multiplier, 439n
money supply, 423–26, 427, 453
defi ned, 424
domestic and international component in, 
435–36
markets and, 141
in open economies, 558, 564
recession of 2008 and, 391
Mongolia, 683
monopolies, 133b
price distortions and, 149
monopoly power, 445
Montezuma, 34
Montiel, Peter, 552, 552n
moral hazard, 493
moral suasion, 439
Moran, Dominic, 788n
Moran, Th eodore H., 368n, 369n, 370, 
370n, 744n
morbidity, 304
see also disease (morbidity)
Morduch, Jonathan, 453
Morocco, 187
Morris, Cynthia Taft, 74, 74n
Morrisey, Oliver, 531n, 650n
mortality, 309, 310, 310n
defi ned, 304
leading causes of, 311t
modern history of, 318b
see also deaths, death rates
Moses, Lawrence O., 650n
Mosher, Arthur, 623, 623n
Mosher framework, 623–25, 624f, 626f, 627, 
630, 637
Mosley, Paul, 533n
Moss, Todd, 50n
Moyo, Dambisa, 500n
Mozambique, 45, 92, 500, 520, 532, 583, 658, 681
Mubarak, Hosni, 532
Mugabe, Robert, 206, 658
multidimensional poverty index (MPI), 182n
multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB), 334
Multi-Fiber Agreement (MFA), 748, 751
multilateral aid, 506–7, 517, 535
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
(MIGA), 508
multilateral trade negotiations, 750–53, 756
multinational corporations (MNCs), 364, 367, 
368, 369, 370, 371, 372, 373, 380
Mumford, Kevin J., 762n
Museveni, Yoweri, 479b
Mutharika, Bingu wa, 645b
Muto, Megumi, 652b
Myanmar (Burma), 15, 58, 546, 687, 710
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 312, 324b
Myint, Hla, 685, 685n
Myrdal, Gunnar, 140, 140n
Mystery of Capital, Th e (de Soto), 83, 83n
Namibia, 326, 328
narrow money, 424
National Autonomous University of Mexico 
(UNAM), 285
National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, 339
national income, 166
gross national product and, 24
nontraded goods and services and, 27–28
reporting on, 30
national income accountiing identity, 577
national income accounting, balance of 
payments in context of, 577–79
National Tuberculosis Project Offi  ce, 337
national vaccine days (NVDs), 339
natural capital, 762, 763, 764t, 765, 766
natural disasters, 574–75
natural experiment, education and, 277–78
natural experiments, 286
natural increase, in population, 220
natural logarithms, 43b
natural resources, 683–84, 685
economic growth and, 59–60b, 63, 687, 688f
foreign direct investment and, 365, 370
sustainable development and, 763, 765, 766, 
775, 782, 786, 790
taxes on, 402
natural resource trap, 703–5
Neary, S. Peter, 564, 564n, 694n
negative real interest rates, 445, 446, 447, 454
negative spillovers, 371
Nehru, Jawaharlal, 132
neoclassical growth model. see Solow growth 
model
neoclassical production function, 103, 117
neoclassical production technology, isoquants 
for, 104f
neoclassical two-sector model, 599–602, 600f
neo-Malthusians, 242, 242n, 243

I N D E X   831
Nepal, 187, 326, 375, 613, 673, 772
net barter terms of trade, 692, 693f
net cash fl ow, 351, 353
net enrollment rates, 261
Netherlands, 505
net present value (NPV), 352, 353–54, 354t, 
356, 460
net saving (NS), 766
net unilateral transfers, 578
neutral tax, 418, 419–20
nevirapine, 326
new household economics, 235, 236
Ne Win, 710
New Zealand, 226
Nicaragua, 77f, 432, 683
education in, 267, 268f
Niger, 45, 87, 112b, 608, 656
cell phones and grain traders in, 652b
polio in, 338
Nigeria, 71, 326, 509, 687, 693, 702, 703, 705, 709
Dutch disease in, 700–701b
natural resources in, 370
oil boom in, 696
oil revenues and, 763, 766
polio in, 338
population growth, age structure, and 
dependency ratios in, 239–40b
population of, 231
Nike, 746–47b
nitrous oxide, 793
Nixon, Richard M., 468
Nkrumah, Kwame, 135, 138, 139b
Noland, Marcus, 729n
nominal exchange rates, 547, 549, 694, 695
fi xed, 559
in open economies, 550–52b
real exchange rates vs., 550–52b
nominal GDP, 25n
nominal rate of interest, 447, 454
nominal rates of protection, 713, 713f
nonagricultural market access (NAMA), 752
nonconcessional assistance, 502
nonexcludability, 393, 394
nonfi nancial assets, 424
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), 138, 
502, 646b
nonprice constraints, 649
nonrenewable resources, 758, 765, 775
nonrival consumption, 393, 394
nontradable goods and services, 27–28, 
547, 548
disequilibrium in, 576
Dutch disease and, 697–99b
exchange-rate management and, 722
markets and, 554f, 558
natural disasters and, 574
open economies and, 553, 561
prices for, 694, 695, 696
Nordhaus, William, 797, 797n
Norgaard, Richard B., 772n
North, Douglass, 79, 79n, 80b, 80n, 653, 653n
North Africa, rate of GDP per population 
growth (percent/year), 37, 37n
North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA), 204, 710, 725n, 740
North Korea, 15, 514, 546, 710
North vs. South, 11
Norton, George W., 620n, 621
Norway, 505
Notzon, Francis, 308n
NPV debt/export ratios, 477, 478
NPV debt/exports, 461
NPV debt/GDP, 460–61
NPV debt/revenue, 461
Nunberg, B., 532n
Nunns, Jim, 404n
nutrition:
caloric intake, population and, 241, 241n
health and, 323
linkage to economic growth, 608–9b
see also food
NUTs. See net unilateral transfers
Odell, Kathleen, 452n
odious debt, 466, 475, 476–77b
offi  cial development assistance (ODA), 502–3, 
506, 511
offi  cial foreign saving, 385–86
Ohlin, Bertil, 677, 682
oil, as resource trap, 703
oil prices, 36, 568, 692
food crisis of 2005-08 and, 661
infl ation and, 432, 468
nominal, trends in, 659f
role of government in development and, 
140–41
in Venezuela, 155
old age support, 254, 255
Oleson, Kirsten, 762n
oligopoly power, 445
Omran, A. R., 309n
one child campaign, in China, 245, 250–51, 
250n, 253
one child policy, in China, 379
One Hundred Countries, Two Billion People 
(McNamara), 217

832   I N D E X
O’Neill, Brian, 227n
on-the-job training, 257–58
open access, 770
open economies, 435, 564, 575
disequilibrium in, 556–60
equilibrium in, 546–49, 548f, 552–63
poverty and, 203, 204
stabilization in, 559–60t, 560–63
open-market operations, 422, 438, 438n, 
439, 454
open-mouth operations, 441
openness, 725, 738
Operation Mop-Up, 339
Oportunidades (Mexico), 207, 215, 288–89b, 
290, 395
opportunity costs, 355
optimal target, for CO2 concentrations, 797
oral polio vaccine (OPV), 339
oral rehydration therapy (ORT), 317, 340, 341, 
342, 345, 500
Orazem, Peter, 276n
Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD), 173–74, 264, 
266, 417, 501, 750
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries 
(OPEC), 140, 141, 407b, 468, 511, 700b
Orlando, Maria Beatriz, 525n
Ostrom, Elinor, 772, 772n
Ostry, Sylvia, 752n
output:
growth rate of, 97–98
in isoquants, 94
price and, 648f, 649
output per eff ective worker, 115
output per worker, 68, 104, 105
sources of growth in East Asia and other 
regions, 1960–2000, 72t
technological progress and, 113
output prices, tariff s and, 715b
outsourcing, 670
outward orientation, 674, 725, 728, 734, 
741, 755
core standards of, 745
economic growth and, 83, 84
sweatshops and, 743–47
wages and, 744
Oxfam International, 502
Oxford Poverty & Human Development 
Initiative, 182n
Pack, Howard, 368n, 531n, 729n
Pack, Janet Rothenberg, 531n
Pagett, Richard, 408n
Pagiola, Stafano, 779n
Paisner, Michael, 622n
Pakistan, 122f, 123, 137, 138, 402, 516, 525, 
589, 660
fi nancial policy in, 448
population of, 222, 231
Palestinian Territories, polio in, 338
Panama Canal, 321
malaria, yellow fever and, 322b
PanAmerican Health Organization, 339
pandemics, epidemics vs., 323n
panics:
creditor, 486–89
rational, 488
stopping, 489–91, 493–94
Papageorgiou, Stavros, 788n
Papua New Guinea, 15, 500
education in, 294
Paraguay, 27, 653, 656
parasite presence, in poor children, 329f
parent teacher associations (PTAs), 296
Pareto, Vilfredo, 133b
Pareto effi  ciency, 133b
Pareto optimality, 138
Paris Club, 474, 475, 478
Paris Declaration on Aid Eff ectiveness and the 
Accra Agenda for Action, 540
Pasteur, Louis, 312
pastoralists, 194
pastoral nomadism, 621–22, 663
Patinkin, Mark, 729n
Patrinos, Harry, 273, 273n, 275, 276n, 277, 280
Paxson, Christina, 241n
payments for environmental services (PES), 
779
Peace Corps, 504
peanuts, 402
Pearce, David W., 780n
Pearson, Scott, 584, 584n, 623n
Pechman, Joseph A., 408n
pegged exchange rates, 433, 434f
PEMEX (Mexico), 364, 456
Penang, Malaysia, semiconductor industry 
in, 3–5
pension systems, population and, 254
People’s Bank of China, 387–88
per capita income. see incomes, per capita
per capita wealth, 764t
Pereira da Silva, Luiz, 532n
perennial crops, 622
perfectly elastic, 594
Perkins, Dwight H., 408n
Perry, Matthew, 710

I N D E X   833
Persian Gulf, 687
“persistence of the past,” inequality and, 178
personal income taxes, 404, 412
see also income taxes
Peru, 77f, 195, 339, 432, 473, 765
education in, 259f, 266, 282, 294
fi shmeal industry in, 686
hyperinfl ation in, 430, 431b
Pew Research Center, 709
phase diagram, 553–56, 555f, 561
Philippines, 58, 247, 362, 396, 401, 473, 511, 
527, 782
agriculture in, 628
education in, 292
fi nancial crisis in, 480–81, 488, 489
impact of schooling on farm profi tability in, 
279b
Philipson, Tomas J., 308n
physical capital per worker, sources of growth 
in East Asia and other regions, 1960-
2000, 72t
Pinochet, Augusto, 559b
Plasmodium falciparum, 324b
Plato, 212
Pleskovic, Boris, 85n
Poland, 473, 504, 726
education in, 264
Policansky, David, 772n
polio, 345
eliminating in Latin America, 338–40
political economy, inequality and, 179
political institutions, 80b, 81b
political stability, economic growth and, 75–76, 
88, 90, 117
political systems:
global information fl ow and, 16
globalization and, 9
politics. see government
pollution, 762–63
health and, 323
income levels and, 759–60, 800
informal regulation of, 781–82
marketable permits for, 779–81, 780f
multinational corporations and, 368
optimal level of, 774f
sustainable development and, 771, 772f, 
774–76
taxes and, 776–79
Poor Economics (Banerjee and Dufl o), 317
population, population growth, 9, 308
accumulation and, 237–38
agriculture and, 241–42
authoritarian approaches and, 249–51, 253
brief history of, 218–20
carbon dioxide emissions and, 794–95, 794f
causes of, 231–36
demographic dividend (or bonus) and, 238
demographic future and, 227–28, 231
demographic transition and, 220–24, 238
economic development and, 236–38, 240–41
economic growth and, 112b
explosion in, 220
family planning and, 246–49
fertility and, 240–41
GDP and, 124f, 237
immigration and, 224, 226, 231
implosion in, 226
levels and trends in world population, 
2009, 226t
market failures and, 243–44
present demographic situation and, 224, 
226–27
productivity and, 241–43
rate of gross domestic product per, 37t
reducing unwanted births, 247
savings and, 238
in Solow growth model, 106, 237, 237n
sustainable development and, 758, 763, 787
in twenty-fi rst century, 253–54, 255
world population growth through 
history, 219f
world population historical trends and 
projections, 228f
world’s 10 most populous nations in 
2050, 230t
see also Malthus, Th omas R.
population-carrying capacity, 220
population growth rate, changes in Solow 
model, 109–13, 111f
population momentum, 228, 229–30b
population neutralists, 243
population optimists, 242, 243
population pessimists, 237, 242, 243
population policy, 245–46
population revisionists, 243, 244
population-weighted international 
inequality, 211
portfolio equity, 363, 386, 389
Portugal, 514
fi nancial crisis in, 455
POSCO, 734
positive checks, 232
positive externality, 126
positive real interest rates, 447, 454
positive spillovers, 371, 372
postindustrial countries, 11

834   I N D E X
potential level of output per worker, 109
poverty, 17, 20, 55, 56
absolute, standard international defi nition 
for, 165
agriculture and, 205, 588, 589, 610–17, 618
in Bangladesh, 165–66
climate change and, 796
descriptions of, 197
in developing world, 15
dissenting opinions on, 191
economic development and, 202b
economic growth and, 58, 197–98, 203
economic growth as good for the poor, 
198–200, 199f
economic growth as not being enough for 
poor, 200–201
education and, 205, 206
environment and, 785–92, 790f, 801
in Ethiopia, 5–6
extreme, 186
fi nancial crisis of 2008 and, 193
food prices and, 662
foreign aid and, 499, 500, 501–2, 516–17, 543
gender and, 194–95
geography of, 84
global estimates of, 165
global inequality and end of, 208–14
health and, 205, 206, 344
HIV/AIDS and, 327
improved opportunities and, 205–6
income transfers and, 206
inequality and, 166, 178–79, 180
intergenerational cycles of, 205, 206
life expectancy and, 314, 314f
living in, 195–97
in Malaysia, 3
MDGs and, 48, 49f
measuring, 180–82, 184–90
in Mexico, 166
micro credit and, 451–52b, 452, 454
multidimensional quality of, 181, 182, 182n
political unrest and, 76
population and, 193–95, 244
reducing, strategies for, 197–208, 215
rural, 611, 611f
rural-urban divide and, 194, 214
savings and, 374
severity of, 185–86, 189–90
since 2005, 192–93
social safety nets and, 207
subsidies and, 396
temporary migration and, 753–55, 756
trade and, 681, 736, 739–41, 743, 744, 756
ulta-poor, 196–97, 197n
urban, 611, 611f
women and, 214
poverty gap (PG), 185, 190
calculating, 186
poverty gap squared, 186
poverty lines, 181–91, 182n, 188f, 192b
in Bangladesh, Mexico, and United States, 
183–84b
defi ned, 181
reason for $1.25 a day, 186–90
regional distribution of people living below 
$2-a-day poverty line, 2005, 193f
Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers, 478
praziquantel, 290
Prebisch, Raul, 136, 689, 690, 705, 708, 711n
Prebisch-Singer hypothesis, 605–6, 689, 692
present value (PV), 270–71, 351–54
Preston, Samuel, 316, 316n
Preston curve, 316, 316f
preventive checks, 232
price elasticity of demand, 136, 403
prices, pricing, 17
infl ation and, 203–4, 215, 427
international, deriving, 30
market functionality and, 150
monetary policy and stability in, 432–42
in open economies, 546–49, 552–56, 558–59
output and, 648f, 649
price ceilings, 18
state-set pricing, 145–46
see also oil prices
price takers, 546
primary export-led growth, empirical evidence 
on, 687–707
primary exports:
economic growth and, 687–88
governance and, 704–5, 708
primary products, trade in, 683–86, 684f, 686, 
687, 707
principal-agent problem, 536–37, 539, 543
Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, 
Th e (Ricardo), 591, 674
Pritchett, Lant, 36n, 75n, 192b, 247n, 248n, 
266n, 280n, 281n, 315n, 534, 534n, 738n, 
754, 754n
private enterprise, economic growth and, 
82–83, 88
private foreign saving, elements of, 386
private goods, public goods vs., 134b
private marginal cost curve, 772f
private return, 269, 269f
private savings, 578

I N D E X   835
private voluntary assistance, 502
privatization:
of state-owned enterprises, 151, 151n
Washington Consensus and, 147
produced capital, 762, 764t
producers’ surplus, 714
production, productivity, 87, 127
economic growth and, 60, 64, 66, 67f, 
87–88, 90
education and, 281, 298
health and, 319–20
of investment, 351–57
life expectancy and, 77
population growth and, 241–43
technological progress and growth in, 
113, 114
see also gross domestic product; gross 
national product
production function, 66
derivation of, 91
diminishing returns and, 117–21
in Harrod-Domar model, 94–96
in Solow diagram, 108
in Solow growth model, 105f
production isoquant, 636b
production possibility frontier, 638, 649
production subsidies, 720722
productivity growth:
defi nition of, 64
economic growth and, 74
as “manna from heaven” in Solow model, 117
measuring, 88
profi ts, maximization of, 150, 639, 640, 644
progessive taxes, 411
Programme for International Student 
Assessment (PISA), 264, 266
PROGRESA (Programa de Educación Salud y 
Alimentacíon), 207, 288b
progressive income taxes, 412
project appraisal, 351
property rights, 82, 83, 801
marketable permits and, 779–81
population and, 243
secure, costs/benefi ts of, 655
sustainable development and, 773, 774
Washington Consensus and, 147
women and, 194
see also land
property taxes, incidence problem and, 414–16
pro-poor growth, 201–4, 205, 215
protective tariff s, 713–18
direct eff ect of, 713
import quotas, 714, 717–18
markets and, 713–14
nominal, 713, 713f
world price and, 713, 717
Psacharopoulos, George, 273, 273n, 275, 276n, 
277, 280
public goods, 133b, 393
market failure associated with, 133b
private goods vs., 134b
public investment expenditures, 394
public sector investments, opportunity costs 
and, 355
Puerto Rico, 172
Punic Wars, 465b
purchasing power parity (PPP), 12, 28, 32, 
53–54, 477
hypothetical conversion for two countries 
using two goods, 29t, 30
limitations with, 31–32
poverty line and, 187, 188
Qatar, 12
quantitative restrictions, on imports, 714
quantity regulations, 774
quota rents, 717, 717n
quotas, 712, 736, 750
market access and, 748–49
race, poverty and, 194
Radano, Alberto H. J., 406b
Radelet, Steven, 37n, 73, 73n, 118n, 155, 
198n, 378, 384, 487, 491n, 517, 521n, 
540n, 733n
Ramanathan, V., 795n
Ramsey (inverse elasticity) rule, 419
randomized controlled trials (RCTs), 286, 287, 
293, 293n, 295b, 297, 298, 451b
randomized evaluations, 286
Rangarajan, C., 607n, 608n
Ranis, Gustav, 592, 592n, 603b
rapid infl ation (hyperinfl ation), 573
rapidly growing countries, characteristics of, 
74–79, 82–87
rates of return
in education, 269–71, 272, 273–79, 273t, 298
estimating from wage equations, 275–76b
rational panics, 488
Rausser, G., 608n
Ravallion, Martin, 45n, 175n, 176n, 187n, 188, 
189, 201n, 203n, 205n
Rawlings, Jerry, 139b, 566b
Rawls, John, 411
real appreciation, 695
real depreciation, 695

836   I N D E X
real eff ective exchange rate (REER), 552n
real exchange rates (RER), 549n, 703
defi nition for, 695
Dutch disease paradox and, 696
nominal exchange rates vs., 550–52b
in open economies, 549, 553
real GDP, 25
computing, 25n
real GDP per capita, 25
real interest rates, 352, 445, 446, 446t, 447, 454
Reardon, Th omas, 786, 789, 790n, 791, 792
recessions, combating, international debt and, 
441–42
recurrent costs, 420
recurrent expenditures, 394–95, 397
rediscount rates, 438, 440
redistributive land reforms, 657–58
reduction in debt, 471
Reed, Walter, 322b
refi nancing, of debt, 471
regional development banks, 511
regulation:
barriers to doing business and, 361, 362
fi nancial policy and, 423
role of, 421–22
regulatory mechanisms, economic growth and, 
83, 88
Reinikka, Ritva, 296n, 706n
Renelt, David, 75n
renewable resources, 758
sustainable development and, 799
renminbi (RMB), 731b
rental rate of capital, 642
rent ceilings, 657
rent contracts, reform of, 656
rent control, 18
rent reduction, 656
rent seeking, 723, 724
rent-seeking behavior, 358, 361, 388, 725
Repetto, Robert, 402n, 784n
RER, 704
rescheduling of debt, 471
research and development (R&D), investments 
in, 126
reserve requirements, 439, 454
residual claimants, 655
resource balance, 470
resource cost, 714
resource curse, 683, 688, 707
breaking, 705–7, 708
resource endowments, inequality and, 178
resource movement eff ect, 697b
resource rents, 686, 704, 705, 708
resources, access to, measuring, 42
resource trap, 703–5
retail price, 650
retirement savings, 254
return on investment, 117
returns to scale, 119
revaluation, 547
Ricardian equivalence, 383
Ricardo, David, 130, 159, 383, 384, 591, 
592, 597, 674, 676, 677, 681, 682, 707, 
709
rice market, events in, 661f
rice production, 178, 610, 628, 633, 643–44, 
647–49, 702b
biofuels and, 660
price trends and, 659, 659f, 660
Riley, Nancy E., 250n, 252n
risk
agricultural production and, 586
transformation and distribution of, 426–27
river blindness (onchocerciasis), 321, 342, 500, 
524–25b
Robinson, James, 59n, 82n
Robinson, Joan, 98n, 113n
Rodríguez, Francisco, 84, 84n, 738n
Rodríguez-Clare, Andrés, 736, 736n, 737
Rodrik, Dani, 59n, 80b, 80n, 84, 84n, 89, 90n, 
180n, 202b, 546n, 729–30, 735, 735n, 
736, 738n
Roemer, Michael, 198n, 406b, 408n, 428n, 
694n, 733n
Roesad, Kurnya, 783n
Rogoff , Kenneth, 738n
Rohaly, Jeff , 404n
Romania, 328
Romer, David, 83, 83n, 736, 736n, 737
Romer, Paul, 125n
Roodman, David, 508n, 533n
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 339
Roosevelt, Th eodore, 322b
Rosegrant, Mark, 622n
Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul, 132, 132n, 134
Rosensweig, M. R., 320n
Rosenzweig, Mark, 279b, 603b
Ross, Ronald, 322b
Rostow, W. E., 520n
Rostow, Walter, 131n, 520, 520n
Rotary International, 524
Roubini, Nouriel, 491n, 493, 493n, 496n
royalties, 399
rule of 70, 63b
doubling times and, 62b
rule of law, economic growth and, 79, 82

I N D E X   837
runaway infl ation (hyperinfl ation), 428
among developing countries, 1948-2008, 
429–30t
rural areas
environmental degradation and, 786–87
market access and, 651
see also migrants, migration
rural population, agroecological 
potential and, 627
Russell, Steven, 327n
Russia, 7, 146, 360, 432, 661, 709
fi nancial crisis in, 386, 457, 480, 488, 493
foreign direct investment in, 365
foreign savings in, 384
health in, 314
life expectancy in, 308
markets in, 150
MDR-TB in, 334
population growth, age structure, and 
dependency ratios in, 239–40b
population in, 231
state price controls in, 145
Washington Consensus and, 148
see also Soviet Union
Ruttan, Vernon, 635b, 637n
Rwanda, 328, 757, 791
Sabin, Albert, 339
Sachs, Jeff rey D., 84n, 85n, 118n, 124, 124n, 
213, 332, 378, 464n, 467, 487, 491n, 500, 
521n, 687, 687n, 688, 738, 738n
Sadoulet, Elisabeth, 611, 611n, 613, 613n, 615
Saggi, Kamal, 368n
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, 75n
salaries. see wages
sales taxes, 402, 403, 413, 414, 417, 420
Salih, Kamal, 3n
Salk, Jonas, 339
Salter, W. E. G., 546n
Sam, Kim Young, 143b
Samoa, 673
Samuelson, Paul, 682n
Sandler, Todd, 542n
Sangraula, P., 187
Sanyal, Amal, 406b
Sarkozy, Nicolas, 26n
Sarraf, Maria, 775n
SARS, 309, 337
satellite communications, 87
Saudi Arabia, 546, 564, 693
foreign aid through, 505n
Saudi Fund for Development, 503
Save the Children, 502
saving function, in Solow diagram, 108
savings, saving rates, 65t, 92, 350
balance of payments and, 578–79
changes in Solow model, 109–11, 110f, 113
corporate saving, 379–80
domestic capital formation and, 375t
domestic savings, 374–75, 376, 389
economic growth and, 65–66, 90, 126
fi nancial intermediation and, 426
food prices and, 610
foreign aid and, 521, 529–31, 543
foreign savings, 374, 384–88, 389
government savings, 380–84, 389
gross domestic savings, 65
in Harrod-Domar model, 98–99, 109
household saving and consumption, 376–79
investments and, 350, 374–88, 389
life-cycle hypothesis of, 241
life-cycle model of, 377–79
life expectancy and, 77
population growth and, 238
price infl ation and, 204
retirement accounts, 254
in Solow model, 106–7, 116
sustainable development and, 765–67
in Th ailand, 101b
savings gap, 131
Schady, Norbert, 207n
schistosomiasis, 319, 321
Schmidt, Robert, 236n
Schmidt-Hebbel, Klaus, 378
schooling. see education
Schultz, Paul, 276n
Schultz, Th eodore W., 257, 257n, 258, 621, 621n
Scorse, Jason, 746b, 747n
sea levels, rise in, 758–59, 798
seasonality, agricultural production and, 
585–86, 617, 621
sectoral labor productivity, agriculture and 
nonagriculture, 90t
self-discovery, 735–36
self-fulfi lling creditor panics, 486–87b, 488
semiconductor industry, in Malaysia, 3–4
semidwarf disease resistant wheat, 628
Sen, Amartya, 39, 40, 252b, 252n, 253n, 
602b, 603b
Senegal, 61b, 62b, 63b, 325, 402, 583, 686
education in, 284
September 11, 2001 attacks, 36, 505n
Serven, Luis, 378
service-based economies, 11
Sese Seko, Mobutu, 475, 476b
Setser, Brad, 491n, 493, 493n, 496n

838   I N D E X
settled agriculture, 621, 622, 663
Seva Mandir (India), 294–96b
Sevilla, Jaypee, 241n
sex-selective abortions, 251b
sexually transmitted diseases, 324b, 336
Seychelles, 92
shadow prices (economic opportunity costs), 
355–56
eff ects of, on cost-benefi t analysis, 357t
estimating, 356
Shah, Anwar, 784n
shallow fi nance, 443
shallow fi nancial strategy, 444–47
Shambaugh, Jay C., 495n
Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation, 380
share cropping, 655
Sheahan, John, 140n
shifting cultivation, 621, 663
shock therapy approach to reform, 151, 158
shorting the peso, 483n
short-term capital fl ows, 495, 497
short-term foreign debt and reserves, 485t
short-term foreign debt/foreign exchange 
reserves, 461, 462
short-term loans, 484
Shoup, Carl, 403n
Sicat, Gerry, 403n
Sierra Leone, 89, 304, 432, 519, 703, 705
health in, 299–302, 300f, 301t, 306
natural resources in, 370
Silent Spring (Carson), 333
Silvani, Carlos A., 406b
Simon, Julian, 242, 242n
Sinding, Steven, 236n
Singapore, 82, 84, 85, 122f, 124n, 141, 176n, 401, 
440, 687, 711
doing business in, 360
economic growth in, 58, 59b
fi nancial policy in, 448
fi scal policy in, 441
government’s role in development of, 142
health in, 321
liberalization and, 728, 728n
savings rate in, 107
semiconductor industry in, 4
trade and, 668, 671, 726, 741
see also East Asian tigers
Singapore Airlines, 728
Singer, Hans, 136, 689, 690, 705, 708, 711n
Sinopec Corporation, 380
size distributions, 214
calculating, 169
of consumption or income in Bangladesh, 
Mexico, and United States, 170t
Sjöholm, Fredrick, 369n
Slade, Roger, 607n, 608n
slash and burn agriculture, 621
sleeping sickness, 321
small business, 83
small economies, 546, 547
smallpox, 34, 322b, 524
eradicating, 337–38, 345
Smith, Adam, 60, 89, 129, 130, 132, 159, 672, 
672n, 709
Smith, Lisa C., 197n
Smoot-Hawley tariff s, 136, 710–11
smuggling, 401
Snodgrass, Donald, 408n
Soares, Rodrigo R., 308n
social cost-benefi t analysis, 417
social discount rate, 356
social evaluation, 388
socialist economies, socialism, 738–39
social marginal cost curve, 772f
social project appraisal, 357
social returns, of education, 271, 272f, 273t
social safety nets, 207–8, 215
Social Security, 254, 399, 400, 404
Society, Politics, and Economic 
Development—A Quantitative 
Approach (Morris), 74, 74n
soft governments, 158
soft loans, 386
Solimano, Andrés, 560n
Solow, Robert, 64, 64n, 66, 66n, 70, 90, 91n, 103, 
103n, 113n, 126
Solow (neoclassical) growth model, 64–66, 68, 
73, 103–17, 118b, 121, 123, 127, 128, 457, 
520, 520n, 521
basic equations of, 104–7
change in saving rate and population growth 
rate in, 109–11, 113
changes in population growth rate in, 111f
diagram of, 108–9, 108f
increase in saving rate in, 110f
moving beyond, 125–27, 128
population growth, economic growth 
and, 112b
powerful implications tied to, 128
production function in, 105f
strengths and weaknesses of, 116–17
technology and, 113–16, 115f
Solow residual, 69, 70
Somalia, 241n, 337, 757
Somoza, Anastasio, 476b
son preference, 251–52b
source of capital, 365
sources of growth analysis, 68, 71, 88, 126

I N D E X   839
South Africa, 84, 325, 326, 546, 781
education in, 266
inequality in, 177, 209
land reform in, 658
PES program in, 779
Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
in, 476b
South America, 144, 159
import substituting industrialization in, 
135, 136
land distribution in, 653
South Asia, 144
average TFP growth in, 71, 73t
cereal yields and poverty in, 612f
foreign aid in, 500
poverty in, 189
rate of GDP per population growth 
(percent/year), 37n
Southeast Asia, 402
under-fi ve mortality rate in, 302
Southern Africa Customs Union, 60b
South Korea, 141, 142, 158, 160, 189, 468, 
507b, 709
debt restructuring in, 493–94
declining eff ectiveness of government 
intervention in, 143–44b
economic growth in, 58
fi nancial crisis in, 481, 491, 493
fi nancial policy in, 440
land reform in, 177, 206
personal income taxes in, 412
savings rate in, 378
semiconductor industry in, 4
see also East Asian tigers
sovereign debt, 469
sovereign lending default, 464–66b
sovereign wealth funds, 705–6
Soviet Bloc, trade and, 151
Soviet command model, transition to market 
economies, 148–53
Soviet economic model, 153
Soviet growth model, 159
Soviet Union, 152, 430, 432, 514, 518, 546, 726
collapse of, 7, 149
collectivization in, 39
growth model pioneered by, 135, 137
structural change in, 151
trade and, 671
see also Russia
Spain:
doing business in, 360
fi nancial crisis in, 455
Spandana, 450–51b
Spanish-American War, 465b, 476b
special economic zones (SEZs), 731b
specialization, foreign direct 
investment and, 366
special safeguard mechanism, 752–53
specifi c-factor models, 741n
Spence, M., 754n
spillovers, 367–68, 369n, 371
Squire, Lyn, 175n, 176n
Sri Lanka, 172, 396, 402, 409, 426, 439, 748
Srinivasan, T. N., 378
stabilization:
in Chile, 559–60t
economic growth and, 75–76
in fi nancial system, 427
macroeconomic, 149, 203, 204
in open economies, 560–63
programs, 545
stabilization and structural adjustment 
programs, 472
stabilization package, from infl ation and a 
defi cit, 569, 570–71, 570f, 573–74
Stages of Economic Growth, Th e (Rostow), 131n, 
520
stamp taxes in, 417
Standard Oil, 685
stand-by credits, 511
standstill, 493
Stark, O., 320n
state-owned enterprises (SOEs), subsidies to, 
396, 399
static conditions, 674, 682
steady state, of Solow model, 109, 110, 
115, 117
sterilization, money supply and, 558
sterilization campaigns, 249
Stern, Joseph, 408n
Stern, Nicholas, 133n, 750n, 796, 796n
Stern, Robert, 744n
Sterner, Th omas, 781n
Stern Review, 797, 798
Stevenson, Betsey, 51n
Stiglitz, Joseph, 26n, 85n, 404n, 491n, 500
stimulus packages, 442
stock markets, 150, 448, 454
stocks, in education, 259
Stolper, Wolfgang, 682n
Strauss, John, 276n
Strengthening of Rural Health Delivery 
Project, 341
structural adjustment reforms, 145–46
structural rigidities, 558
structural transformation:
in agriculture, 587–90, 588f, 617
phases in, 588–89

840   I N D E X
stunted growth, 609b
stunting, 301
poverty and, 192b
Subramanian, Arvind, 80b, 80n, 
89, 90n
Sub-Saharan Africa:, rate of GDP per 
population growth (percent/year), 
37, 37n
subsidies, 155, 158, 395–96, 722, 736, 750
environment and, 776–79
food or fuel, 145
impact of, on fi rms competing with imports, 
721f
production, 720–22
to state-owned enterprises, 399
Washington Consensus and, 147
subsistence level, 593
substitutes, substitution, between labor and 
capital, 100
Sudan, 87, 500, 703n, 705
Suharto, 494
Summers, Lawrence H., 75n, 276n, 315n
Summit of the Americas, 665
supply curve of labor facing the industrial 
sector, 593–94
supply response, 647
surplus labor:
in China, 598–99b
debates over, 601–3b
surplus labor model, 174–75
sustainable development, 700, 757–801
concept of, 761–63, 765, 801
global climate change and, 792–800, 801
harvests and, 787–88
international climate negotiations and, 
799–800
market failures and, 769–72
policy failures and, 782–800
policy solutions for, 773–82
savings and, 765–67
wealth and, 762
sustainable economic growth, 74
sustained economic development, import 
substitution and, 711–12
Svensson, Jakob, 296n, 539n, 706n
Swan, Trevor W., 546n
Swaroop, Vinaya, 531n
Swaziland, 58, 325
sweatshops, 743–47
Sweden, 412, 505, 507b
Swedish International Development 
Cooperation Agency (SIDA), 503
Switzerland, 86, 673
Tait, Alan A., 410n
Taiwan, 141, 142, 158, 160, 176n, 189, 500, 514, 
666, 687, 711
doing business in, 360
economic growth in, 205
fi nancial policy in, 440
foreign debt in, 496
Gini coeffi  cient for, 175, 176f
land reform in, 657
savings rate in, 378
semiconductor industry in, 4
trade and, 668, 671, 726, 729, 730, 741
see also East Asian tigers
Tajikistan, 187, 241n, 378, 428
Tanzania, 187, 327, 478, 509, 520, 542
agriculture in, 613, 650
education in, 277, 287
health in, 319
state owned enterprises in, 396
tax rates in, 412
tariff  escalation, 686, 748
tariff  peaks, 748
tariff  rates, 156, 715b
tariff s, 145, 372, 413, 414, 710–11, 715b, 717, 
718, 721, 722, 725, 733, 736, 738, 
747, 750
average unweighted tariff  rates by region, 
727f
defi nition of, 712
protective, 713–18
reducing average tariff s, trend in, 727
Tarp, Finn, 522n
Tata Steel (India), 380
Tax, Sol, 195n
tax administration, changes in, 405
taxation, taxes, 18, 420, 686
composition of tax systems by type of tax, 
2009, 400t
corporate income taxes, 404
eff ective taxes, 412
effi  cient tax system, 418–19, 419f
environment and, 776–79
excise taxes, 402–3
FDI and, 372–73
government expenditures and, 399–401
government saving and, 381
income distribution and, 411–16
on international trade, 401–2
neutral taxes, 418, 419–20
new sources of tax revenues, 404–5
personal income taxes, 404
progessive taxes, 411
sales taxes, 402, 403, 417

I N D E X   841
sources of ineffi  ciency, 417–18
stamp taxes, 417
temporary migration and, 755
value-added tax, 403, 410
see also protective tariff s
tax codes, simplifi ed, 420
tax form, Indonesian, 407–8b
tax holidays, 372–73, 388–89
tax reform
fundamental, 405–6, 408–11
Washington Consensus and, 147
Taylor, Alan M., 577n
tea, 402
technical ceiling:
in Mosher framework, 623, 624, 624f, 625
raising, 627–35
technical change, Solow model with, 115f
technically effi  cient crop mix, 639
technology, technological change, 16
in agriculture, 586, 627, 630, 633, 635–37b, 
651–52b, 663
environment and, 759
FDI and, 370
job creation and, 10
labor-saving, 635b
land-saving, 635b
productivity and, 64
in Solow model, 113–16, 114n, 115f
trade and, 680, 689
technology diff usion, 627
temporary migration, 756
textiles, footwear, and apparel (TFA), 746–47b
textiles and apparel, 601–2, 686, 742, 756
market access and, 748–49
Th ailand, 82, 176n, 189, 326, 327, 589, 656, 
660, 700
baht-dollar exchange rate and, 433
beer tariff  in, 718
doing business in, 360
economic growth in, 15, 56, 101b–102b
education in, 259f, 260
fi nancial crisis in, 386, 457, 480, 481, 483, 
484, 488, 489
HIV/AIDS prevention in, 336
intersectoral labor shifts in, 590
mean levels of life satisfaction in, 53
trade and, 726, 729, 739, 748
Th eodore Schultz, 602b, 603b
Th eory of Economic Growth, Th e (Lewis), 53
theory of induced innovation, 635b
Th ird International Mathematics and Science 
Study, 266
third world, 10–11
Th omas, Vinod, 75n
Tiananmen Square, 146
timber, 402
sustainable yields of, 787–88
time deposits, 424, 425
time profi le, of net cash fl ow, 352, 353f
Timmer, C. Peter, 584, 584n, 587, 587n, 588n, 
608n, 623n, 625n
Timor-Leste, 360
tin, 402
Tinbergen, Jan, 562
Tobago, 665
Toder, Eric, 404n
Togo, 45, 401, 681
total debt stock, 459
total economic production, 63
total factor productivity (TFP), 68–71, 73–74, 
644–45
sources of growth in East Asia and other 
regions, 1960-2000, 72t
total fertility rates (TFRs), 224, 225–26b, 226, 
227, 228, 231, 250
total liquid liabilities, 424
total suspended particulates (TSP), trading 
program in Chile, 781
total wealth, 762, 763
township and village industries, in China, 152
Trabajar program (Argentina), 208
tradable goods and services, 547, 548
disequilibrium in, 576
Dutch disease and, 697–99b
exchange-rate management and, 722
market for, 554f, 555
natural disasters and, 574
in open economies, 553, 561, 564
prices for, 694, 695
trade, 27–31, 665–708
aggregate gains from, 682
agriculture and, 749–50, 749t
balance of trade, 549
benefi ts of, 677–81, 678f
comparative advantage and, 674–83
declining terms of, 567–68, 569f, 690–93, 690f
distributional consequences of, 681–83
economic growth and, 60, 83–84, 118b, 
666–67, 668i, 682–83, 685, 707, 
736–39, 756
export orientation and, 711, 725–30, 733–34
favorable views toward, 709
foreign investment and, 685–86
geography and, 671–74, 737
importance of, to economies, 1970-2007, 
669f

842   I N D E X
trade (continued)
industrial policy and, 734–36
international terms of, 677
investment and, 9, 701, 745
labor and, 683, 685, 686, 696, 742–47
to less populous nations, importance of, 672f
liberalization strategy, 728
markets and, 674–76, 679–81, 750–53
migration and, 753–55
net barter terms of, 692, 693f
policy debate about, 710–11
poverty and, 739–41, 743, 744, 756
poverty reduction and, 736
in primary products, 683–86, 684f, 686, 
687, 707
sustainable development and, 700
technology and, 689
trends and patterns in, 667–71
winners and losers, 681–83, 740
see also import substitution; primary 
exports; protective tariff s
trade balance, 385, 577, 578
trade barriers, 136
trade policy(ies)
inward-oriented, 83
outward-oriented, 83, 84
Sachs-Warner measure of, 738–39
trade volumes vs., 737, 739
trade protection, politics and, 718, 720–25
trade reforms, poverty and, 204
trade-related intellectual property rights 
(TRIPS), 751
trade volumes:
measuring, 737
trade policies vs., 737, 739
traditional agriculture, 620–22, 663
Tragedy of the Commons, population growth 
and, 243
training of workers and managers, 368
transferable deposits, 424
transfer of technology, skills, and ideas, 367
Trans Nzoia, 650
Transparency International, 358–59, 361, 362
transportation, 666
population and, 220
transport costs, geography and, 86–87
traps, 704
Trebbi, Francesco, 89, 90n
Trevedi, Mandar, 788n
Trinidad, 665
tropical countries, growth rate per capita in, 85
tropical rain forests, loss of, 787–88
Truman, Harry, 503b
trypanosomiasis, 321
tuberculosis (TB), 9, 312, 321, 323, 324–25b, 
330b, 333–34, 336–37, 345
Tunisia, 27, 371, 726
Turkey, 122f, 123, 396, 448, 538, 727
fi nancial crisis in, 457, 480, 481, 491, 493
Washington Consensus and, 148
Turkmenistan, 430
Turner, R. Kerry, 780n
turning point, 594
two-country model, with a tariff , 719–20b
two-gap model, 131
two-sector labor surplus model, 596f
two-sector models of development, 
590–602, 618
labor surplus model, 591–97, 596f
neoclassical, 599–602
typhoid, 312
Uganda, 87, 325, 432, 478, 500, 511, 613, 706
debt relief in, 478, 479b
education in, 287, 294, 296
Ukraine, 6–8, 9n, 432, 661
UNAIDS, 328
uncertainty, agricultural production 
and, 586
unconditional convergence, 121, 125
UNCTAD, 365n
underemployment, 591
under-fi ve mortality rate, 299–300, 302
undervaluation, 557
undervalued exchange rates, 724
underweight children, 301, 344
unemployment, 427, 555–56, 558, 567, 696
labor surplus and, 591
markets and, 150
UNESCO, 284
UNICEF, 341, 525
United Arab Emirates, 700
United Climate Change Conferences, 799
United Fruit, 685, 685n
United Kingdom, 113, 510, 514
foreign aid through, 505
savings rate in, 375
top marginal tax rate cut in, 408
United Nations, 11, 30, 227, 231, 249, 253, 503, 
508, 512
International Comparison Program, 187
System of National Accounts, 579n
World Population Conference, 246
United Nations Children’s Fund, 512
United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development (UNCTAD), 691
United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP), 25, 30, 40, 42, 44, 198, 
512, 524b

I N D E X   843
United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC), 799, 800
United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNHCR), 512
United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization (UNIDO), 136
“United Nations Millennium Declaration,” 
adoption of, 46
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), 
512
United States, 12, 84, 113, 122f, 123, 172, 180, 
226, 387, 415, 474, 475, 507b, 514, 661, 
666, 685, 709, 747, 748, 752
average farm size in, 653
as benchmark for convergence, 121
carbon dioxide emissions and, 794
economic growth in, 444
education in, 259–60, 259f, 264
fi nancial crisis of 2008-09 in, 8, 391, 422,
427, 494
foreign aid and, 504, 514, 516, 543
foreign borrowing in, 458
foreign income taxes in, 410
foreign savings in, 384
global inequality and consumerism in, 212
income distribution in, 167, 168f
income inequality in, 177n
life expectancy in, 312
maintenance and replacement expenditures 
in, 395
market exchange rate vs. purchasing power 
parity methods of converting GDP in, 
28–30, 29t
mean levels of life satisfaction in, 53
NAFTA and, 710, 740
population of, 231
poverty lines in, 183–84b, 184, 184n
sales taxes in, 417
savings rate in, 375
size distributions of consumption or 
income in, 170–71, 170t
smallpox eradication and, 338
tax avoidance in, 412
top marginal tax rate cut in, 408
trade and, 674, 675, 676, 677, 681, 682
world markets and, 742
units of account, 423
upper-middle-income countries, 11, 12, 13t
central government expenditure as share of 
GDP in, 393t
composition of tax systems in, 400t
see also middle-income countries
urbanization
fi rst indications of, 218
health and, 323
inequality and, 174
Uruguay, 447, 448
fi nancial crisis in, 480
Uruguay Round of trade negotiations, 751–52
U.S. Agency for International Development 
(USAID), 341, 343, 503, 525, 542, 646b
U.S. Census Bureau, 227n
U.S. Export-Import Bank, 386
U.S. Treasury bills, 387, 388
usury laws, 444
Uttar Pradesh, 194, 260
Uzbekistan, 428
vaccines, 302, 312, 319, 344
making markets for, 330–32b
polio, 339
smallpox, 338
Vaillant, Charlotte, 650n
value added, 25, 715b
value-added taxes (VATs), 403, 410–11, 420
van der Ploeg, Frederick, 694n, 701n
Vedeld, Paul, 788, 788n
Venezuela, 58, 360, 361, 396, 473, 685, 706
energy pricing and, 784
fi nancial crisis in, 480
infl ation in, 428
natural resources in, 370
SOE defi cits in, 396
Washington Consensus and, 155
vent for surplus, 685
vertical spillovers, 368
Vietnam, 144, 146, 157, 442, 509, 514, 660, 687, 
718, 726, 742, 744, 782
agriculture in, 613, 615
changing market participation among 
farming households in, 614, 614t
electronics industry in, 5
foreign direct investment in, 366
market reforms in, 160
reform path in, 152
Vietnam War, 468
Viktor, 6–8, 10
Vincent, Jeff rey R., 766, 766n, 777n, 784n, 786n, 
787, 787n, 795n
Voss, Maj-Lis, 248n
Vosti, Stephen A., 789, 790n, 791, 792
Wacziarg, Romain, 84, 84n, 738n
Wade, Robert, 729n
wage equations, rates of return estimated from, 
275–76b
wages, 28
agriculture and, 599, 601–2
education and, 267–69, 270, 278, 525

844   I N D E X
wages (continued)
health and, 320
labor and, 7
in semiconductor industry, 4
temporary migration and, 753–55
trade and, 743–44
see also incomes; labor, labor sector
Wang, Hua, 759n
Warden, Staci, 734n
Warner, Andrew, 84n, 124, 124n, 198n, 687, 
687n, 688, 738, 738n
wars, 76, 77f, 156, 297, 430, 504, 705
Washington Consensus, 146, 150, 152, 
153, 724
components of, 147
infl ation and, 442
Latin America and, 144, 146, 148, 
154–55, 160, 161
poverty and, 197, 203
success or failure?, 153–59, 161
water resources, 762–63
climate change and, 798
wealth, 764t
comprehensive, 762, 765, 801
distribution of, 166–67
Wealth of Nations, Th e (Smith), 60, 129
Webb, Richard, 431b
Weismann, Doris M., 197n
Weitzman, Martin, 798, 798n
Welch, Karen Horn, 84, 84n, 738n
welfare weights, 356–57
Western Europe, levels of GDP per capita in, 
1820-2008, 35f
What Works Working Group, 335
wheat, 633
Green Revolution and, 628
trends in prices of, 659, 659f, 660–61
Wheeler, David, 759n
White, Howard, 522n
wider band system, of exchange rate, 
434, 434f
Williams, Roberton, 404n
Williamson, Jeff rey, 241n
Williamson, John, 146, 146n, 147, 434n, 
466n, 477n
Wink, Claudia, 252n
Witcover, Julie, 622n
Wolfensohn, James, 218
Wolfers, Justin, 51n
women:
childbearing, wages and, 235
education and, 263, 267, 276, 298
HIV/AIDS and, 326
micro credit and, 450
population and, 233, 245
poverty and, 194–95, 214
worker-to-population ratio, 112b
World Bank, 11n, 24, 25, 36, 79n, 102, 137, 
139b, 140, 142n, 172, 177, 192b, 193, 
197, 206, 214, 217, 351, 358, 374, 400, 
441, 459, 474, 477, 496, 511, 517, 524b, 
525, 526, 564, 570, 627, 645, 646b, 651, 
749, 750
barriers to doing business and, 359
Berg Report published by, 146
classifi cation of world economies by, 11, 
12, 13t
DOTS strategy and, 334
establishment of, 508
foreign aid and, 144, 503, 508, 509, 510, 512, 
537, 538, 540, 541, 542
foreign debt and, 472, 479b
global warming and, 796
international poverty line of, 165n
international prices and, 30
Living Standards Measurement Study, 195
population projections by, 227n
poverty line defi ned by, 186
structural adjustment reforms and, 145
sustainable development and, 762n, 763, 
775, 788
World Bank Institute, 81b
World Development Indicators, 3n
World Development Report (WDR), 186, 197, 
613, 633, 647b
world exports, growth in, by region, 1974–2008, 
668f
World Food Program (WFP), 512
World Health Organization (WHO), 60b, 249, 
301, 341, 512, 524, 524b
health-related measures for regions, 2009, 
303t
World Health Report (2002), 343
world price, 713
World Trade Organization (WTO), 136, 373, 
402, 510n, 665, 681, 691, 740, 751, 
752, 753
World Vision, 502
World War I, 10, 135, 135n, 136, 384, 465b, 
710, 750
World War II, 135, 141, 149, 177, 220, 374, 
441, 455, 466b, 468, 490, 508, 711, 
742, 750
development thinking after, 130–32, 
134–37, 159
Marshall Plan and, 503–4b

I N D E X   845
worm infestation, in school children, 290–91
Wriston, Walter, 465b
Wunder, Sven, 779, 779n
Yamano, Takashi, 652b
yellow fever, Panama Canal and, 322b
Yeltsin, Boris, 149
Yemen, 112b, 703n
yield, 623
yield gap, 634, 639
Young, Mei Ling, 3n
Younger, Stephen, 527n
Ythier, Jean Mercier, 539n
yuan, 731b
Yulia, 6–8, 10
Yunus, Muhammad, 449
Zaire. see Congo, Democratic Republic of
Zambia, 87, 325, 330, 546, 558, 684, 687, 703, 
726, 741, 765
economic growth in, 56, 58
education in, 282, 287
natural resources in, 370
Zedillo, Ernesto, 288b
Zeufack, Albert, 5n
Zheng He, 10
Zhu, Min, 531n
Zhuravskaya, Ekaterina, 53n
Zimbabwe, 42, 45, 156, 206, 247, 325, 326, 430, 
432, 658, 765
Zoellick, Robert, 218, 218n
Zoido-Lobatón, Pablo, 82n
zones of imbalance, 555, 556f

0
250
500 miles
I N D I A
SR I LA NK A
PAKI STA N
AFG H AN IS TA N
C HINA
NEPA L
MYA NMA R
BANGLA-
DESH
BHUTAN
Indus
 R
. 
G
a
n
g
es
 
R
. 
B
r
a
h
ma
pu
tra
 R
. 
Arabian Sea
I N D I A N  O C E A N
Bay of Bengal
Low income
SOUTH ASIA
Lower-middle income
Upper-middle income
High income
Income status, 2011
Source: World Bank, http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-classifications
/country-and-lending-groups

0
500
1000 miles
South
China 
Sea
Sea of
Japan
East
China
Sea
Bay of
Bengal
P A C I F I C
O C E A N
I N D I A N  O C E A N
A U ST R A L I A
I
N
D
O
N
E
S
I
A
C H I N A
A U ST R A L I A
P A P U A
N E W
G U I N EA
T H A I L A N D
M A L A Y S I A
M A L A Y S I A
P H I L I P P I N ES
H O N G  K O N G
T A I W A N
J A P A N
M O N G O L I A
R U S S I A
BRUNEI
DARUSSALAM
SINGAPORE
MYANMAR
BHUTAN
BANGLA-
DESH
VIETNAM
LAO
PEOPLE'S
DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC
REPUBLIC
OF KOREA
DEMOCRATIC
PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF KOREA
CAMBODIA
M A C A O
Income status, 2011
Source: 
Low income
EAST ASIA
Lower-middle income
Upper-middle income
High income
World Bank, http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-classifications
/country-and-lending-groups

