
ECOSYSTEMS AND 
TECHNOLOGY
Idea Generation and  
Content Model Processing


ECOSYSTEMS AND 
TECHNOLOGY
Idea Generation and  
Content Model Processing
Edited by
Cyrus F. Nourani, PhD
Research Professor, Simon Fraser University,  
British Columbia, Canada
Academic R&D at Berlin, Sankt Augustin-Bonn and  
Munich, Germany
Innovation Management and Computing

Apple Academic Press Inc.	 Apple Academic Press Inc.
3333 Mistwell Crescent	
9 Spinnaker Way 
Oakville, ON L6L 0A2	
Waretown, NJ 08758
Canada	
USA
©2017 by Apple Academic Press, Inc.
Exclusive worldwide distribution by CRC Press, a member of Taylor & Francis Group
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-77188-507-2 (Hardcover)
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-315-36566-4 (CRC Press/Taylor & Francis Ebook)
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-77188-508-9 (AAP eBook)
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form or by any 
electric, mechanical or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and re-
cording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publish-
er or its distributor, except in the case of brief excerpts or quotations for use in reviews or critical articles.
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reprinted material 
is quoted with permission and sources are indicated. Copyright for individual articles remains with the 
authors as indicated. A wide variety of references are listed. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish 
reliable data and information, but the authors, editors, and the publisher cannot assume responsibility for 
the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors, editors, and the publisher have 
attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to 
copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material 
has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Trademark Notice: Registered trademark of products or corporate names are used only for explanation 
and identification without intent to infringe.
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
Ecosystems and technology : idea generation and content model processing / edited by 
Cyrus F. Nourani, PhD, Research Professor, Simon Fraser University, British Columbia, 
Canada, Academic R&D at Berlin, Sankt Augustin-Bonn and, Munich, Germany.
(Innovation management and computing)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Issued in print and electronic formats.
ISBN 978-1-77188-507-2 (hardcover).--ISBN 978-1-77188-508-9 (PDF)
1. Technology--Social aspects.  2. Computer networks--Social aspects.  3. Technological 
innovations--Data processing.  4. Telematics. I. Nourani, Cyrus F., author, editor  II. Series: 
Innovation management and computing
T14.5.E36 2016	
303.48'3	
C2016-907185-5	
C2016-907186-3
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Nourani, Cyrus F., editor.
Title: Ecosystems and technology : idea generation and content model processing / editor, 
Cyrus F. Nourani, PhD.
Description: Toronto ; [Hackensack?] New Jersey : Apple Academic Press, 2017.
 | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016049823 (print) | LCCN 2016051014 (ebook) | ISBN 
9781771885072 (hardcover : alk. paper) | ISBN 9781315365664 (CRC Press/Taylor & 
Francis eBook) | ISBN 9781771885089 (AAP eBook)
Subjects: LCSH: Technology--Social aspects. | Computer networks--Social apects. | Tech-
nological innovations--Data processing. | Telematics.
Classification: LCC T14.5 .E36 2017 (print) | LCC T14.5 (ebook) | DDC 303.48/3--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016049823
Apple Academic Press also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears 
in print may not be available in electronic format. For information about Apple Academic Press products, 
visit our website at www.appleacademicpress.com and the CRC Press website at www.crcpress.com

Innovation is the generation and application of new ideas and skills to 
produce new products, processes, and services that improve economic and 
social prosperity. This new book series aims to cover important issues in 
the burgeoning field of innovation management and computing, from an 
overview of the field to its current and future contributions. The volumes 
will be of value and interest to computer and cognitive scientists, econo-
mists, engineers, managers, mathematicians, programmers, and engineers.
Current books in the series:
•	 Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model  
Processing
Tentative forthcoming volumes in the series:
•	 Computing Predictive Analytics, Business Intelligence, and Economics 
Models
•	 Haptic Computing Logic, Emotional Intelligence, Neurocognitive and 
Genetic Computing
•	 Innovations on Agent Cooperation and Coordination
•	 Newer Developments on Computability, Languages, Sets, and Model 
Theory
•	 Economic Game Models and Predictive Analytics
•	 Epistemic Computing, Model Checking, Spatial Computing and 
Ontology Languages
•	 Content Processing, Intelligent Multimedia Databases, and Web Inter-
faces
•	 Agent Software Engineering, Heterogeneous Computing, and Model 
Transformations
BOOK SERIES: INNOVATION 
MANAGEMENT AND COMPUTING


List of Contributors...................................................................................... ix
List of Abbreviations.................................................................................... xi
About the Editor.........................................................................................xiii
Preface.........................................................................................................xv
1.	
Technology Selection for Software Startups............................................. 1
Michel Floyd
2.	
Innovation Ecosystems and Technology.................................................. 11
Eunika Mercier-Laurent
3.	
Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches:  
The Impact of Social Norms on Self-Regulated Innovation  
Activities in Self-Managing Teams.......................................................... 37
Maria Carmela Annosi, Federica Brunetta, and Mats Magnusson
4.	
Digital Opportunities for First-Year University Students’  
Motivational Enhancement...................................................................... 77
Dace Ratniece
5.	
Building a Successful Innovation Platform for Affordable  
Medical Technology in Low Resource Settings......................................91
Ramakrishna Pappu and Jagdish Chaturvedi
6.	
Soft-Factors Enabling Innovation......................................................... 115
Christine G. Kapp
7.	
IoT and M.E.S.: Are You Ready for the Next  
Industrial Revolution?............................................................................141
Selem Charfi
8.	
A Structured Process to Generate Ideas in MedTech..........................157
Jagdish Chaturvedi and Ramakrishna Pappu
CONTENTS

viii	
Contents
9.	
Logic-Based Medicine versus Evidence-Based Medicine for  
Modeling Qualified-Self Health Kits..................................................... 183
Patrik Eklund
10.	 Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, and  
Analytics Content Processing................................................................. 189
Cyrus F. Nourani
11.	 A Haptic Computing basis for Facial or Visual Emotion  
Expression Recognition.......................................................................... 223
Cyrus F. Nourani
Index.......................................................................................................... 251

LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
Maria Carmela Annosi
Ericsson AB—Research, Färögatan 6, SE-164 80 Stockholm, Sweden; IPD, School of Industrial 
Engineering and Management—KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Brinellvägen 8, 114 28 
Stockholm, Sweden
Federica Brunetta
Department of Business and Management—LUISS Guido Carli University, Viale Romania, 32, 00197 
Roma, Italy
Selem Charfi
HD Technology, Europarc du Chêne, 8 rue Pascal-BP90, 69672 BRON Lyon, France, E-mail: Selem.
Charfi@hdtechnology.fr
Jagdish Chaturvedi
Director Clinical Innovations, InnAccel, 5th Floor, Aanand Towers, Municipal No. 4, Rajaram Mohan 
Roy Road, Ward No. 77, Sampangiramanagar, Bangalore–560025, India
Patrik Eklund
Umeå University, Department of Computing Science, SE-90187 Umeå, Sweden
Michel Floyd
Founder of “cloak.ly,” Board Member of VLAB, the MIT Enterprise Forum of the Bay Area, 767 
Upland Rd, Redwood City, CA 94062, USA, Mobile: +1-650-814-3961
Christine G. Kapp
DataPsy, Inc., 1503 Ross Ave, Kissimmee, Florida 34744, USA, E-mail: ckapp@DataPsy.com
Mats Magnusson
IPD, School of Industrial Engineering and Management—KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 
Brinellvägen 8, 114 28 Stockholm, Sweden
Eunika Mercier-Laurent
University Jean Moulin Lyon 3, France, E-mail: eunika.mercier-laurent@univ-lyon3.fr
Cyrus F. Nourani
Research Professor, Simon Fraser University, British Columbia, Canada
Ramakrishna Pappu
Business Associate, InnAccel, 5th Floor, Aanand Towers, Municipal No. 4, Rajaram Mohan Roy 
Road, Ward No. 77, Sampangiramanagar, Bangalore–560025, India
Dace Ratniece
Distance Education Study Centre, Riga Technical University, Kronvalda Boulevard 1, Riga, LV 1010, 
Latvia; Faculty of Sciences and Engineering, Liepaja University, Liela Str.14, Liepaja, LV-3401, 
Latvia


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AHA	
active and healthy ageing
AI	
artificial intelligence
AII	
abstract intelligent implementation
AIIMS	
All India Institute of Medical Sciences
AU	
action units
BI	
business intelligence
BIOME	
Bio Innovations and Opportunities in Medicine and Engineering
CRDM	
cardiac rhythm disease management
EBM	
evidence-based medicine
EDB	
Economic Development Board
ERP	
Enterprise Resource Planning
FACS	
Facial Action Coding System
IIC	
Industrial Internet Consortium
IPMP	
innovation process management process
ITESM	
Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education
IUSSTF	
Indo-US Science and Technology Forum
JFMDA	
Japan Federation of Medical Devices Associations
JMSUICE	 JurInfoR-MSU Institute for Contemporary Education
KM	
knowledge management
KPI	
Key Performance Indicators
LBM	
logic-based medicine
MVP	
minimum viable product
NEET	
not in employment, education or training
OISPG	
Open Innovation Strategy and Policy Group
OM	
organizational memory
PLM	
product lifecycle management
RDF	
Resource Description Framework
RMNCH	
Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, and Child Health
SDC	
System Development Corporation
SIB	
Stanford India Biodesign
SMS	
Short Message Service
SSB	
Singapore-Stanford Biodesign


Cyrus F. Nourani, PhD
Research Professor, Simon Fraser University, British Columbia, Canada; 
Academic R&D at Berlin, IMK Bonn and Munich, Germany
Dr. Cyrus F. Nourani has a national and international reputation in com-
puter science, artificial intelligence, mathematics, virtual haptic compu-
tation, information technology, and management. He has many years of 
experience in the design and implementation of computing systems. Dr. 
Nourani’s academic experience includes faculty positions at the Univer-
sity of Michigan-Ann Arbor, the University of Pennsylvania, the Univer-
sity of Southern California, UCLA, MIT, and the University of California, 
Santa Barbara. He was also a Research Professor at Simon Frasier Univer-
sity in Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada. He was a Visiting Professor at 
Edith Cowan University, Perth, Australia, and a Lecturer of Management 
Science and IT at the University of Auckland, New Zealand.
Dr. Nourani commenced his university degrees at MIT where he 
became interested in algebraic semantics. That was pursued with a cat-
egory theorist at the University of California. Dr. Nourani’s dissertation 
on computing models and categories proved to have intuitionist-forcing 
developments that were published from his postdoctoral times on at ASL. 
He has taught AI to the Los Angeles aerospace industry and has worked 
in many R&D and commercial ventures. He has written and coauthored 
several books. He has over 350 publications in mathematics and computer 
science and has written on additional topics, such as pure mathematics, 
AI, EC, and IT management science, decision trees, predictive economics 
game modeling. In 1987, he founded Ventures for computing R&D. He 
began independent consulting with clients such as System Development 
Corporation (SDC), the US Air Force Space Division, and GE Aerospace. 
Dr. Nourani has designed and developed AI robot planning and reasoning 
systems at Northrop Research and Technology Center, Palos Verdes, Cali-
fornia. He also has comparable AI, software, and computing foundations 
and R&D experience at GTE Research Labs.
ABOUT THE EDITOR


Innovation is the generation and application of new ideas and skills to 
produce new products, processes, and services that improve economic 
and social prosperity. This includes management and design policy deci-
sions and encompasses innovation research, analysis, and best practice in 
enterprise, public, and private sector service organizations, government, 
regional societie,s and economies. This volume presents important new 
innovations in the area of management and computing, particularly ven-
ture planning for innovations and competitive business modeling.
Ecosystems and context-driven innovation modeling systems assist in 
the generation of better ideas faster; in measuring relevant data on ECO 
systems; in creating idea streams, innovation platforms, and virtual inter-
faces; in enhancing business intelligence and content processing; and in 
analyzing  haptic expression and emotion recognition innovations, with 
applications to neurocognitive medical sciences.
This volume starts with a glimpse on technology selection for startups. 
Startups face tremendous challenges across many fronts, from fundrais-
ing to attracting talent to getting their first customers. In the early days of 
a technology startup, the focus is on creating a minimum viable product 
(MVP). Chapter 1 explores the early technology choices made by startups 
and how they can impact future success with real-world examples. Fac-
ing today’s challenges and competition involves continuous innovation, 
which is considered as ecosystems generating impact. Balancing these 
ecosystems for sustainable success requires connecting and combining 
multidisciplinary knowledge, know-how, and intelligence. Focusing on an 
ecosystem model of innovation, a condition for balance, and the role of 
technology in making it effective are explored in chapter 2. Agile methods 
are explored in a following chapter. Intensified competition putspressure 
on organizations to outperform their competitors by addressing customer 
needs in a timely, cost-effective, and superior manner. Newer trends with 
decentralized structures, abandoning hierarchical organizational forms in 
PREFACE

xvi	
Preface
favor of flattened hierarchies and a massive use of self-managing teams, 
are explored.
Agile software development paradigm is conceived of being about 
feedback and change. However, there is a lack of clear or detailed recom-
mendations about how to successfully drive autonomous teams towards 
high innovation performances. Additional areas treated are Swedish Medi-
cal Apps Management.
Innovations in education systems are considered in chapter 4. Young 
people, who are the fundamental asset of our economies and societies 
across the world, face real and increasing difficulties in finding decent 
jobs more and more often. The aim of this study is to find the optimal ratio 
of e-learning and conventional learning for first-year students to increase 
motivation. Research methods on “Entrepreneurship (Distance Learning 
e-Course)” are reviewed. The students were tested by (i) a survey about the 
course on “Entrepreneurship (Distance Learning e-Course)” assessment; 
(ii) psychologist M. Lusher’s color test, which is based on the method of 
projection individual’s emotional state of the diagnosis; (iii) the degree of 
risk appetite according to Schubert’s method of success; (iv) motivation 
after T. Elersamethods, failure avoidance motivation in correlation with T. 
Elersa method; and (v) a survey about optimal proportion between tradi-
tional and e-learning studies.
The healthcare domain area examples are presented in several chapters 
(chapters 5 and 8) that provide an overview of the various methods used 
today for identifying unmet needs and developing products. The healthcare 
domain is chosen as the medium for the description. The biodesign pro-
cess as developed at Stanford University is described, along with multiple 
alternate adaptations of the process. Chapter 5 analyzes other processes 
examining the critical factors that lead to the success of these programs. It 
also analyzes through examples of medical devices and medical technol-
ogy developments, where a lack of a structured process has led to ‘fail-
ures,’ the key learning from these case studies.
Building a successful innovation platform for affordable medical tech-
nology is important to address. This chapter 5 emphasizes the need for an 
innovation platform for successful accomplishments. It takes the example 
of healthcare innovations and explores the different facets that need to be 
brought together to create an innovation platform in the medical technol-

ogy space and its use today to enable affordable medical technology in 
low-resource settings. The authors use various case studies of innovation 
platforms accessible to healthcare innovators and highlight the thought 
process behind developing such platforms (Stanford Biodesign, John’s 
Hopkins’ innovation platform, CAMtech’d innovation platform, InnAc-
cel’s acceleration program, government-run incubation programs, etc.). 
The chapter details a stage-wise process that begins with the identification 
of gaps in the ecosystem through feasibility studies to setting up a physi-
cal medical technology innovation platform. Further, the authors highlight 
the need for the incorporation of structured processes for needs identifica-
tion and product development embedded within innovation platforms. An 
overview of how this is being used today in different settings is described.
In chapter 9, logic-based medicine versus evidence-based medicine 
for modeling qualified self-health kits is examined. In this chapter for-
mal logic is applied to bridge the gap between information management 
in qualified self apps and information classification and structures resid-
ing within health and healthcare ontology. Mathematical innovative tech-
niques are briefly described to enable a well-founded logical and ontology 
representation. Modeling uses these theoretical notions in order to extend 
the logical structure of classifications of health. The author focuses on 
active and healthy aging, including aspects of assessment and classifica-
tion so that individuals and patients can manage their own data, in particu-
lar for self-monitoring purposes. There is the need to shift from society 
owning all individual health data to individuals themselves owning their 
data. Another aspect is that the quantified-self movement is still rooted 
mostly in wellness and even fitness, and as having various apps at their 
disposal.
Chapter 6 begins by describing the art of innovation as an analogy that 
shows the exponential level of complexity when scaling innovation man-
agement processes from personal innovation to visionary and led innova-
tion, and finally to enterprise/ecosystem innovation. Soft factors to the 
innovation process are explained at each level, with the emphasis being 
on enterprise and level factors with suggestions for overcoming them. We 
have the perception that process models, idea generation platforms,and 
cognitive products are all necessary to improve an organizational innova-
tion management process. However, many soft factors provide the real key 
Preface	
xvii

xviii	
Preface
to innovation success. There is an inhibitive factor when the role has been 
designed to be 95% reactive. This chapter describes some of the factors 
inherent in people and organizations that can inhibit innovation.
The new IoT areas are considered in a chapter that presents the 
impact of the IoT concept on the manufacturing systems and the chal-
lenges that R&D actors face in order to anticipate future evolution. The 
author first presents the general concepts related to IoT and M.E.S. Then 
the announced benefits from this exposition are presented. These benefits 
present new challenges.
The newer realistic challenges are previewed in chapter 10 on virtual 
mobile or cloud interfaces, business intelligence, and analytics content 
processing. Intelligent business interfaces are designed with intelligent 
multi-tiers and interfaces applying agents and intelligent business objects 
with applications to intelligent WWW. Basic content management with 
multi-tier designs for interfaces are presented. The field of automated 
learning and discovery has obvious financial and organizational memory 
applications. A computing model based on a novel competitive learning 
with database warehousing, model discovery, and customizing interface 
design is discussed. Intelligent visual computing paradigms are applied 
to define the multimedia computing paradigm and active databases. The 
intelligent multimedia paradigms can be applied to databases and query 
processing applications to stock trading. A view-model-controller design 
prototype for mobile business platforms with content processing specifics 
is presented. Web content is an important interface to preview. 
The volume concludes with innovations on haptic and neurocognitive 
computing for visual facial expression emotion recognition. The chap-
ter presents novel modeling techniques for facial and visual expression 
computation and recognition. Based on the functions on the haptic com-
puting logic, we can state expression-spanning schemas—hereon called 
Eigen Schemas—that on tuples are morphed to characterize facial expres-
sions. The Eigen schemas allow us to express or detect human emotions 
expressed on facials. The haptic logic encompasses a predictive Bayesian 
confidence on the characterizations.

CHAPTER 1
TECHNOLOGY SELECTION FOR 
SOFTWARE STARTUPS
MICHEL FLOYD
Founder of “cloak.ly,” Board Member of VLAB, The MIT Enterprise 
Forum of the Bay Area, 767 Upland Rd, Redwood City, CA 94062, 
USA, Mobile: +1-650-814-3961
CONTENTS
Abstract...................................................................................................... 1
1.1  Tools.................................................................................................. 2
1.2  Why Tools Matter?............................................................................ 3
1.3  Leading Edge or Mere Survival........................................................ 5
1.4  Tools and Culture.............................................................................. 7
Keywords................................................................................................... 8
References.................................................................................................. 9
ABSTRACT
Many, perhaps most, software startups start with just an “idea.”
•	
It should be easier to get a ride to go where I need to go now;
•	
I want to sell my beanie babies online;
•	
It should be easier to find information.
If the inventor is a software engineer they might just start writing soft-
ware-using tools that they already know. Some might think a little harder 

2	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
and learn a new tool that seems particularly well suited to the job. The 
founder of Instagram famously taught himself to code while creating the 
app. In every case, a decision will be made and a minimum viable product 
will be built using some set of tools. In this chapter we will lay out how 
this choice—made during a software startup’s birth—can affect a startup’s 
culture and eventual success.
1.1  TOOLS
When a carpenter shows up at a construction site he or she can be rec-
ognized instantly by the tools on their belt: the hammer, a tape measure, 
a pencil, some screwdrivers or a power drill, and a few others. That the 
carpenter has these tools doesn’t guarantee they are skilled, it just means 
they are equipped and ready to work.
Meanwhile a software developer shows up at their office with nothing 
more than a laptop and a pair of headphones. While the laptop, like the 
hammer, is itself a tool, the developer’s real tools are the invisible pieces 
of software inside, on servers, and in the cloud. The laptop is just a means 
to gain access to the real tools. In a way the laptop can be thought of as a 
tool belt in the carpenter metaphor.
The hammer is a tool, which is over 2.6 million years old. PCs have 
been around for about 40 years, laptops for around 30. The oldest soft-
ware tool on that laptop might be the text editor or a C compiler, both 
just slightly older than the PC itself. The tools of the trade in software are 
incredibly young by comparison to most of the carpenter’s tools. The very 
oldest software tools in current use are barely older than the developers 
using them. The very newest tools on the other hand, may only be years 
or even months old. Software tools are being invented and refined at an 
incredible rate, which brings us to our first observation.
Software tools and technology are changing all the time. Many of the 
ones you choose for your new company will soon be out of date.
Knowing this, it can be hard, especially for a nontechnical founder, to 
understand how software engineers can be so incredibly opinionated about 
the choice of tools used to build a system in a new company!

Technology Selection For Software Startups	
3
1.2  WHY TOOLS MATTER?
If the carpenter with his tool belt is asked to frame a two-story house he 
or she is probably going to be able to do it if they have any basic skills. A 
more skilled carpenter will do it faster, several skilled carpenters will do it 
faster, and if the team has worked together before and built many similar 
houses they will be faster yet. This I learned building tract homes for a 
summer.
On the other hand if you ask even a great team of carpenters to build a 
12-story building they will fail. Buildings that tall need steel and concrete 
structures and a completely different set of workers (e.g., welders, con-
crete pourers) with different tools and materials.
Similarly in software, different kinds of applications need different 
developer skills and tools. Developing for smartphones can be pretty 
different than developing for web browsers which is very different than 
developing for embedded devices like the computerized engine control-
ler in your car. The problem domain itself, for example, deep learning or 
e-commerce, or search, also influences much of the expertise required. 
Some top-tier developers can migrate from one such domain to another 
relatively quickly but many cannot. In any case, many of the tools they use 
can be quite different.
1.2.1  SKILLS MATTER MORE
When Mark Zuckerberg started building the Facebook he used what he 
knew: the LAMP stack. LAMP stands for “Linux, Apache, MySQL and 
PHP/Perl/Python.” These acronyms formed the basis for most new web 
applications being developed in the early 2000s. Mr. Zuckerberg specifi-
cally chose PHP as the language with which to build his project. PHP is 
widely derided by computer science “purists” as a hack that has evolved 
over time. It’s original author, Rasmus Lerdorf was quoted as saying “I 
don’t know how to stop it, there was never any intent to write a program-
ming language […] I have absolutely no idea how to write a programming 
language, I just kept adding the next logical step on the way.”

4	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
My favorite observation about PHP came from a Stanford profes-
sor who derided Facebook’s early efforts with the comment “PHP won’t 
scale.” One and a half billion users later that comment sticks with me as 
being one of the most dramatically wrong assessments of a startup I’ve ever 
heard. Technically, he was correct. PHP is not the ideal choice for a massive 
website project, especially one involving thousands of engineers. Facebook 
compensated for their initial non-ideal tools by hiring the best developers 
on the planet and applying relentless effort to the problem. Along the way 
Facebook altered many of the basic premises of PHP, for example by creat-
ing a compiler for it. This leads us to our second observation:
“Great developers using mediocre tools will almost always outperform 
poor developers with great tools.”
It is not the case however that any tool will do, even given the world’s 
best talent. Non-technical managers who have a passing knowledge of 
software are prone to suggesting tools that are completely inappropriate 
to the job at hand. If such a leader said “Let’s use PHP for our self-driving 
car project” their developers would view them with the kind of disdain that 
Dilbert normally reserves for his pointy haired manager.
1.2.2  MOST INTERESTING SOFTWARE SYSTEMS ARE BEING 
BUILT FOR THE FIRST TIME
A carpenter only frames a house for the first time once. Each additional 
house is a near repetition of their first. Even if the size and floor plan change 
the basic tools and techniques are very similar. Carpenters learn on the job 
fast and quickly reach a point where every new build seems fairly routine. 
With repetition comes predictability and usually increasing quality.
Some classes of software projects can seem very similar, for example 
e-commerce sites, corporate websites, or blogs. Developers who do many 
of these also build up their skills over time and become able to build them 
repeatedly and predictably.
However, many interesting software projects are being built for the 
very first time using new tools and a team that has never worked together 

Technology Selection For Software Startups	
5
before to address brand new requirements. The large number of unknowns 
can be overwhelming. Figuring out how to best approach the problem can 
take several rounds of trial and error. Furthermore as the first prototypes 
are created the problem to be addressed is also continuously being rede-
fined. During this process it’s important to get to “good enough” quickly. 
Is the immediate problem solvable with the team you have using the tools 
you already know or have just learned during experimentation? If so you 
want to get going.
Had Facebook’s early team been required to consider scaling Face-
book to 1.5 billion users they would have quickly concluded that would 
be impossible for their young team using any existing set of tools and then 
given up. Instead they got going, their success gave them the wherewithal 
to improve their team and tools and even invent many brand new tools 
along the way.
1.3  LEADING EDGE OR MERE SURVIVAL
In the selection of the toolset there will be a tension between being on the 
bleeding edge and staying with the tried and true. A fairly big part of the 
developer population wants to be on the bleeding edge in terms of tools. 
Why? Several important reasons:
•	
They get to learn more. Developers love to learn new things. This 
is just how their brains are wired. Learning is fun.
•	
It gives them a chance to be an expert in a new thing. If you want 
to become a world-renowned expert on UNIX or SQL, good luck. 
There are already many experts in such tools, people who’ve been 
working on them for 30 years, have written books on them, given 
many talks at well established conferences, gurus basically. When 
a new technology arises the people who start using it first get to 
become the first experts. They might get to write the first book, 
their talks are packed, people read their blogs, and companies start 
recruiting them because they have unique skills. Fundamentally, 
their market value increases.
•	
It makes them indispensable. This is a kind of employee lock-in. 
If your team are the world’s only experts on a new technology that 

6	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
you’re betting your company on, they are almost impossible to 
replace. Throw them out and you’re going to be stuck starting over.
How can you tell if you’re picking a bleeding edge technology? Are 
there several books on the topic, or has the first book yet to be published? 
Look up the term on Google trends (https://www.google.com/trends) and 
see how recently it started gaining attention. Is it on its way up or stuck on 
a plateau? Another great place to look is Stack Overflow (https://stackover-
flow.com/), the leading question-and-answer site for software developers. 
Once enough questions have been asked about a technology it will gain 
it’s own keyword. For example if you search for [meteor] (https://meteor.
com) (the square brackets denote a keyword.) then you can see that, today, 
over 19,000 questions have been raised about it. If you looked for [mari-
adb] (https://mariadb.com), you would only find 1,441 questions which 
makes it considerably newer and, perhaps in some people’s minds, riskier. 
By way of comparison, a very mature technology such as java has over 1 
million questions on Stack Overflow.
If you plan to scale and grow your development team quickly, dependence 
on a niche or bleeding edge technology can become a major constraint.
You will be hiring among a small pool of talent, your outsourcing/off-
shoring options will be limited, there will be fewer resources with which 
to train new talent (books, blogs, conferences). Your developers may be 
highly productive but you can easily find yourself boxed in with a mount-
ing development backlog and no easy way to add resources.
Sometimes a technology can be mature yet have never gotten past the 
niche phase. Take erlang [5], for example. Originally invented in 1986, 
this language has fierce proponents but never became truly mainstream. 
For some types of applications it is the best possible solution but finding 
people that know it well may be difficult.
From a founder’s point of view, if your engineers are primarily con-
cerned with becoming experts on a new technology or in making them-
selves indispensable then they are the wrong people. Find someone who 
is interested in learning how to build a great company, being an expert in 
making your product great, and who is eager to (eventually) help bring on 
new talent. You can attract new talent with the lure of working with the 
latest and greatest tools but that can’t be the only thing.

Technology Selection For Software Startups	
7
There is plenty of risk on the nearly dead end of the spectrum as well. 
Picking long-in-the-tooth technology will make it very hard to attract new 
talent and you’ll find it correspondingly hard to scale. Interoperability with 
other systems will be difficult or even impossible. You won’t be as agile as 
your competitors. If this sounds a bit like the temperature of the porridge 
needs to be just right, rest assured that it’s really only the extremes that 
should concern you. There’s a broad middle of up-and-coming to tried-
and-true technology that is likely to be applicable to your problem.
1.4  TOOLS AND CULTURE
In much the same way that human language and culture are intertwined, 
the set of development tools (including programming languages) used 
within an organization and its culture are intertwined. Two areas where 
these differences manifest themselves most distinctively are in open 
source vs. closed source and in on-premise vs. cloud (or SaaS).
Closed source developers are comfortable paying large software compa-
nies for software that (nominally) works, is documented, is going to be sup-
ported for many years, interoperates well with other tools and applications 
from the same supplier or related suppliers, is kept up-to-date with changes 
to operational hardware, and for which expert consultants are readily avail-
able. The managers of these developers also like having a big company to 
blame for their problems. Closed-source developers tend to be more secre-
tive about their work; they are less likely to contribute to open-source proj-
ects or reuse them. They can also be less likely to share information with 
others outside their own companies. Lack of visibility into the tools they are 
using begets lack of transparency into what they are themselves creating.
Open source developers, on the other hand, viscerally hate paying for 
software. Commercial, closed-source software is often seen as bloated, 
inefficient, dated, and ridiculously overpriced. Taking hard-won startup 
capital and forking it over to Microsoft, Oracle, or IBM is seen by such 
developers as profligate spending. Better to put that money into a ping-
pong table or bigger monitors! Open source developers are by their very 
nature integrators: they pull together various open source components to 
build a complete system. They are also tinkerers. If a package doesn’t 

8	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
work and there’s no ready alternative, then they will go try to fix the prob-
lem themselves and even contribute the fix back to the community so that 
everyone else (even their competitors!) benefits. Starting or contributing 
to open source projects can help build a developer’s reputation in what end 
up being global communities. Top open source developers are referred to 
by single names just like pop stars! Open source developers take quite a 
bit of pleasure in helping others, which may be a big factor in your own 
organization developing strong teamwork.
On the on-premise vs. cloud axis, developers who run their applica-
tions in their own data centers (on-premise) tend to be much more well 
versed in hardware and optimization. They strive to get maximum perfor-
mance from their systems (hardware + software) and need total control in 
order to do so. They also love to tinker and try new hardware combina-
tions (more memory, faster disks, using GPUs instead of CPUs). Cloud 
developers on the other hand, have gradually become almost disinterested 
in any hardware beyond their own laptop. If the cloud is too slow, just spin-
up more instances! This saves time in terms of tinkering but can lead to a 
rude shock when you open your Amazon Cloud Services bill! It can also 
lead to poorly performing applications because the developers have lost 
their optimization and performance tuning skills.
Is your innovation highly performance-sensitive? For example, are 
you building a high-frequency trading application? If so, you’re going to 
want some of those optimization-focused on-premise developers to get 
you there. Are you looking to grow your company globally and quickly? 
The cloud people are going to get you there faster and cheaper, with a lot 
less capital equipment!
KEYWORDS
••
agile
••
choices
••
CTO
••
innovation
••
startups
••
technology

Technology Selection For Software Startups	
9
REFERENCES
http://languagemagazine.com/?page_id=2103, Blurring the Lines Between Language and 
Culture.
https://mariadb.com, an open source relational database based on MySQL.
https://meteor.com, Meteor, as of this writing, is a fairly new JavaScript framework for 
developing web applications.


INNOVATION ECOSYSTEMS AND 
TECHNOLOGY
EUNIKA MERCIER-LAURENT
University Jean Moulin Lyon 3, France,  
E-mail: eunika.mercier-laurent@univ-lyon3.fr
CONTENTS
Abstract.....................................................................................................11
2.1  Introduction..................................................................................... 12
2.2  Related Work................................................................................... 13
2.3  Model of Innovation Ecosystems.................................................... 20
2.4  Ecoinnovation Process—Conditions For Balance.......................... 22
2.5  Importance of Managing Knowledge............................................. 25
2.6  Multiple Impacts of Innovation...................................................... 31
2.7  Conclusions and Perspectives......................................................... 32
Keywords................................................................................................. 32
References................................................................................................ 33
ABSTRACT
Today facing challenges and competition involves continuous innova-
tion. It became an integrated part of organizational and business activities. 
Technology has a potential to empower the both interrelated steps of the 
innovation dynamics.
CHAPTER 2

12	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
While many focus on research and development, innovation should be 
considered as ecosystems generating also 7D impacts to manage.
Balancing these ecosystems to ensure sustainable success requires 
connecting and combining multidisciplinary knowledge, know-how and 
intelligence.
After a short presentation of related work, this chapter focuses on eco-
system model of innovation, conditions for balance and the role of tech-
nology in making it effective and successful.
2.1  INTRODUCTION
Innovation has always been associated with research centers, R&D depart-
ments of large companies and start-up challenged to grow. The recent 
economic crisis in developed countries has increased the interest for inno-
vation—politics hope that innovation will generate economic growth and 
create jobs. The word “innovation” is in the headlines of reports, articles 
and business media, and is also the subject of events, projects, think-tanks, 
clubs and blogs. Numerous forums on social networks are devoted to vari-
ous forms of innovation. This is a global phenomenon. Now, it is no longer 
a confidential matter: we innovate in politics, organization, management, 
business models, in managing of intellectual capital and other intangibles, 
in training, services, gastronomy and even DIY and gardening.
Many, including European Union, consider mainly technological inno-
vation issue from research, but it is changing—now open and social inno-
vation are leveraged in aim to involve more people.
The innovation process nourishes by multidisciplinary knowledge and 
needs “soft sciences” such as management, marketing, intellectual capital 
to succeed. The organization and management of related knowledge influ-
ence the speed of innovation and its efficiency. Technology and in par-
ticular artificial intelligence approaches and techniques have a great role 
to play in accelerating the innovation dynamics, balancing related ecosys-
tems and leading innovation to sustainable success.
After presenting some research work in concerned areas, this chapter 
focuses on the innovation context, ecoinnovation process and the role of 
technology in making it successful.

Innovation Ecosystems and Technology	
13
2.2  RELATED WORK
Innovation is a very large topic covering all domains of activity. Scientific 
publications on innovation are numerous and address mostly technological 
innovation, product design, medical equipments including surgery robots, 
augmented human, biotechnologies, nanotechnologies, chemistry and 
environmental concern such as intelligent building, energy and water con-
sumption, but also organizational, social and economic innovation. Smart 
home, smart city and smarter planet, ambient intelligence, connected 
objects, biomimicry, entertainment and others are technology-based.
We can still notice confusion between research and development (R&D) 
and innovation. Most of persons in charge of R&D renamed recently their 
position to “Chief Innovation Officer.” But what innovation really is?
2.2.1  SOME DEFINITIONS
The amplified interest for innovation and extension of its spectrum into 
multidisciplinary dimensions enriched traditional definitions “from idea 
to products and to market” (Dubuis, 2007). However, those of Schumpeter 
(1912), remain still among the most complete. In his theory of economic 
evolution Schumpeter specifies that “innovation meets five main criteria: 
the manufacture of a new good, introduction of a new production method 
or of new means of transportation, implementation of a new organization, 
opening a new market and the conquest of a new source of raw materials.”
According to OECD references such as Oslo Manual and Frascati Man-
ual “innovation is the implementation of a new or significantly improved 
product (good or service), or process, a new marketing method, or a new 
organizational method in business practices, workplace organization or 
external relations.”
They consider innovation as a “complex, diversified activity with many 
interacting components. Successful innovation requires involvement of 
scientific, technological, organizational, financial and commercial actors” 
(Oslo Manual, 1996; Frascati Manual, 2002). This definition fits well to 
industrial era, but what is an appropriate definition for transition era we are 
living and for Knowledge Era?

14	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
There are as much as definitions as fields concerned by innovation. 
According to The Webster’s New World Dictionary (Second College Edi-
tion, 1982),
Invention is the power of inventing or being invented; ingenuity or 
creativity; something originating in an experiment; and
Innovation is the act or process of innovating; something newly intro-
duced, new method, custom, device, etc.; change in the way of doing 
things; renew, alter.
More definitions can be found in Entovation International (1998). All 
these definitions express the various points of view.
Finally, innovation can be seen as trajectory from idea to product, from 
idea to market or from idea to success (Amidon, 1997) and sustainable 
success (Mercier-Laurent, 2011).
Amidon’s (1997) definition embodies a holistic vision of it influence 
on world welfare:
“Creation, evolution, exchange and application of new ideas into mar-
ketable goods and services for:
•	
the success of an enterprise;
•	
the vitality of a nation’s economy;
•	
the advancement of society.”
Overall image of innovation needs to be seen from different perspectives.
2.2.2  MULTIPLE FORMS OF INNOVATION
Technological innovation is the most popular and there is a plethora of pub-
lications on it, such as Technology and Innovation, Journal of the National 
Academy of Inventors, International Journal of Innovation Management, 
Journal of Innovation Economics and Management, European Journal of 
Innovation Management, Journal of Innovation Management, Journal of 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship, International Journal of Innovation Sci-
ence and many others representing respective points of view. Many related 
papers are available on http://researchgate.net and on http://academia.edu.
The European Database Cordis (http://cordis.europa.eu/) is a real trea-
sure and resource for innovation. It contains all publications on European 
Research Programs and results since its beginning by the Spirit 1 program 
in 1984.

Innovation Ecosystems and Technology	
15
As innovation is often associated with industry, design is an innovation 
field per se; many publications focus on product, technology related to 
design and product lifecycle management (PLM) (Stark, 2004). Industrial 
tools for design as, for example, CATIA provides 3D library of forms, 
knowledge about materials and product related constraints checking facili-
ties. However, in many fields and in SMEs basic technology is only used 
to support innovation activities, if innovation is managed.
Newly, ecodesign ambitions in integrating environmental principles 
into design activities of all involved professionals. The Convergence proj-
ect is among examples of such integration with strong focus on what is 
required by norms and environmental aspects (Ecodesign Your Future, 
2012; Zhang et al., 2013).
Biomimicry, or nature inspired design is a step to conceive more 
respectful products if their ecosystems are considered. Nature is full of 
ingenious solutions, people have to observe and learn more from environ-
ment instead of destroying it (Mercier-Laurent, 2015).
Because technological innovation did not brought expected results in 
Europe in term of growth and job creation, the other forms of innovation 
are now encouraged and experimented such as ecoinnovation (Ecoinnova-
tion, 2015) and social innovation (This is European Social Innovation, 
2010).
Ecoinnovation focuses mainly on generating business from planet 
protection—intelligent management of energy and water, smart transpor-
tation, recycling and ecodesign. Any form of innovation leading to the 
improvement of environment protection is considered, such as new pro-
duction processes, new products and services, new management methods, 
as well as all uses or implementations able to prevent and reduce envi-
ronmental risks: pollution and other negative impacts due to the use of 
resources in the lifecycle of human activities. Priorities are transportation, 
recycling, use of sustainable building techniques and materials, cleaner 
production and packaging techniques for food and drinks and the recogni-
tion of environmental criteria for purchases, and adoption of a rational use 
of resources by companies.
The social innovation powered by technological platforms facilitates 
communication and “trade of ideas”; social networks connect people and 
play sometimes a role of brainstorming support. Many topics are addresses 

16	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
such as fixing Greek economy, solving migrants’ problems, distributing 
goods, connecting people offering services with those who need them. 
The hidden objective of social innovation is to involve PhD from “soft 
sciences” to the innovation process.
Economists, influenced by environmental concern and those involved 
in Corporate Social Responsibility push “product-service” (Buclet, 
2015) and circular economy. Product–service economy interest in gener-
ating revenue not from sales of products, but from sales of services that 
product can offer; for example, Michelin sales the function of bearing 
instead of tires.
The objective of circular economy is a continuous development cycle 
that preserves and enhances natural capital, optimizes resource yields, and 
minimizes system risks by managing finite stocks and renewable flows.
“All material are recycled indefinitely, all energy is derived from 
renewable, human activities support ecosystems and the rebuilding of nat-
ural capital, resources are used to generate values, human activities sup-
port human health and happiness, and healthy and cohesive society and 
culture (Webster, 2015).”
Circular economy prefers repairing instead of recycling. But the main 
problem with recycling is that spare parts and repairing cost today more 
than buying a new product.
Knowledge Economy—related to Knowledge Management—is about 
generation of values from knowledge, which is also embedded in products 
and services, for ex design and reparation requires knowledge and know-
how (Amidon et al., 2005). For instance we are used to estimate the ROI 
in financial term, but accounting of intangible appears now in some reports 
(Pablos and Edvinsson, 2015). According to the World Bank (www.world-
bank.org/kam), knowledge economies are defined by four pillars: institu-
tional structures that provide incentives for entrepreneurship and the use 
of knowledge, skilled labor availability and good education systems, ICT 
infrastructure and access, and, a vibrant innovation landscape that includes 
academia, the private sector and civil society.
The emergence of innovation as a mean to impulse growth and job cre-
ation made it trendy but the performances are not measured and the right 
indicators are still missing. Only short-term economic impact is evaluated. 
Some institutions measure number of start-up created but not their “death 

Innovation Ecosystems and Technology	
17
rate,” neither the reason of fail. Innovation is not really managed in most 
of companies and institutions.
Innovation in management methods and organizational innovation fol-
low the trends, but Collaborative innovation involving selected users is at 
its beginning.
There are few publications on innovation metrics, mainly limited to 
statistics (Frascati Manual, 2002, 2015), only few publications are related 
to technology and intelligent technology (Mercier-Laurent, 2005, 2011; 
Mercier-Laurent and Pachet, 2013) supporting the overall innovation pro-
cess. Recently European Union introduced evaluation of the innovative 
potential of selected funded research projects.
The innovation facets are shown in Figure 2.1.
European Union has invested in education and research. Many inter-
esting prototypes with high potential of innovation were developed in the 
framework of successive programs Esprit 1, Esprit 2, 6th Framework Pro-
gram, 7th Framework Program and recent Horizon 2020 (Horizon, 2020).
Open Innovation Strategy and Policy Group was created to promote 
open innovation integrating researchers, companies and territories (Curley 
and Salmelin, 2013). The research results should be now transformed into 
commercial products and services—“Succeed in getting research results 
to market” is among three challenges expressed by Carlos Moedas, Com-
missioner for Research, Science and Innovation last July (Moedas, 2015).
FIGURE 2.1  Innovation spectrum.

18	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
The Frascati Manual 2015 as well European Union distinguishes two 
activities: research and innovation. Implementation is considered as “inno-
vation process” (Frascati Manual, 2015).
2.2.3  INNOVATION PROCESS
According to Frascati Manual (2015), “innovation activities also include 
the acquisition of existing knowledge, machinery, equipment and other 
capital goods, training, marketing, design and software development. 
These innovation activities may be carried out in-house or procured from 
third parties.”
They consider that “design plays a key role in the development and 
implementation of innovations. Design can be described as a potential 
multifaceted innovation activity aimed at planning and designing proce-
dures, technical specifications and other user and functional characteristics 
for new products and processes. Among these activities are initial prepa-
rations for the planning of new products or processes, and work on their 
design and implementation, including adjustments and further changes 
(Frascati Manual, 2015).”
Linear process model, technology push model or market push models 
are mainly considered (Khurana, 2013).
The environmental aspects of innovation enter to industrial design; the 
involved professionals have to respect the related norms (Zhang et al., 
2013; AFNOR ISO 26000). It may be a very heavy task for SMEs.
Only few companies include customers into their innovation process.
2.2.4  THINKING
The ability of thinking and of problem solving is the most important to 
innovate quickly and effectively. According to Tony Buzan everybody can 
be creative (Buzan, How to Improve Your Creative Thinking?). Edward 
de Bono, the inventor of six hats method, claims that the worst tread of 
current generation is poor thinking (De Bono, 1999, 2000). Finding a 
simple solution requires imagination, capacity of thinking without barri-
ers between fields and art of combination of multidisciplinary knowledge 
(Mercier-Laurent, 2011).

Innovation Ecosystems and Technology	
19
Artificial intelligence has been brought a significant contribution 
in term of thinking methods and reasoning models (Russel and Norvig, 
2010). Over hundred reasoning models are available for adaptation and 
reuse (Open KADS, 1990).
An example of different thinking in designing computers is those of 
Apple. Lisa, the first Apple personal workstation, inspired probably by 
Star of Xerox, did not brought expected success on the market for several 
reasons: price, to early (“time to market”) and new way of using comput-
ers—personal instead of server. On the advice of Regis McKenna, Apple 
designed McIntosh for publishers, offering intuitive interface.
TRIZ method and related tools improve a capacity of thinking without 
the borders between domains—when all possible solutions in a given area 
were already explored, this method offer solutions from the other areas 
that apply in a given case (Altshuller et al., 1997).
Finally the most important is the ability of mental flexibility.
2.2.5  KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND INNOVATION
The success of innovation depends on how the related internal and exter-
nal knowledge is organized and managed. An optimized knowledge flow 
containing an idea generator amplifying human imagination, simulators, 
past experiences, knowledge models supporting design, constraints propa-
gation engine will enhance all involved capacities (Mercier-Laurent, 2011; 
The Institute for Knowledge and Innovation).
Actually, Knowledge Management was introduced as management 
method in the 1990s (Drucker, 1992). In its beginning the focus was on 
organizing people knowledge to be more effective. Artificial Intelligence 
interest have emerged in the same period, from experiences of transferring 
knowledge into computers and organizing it to help human in his work 
(Mercier-Laurent and Boulanger, 2014).
One of the first that made a connection between knowledge and inno-
vation was Amidon (Amidon, 1997). She introduced “Knowledge Inno-
vation” and put emphasis on importance of involving clients and others 
stakeholders, that she calls “Extended Business Network,” into the inno-
vation process. Since, others have been added the word innovation to 
Knowledge Management (The Institute for Knowledge and Innovation).

20	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Stakeholders are now considered in Corporate Social Responsibility 
approach (Corporate Social Responsibility, 2015).
While many agree that technology helps sharing knowledge, those who 
use the right technology are few. Among technology supporting usually 
separate Knowledge Management blocs the commonly used is Intranet, 
groupware software, and social networks (Moing, 2014).
Considering knowledge related to innovation involves architecturing 
of an appropriate Knowledge Flow including several techniques that apply 
in a given situation.
A Knowledge Flow can be defined as: “creation, collection, processing 
and sharing of information and knowledge in an organized and optimized 
way, taking into account the different activities of the extended enterprise 
as well as the needs, individual and collective motivations of all the par-
ticipants” (Mercier-Laurent, 1997, 2011).
The success of innovation depends on how knowledge is organized 
and managed, on a comprehension of innovation dynamics and respecting 
balance conditions of innovation ecosystems.
2.3  MODEL OF INNOVATION ECOSYSTEMS
Many, including the European Union, consider that the innovation comes 
mainly from research—researchers invents things, create start-ups (or sell 
to Google). Only few start-ups are able to grow quickly and become a big 
company.
The US government strategy is to help developing start-ups by creating 
a bridge over “death valley” (Gray, 2011). This bridge is composed of four 
elements: funds, regulation, mentoring and taxes. Technology that may 
improve these actions is not mentioned.
The European Union allocates funds for research programs, but is up 
to each partner to transform the project results into marketable products 
and services.
The strategy of the European Union is expressed in the recent talk of 
Carlos Moedas: “we must focus on opening up our research and innova-
tion systems and succeed in getting research results to market (Moedas, 
2015).”

Innovation Ecosystems and Technology	
21
An innovation ecosystem is presented in Figure 2.2. Researchers invent 
things and create their start-up or push the results to large companies that 
need them or able to explore these results commercially.
But the other way is a little explored. Companies and organizations 
have to face today challenges and solve specific problems related to their 
activity. These topics are challenging for research, but often require con-
necting interdisciplinary knowledge and “out of the box” thinking.
Politics set strategy, rules and incentives for innovation. For example 
French government invested to contests, incubators, clusters and special 
programs allocating funds for research but the funds for making grow 
start-ups are confidential, difficult to got, and low (Contest of French Min-
istry of Research, 1999; Houel and Daunis, 2009; Report on Incubators 
France, 2009). The feedback from field will allow them adapting their 
policy to the real needs, but they are not open. It is the same for EU policy.
In France, technology transfer departments were created inside of uni-
versities to encourage students and especially PhD students to start their 
company. But entrepreneurship is not integrated into education programs. 
FIGURE 2.2  Innovation Ecosystems (Mercier-Laurent, 2011).

22	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
By consequence the start-ups do not have skills for successful manage-
ment of a company. The educational programs are set by the Ministry of 
Education and it is impossible to suggest evolving them.
Each component interacts with the others. This ecosystem balance 
depends on the integration of feedback from experimentation, on the right 
use of technology and on mastering of all 6D impacts of the innovation 
activity. Environmental impact is one of them.
2.4  ECOINNOVATION PROCESS—CONDITIONS FOR BALANCE
After heavy industrialization, the awakening about planet condition is 
growing– we have to reduce our footprint—control energy and water con-
sumption, CO2 emissions, optimize and green transportation, design and 
others human activities, reduce garbage and recycle.
All this tasks need to be supported by right technology. The paradox 
with technology is that it is supposed to helps us, make our lives more 
comfortable, but it also generates waste (Mercier-Laurent, 2015). The 
overall balance depends also on how far we are able to change our atti-
tudes form having more to knowing more and to share.
2.4.1  ECOINNOVATION
Main principles of ecoinnovation are shown in Figure 2.3. It takes roots in 
past and today knowledge and experience and creates new knowledge con-
tinuously. It is about never-ending collaborative process involving intel-
ligences and technology, generating tangibles and intangible values and 
multiple impacts to manage. It requires and influences education systems.
2.4.2  ECOINNOVATION PROCESS
The innovation process has been evolved from closed to open, global and 
collaborative (Mercier-Laurent, 2015).
It is composed of two interlinked stages—creativity and transforma-
tion, shown in Figure 2.4.

Innovation Ecosystems and Technology	
23
FIGURE 2.3  Ecoinnovation (Mercier-Laurent, 2011).
FIGURE 2.4  Ecoinnovation process (Mercier-Laurent, 2011).

24	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
The first aims in producing ideas that will be evaluated and the most 
valuables will be transformed into products or services.
An idea can be born from observation of individuals or group, from 
trends, detected opportunity (collaborative “business intelligence”). New 
ideas may also come from dreams.
An idea can address existing needs or create new needs, as for example 
Apple did with smartphone, connected pocket computer and camera. Open-
ing to the world, imagination and cognitive flexibility is required here.
Stakeholders such as clients, distributors, and partners should be also 
involved. They know both products and competitors offer. At the univer-
sity or in school parents, professors, providers of internship and of equip-
ments are concerned.
Generated ideas are evaluated by a committee composed at least of three 
professionals in charge of technology, marketing and human resources. 
The first checks the feasibility, the second verifies if the addressed market 
is big enough and third plans the resources needed for successful transfor-
mation of idea into commercial product or service.
Before transformation it is vital to verify all constraints, such as, tech-
nological feasibility, competitors’ offers, availability of resources, market 
impact, return on investment in term of tangible and intangible values, 
environmental impact and ethics.
Knowledge of competitors is an important element—if we have 
some, it should be decided how to improve our initial strategy—modify 
our product or work in synergy with them. For example when Michelin 
invented PAX system (Mercier-Laurent, 2003) they associated with Pirelli 
and Goodyear to take a bigger part of market.
The others constraints that must be also verified before transformation 
are the price and availability of raw materials, recyclability of our future 
product and social impact (use of local resources) as well. Simulators may 
be of considerable help in this task.
After these verifications decisions can be taken on future development 
and scheduled.
The next steps are the design and exploitation. Design is in fact about 
ecodesign, because we integrate the environmental principles, verify the 
impacts, optimize the use of raw material, shape, recyclability and ergo-
nomics. The exploitation phase has to generate values, as well tangible 

Innovation Ecosystems and Technology	
25
as intangible to share among the participants of the innovation process. 
The objective is sustainable success of all actors mentioned in Figure 2.4, 
including clients. The integration of feedback and continuous capturing 
of opportunities all along these activities helps improving existing and 
generating new ideas.
Connecting, combining and managing related knowledge, know-how, 
intelligences and experiences is among conditions of sustainable success 
of innovation.
2.5  IMPORTANCE OF MANAGING KNOWLEDGE
The impact of innovation depends on how quickly we capture opportuni-
ties and to the speed of ambient information and knowledge exploitation.
According to three laws of Knowledge Dynamics (Amidon et al., 
2005) “knowledge is a multiplier to be managed and leveraged; innova-
tion is a process that convert knowledge into action, through Knowledge 
Innovation, a collaborative, open process.”
The innovation dynamics able to ensure a sustainable development 
of the companies, regions and countries rely on both current and past 
knowledge and on tools able to amplify the innovation capacity of 
humans and machines involved in knowledge flow. Such an organiza-
tion will enable disruptive innovation and will facilitate managing risks 
related to innovation.
The concept of knowledge management (KM) was born in the 1980s, 
as a new managerial method. Since organizations have been implemented 
various approaches on top and middle-management levels.
Three ways of introducing this method in organizations have been 
experimented: KM as corporate strategy, tool oriented and users oriented 
(Mercier-Laurent, 2011).
Some of the collaborative work tools may work to start ecoinnovation. 
Main difficulty to face is the education of the ability to work in collabora-
tion instead of competition. Social networks are certainly helpful in find-
ing the right resources. We should add to this, specific tools for creativity, 
design, customer relationship management, e-learning, e-commerce and 
others. However, to enhance the efficiency of the innovation process all 
related knowledge should be organized and optimized.

26	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Considering the participants needs is probably the best way of intro-
ducing the useful help. Using this approach allows building incrementally, 
thinking global doing small, an appropriate knowledge flow exploring at 
best the abilities of both humans and computers.
Since 1956 Artificial Intelligence (AI) researchers and practitioners 
have invented methods and techniques to process knowledge by comput-
ers. Most of them have been experimented and successfully used in robots 
and in decision support systems, in order to learn, predict, plan, simulate, 
innovate and play.
AI techniques are useful all along the knowledge lifecycle: creation-
transfer—processing-sharing.
The challenge for intelligent technology is particularly important in the 
current context, where the information overload and a lot of nontargeted 
push make us loose time, which has become a valuable asset. It would 
be extremely useful to eliminate unsolicited mail at the source before it 
arrives in our email box, or influence other ethics. Computers in all forms 
powered by AI help storing a large amount of information, simultaneously 
taking into account a large number of parameters; researching solutions 
respecting the given constraints set by exploitation, in a huge space of 
possibilities; searching for relevant information within an immense quan-
tity of data and information; and knowledge discovery in databases, texts 
and images. They are able to check the coherence of information from 
multiple sources, “read” documents and make a summary of them as a 
function of the current user interests, to report information, articles, events 
or books that are of interest. Able to learn by discovery, analogy, observa-
tion, computers can help in complex system diagnosis, translate simple 
and well-structured texts, help to capitalize knowledge, to design docu-
ments, products or to gather know-how in a given field.
The human-machine synergy, or even symbiosis, strongly depends on 
the last architecture, interfaces and on programming, which is preferably 
user-centered.
Artificial Intelligence provides methods and techniques supporting the 
knowledge innovation that help succeed innovation by
•	
knowledge modeling allow building a blocs for future reuse;
•	
gathering and organizing knowledge related to the given problem 
solving;

Innovation Ecosystems and Technology	
27
•	
providing techniques for problem solving, knowledge processing, 
simulation, decision support and constraints verification.
Technology can play several roles in the innovation process: that of 
a facilitator of the collective intelligence; a generator of ideas, able to 
check if a new idea has already been carried out somewhere in the world; 
a business intelligence specialist; a consistency and constraint controller; 
a simulator “to see before doing”; a design assistant; an adviser and a 
box of ideas. Equipped with artificial intelligence techniques, computers 
can “think,” solve problems, become experts, and accumulate a collec-
tive experience, under the condition that we transfer to them the relative 
knowledge and the necessary reasoning and learning techniques.
Solving complex problems begins with understanding the problem in 
context, the discovery of real needs, analysis of the nature of knowledge to 
be exploited and the decision making mechanisms. The choice of a tech-
nique will be made as a function of all these elements. Very often, several 
techniques are necessary.
Among them, we can mention:
•	
the expert system, where the reasoning is based on rules. In reality, 
there are few situations where the rules are used to solve a given 
problem. This technique is effective in the areas where the rules are 
well-defined and there are few exceptions, such as the allocation 
of taxes at customs, equipment configuration, process control or in 
administration;
•	
the cause to effect graph is useful for finding a cause of an observ-
able symptom by exploring the branches. This technique is used 
for diagnosis and to model the correct operation state. Building a 
graph for a complex system is time and energy consuming;
•	
the decision tree or static induction, used for diagnosis and in data 
mining. A tree is automatically generated from examples (Quinlan 
and Michalski, 1983);
•	
analogy (Bergmann et al., 2003) is very useful to learn and get 
inspiration from already known solutions, to build a collective 
experience and for any matching of the supply and demand, such 
as job-, travel- or house-hunting. This technique can be used to 
build an idea generator;
•	
dynamic induction (Auriol, 1995; Manago and Mercier-Laurent, 
1994) including the advantages of induction and analogy. The 

28	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
decision tree is built while the user is answering the questions 
asked by the system. The processing of unknown values is taken 
into account by the analogy engine, which proposes the best 
choice among the possibilities;
•	
constraint programming (Dingbas et al., 1988) integrating a con-
straint propagation engine and algorithms of optimization and 
generation of solutions, which respect the given constraints. This 
enables us to solve combinatory problems, such as scheduling, 
planning, resource allocation and management, optimization and 
routes or frequency allocation;
•	
natural language processing techniques, based on semantic net-
works, conceptual graphs, ontologies and grammatical analysis 
are helpful to communicate with computers, for database queries, 
web searching, for knowledge discovery in texts, confirmation or 
discovery of experts from texts they have written, as well as for 
automated translation;
•	
multiagent systems (Russel and Norvig, 2010) are programmed 
to perform various distributed and collaborative tasks. Their orga-
nization copies that of humans—there are agents, tasks managers 
using different forms of reasoning. There are even agents pre-
venting the others from working, what enables the simulation of 
dynamic constraints. They can organize themselves to “create” a 
collective intelligence, inspired from insects (Quinqueton, 2006);
•	
neural networks are generally applied to form recognition in image 
processing, in data mining in association with other techniques, 
or in design. They are equipped with automated learning “ability” 
(Cardon, 2000).
The Figure 2.5 presents a variety of AI techniques.
The current trends and works of the researchers are mainly focused on 
ontologies and multiagent systems (Open KADS 1990).
The usefulness of “knowledge thinking” and of the aforementioned 
techniques in creativity and in the innovation process lifecycle is undeni-
able (Mercier-Laurent, 2013). However, their choice should be made as 
a function of the problem to be solved, the objectives and processing to 
consider (constraint verification, simulation, and computation), the way of 
working with stakeholders and the expected results. Involving computers, 

Innovation Ecosystems and Technology	
29
in all their forms, and using suitable approaches and techniques, can boost 
the innovative capacity of individuals and groups. The organization and 
management of knowledge increases the chances of successful innovation.
2.5.1  AMPLIFYING CAPACITY TO INNOVATE—
COLLABORATIVE HUMAN-MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
Technology has a potential to empower the two interrelated components of 
the innovation process—creativity and transformation. It is never-ending 
process, because organizations, should innovate permanently for sustain-
able success.
The first step of the innovation process—creativity can be amplified by 
an analogy based generator of ideas and/or TRIZ based finder of solutions 
in addition to opportunity “hunting” by all participants.
The creativity sessions may be powered by generator of ideas, shown 
in Figure 2.6.
The ideas of employees and stakeholders are stored in the electronic 
“box of ideas.”
FIGURE 2.5  Map of AI techniques.

30	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Such a generator is available according to corporate strategy for every-
body in a given organization and may be shared with stakeholders. A small 
base of cases (ideas) should be available to initiate the system. The HMI 
allow entering new idea to electronic “box of ideas” using knowledge 
model of case to be process automatically by analogy engine.
When someone enters a new idea, the analogy engine compares with 
what is “known” and display one of three possibilities:
•	
new idea—submit for evaluation;
•	
similar idea—someone already enter something similar—person 
that enter new idea is the invited to contact this person and enrich 
idea together;
•	
known idea—this idea was already explored.
New idea is then evaluated by at least three professionals to estimate 
the market, technological feasibility and skills available for working on 
new project.
The similar idea can be modified and than evaluated or “frozen” for 
future exploration.
The next step of the innovation process is a transformation that 
begins by evaluation of impacts before doing can be also empowered by 
technology. It involves often the virtual connection of multidisciplinary 
knowledge.
At this stage the various simulators help verifying availability, con-
straints and impacts.
FIGURE 2.6  Generator of ideas based on analogy engine (Mercier-Laurent, 2011).

Innovation Ecosystems and Technology	
31
2.6  MULTIPLE IMPACTS OF INNOVATION
As mentioned before, the innovation generates multiple impacts that should 
be minimized or enhanced in aim of preserving the ecosystems balance.
The main impacts are shown in Figure 2.7
Each impact may influence each other. All impacts have to be evalu-
ated all along of the innovation process.
Technological innovation impact is often evaluated only in economic 
terms—generated revenue. Unfortunately many investors as well public as 
private evaluate short-term revenues and not at all the innovative capacity 
of a given company vital to sustain in the future.
Sustainable development put emphasis on only economic, societal 
and environmental impact, technological is not considered. Many com-
panies employed Chief Sustainability Officer. Most of these persons 
organize actions aiming in enhancing the company image as respectful 
of environment, forgetting often the importance of balancing economic 
impact as well.
FIGURE 2.7  7D impacts of innovation (Mercier-Laurent, 2013).

32	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Quick development of technology and accelerated push of many tech-
nological objects and solutions influence our cognitive capacity. The auto-
mated processing of emails or FAQ based only on key words, automated 
help desk, tracking the users navigation without understanding purpose 
and context, connected objects that reasons and take decisions for the 
users, prevent us of using our brain that we disconnect at the point of 
losing the ability to think. We have also added the impact of ubiquitous 
electromagnetic field on our health, navigation on several screens for our 
eyes and influence of war games on our behaviors.
The sustainability of ecoinnovation process depends on how company 
manages all these impacts. On the long run, preserving our heath and 
planet should be also considered better than immediate revenues.
2.7  CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES
Technology has an extraordinary capacity of enhancing the ecoinnovation 
process, amplifying our creativity and help as taking right decisions by orga-
nizing knowledge and verifying all related constraints. Their design and pro-
gramming should consider not only intuitive interface, but also facilitation 
of a synergy between them and their users and of mutual learning.
Collaborative innovation systems powered by right technology enable 
us to innovate real time and globally. However, the attitude to innovate 
with stakeholders including clients is to cultivate.
Innovation should become companies and organizational strategy.
Ecoinnovation for human and planet purpose in harmony with nature 
has an ambitious goal to preserve and reuse the best of our knowledge 
without destroying human conditions and replacing humans by machines.
KEYWORDS
artificial intelligence
creativity
ecoinnovation
innovation

Innovation Ecosystems and Technology	
33
REFERENCES
AFNOR ISO 26000, http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards/iso26000.htm.
Altshuller, G., Shulyak, L., Rodman, S. 40 Principles TRIZ keys to Technical Innovation, 
http://www.triz40.com/aff_Principles.htm, 1997.
Amidon, D. M. The Innovation Strategy for the Knowledge Economy, Butterworth Heine-
mann, Boston, 1997.
Amidon, D., Formica, P., Mercier-Laurent, E. Knowledge Economics: Principles, Prac-
tices and Policies, Tartu University Press, Estonia, 2005.
Association Française pour Intelligence Artificielle.
Auriol, E., Intégration d’approches symboliques pour le raisonnement à partir d’exemples, 
PhD thesis, Paris IX, 1995.
Bergmann, R., Althoff, K. D., Breen, S., Göker, M., Manago, M., Traphöner, R., Wess, 
S., Developing Industrial Case-Based Reasoning Applications the INRECA Meth-
odology, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, 2nd edition, vol. 1612, Buchreihe, 
Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2003.
Buclet, N. Concevoir une nouvelle relation a la consommation: l’économie de fonctionna-
lité. Série des Annales des Mines: Responsabilité et environment, 2005, pp. 57–67.
Buzan, T. How to Improve Your Creative Thinking? https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=zO2LdDpx-Tc.
Cardon, A. Conscience artificielle et systèmes auto-adaptatifs, Eyrolles, Paris, 2000.
CATIA—http://www.3ds.com/products-services/catia/capabilities/design/
Contest of French Ministry of Research, 1999. http://www.enseignementsup-recherche.
gouv.fr/cid22991/concours-national-aide-creation-entrepriseentreprises-technolo-
gies-innovantes-2009.html.
Corporate Social Responsibility, 2015, http://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/corporate-
social-responsibility/index_en.htm.
Curley, M., Salmelin, B.: Open Innovation 2.0: A New Paradigm, European Union, Open 
Innovation Strategy and Policy Group (OISPG), 2013. See also Yearbook 2014 and 
2015.
De Bono, E. Re-thinking the Future, Creative Innovation 2010, Melbourne, https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=e20lpMyXFj4.
De Bono, E. Six Thinking Hats, Little, Brown & Co., London, 1999.
Dingbas, M., Van Hentenryck, P., Simonis, H., Aggoun, A., Herold, A., The CHIP System: 
Constraint Handling, in the Prolog, CADE (International Conference on automatic 
Deduction), Argone (IL), United States of America, 1988.
knowledge management
multiple impact
technology
thinking

34	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Drucker, P. F. The New Society of Organizations, Harvard Business Review, September–
October 1992.
Dubuis, B. J’innove. Comment gérer son innovation: de l’idée au marché, Les Clefs du 
Savoir, Suisse, 2007.
Ecodesign Your Future. How Ecodesign Can Help the Environment by Making Products 
Smarter, European Union, 2012.
Ecoinnovation: When Business Meets the Environment, 2015, http://ec.europa.eu/environ-
ment/eco-innovation/.
Entovation International, Ten Definitions of Innovation, 1998, http://www.entovation.com/
innovation/10definitions.htm.
Frascati Manual, Guidelines for Collecting and Reporting Data on Research and Experi-
mental Development, OECD, October 8, 2015.
Frascati Manual. Proposed Standard Practice for Surveys on Research and Experimental 
Development, Chapter 2, OECD, 11 December 2002.
Gray, T. Tell the White House How to Power Startups, http://www.fastcompany.
com/1740238/tell-white-house-how-power-startup, 2011.
Horizon, 2020. European Union Program, http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/
en/what-horizon-2020.
Houel, M., Daunis, M., Les pôles de compétitivité: bilan et perspectives d’une politique 
industrielle et d’aménagement du territoire, Rapport du Sénat, no. 40, 14 October 
2009.
Khurana, V. K. Innovation Process, http://fr.slideshare.net/VijayKrKhurana/innovation-
process-models, 2013.
Le Moing, B. Gestion de connaissances au cœur du program d’entreprise, Qualitique No 
256, November 2014, pp. 46–48.
Manago, M., Mercier-Laurent, E., INRECA+Integrating Induction and Case Based Rea-
soning for Diagnostic Problems with Focus on Medical Domains, Project INTAS, 
1994.
Mercier-Laurent, E. Artificial Intelligence Supporting Innovation Ecosystems, AAIA, 
Fedcsis 2015, September 14, Lodz, Poland.
Mercier-Laurent, E. Innovating Corporate Management: Introducing Environmental 
Aspects to Design Activities, ICICKM, Washington, September 2013, pp. 267–271.
Mercier-Laurent, E. Innovation Ecosystems, Wiley, 2011.
Mercier-Laurent, E. Innovation globale à partir des connaissances, Technologies Interna-
tionales, No. 94, 2003, pp. 41–44.
Mercier-Laurent, E. The Innovation Biosphere—Planet and Brains in Digital Era, Wiley, 
2015.
Mercier-Laurent, E., Boulanger, D. Artificial Intelligence for Knowledge Management, 
Springer, IFIP AICT 422, 2014.
Mercier-Laurent, E., Global Knowledge Management Beginning from Website– How to 
Organize the Flow of Knowledge in An International Company—Theories and Prac-
tice, ISMICK 97, Compiègne, France, 1997.
Mercier-Laurent, E., Pachet, F. Créativité et innovation, Bulletin AFIA N° 78, 2013.
Moedas, C. A New Start for Europe: Opening up to an ERA of Innovation, Brussels 22 June 
2015, http://ec.europa.eu/research/conferences/2015/era-of-innovation/index.cfm.
Open KADS, http://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/8773_en.html, 1990.

Innovation Ecosystems and Technology	
35
Ordonez de Pablos, P., Edvinsson, L. Intellectual Capital in Organizations. Nonfinancial 
Reports and Accounts, Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, New York, 2015.
Oslo Manual, European Commission, Eurostat, 2nd edition, 1996, p.31, http://www.oecd.
org/sti/inno/2367580.pdf.
Quinlan, J. R., Michalski, R. S., Machine Learning—An Artificial Intelligence Approach, 
p. 463–482, Tioga, Palo Alto, 1983.
Quinqueton, J. Aspects socioorganizationnels dans les systèmes multiagents. Intelligence 
artificielle en essaim, RIC 2006, Nîmes, France, 2006.
Report on Incubators France. Recherche et Développement. Innovation et Partenariats, 
DGRI, September 2009.
Russel, S., Norvig, P. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, Pearson, 2010, http://
aima.cs.berkeley.edu/.
Schumpeter, J. Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, Dunken & Humblot, Berlin, 
1912.
Stark, John. Product Lifecycle Management: Paradigm for Twenty-First Century Product 
Realization, Springer-Verlag, 2004. ISBN 1852338105.
Technology and Innovation, Harvard Business School, 2015, http://www.hbs.edu/faculty/
topics/Pages/technology-and-innovation.aspx.
The Institute for Knowledge and Innovation, http://phdkim.bu.ac.th/.
This is European Social Innovation, European Union, Belgium, 2010, ISBN 978-92-79-
17075-1.
Webster, K. The Circular Economy—A Wealth of Flows, Product Life Institute, Geneva, 
2015.
Zhang, F., Rio, M., Allais, R., Zwolinski, P., Reyes Carrillo, T., Roucoules, L., Mercier-
Laurent, E., Buclet, N., Toward a Systemic Navigation Framework to Integrate Sus-
tainable Development into a Company, Journal of Cleaner Production, Volume 54, 
1 September 2013, pp. 199–214.


SELF-ORGANIZING COORDINATION 
AND CONTROL APPROACHES: THE 
IMPACT OF SOCIAL NORMS ON 
SELF-REGULATED INNOVATION 
ACTIVITIES IN SELF-MANAGING 
TEAMS
MARIA CARMELA ANNOSI,1,2 FEDERICA BRUNETTA,3  
and MATS MAGNUSSON2
1Ericsson AB—Research, Färögatan 6, SE-164 80 Stockholm, Sweden
2IPD, School of Industrial Engineering and Management—KTH Royal 
Institute of Technology, Brinellvägen 8, 114 28 Stockholm, Sweden
3Department of Business and Management—LUISS Guido Carli 
University, Viale Romania, 32, 00197 Roma, Italy
CONTENTS
Abstract.................................................................................................... 38
3.1  Introduction..................................................................................... 38
3.2  Teams and Innovation..................................................................... 42
3.3  Team Norms.................................................................................... 46
3.4  Agile Software Development.......................................................... 50
3.5  Influence of Team Descriptive Norms............................................ 53
3.6  Influence of Team Injunctive Norms.............................................. 58
CHAPTER 3

38	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
3.7  Concluding Discussion................................................................... 65
Keywords................................................................................................. 67
References................................................................................................ 67
ABSTRACT
The development of social norms, as well as how and under which condi-
tions social norms impact behavior, are determined by the social influence 
process. By leveraging the influence process we can create and handle 
change in self-managing teams in order to foster growth and steer team 
members in a positive direction, away from negative habits. At the same 
time, if poorly managed the developed social norms can inhibit change, 
and in the worst case result in conflict and resentment within the team.
If team members feel part of a group and consider that group mem-
bership is relevant for them, they will adapt their behavior to align to the 
group’s norms and standards, which in turn will dictate context-specific 
attitudes and behaviors that are appropriate for the team.
This chapter focuses on teams’ social norms, distinguishing between 
descriptive (what most others do) and injunctive (what most others 
approve or disapprove of) norms, investigating important moderators in 
the relationships between descriptive norms and behaviors, discussing the 
role of the social environment on the changes to and inculcation of injunc-
tive social norms, and describing how individual team members’ attributes 
refine the susceptibility of individuals to normative influences.
3.1  INTRODUCTION
Intensified competition puts pressure on organizations to outperform their 
competitors by addressing customer needs in superior ways. To increase 
their ability to fulfill customer demands, firms are becoming more and 
more aware of the need for overarching change, converting to decentral-
ized structures and abandoning hierarchical organizational forms in favor 
of flattened hierarchies and massive use of self-managing teams. This has 
resulted in several organizations moving from traditional, planning-inten-
sive and linear development approaches to more iterative and self-orga-
nized approaches inspired by Agile methodologies (e.g., Martin, 2003).

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
39
The popularity of Agile methods has grown, especially in relation to 
technology projects, which are designed to address high volatility in the 
market environment (Lindvall et al., 2002). They are able to cope with the 
different types of changes that occur in projects, in relation to: (i) goals; 
(ii) materials, resources, tools, and techniques; and (iii) relationships with 
other projects, services, or products (Collyer et al., 2010). Consistent with 
this, Williams and Cockburn (2003, p. 39) define Agile software develop-
ment as being “about feedback and change,” and argue that Agile method-
ologies have been conceived to “embrace, rather than reject, higher rates 
of change.”
Despite the increased adoption of Agile by companies, clear and 
detailed recommendations about how to drive autonomous teams towards 
successful high innovative performance are lacking. The attention in 
research on Agile methodologies focuses on the introduction and adoption 
phases of Agile (Dybå & Dingsøyr, 2008), rather than on the long-term 
effects of Agile implementation and the impact on innovation (Abrahams-
son et al., 2009).
Agile methods are appropriate to foster innovation and creativity and 
to explore new fields (Highsmith, 2002). The autonomy and self-organi-
zation among team members provides conditions conducive to the devel-
opment of learning capabilities and solving problems through creativity 
(Imai et al., 1984), and renders team members more open to novel ideas 
(Lyytinen and Rose, 2006). In addition, creativity and innovation are 
favored by the fact that Agile creates a balanced but not fully structured 
context (Highsmith, 2002).
However, in such a context, the social aspect is fundamental. Agile 
software development methods emphasize teamwork (Nerur and Balij-
epally, 2007) in contrast to the plan-driven development approach which 
foresees individual role assignment (Nerur et al., 2005).
Integrating individual knowledge is not sufficient to generate innova-
tive ideas if the team environment does not provide the proper conditions 
to allow team members to develop the ability and motivation to use their 
potential (Aalbers et al., 2013; Shin et al., 2012). The generation of team-
level knowledge is derived from the joint effect of members’ individual 
personal characteristics and their belonging to a social context (Shalley 
et al., 2004). In order to create and act on teams’ internal knowledge and 

40	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
individual innovative ideas, team members need to share their thoughts 
with their peers, and to sense and seize other members’ insights to cre-
ate proper associations which potentially could result in the creation of 
workable solutions (Baer et al., 2010; Harrison and Rouse, 2014). Con-
sequently, we argue that a relevant part of a team’s self-regulated inno-
vation activities stems from established social interaction processes and 
norms which act as source of influence that guides the behavior of team 
members.
A team’s social behavior is influenced heavily by the team norms to 
the extent that team members adopt a relevant group identity (Cialdini and 
Trost, 1998). Team identification is responsible for the development of 
injunctive characteristics based on the perceived sanctions associated with 
conformity to or violation of these norms (Cialdini and Trost, 1998). Spe-
cifically, using the theoretical lens of self theories (Dweck, 2000; Dweck 
and Molden, 2005), it is seen that injunctive norms constitute self-stan-
dards that identify whom people ideally would like to be or whom they 
ought to be (Higgins, 1987; Moretti and Higgins, 1999; Schwartz, 1977; 
Schwartz and Fleishman, 1978). However, in contrast to the explicit sanc-
tions imposed by injunctive norms, descriptive norms provide insights 
into the group’s typical conduct: they provide information on what team 
members are really doing allowing identification of group adaptive behav-
iors (Cialdini et al., 1991). Descriptive norms may not reflect the favored 
identity, with the result that the process guiding the impact of descriptive 
norms may differ from that guiding the team’s injunctive norms. Conse-
quently, both types of norms are salient for identifying the group’s behav-
ior and predicting any kind of committed team action.
Based on this reasoning, this chapter analyzes the roles of two types 
of norms, descriptive and injunctive, to predict team innovation activ-
ity. It examines the nature of the stimuli likely to lead to the formation 
and activation of these norms, and determining the conditions in which a 
unique effect of Agile work routines and managerial practices will emerge. 
This chapter also emphasizes the influence of the source of these norms—
whether they are promoted in-group (i.e., the group to which the indi-
vidual belongs) or out-group (i.e., in another group than that to which 
the individual belongs but which forms part of the surrounding social 
environment such as team stakeholders and manager). This differentiation 

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
41
might explain why individuals might respond differently to injunctive and 
descriptive norms as a function of whether the norms are in-group or out-
group. This also highlights the roles of the team’s executives and leaders, 
and allow us to propose a new approach to managerial organizational con-
trols as crucial determinants of the functioning of organizational units and 
firm performance (Loughry and Tosi, 2008; De Jong et al., 2014), which 
can replace the close monitoring and supervision imposed by social-ideo-
logical modes of control.
Additionally, the chapter analyzes the relationships between descrip-
tive and injunctive norms, underlining their interactive effect on team 
behavior, demonstrating the importance of injunctive norms, and identify-
ing the environmental conditions that make injunctive norms more impor-
tant in an Agile context.
The chapter builds on the results of a four-year study of hundreds of 
teams in several organizational units dealing with product development. 
Initially, we ran a pilot study in a small research and development (R&D) 
organization; we then conducted 17 group interviews and an exploratory 
survey, plus three follow up meetings in three bigger R&D organizations 
to discuss the relevant findings. This allowed us to scale up the analysis 
to involve an entire product development unit comprising four large R&D 
departments and a total of 1,700 employees. We interviewed 44 individu-
als selected from different hierarchical levels and functions. Finally, we 
launched a global, multilevel and multisource survey involving partici-
pation of 20 different R&D organizations in 11 countries, including the 
members of 97 teams and their team managers, plus their higher-level 
managers in the related organizations. Our main research methods used 
grounded theory, cross-case analysis, triangulation, and linear and hierar-
chical linear regression models. We collected organizational documenta-
tion from each organization involved which constituted a valid source of 
secondary data.
The remainder of this chapter is structured as follows. We outline the 
general concept of team innovation, and accompanying team norms and 
peer pressure (sections Teams and innovation and Team norms). We dis-
cuss complementarity among control mechanisms, and describe Agile 
methodologies to provide the research setting for this research (section 
Agile Software Development). We integrate and apply the theoretical 

42	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
logics of social identity and stakeholder theory with control mechanisms 
to explain how combinations of controls operate to affect a team’s self-
regulated learning process. On this basis, we develop a conceptual model 
that captures how combinations of norms and peer pressure affect team’s 
self-regulated learning strategies, and ultimately, team innovation perfor-
mance (sections Team descriptive norms’ influence over individual social 
conduct for innovation and Influence of Team injunctive norms on indi-
vidual social conduct for innovation).
3.2  TEAMS AND INNOVATION
By innovation we mean “the intentional introduction and application 
within a job, work team or organization of ideas, processes, products or 
procedures which are new to that job, work team or organization and which 
are designed to benefit the job, the work team or the organization” (West 
and Farr, 1990, p. 9). There is an important differentiation in this field 
of research between creativity and innovation. Innovation involves two 
stages: the production of new ideas, and their implementation (Amabile, 
1996; West and Farr, 1990; Woodman et al., 1993). Creativity is involved 
in the first stage of the innovation process—idea generation—which can 
be considered as a subprocess of innovation. The study in this chapter 
investigates the antecedents to idea generation in a self-managing team 
context. Idea generation is seen as an outcome of the team’s development 
of a novel and useful solution to a problem encountered in the pursuit of a 
work goal (Drucker, 1985; Hirst et al., 2009). In what follows, we use the 
term innovation to also include creativity.
Despite the relevance of creative ideas at the fuzzy front end of product 
innovation, studies of creativity at team level are limited (Amabile, 1983, 
1988). Anderson and West (1998, p. 239) argue that, “comparatively few 
studies have focused at the level-of-analysis of the work group. This is 
a notable shortcoming because it is often the case that an innovation is 
originated and subsequently developed by a team into routinized practice 
within organizations.” Investigations of how groups within organization 
can promote or constrain innovation are scarce (e.g., Burningham and 
West, 1995; Drach-Zahavy and Somech, 2001).

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
43
Although there is some research indicating that both individual quali-
ties and environmental factors affect the level of creativity in teams (e.g., 
Amabile, 1988; Hargadon and Sutton, 1997; Oldham and Cummings, 
1996) there is little evidence showing how team-level factors influence 
creativity in teams. Some studies show that team processes are key compo-
nents of the development of innovation (Taggar, 2002), and meta-analysis 
of the team level antecedents to creativity and innovation in the workplace 
(Hulsheger et al., 2009) shows that team input variables (e.g., team com-
position, team structure) have a weaker effect than team process variables 
(vision, participative safety, support for innovation, and task orientation). 
However, these findings are inconsistent, suggesting unknown moderating 
effects in addition to simple direct effects (Hülsheger et al., 2009).
Among team processes, team learning plays a dominant role and the 
empirical evidence suggests that organizational and collective learning 
form the basis for the development and adoption of organizational innova-
tion (Argyris, 1993). Specifically, the learning function describes the extent 
to which team members put their effort to reflect on the team’s objectives 
and strategies aimed at creating a team-level intellectual product which 
triggers change (Larson and Christensen, 1993; Swieringa and Wierdsma, 
1992; West, 1996). Additionally, although not connected directly to inno-
vation, research shows that team learning leads to improved problem rec-
ognition (Hirokawa, 1990), better scanning of the environment (Ancona 
and Caldwell, 1992), and generation of creative solutions (Maier and 
Solem, 1962), all of which could be relevant to team innovation. However, 
by limiting the analysis to the cognitive representation of knowledge and 
interpretation of information, important dimensions explaining the team’s 
psychosocial functioning based on motivational and personal factors and 
the related social contextual influences (Bandura, 1986) are neglected.
The creation of new knowledge at team level relies on individual char-
acteristics and social interaction (Shalley et al., 2004): team members need 
to share knowledge within their group, and to identify and capture other 
members’ solutions and ideas in order to combine them into workable 
solutions (Baer et al., 2010; Harrison and Rouse, 2014). A willingness to 
interact is essential for team members to secure a creative outcome within 
a proper team environment where the individual is motivated to exploit his 
or her full potential (Aalbers et al., 2013; Shin et al., 2012).

44	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
In this light, researchers have analyzed more in depth the cognitive 
motivating processes that foster innovation, as recommended by Locke 
and Latham’s (1990) goal-setting theory.
In the case of self-managing teams, investigation of the organiza-
tional learning processes requires greater attention to the motivational and 
social dimensions of teams. In contrast to traditionally managed teams in 
which team members had little autonomy and restricted decision making 
authority, self-managing teams can make their own decisions about work 
processes and regulate their own behavior. For instance, self-managing 
teams usually have the authority to establish their own work plans, define 
budgets, manage production orders, and monitor product quality (Barker, 
1993; Stewart et al., 1999).
On the other hand, shared responsibility for the assigned team task, 
a smaller number of team members, and delegation of authority over 
the team’s work processes promotes collective thinking and a collective 
intention (Searle, 1990) by enabling the emergence of naturally occurring 
team interactions which however, eventually constrain individual activ-
ity in ways that often are difficult to perceive and understand (Barker, 
1993). Along these lines, Tuomela (1995, p. 2) proposes a we-intention 
as the “commitment of an individual to participate in joint action, and 
involves an implicit or explicit agreement between the participants to 
engage in that joint action.” Accordingly, we-intentions rely on individ-
ual commitment, and commitment to offering mutual support meaning 
that a member is “not only committed to performing the preassigned part 
but he is also committed to furthering” (Tuomela, 1995, p. 129) the joint 
action (such as supporting others in running their parts, when needed). 
Thus, unlike the traditional personal intention which points to an action 
that a person can perform by her- or himself, we consider we-intentions 
as focusing more on the social behavior within the team. We-intentions 
represent intentions articulated either in the form, “I intend that we act 
jointly” (Bratman, 1997), or in the form, “I intend that our group per-
forms group activity X” (e.g., Tuomela, 1995). Therefore, we-intentions 
mirror the intention of a person identifying him- or herself as a social 
category, acting as an individual actor but in concert with his or her 
team members. In line with this, some studies (e.g., Bagozzi and Dhola-
kia, 2002) show how positive anticipated emotions and social identities 

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
45
affect we-intentions. Therefore, under these conditions, team members 
are psychologically tied to social foci such as goals (Klein et al., 2001; 
Herscovitch and Meyer, 2002; Morrow, 1993), as well as to their work 
groups (Becker et al., 1996; Bishop and Dow Scott, 2000; Siders et al., 
2001). A collective intention to learn fosters the development of team 
members’ competences and master of tasks, as result of their intrinsic 
interest in the innovative task which gives them the means to improve 
their skills and knowledge. This increases the likelihood that team mem-
bers will decide to devote their efforts to complex tasks in situations 
where there are no extrinsic rewards (Dweck and Sorich, 1999). In addi-
tion, intrinsic motivation to perform the innovation task fosters a deeper 
and more serious effort to learning which often leads to creative behav-
iors (Amabile, 1996) and a better attitude to undertaking difficult and 
stimulating tasks (VandeWalle, 1997). Under these conditions, individu-
als will invest their efforts in acquiring new knowledge and realizing 
“deep-processing strategies” needed to tackle complex tasks (Elliot and 
McGregor, 2001).
A we-intention demonstrates individual intention to be involved in 
a joint activity not as an individual action but as contributing to group 
performance or group action as a member of the group. In this case, the 
individual looks at the group activity holistically in order to identify his or 
her part in a social representation (Bagozzi and Lee, 2002). We-intentions 
to perform a group act are promoted by (i) individual reasons to perform 
the group act (e.g., attitudes to conducting a joint activity with others); 
(ii) interpersonal pressure to perform a group act (e.g., subjective norms); 
(iii) group norms to perform a group act, and (iv) social identity related to 
a group act (Bagozzi and Lee, 2002). Therefore, all learning activities—
within the team and related to direct experience—can occur vicariously 
by observing others’ behaviors and their consequences (Bandura, 1986; 
Rosenthal and Zimmerman, 1978)
However, individuals learn and increase their knowledge and skills 
based on the information carried on by modeling influences constituted by 
team norms. In this setting, vicarious learning can also occur:
“By observing a model of the desired behavior, an individual forms 
an idea of how response components must be combined and sequenced to 
produce the new behavior. In other words, people guide their actions by 

46	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
prior notions rather than by relying on outcomes to tell them what they 
must do” (Bandura, 1977, p. 35).
Based on this reasoning, we analyze the role of team social norms for 
predicting team learning and innovation. We argue that an important part 
of a team’s self-regulated learning and innovation activities stems from 
established team conduct, which acts as source of influence that guides 
team members’ behaviors.
3.3  TEAM NORMS
Norms can be seen as informal standards of appropriate behavior pre-
scribing how the members of a group should act (Argote, 1989). Social 
norms both catalyze and direct action in significant ways (Aarts and 
Dijksterhuis, 2003; Cialdini et al., 1991; Darley and Latané, 1970; 
Kerr, 1995; Terry and Hogg, 2001). Thus, social norms can be seen as 
the most influential control mechanism regulating self-managing team 
behavior (Hackman, 1992). However, norms are multidimensional: 
they can be described through different content and structural dimen-
sions related to the many ways and situations they give evidence of 
themselves (Gibbs, 1965; Jackson, 1966; Jasso and Opp, 1997; Marini, 
2000; Opp, 1982). Consequently, different conceptualizations of norms 
are equally legitimate (Gibbs, 1965; Jasso and Opp, 1997). Beyond the 
dimension of content, norms can be determined based on their structural 
aspects where the structure (or “strength”) of norms is defined in terms 
of intensity and consensus (Jackson, 1966; Jasso and Opp, 1997). Inten-
sity is related to how firmly team members adhere to, and the degree of 
relevance members give to these norms. Consensus refers to the extent 
to which norms are diffused among team members and show their col-
lective agreement with and acceptance of them. The closer the adher-
ence to and stronger acceptance of norms among team members, the 
more intense is the motivational force guiding behaviors (Hackman, 
1992; Marini, 2000).
Norms can be voluntary and spontaneously created within the team 
(Barker, 1993) or they can be induced and originate externally to the team 
(Feldman, 1984; Flynn and Chatman, 2003; Opp, 1982). In many case 

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
47
management plays a crucial role in building team norms (Annosi et al., 
2015; Ehrhart and Naumann, 2004; Feldman, 1984).
Induced and spontaneous norms are qualitatively different in their 
functionality, idiosyncrasy, and specificity of content (Marini, 2000). First, 
management in an attempt to align the team with the organizational goals 
may impose norms that are more functional than voluntary norms (Celani 
et al., 2010; Doherty et al., 2004; Ehrhart and Naumann, 2004; Hoegl and 
Gemuenden, 2001; Munroe et al., 1999; Wageman, 1995). Second, organi-
zationally induced norms deriving from a single source (i.e., management) 
rather than from each team, are less team idiosyncratic in their content 
than voluntary norms. Third, organizationally induced norms are general 
(i.e., less specific) than voluntary norms, in the range of the behaviors they 
prescribe.
3.3.1  ENACTMENT OF NORMATIVE CONTROL INSIDE TEAMS
When team members belong to a group and feel that being a group mem-
ber is important to them, they will align their behaviors with the group’s 
norms and standards, in line with the normative controls imposed by 
their peers in the team. Thus, consistently with the following definition 
of control, normative control can be seen as a force that “comes from the 
knowledge that someone who matters to us is paying close attention to 
what we are doing and will tell us if our behavior is appropriate or inap-
propriate” (O’Reilly and Chatman, 1996, p. 161). As a result of peer nor-
mative control, members of self-managing teams are transformed into 
“someone” accountable for monitoring and influencing other members 
to coordinate work (Barker, 1993; Manz and Sims, 1987; Tompkins and 
Cheney, 1985).
Normative control relies on a sense of belonging and attachment pro-
moting social pressure for the individual to comply with the group or 
organizational standards. Desire to feel part of a community motivates the 
individual to achieve the goals endorsed by the group and to avoid behav-
iors that the collective considers undesirable (Sorrels and Kelley, 1984). 
This motivational state is tied to the processes of social identification 
(Ashforth and Mael, 1989) and social categorization (Tajfel, 1982), and 

48	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
acts such that normative control leads to the internalization of group stan-
dards (MacNeil and Sherif, 1976; Pollis et al., 1975). Within self-managed 
teams, peer-based normative control is a motivational state originating 
from the perceptions of individuals of influence from teammates through 
the forces of social inclusion and internalization.
Thus, normative forms of peer-based control mirror emergent states 
that affect motivated teams’ behaviors since they (a) are manifest as shared 
beliefs regarding what is valued in the environment, and (b) constitute 
proximal influences for individual and collective investments of effort by 
directly shaping goals and their pursuit (Chen and Gocus, 2008; Chen and 
Kanfer, 2006).
3.3.2  TEAM’S DESCRIPTIVE AND INJUNCTIVE NORMS
In considering normative influences on behavior, it is relevant to differen-
tiate between the “is” (descriptive) and the “ought” (injunctive) meaning 
of social norms, since each refers to a distinct origin of human motiva-
tion (Deutsch and Gerard, 1955). Descriptive norms define what is typi-
cal or normal. They represent what most people do promoting adaptive 
action. Descriptive norms provide an information-processing opportunity 
to achieve a decisional shortcut in deciding which behavior to adopt in a 
given situation (Cialdini, 1988). Research shows that the perception of 
what others are doing shapes others’ behaviors inducing similar behavior 
when the behaviors are morally as neutral as selecting a consumer product 
(Venkatesan, 1966)
Injunctive norms are related to rules or beliefs about morally approved 
or disapproved conduct. Descriptive norms define what is done, and 
injunctive norms describe what ought to be done. Unlike descriptive 
norms which provide information about others’ actions, injunctive norms 
demand action based on the promise of social sanction. Since what is 
approved is usually what is normally done, it is easy to confound these 
two meanings of norms. However, they are conceptually and motivation-
ally distinct, and it is important for a proper understanding of normative 
influence to keep them separate, especially in situations where both are 
acting simultaneously.

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
49
Discriminating between injunctive and descriptive norms is important 
since both types can be present at the same time in a social context and 
can have a consistent or a conflicting effect on social behavior (Cialdini 
et al., 1991). Moreover which of these norms is salient at a particular time 
will shape individual emergent behavior (Cialdini, 1993). Thus, in a social 
context where descriptive normative information might generate an unde-
sirable boomerang effect, it is possible to combine descriptive norms with 
an injunctive message showing that the desired behavior is approved.
The purpose of the current research is to advance our understanding 
of how normative information, distributed within teams’ descriptive and 
injunctive norms, may differentially affect self-managing teams’ social 
behavior such that it influences teams’ self-regulated learning strategies, 
and consequently team’s innovation performance. In responding to the call 
for a more nuanced explanation of team innovation, we analyzed the joint 
impact of (descriptive and injunctive) norms and their related peer pres-
sure on their self-regulated learning strategies. We adopt the perspective of 
social identity and stakeholder theories to clarify the content and structural 
dimensions of injunctive norms in teams and to emphasizes the role of the 
sources of both types of norms distinguishing in-group (i.e., the group to 
which the individual belongs) or out-group (i.e., other groups in the sur-
rounding social environment such as stakeholders and managers) sources. 
This allows us to highlight the role of the team’s executives and leaders, 
and to examine a new approach to managerial organizational controls, as 
crucial determinants of the functioning of organizational units and firm 
performance (Loughry and Tosi, 2008; De Jong et al., 2014) as opposed to 
close monitoring and supervision in social-ideological modes of control. 
Combining the effects of different types of norms with the derived peer 
pressure allows analysis of the joint and complementary interaction of dif-
ferent control mechanism—an area where research is scarce. Analyzing 
multiple mechanisms not only allows a more reliable evaluation of the 
role of each mechanism but also allows development of alternative justi-
fications for how control combinations influence self-regulated learning 
choices, and consequently innovation performances
Our contribution to theory lies in our successful combining of different 
related logics to provide a systematic description of the complex system of 
controls which may be complements and which regulate team behavioral 

50	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
choices, and formulating a theory on the specific macro and micro organi-
zational mechanisms responsible for the activation of these controls
3.4  AGILE SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
We provide a short description of the Agile Scrum methodology which 
is the most frequently used method in the organizations studied. We also 
review the current literature on the effect of about Agile methods on team 
innovation.
3.4.1  AGILE SOFTWARE METHODOLOGIES AND SCRUM
Agile software development methods such as XP (eXtreme Programming), 
Scrum, DSDM (Dynamic Systems Development Method), and FDD (Fea-
ture-Driven Development) are different sets of practices created with the 
intent to improve a software team’s abilities to embrace and respond to 
changing requirements (Beck and Andres, 2005; Coad et al., 1999; Schwa-
ber and Beedle, 2002; Stapleton, 1997). They were developed as a reaction 
to plan-driven, structured approaches since the agile practices focus more 
on lean processes and dynamic adaptation than on detailed front-end plans 
and heavy documentation (Nerur and Balijepally, 2007).
Software development agility is the ability of the team to respond effi-
ciently and effectively to changes in user requirements. It is crucial to 
Agile development methods, which embed the ability to respond rapidly, 
and flexibly to changes in the business and technical domains (Hender-
son-Sellers and Serour, 2005; Highsmith and Cockburn, 2001). It also 
includes such aspects as lightness or leanness (i.e., minimal formal pro-
cesses) (Cockburn, 2007) and related notions such as nimbleness, quick-
ness, dexterity, suppleness, and or alertness (Erickson et al., 2005). In 
essence, Agile software methodologies propose a ‘light’ approach that 
promotes maneuverability as well as speed of response (Cockburn, 2007). 
Hence, the business value is created by delivering working software to 
customers at regular, short intervals (Dingsøyr et al., 2012). At the core of 
Agile practices, is the idea of self-organizing teams implementing Agile 
practices, designed to allow changes in requirements at any stage in the 

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
51
development process and to involve customers (or their representatives) in 
the whole development process. Teams are the basic units responsible for 
implementation of Agile practices in order to realize effective outcomes 
and eliminate waste and inefficiencies (Conboy, 2009) while sustaining 
organizational learning (Lyytinen and Rose, 2006).
A number of studies and practitioners in the information systems com-
munity, report the increasing popularity of Agile development methods 
and the implications of their diffusion (e.g., Conboy, 2009; Sarker et al., 
2009). According to Forrester Research (West et al., 2010), Agile develop-
ment methods have achieved wide adoption. A Forrester/Dr. Dobbs Global 
Developer Technographics® survey administered in Q3 2009 to IT profes-
sionals shows that 35% responding to describe their development process 
as Agile, with Scrum the most frequent Agile methodology.
The Scrum development process was introduced by Schwaber (1995) 
and is derived from the new product development methodology described 
in Takeuchi and Nonaka (1986) which was presented as a new approach 
to increase speed and flexibility. Scrum methods foresee delegation of 
decision making authority to the operational layer in the organization, 
and reliance on self-managing teams and a focus on reciprocal trust and 
respect, and the ability to self-organize to respond to problems (Cockburn 
and Highsmith, 2001). Feedback loops are key to this process, and Scrum 
results in a context where it is difficult to plan ahead (Dyba and Dingsør, 
2008). In Scrum the software is implemented incrementally (in sprints) 
starting with a planning session and ending with a review. The items to 
be developed are prepared by the product owner and listed in the product 
backlog. Daily stand up meetings are held to coordinate the team’s work. 
One team member, acting as Scrum master, is responsible for solving the 
problems preventing the team from working effectively.
3.4.2  AGILE SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT IN THE INNOVATION 
DOMAIN
Innovation is often considered the main motivation for using Agile meth-
odologies (Highsmith, 2004), since self-managing teams provide the 
appropriate preconditions for successful innovation activity (Hoegl and 

52	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Parboteeah, 2006; Takeuchi and Nonaka, 1986). The importance of creativ-
ity is acknowledged and supported by the whole Agile movement (Cock-
burn and Highsmith 2001; Highsmith, 2002, 2004), promoting the belief 
that only through creativity is it possible to deal with complex software 
development problems (Cockburn and Highsmith, 2001), and propos-
ing Agile methods as supporting for firms faced with changes in com-
plex product development. It also discloses the malfunctions and inhibits 
organization from reaching their true value (Rubin, 2012). Agile software 
development methods are indicated specifically for exploring new fields 
and for supporting the goals of innovation and creativity (Highsmith, 
2002). However, despite claims that Agile can help to deliver innovation 
in uncertain situations, there is no confirmatory evidence. Despite the 
increasing popularity and relevance of Agile methods, few studies empiri-
cally analyze their related core concepts and implicit theoretical relation-
ships (Baskerville, 2006; Boehm and Turner, 2004; Larman, 2004), or the 
conditions under which Agile development is effective for the adopting 
organizations (Fruhling and De Vreede, 2006; Moe et al., 2008).
Some studies assume that Scrum is based largely on Nonaka’s theory 
of knowledge creation (see for example, Sutherland, 2010), and aimed at 
effective and efficient knowledge creation in the organization (Beedle et 
al., 1999) which is at the base of the ideation process. This theory is the 
basis of some of the core characteristics of Scrum, for example, the cre-
ation of new knowledge through direct interaction among people in teams, 
emphasis on tacit knowledge, feedback from working software, and signif-
icant information sharing (Beedle et al., 1999; Sutherland, 2010). In addi-
tion, Scrum prescribes the implementation of different routines enabling 
knowledge sharing, knowledge creation, and learning through software 
development activities, and sustaining a flexible and collaborative organi-
zational approach (Nerur et al., 2005).
However, the research on Agile methodologies focuses mostly on 
the introduction and adoption phases (Dybå and Dingsøyr, 2008) rather 
than the long-term effects of Agile implementation on innovation (Abra-
hamsson et al., 2009). Dybå and Dingsøyr (2008) find that the available 
evidence cannot be considered reliable due to differences in data collec-
tion procedures and analyzes, and call for more and better quality studies. 
Thus, the effectiveness of principles and practices of Agile development is 

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
53
mainly anecdotal. The development of Agile needs theoretical underpin-
nings and concrete evidence of its declared benefits and core principles 
(Erickson et al. 2005).
3.5  INFLUENCE OF TEAM DESCRIPTIVE NORMS
This section identifies descriptive norms within self-managing teams to 
describe the strength of the descriptive norm-intention relation and to 
examine potential moderators and antecedents to the descriptive norm 
intention relation to explain why team members individually embrace a 
weak self-regulated learning strategy. By intentions we mean individual 
motivation to act in a specific manner and demonstrate the individual’s 
level of commitment and the time and effort devoted to performing a 
behavior.
The above approach originates in an understanding of the experience of 
team members within their teams, and proposes a broad range of attributes 
associated with innovation in teams in order to capture relevant social fac-
tors related to innovation in self-managing teams. Since we want to iden-
tify the dimensionality of the descriptive norms related to innovation, we 
provide some quotes from team members and other organizational func-
tions that interact with the teams which might result in informally created 
standards that might influence innovation in the teams. Following a thor-
ough review of the quotes, we identified a few items that were representa-
tive of the full range of items mentioned that were frequently described 
by the groups of team members and organizational roles involved. These 
items reflect the behavior of others, by reporting information on the “nor-
mal” way to behave within the team. Perceptions of others’ behavior may 
be particularly influential for motivating behavior among team members. 
Indeed, several researchers show that the social influence of peers is the 
most important predictor of behavior (Kandel, 1980; Oetting and Beau-
vais, 1986, 1987). Social learning theory (e.g., Bandura, 1977) informs us 
that this effect is due to imitation of the behaviors of those who have lived 
the environment before them since “people guide their actions by prior 
notions rather than by relying on outcomes to tell them what they must do” 
(Bandura, 1977, p. 35). Thus, all learning encompassed by the team may 

54	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
be based on watching others’ behaviors and their results (Bandura, 1986; 
Rosenthal and Zimmerman, 1978).
The following items represent perceptions of organizational phenom-
ena and implementation of internal policies, as well as clear normative 
statements. These data were collected from interviews with team mem-
bers engaged in completing various assignments including development 
of component-testing programs, development of systems-level integration 
projects, design of engineering audit procedures, and failure analyzes.
I can see no innovation within my team. We don’t produce any ideas. 
[Team member]
They focus a lot on the features they are implementing and not too 
much on learning and expending their competence. [Team member]
It is acceptable to spend time in learning, stop working, but no one is 
doing it (at least it happens in a very limited way). [Team member]
Teams don’t spend time on digging the product, people are just making 
features. [Team member]
To assess the relationship between description norms and the individual 
intention to innovate and to devote time to learning, the following items 
were sampled to report on the individual intention to embrace learning and 
innovation activity. These results provide strong support for the relation-
ship among the descriptive norms for creativity and group innovation.
Hence, I feel there is not that much space or possibilities for innova-
tion, because you have to know a concept really good to understand its 
limitation. If you are new to an area, then you cannot see the limitations. 
To know where you want to go, you have first to realize where you have 
been. [Team member]
I think as we work, it’s hard to have innovation opportunities. [Team 
member]
I don’t think I have thought about innovation but I think at least that 
we have a little bit more freedom to do innovation now, if the team find 
something it would like to do, for small improvements, we can just do them 
without asking. For bigger improvements it still has to be agreed as before 
by others, there has to be discussion and decision by manager and project 
leader, as we did in the previous way of working. [Team member].
In line with Astrom and Rise (2001), who show that group norms 
influence adult intentions only among those who identify strongly with 

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
55
the salient reference group, the strong individual identification with team 
concepts and goals seems to favor the influence of group norms on team 
members’ intentions.
We are usually under a lot of stress to handle tasks. Thus, we have 
never had time to develop our competence as individuals. [Team member].
I think it is tough, all people work on features and features, and it is 
hard to come up with innovation. We don’t have time to be innovative; 
previously people had time especially if you were responsible for one or 
two block. Pressure about the deadline is the barrier to innovation. [Team 
member]
Hence, we can stipulate the following:
Research Proposition 1: The team’s descriptive norms for creativ-
ity and group innovation are positively related to the intention to trigger 
innovative initiatives inside the team.
Since behavior may also be guided by a desire to do the “right” thing, 
we need to know more about the influence of injunctive norms on indi-
vidual intention. The following extracts show the underlying effects of 
injunctive norms on descriptive norms.
I don’t think we have managed to incorporate innovation in our way of 
working yet. There is lot of talk about that, a lot of focus on that. We are 
trying to find a way that allows the teams to be able to innovate and work 
on improvements and new ideas and so on. I don’t think we are mature 
enough, we have to learn and figure out how to do, teams don’t have 
instructions to have innovation incorporated in their way of working. It’s 
a little bit early I think, but it’s something that we really try to address. 
[Line manager]
The systems we work with are very complex, it takes a lot of time to 
learn new areas. A team member competent in one area may find them-
selves taken up with work in that area, meaning they have no time to learn 
other areas and no time to teach their area to others. If the company wants 
people to gain new competence this needs to be planned, time needs to 
be set aside for mentoring, otherwise it won’t happen in any big amount. 
[Team member]
I think you have to do innovation in everything you do. It’s hard to 
say that we should work 30% with innovation, it should be talked that we 
do it on daily bases, it could small things or the way of working, in some 

56	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
cases it could be larger impact, but it’s very hard to say what innovation 
is. [Team member]
We learn only what it is needed for completing the task. [Team 
member]
So they are trying to build the competence, at least based on what they 
want to understand to be able to do the work for this feature. During this 
time, they study the feature, they pick some user stories to be able to imple-
ment them. If they understand the whole things, they don’t need to have this 
spike to do some investigation. But if they don’t know, for instance, about 
ROAM, the RNC part of an impact, they do want to have some competence 
build up to be able to do the next user story, because they are preparing to 
understand what to do in the next user stories. So if the team doesn’t have 
that competence, then they plan to have competence build up, at least one 
sprint before the actual work should be done. [Team leader]
Hence, we stipulate the following:
Research Proposition 2: Descriptive norms about group innovation 
are positively related to individual intentions within the team and the mag-
nitude of this association increases as injunctive norms increase
However, Ajzen and Fishbein (1980) suggest that the threat of social 
sanction is not considered necessary for norms to influence individual 
behavior. Norms are indicated as enacting influence because individuals 
use important referents to guide their actions (Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980). 
Thus, from the perspective of social norms, team members may perform 
an action because they think that relevant others expect them to do so (sub-
jective norms), or because failure to do so could result in social sanctions 
(injunctive norms). The common element in these types of influences is 
that behavior is driven by expectations about others’ beliefs. Individuals 
often have clear knowledge about what others want them to do, and con-
sequently they can elaborate their perception about injunctive norms using 
experience of others’ reactions to their behaviors.
The daily stand-up meetings used in the Scrum methodology can act 
as a relevant enforcing mechanism for the establishment of social norms 
for several reasons. First, in these stand-up meetings, team members and 
relevant team stakeholder and managers are invited to attend, although 
team stakeholder and managers can only listen, and are not allowed to 
speak. During the meetings, team members describe the results achieved 

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
57
the previous day, set out plans for the current day including potential 
obstacles, which provide a plan and guidance for the whole team. The 
presence of stakeholders and managers legitimizes the team’s work and 
gives team members the perception that they are acting in response to 
current organization goals.
However, team members’ acknowledgment of legitimacy reflect 
individuals’ beliefs that important referents recognize a correspondence 
between the team’s behavior and “and [their] shared (or assumedly shared) 
beliefs” (Suchman, 1995, p. 574)
Hence we stipulate the following:
Research Proposition 3: Within the Agile Scrum routines of daily 
standup, descriptive and injunctive norms are enacted having as impor-
tant referents the team’s manager and stakeholders
Research Proposition 4: The magnitude of the relationship between 
descriptive norms related to group innovation and behavioral intention 
grows as outcome expectations become stronger.
Additionally, making the team’s activities and planning public known 
to managers and stakeholders, constitutes an important mechanism to 
improve individual identification with the organization. Dutton et al. 
(1994) suggest that the visibility of the affiliation with an organization 
is a moderating factor in the relationship between attractiveness of a per-
ceived organizational identity and organizational identification, since this 
visibility underlines individual affiliation within the organization. On the 
other hand, the visibility of team’s participation in the realization of stake-
holders’ objectives, generates an enhanced cognitive elaboration of the 
organizational social identity of the stakeholders.
Elaboration of the team’s social identity favors and becomes the pre-
requisite for the formation and the enactment of peer control which is a 
form of normative control (injunctive) enacted by peers. In fact, there is 
a robust link between the microtechnique of discipline and employees’ 
identification with the organization. In line with this, Barker and Cheney 
(1994: 30) argue that disciplinary mechanisms are more powerful when 
“they are grounded in highly motivating values that appeal to the orga-
nization’s actors.” Knoke and Wood (1981) provide similar evidence that 
an employee’s commitment can be best understood by narrowing the 
focus to the extent to which he or she internalizes organizational norms 

58	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
and values. A high level of team identification allows for higher norm 
consensus which is helpful in clarification of what the context demands. 
Expectations about team members’ behaviors are made more explicit, and 
their salience increases. The negative consequences of not engaging in 
productive team work acquire more impacts by the team members. This 
process prevents any autonomous decisions about putting effort into the 
team task, thereby eliminating any motivational barriers that could lead 
team members not to participate in productive and collaborative team 
work (Cooper and Withey, 2009).
In addition, as Foucault (1977) notes, when team members identify so 
strongly with organizational values, they do not have the critical distance 
necessary to judge the fairness of the microtechniques they have gener-
ated collectively or in which they have been involved. Specifically, team 
members who identify strongly with their teams should feel better about 
themselves when they accomplish identity-relevant norms compared to 
when they violate these norms. On the other hand, individuals with no 
identification with the group will exhibit emotional responses to confor-
mity versus violation (Christensen et al., 2004).
Hence, injunctive norms, having a moral aspect, and define what peo-
ple should do, acting as self-standards that determine whom the individual 
would like to be or whom they ought to be (Higgins, 1987; Moretti and 
Higgins, 1999; Schwartz, 1977; Schwartz and Fleishman, 1978).
Hence we stipulate the following:
Research Proposition 5: Greater group identification increases the 
use of team injunctive norms as behavioral standards for group members.
Consistent with our discussion, we stipulate the following:
Research Proposition 6: Descriptive norms about group innovation 
are positively related to individual intentions inside the team and the mag-
nitude of this association increases as group identification increases.
3.6  INFLUENCE OF TEAM INJUNCTIVE NORMS
Other relevant aspects for predicting individual intentions are the individu-
al’s perceived degree of control over performed behavior (perceived behav-
ioral control, e.g., “Engaging in a binge drinking session is entirely under/

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
59
outside my control” (Rivis and Sheeran, 2003, p. 218), and people’s evalu-
ations of the consequences of this behavior or their attitudes (e.g., “For 
me, engaging in a binge drinking session would be wise/foolish,” Rivis 
and Sheeran, 2003, p. 219). The perceived behavioral control refers to the 
perceived ease or difficulty of performing the behavior and is assumed to 
reflect both past experience and anticipated impediments and obstacles.
This view of perceived behavioral control is aligned mostly with Ban-
dura’s (1977, 1982) concept of perceived self-efficacy which “is concerned 
with judgments of how well one can execute courses of action required to 
deal with prospective situations” (Bandura, 1982, p. 122). Much of the cur-
rent knowledge about the impact of perceived behavioral control derives 
from the systematic research program of Bandura and his associates (e.g., 
Bandura et al., 1977; Bandura et al., 1980). Their research reveals that 
people’s behavior is strongly affected by their confidence in their ability to 
perform it (i.e., by perceived behavioral control). In this context, the the-
ory of planned behavior indicates three conceptually independent anteced-
ents to individual intention. The first is attitude toward the behavior which 
as already mentioned, is related to the extent to which the individual has a 
favorable or unfavorable evaluation of the behavior in question. The sec-
ond predictor is the subjective norm which is the perceived social pressure 
to enact or not to enact the behavior. The third determinant is the degree of 
perceived behavioral control. According to the theory of planned behavior, 
the more positive people’s attitudes and subjective norms, and the greater 
their perceived behavioral control regarding a behavior, the more likely 
they will intend to perform that behavior. Similarly, the stronger people’s 
intentions, the more likely they will perform the behavior.
The following quotes were extracted from the interviews to give evi-
dence of this.
People Beliefs About Innovation
Learning is not as important as developing and delivering features so 
we don’t spend time on learning. [Team member]
Group Subjective Norms
We are usually under a lot of stress to handle tasks. Thus, we have 
never had time to develop our competence as individuals. [Team member]

60	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Perceived Behavioral Control
Earlier we worked in a certain area, but now our features strike on 
every subsystem, and we don’t have enough knowledge about it so it’s dif-
ficult. [Team member]
Thus, in line with the literature, team members’ beliefs about the rel-
evance of the innovative behavior and their individual self-efficacy are 
positively related to team injunctive group norms and we stipulate the 
following:
Research Proposition 7: Perceived behavioral control towards an 
innovative activity mediates the relationship between the attitude to the 
innovative activity and the injunctive norms to perform (or not) that inno-
vative activity and the individual intention to embrace it.
Pressure to “get the job done” is common within Agile teams. It is 
related to the subjective social norm and affects the individual’s poten-
tial to gain approval or suffer sanction from significant others such as the 
Agile team’s relevant stakeholders as product owner and line manager, for 
engaging in a behavior. Below are reported relevant quotations from team 
members.
Some people are proactive about attending learning days and courses, 
others are less so but when there is on, and we feel that we are getting 
delayed attendance at learning days is reduced. We need to plan properly 
time for learning. [Product Owner]
They struggled with that all the time because they’re focused on deliv-
ering features all the time but they also see they need to help each other, 
the testers need to help with design as well and vice-versa but it’s a chal-
lenge for them. I do have to keep reminding them during the sprint plan-
ning. They tend as default to get finished the feature. [High level manager]
As reported in Annosi, Magnusson, Martini and Appio (2015), per-
ceived time pressure is influenced by: (i) team’s attitude to revealing the 
importance of project tasks to team members; (ii) the characteristics of 
specific Agile routines imposing constraints and rules on people’s actions 
as in the implementation of boundary control systems (Simons, 1991, 
1994); (iii) concertive control from peers enacting pressure to get the job 
done; and 4) implementation of diagnostic controls (Simons 1991, 1994) 
in the form of goals and feedback loops.

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
61
Some extracts related to these constructs are reported in the following 
subsections.
Team Members’ Attitude
My view about the main problem is that we need to be more efficient 
to produce more and then to be able to innovate. Becoming more efficient 
is a condition to have innovation in place, […] it is hard to get things into 
the product because the demand is there but the capability was low. [High 
level manager]
Our team learning opportunity is not much, we have been working with 
two features at the same time, we had pressure to deliver those features 
and we don’t have much time to dedicate to learning. It is not the priority 
as developing and delivering features so we don’t spend time on learning. 
[Team member]
Boundary Control Systems
In Agile we are in quite regular mode, working in a regular and con-
stant time box, which is called sprint, three weeks long. At the beginning 
of each sprint we have half day meeting called sprint planning, where 
the Agile team members are looking at the sprint backlog. As team, we 
know our capacity and according to our estimation of it, we take items 
in the product backlog, pulling out user stories. Among the user stories 
we have also some bonus. It deals with normal work as a normal user 
story, but differently from it, it represents something for which team does 
not take a specific commitment to implement by the end of the sprint […] 
It aims to full use the team’s capacity if some spare time occurs. [Scrum 
master]
Diagnostic Control Systems
I get updated info through several ways: weekly reports about the 
progress and then I have to report their progress to other forum like the 
release project.” [Product owner]
Normally the teams have, according to the Scrum, meetings every day 
in the morning in which they discuss about the progresses, we try to be 
present to this meeting to listen what it is going on. [Line manager]

62	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Concertive Control
Now we are working with new products and we have to learn how 
they work—at least so much that we can see where and how to do the 
implementations. But to really understand the product (to be able to make 
improvements) that takes time. Before you have knowledge about the prod-
uct, now you even don’t know if you can propose/do any improvements—
spending time on investigation without any outcome isn’t so popular I 
guess… Teams don’t spend time on digging the product, people are just 
making features. [Team member]
Specifically, team attitudes mirror the values transmitted through line 
management together with their social environment and represent the basic 
values which drive team intentions. In Agile, team members consider the 
priority to be the development of features not innovation and learning. As 
a result, they prioritize project deadlines which they feel adds pressure, 
and do not implement strategies to foster learning. Identification with a 
social group may increase the importance of an attitude if the team’s rights 
are considered to be a stake (Key, 1961; Modigliani and Gamson, 1979).
Hence we stipulate the following:
Research Proposition 8: Team members’ attitudes about the impor-
tance of group innovation are positively related to injunctive norms about 
group innovation.
Research Proposition 9: Team members’ attitude to the importance of 
group innovation mediates the relationship between group identification 
and injunctive norms about group innovation.
In an Agile context, the effects of boundary control systems, defined as 
the formal systems used by top management to establish obligatory limits 
and rules (Simons, 1994), are to impose complex Agile routines/ceremo-
nies that apply to team members. Among these, product backlog seems to 
limit the team’s freedom to allocate time to anything not clearly included 
in the specific time-period (or sprint). The following quotes are illustrative:
[It is] very difficult to get time for competence development, very tight 
time schedule [Team member].
Transparency of the organization means that even small prioritization 
issues are quickly escalated. There are no buffers since product manage-
ment keeps the teams 100% busy. This means that small additional tasks 

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
63
require the involvement of product management for decisions. [Team 
member]
Diagnostic control systems are defined as formal feedback systems 
used to monitor team outcomes and correct deviations from preset perfor-
mance standards (Simons, 1994). They are represented by the short feed-
back loops in the Agile framework. Examples of feedbacks include daily 
standup meetings, continuous integration activities, three-weekly demo 
and retrospective, frequent meetings with product owners to track team 
progress, and information radiators to constantly monitor team compe-
tence. The presence of these short feedback loops ensures a correct focus 
and allocation of time to team activities but generates stress and pressure 
among team members. Consistent with this one informant told us:
Concerning the stress you feel, in Agile the way of working is stress-
ful. Management wants us to deliver code every day for testing, to find 
out if new code breaks legacy functionality. But the delivery process is 
not good enough. When people make mistakes, you have to roll back and 
many people are waiting for you. This way of working is not so effective. 
It should be modified somehow. [Team member]
Barker (1993) defines concertive control systems for self-regulating 
teams as normative controls that become restrictive for individual team 
members, creating high levels of stress. The effect of concertive control 
is that people feel they are being watched and their contribution to team 
goals checked up on. They feel unable to divert to activities not strictly 
related to those of other team members and the project. There is implicit 
pressure to finish the task as soon as possible in order to start on the next 
one. The following statement highlights this situation:
You have this tight control on what you are doing. As soon as you are 
ready, you go to the board and take a new task. So there is pressure to go 
through this kind of work packages as quickly as possible. And there is 
also “peer” pressure—if you are in a team, everyone knows what everyone 
else is doing. [Team member]
In order to clarify the impact and the relevance of these constructs on 
the team’s injunctive norms, we need to introduce the concepts of goal 
desirability and goal feasibility as norms concerned with the desirability 
of the means and goals. Goal desirability and goal feasibility are two con-
structs to explain goal-directed behavior. They have been described as key 

64	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
concepts (e.g., Atkinson, 1964, Liberman and Trope, 1998; Gollwitzer, 
1990). They have been related to the concepts of desire and belief in the 
philosophy of action (Mele, 1997), and goal desire in turn has been defined 
as “the valence of an action’s end state, whereas belief regards the ease or 
difficulty of reaching the end state” (Liberman and Trope, 1998, p.7).
Specifically, goal desire indicates desire for a behavior, while goal 
perceived feasibility is perceived as behavioral control (Perugini et al., 
2000). Hence, an increase or decrease in the desire for a goal should lead 
to an increase or decrease in the desire for the behavior functionally tied 
to the goal. At the same time, an increase in perceived goal feasibility 
should produce an increase in perceived behavioral control and the influ-
ence of perceived goal feasibility on perceived behavioral control should 
very high given the functional link between goals and behaviors (Perugini 
and Conner, 2000). Thus, as behaviors are selected based on their use-
fulness for achieving a goal, a certain level of perceived easiness of the 
goal should induce a choice of behaviors perceived to be at a correspond-
ing level of feasibility and personal control (Perugini and Conner, 2000). 
According to Perugini and Conner (2000) the motivation and the volition 
to perform a given behavior is usually a function of both distal (e.g., the 
desired goal) and proximal variables (e.g., perceived control over a given 
behavior). Based on the above, we can assume that collective injunctive 
norms in teams are determined by the diagnostic controls, contributing 
to the goal desirability and limited by the boundary control related to the 
implementation of Agile methodologies combined with the interpersonal 
pressure imposed by the concertive control which simultaneously influ-
ences the formation of perceived control. Boundary and concertive con-
trols contribute to the perception of goal feasibility within the team and act 
to limit team members’ actions.
Hence we stipulate the following:
Research Proposition 10: Injunctive norms about group innovation in 
self-managing teams are determined by the implementation of diagnostic 
controls, which contribute to the desire for innovation action by imposing 
continuous monitoring on the team’s work
Research Proposition 11: Injunctive norms are influenced by the 
team’s perception of feasibility of the innovation activity, which is deter-
mined by the related concertive control and boundary controls defining 

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
65
the constraints on team’s actions and impacting the perceived behavioral 
control of team members.
3.7  CONCLUDING DISCUSSION
The objective of the study described in this chapter was to identify the 
social factors involved in influence on team’s collective intention to 
undertake learning and innovation activity. Our findings show that team 
members’ attitudes and team’s subjective norms (descriptive and injunc-
tive) significantly influence the behavioral intention to take innovative 
action. Additionally, in line with Terry and Hogg (1996) for the I-inten-
tion, we proposed that group identity reinforces the power of group norms 
(descriptive and injunctive) that influence the we-intention. We discussed 
the relationships clarifying how identity-relevance of the team and dif-
ferent types of norms interact to predict team members’ behaviors. We 
also proposed a qualitative evaluation of the strength of the relationship 
between descriptive norms and group intentions and highlighted possible 
relevant moderators. Moreover, we identified the proximal determinants 
of injunctive norms by looking at the way the team’s work is organized 
and the social context in which the team operates.
Team’s injunctive and descriptive norms about group innovation act 
help to predict the we-intention to innovate. These concepts were mod-
eled together to represent team norms and to allow for a holistic view of 
possible managerial interventions. This discussion revealed other social 
influences. For example, we found outcome expectations to be impor-
tant resources to better sustain the we-intention to innovate. Studies by 
Cialdini et al. (1990) and Kallgren et al. (2000) demonstrates the influence 
of moderating factors such as outcome expectation, group identity, and 
injunctive norms, on the effect of descriptive norms on behaviors.
We extended these results to the case of self-managing teams operating 
in a permeable social environment transmitting teams the perception of 
managerial expectations building on the implementation of Agile routines. 
The perception of managerial expectations induces beliefs that enacting 
a particular behavior will provide the desired benefits (Bandura, 1986). 
More specifically, outcome expectations can be considered to be the result 

66	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
of the individual’s mental calculus about the benefits of embracing certain 
actions and the associated costs (Rogers, 1975; Rosenstock, 1974). They 
can be thought of as the beliefs that drive behaviors (Aizen and Fishbein, 
1980), and can treated as contributing to individual attitudes to a behavior. 
On the other hand, we found team members’ attitudes have an important 
impact on the perceived behavioral control of team members which in 
turn, influences the team’s injunctive norms related to group innovation.
We found a prevalence of the impact of group identification for influ-
encing the effects of both descriptive and injunctive norms on team behav-
iors. This is in line with Christensen et al., (2004) who suggest that identity 
relevance in the case of both norms is a crucial factor for predicting whether 
norms are adopted as standards against which individuals can assess their 
behavior. Research on nominal groups underlines that identification plays a 
crucial role in an in-group member’s capacity to influence peers within the 
group (Wilder, 1990). Thus, in the absence of identification, there is no way 
for the group identity to affect individuals’ behavioral choices. However, 
if the individual perceives that the prevalence of a behavior among his or 
her reference group is common and if the individual’s identification with 
the group is strong, the group member will be more likely to engage in that 
same behavior (Rimal and Real, 2005). On the contrary, if group members 
experience strong affinity with the group, and at the same time believe that 
a behavior is not acceptable to the other group members, then they will be 
less likely to engage in this less acceptable behavior. Similar to outcomes 
expectations, group identity is socially constructed and Annosi et al. (2015) 
highlight the role of organizational entities, managers and team stakehold-
ers, their dynamic relationships and some specific team routines produce 
the mechanisms at the base of organization and identity formation. This 
result has a number of implications for managerial practice; interventions 
should be aimed at reducing the prevalence of efficiency behaviors and the 
opportunity costs of innovation and learning behaviors.
Regarding the exchange and inculcation of injunctive norms, we pro-
pose that this could be accomplished in multiple and enforcing ways 
which differ in their level of intentionality. Injunctive norms are created 
through a system of goals and feedback controls applied to a team’s work 
with the purpose of shaping goal desirability. Also, norms are deliber-
ately transmitted through active instructions and rituals (Allison, 1992; 

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
67
Lumsden, 1988) deriving from the boundary control systems implemented 
with the adoption of specific Agile routines. Additionally, norms can be 
transmitted more passively through nonverbal behaviors (Allison, 1992; 
Lumsden, 1988) emanating from the enactment of interpersonal pressure 
exercised by peers inside the teams. This is enabled by communication 
whose critical role is highlighted in Latané’s (1996) and Latané et al.’s 
(1994) dynamic social impact theory. Nu adopting the common compo-
nents of social impact theory (Latané, 1981), the strength of the source’s 
personal influence, the physical proximity of the target to the source, and 
the number of sources can be take into account.
Our proposal of norms transmission requires to be tested empirically; 
however, this chapter provides a description of the process through which 
organizational and team norms are spread and may vary.
KEYWORDS
••
controls
••
innovation
••
norms
••
self-managing teams
REFERENCES
Aalbers, H. L., Dolfsma, W., Koppius, O. Individual connectedness in innovation net-
works: On the role of individual motivation. Research Policy, 2013, 42(3), 624–634.
Aarts, H., Dijksterhuis, A. The silence of the library: environment, situational norm, and 
social behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2003, 84(1), 18–28.
Abrahamsson, P., Conboy, K., Wang, X. ‘Lots done, more to do’: the current state of Agile 
systems development research. European Journal of Information Systems, 2009, 18, 
281–284.
Aizen, I., Fishbein, M. Understanding Attitudes and Predicting Social Behavior. Prentice-
Hall. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1980.
Allison, P. D. The cultural evolution of beneficent norms. Social Forces, 1992, 71(2), 
279–301.

68	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Amabile, T. M. A model of creativity and innovation in organizations. Research in Orga-
nizational Behavior, In: B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Greenwich, CT: JAI 
Press, 1988, 10, 123–167.
Amabile, T. M. Creativity in Context. Boulder, CO: Westview, 1996.
Amabile, T. M. The Social Psychology of Creativity. New York: Springer, 1983.
Ancona, D. G., Caldwell, D. F. Bridging the boundary: External activity and performance 
in organizational teams. Administrative Science Quarterly, 1992, 634–665.
Anderson, N. R., West, M. A. Measuring climate for work group innovation: Development 
and validation of the team climate inventory. Journal of Organizational Behavior. 
1998, 19(3), 235–258.
Annosi, M. C., Foss, N. J., Magnusson, M., Brunetta, F. The Interplay Between the Pre-
existing Managerial Control Systems and Stakeholder’s Networks in Self-Managed 
Team’s Identities in EGOS 2015 Conference, 2015.
Annosi, M.C., Magnusson, M., Martini, A., Appio, F. P. Social conduct, learning and inno-
vation: an abductive study of the dark side of agile software development. Creativity 
and Innovation Management, early view. 2016.
Argote, L. Agreement about norms and work-unit effectiveness: Evidence from the field. 
Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 1989, 10(2), 131–140.
Argyris, C. Knowledge for Action: A Guide to Overcoming Barriers to Organizational 
Change. Jossey-Bass Inc. Publishers: San Francisco, CA, 1993.
Ashforth, B. E., Mael, F. Social identity theory and the organization. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 1989, 14(1), 20–39.
Astrom, A. N., Rise, J. Young adults’ intention to eat healthy food: Extending the theory of 
planned behavior. Psychology and Health, 2001, 16(2), 223–237.
Atkinson, J. W. An Introduction to Motivation. Princeton, NJ: Nostrand Co., 1964.
Baer, M., Leenders, R. T. A., Oldham, G. R., Vadera, A. K. Win or lose the battle for cre-
ativity: The power and perils of intergroup competition. Academy of Management 
Journal, 2010, 53(4), 827–845.
Bagozzi, R. P., Dholakia, U. M. Intentional social action in virtual communities. Journal of 
Interactive Marketing, 2002, 16(2), 2–21.
Bagozzi, R. P., Lee, K. H. Multiple routes for social influence: The role of compliance, 
internalization, and social identity. Social Psychology Quarterly, 2002, 226–247.
Bandura, A. Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency. American Psychologist, 1982, 
37(2), 122.
Bandura, A. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive Theory. Pren-
tice-Hall, Inc., 1986.
Bandura, A. Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1977.
Bandura, A., Adams, N. E., Beyer, J. Cognitive processes mediating behavioral change. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1977, 35(3), 125.
Bandura, A., Adams, N. E., Hardy, A. B., Howells, G. N. Tests of the generality of self-
efficacy theory. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 1980, 4(1), 39–66.
Barker, J. R. Tightening the iron cage: Concertive control in self-managing teams. Admin-
istrative Science Quarterly, 1993, 408–437.
Barker, J. R., Cheney, G. The concept and the practices of discipline in contemporary orga-
nizational life. Communications Monographs, 1994, 61(1), 19–43.

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
69
Baskerville, R. L. Artful Planning. European Journal of Information Systems, 2006, 15(2), 
113–115.
Becker, T. E., Billings, R. S., Eveleth, D. M., Gilbert, N. L. Foci and bases of employee 
commitment: Implications for job performance. Academy of Management Journal, 
1996, 39(2), 464–482.
Beedle, M., Devos, M., Sharon, Y., Schwaber, K., Sutherland, J. Scrum: a pattern lan-
guage for hyperproductive software development. In: Pattern Languages of Program 
Design, N. Harrison (Ed.), Boston: Addison-Wesley, 1999, pp. 637–651.
Bishop, J. W., Dow Scott, K. An examination of organizational and team commitment in 
a self-directed team environment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 2000, 85(3), 439.
Boehm, B. W., Turner, R. Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guide for the Perplexed. 
Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2004.
Bratman, M. E. Responsibility and planning. The Journal of Ethics, 1997, 1(1), 27–43.
Burningham, C., West, M. A. Individual, climate, and group interaction processes as pre-
dictors of work team innovation. Small Group Research, 1995, 26(1), 106–117.
Celani, A., Tasa, K., Schat, A. C. H. An examination of collectivistic group norms in rela-
tion to collective efficacy and team performance. Academy Management Annual 
Meeting, Montreal, 2010.
Chen, G., Gocus, C. I. Motivation in and of Teams: A Multilevel Perspective. In: R. Kanfer, 
G. Chen, & R. D. Pritchard (Eds.), Work Motivation: Past, Present, and Future. New 
York, NY: Routledge Academic, 2008, pp. 285–317.
Chen, G., Kanfer, R. Toward a systems theory of motivated behavior in work teams. 
Research in Organizational Behavior, 2006, 27, 223–267.
Christensen, P. N., Rothgerber, H., Wood, W., Matz, D. C. Social norms and identity rel-
evance: A motivational approach to normative behavior. Personality and Social Psy-
chology Bulletin, 2004, 30(10), 1295–1309.
Cialdini, R. B. Altruism or egoism? That is (still) the question. Psychological Inquiry, 
1991, 2(2), 124–126.
Cialdini, R. B. Influence: Science and Practice (2nd ed.). Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman, 
1988.
Cialdini, R. B. Inﬂuence: The Psychology of Persuasion. New York: Morrow, 1993.
Cialdini, R. B., Kallgren, C. A., Reno, R. R. A focus theory of normative conduct: A theo-
retical refinement and reevaluation of the role of norms in human behavior. Advances 
in Experimental Social Psychology, 1991, 24(20), 1–243.
Cialdini, R. B., Reno, R. R., Kallgren, C. A. A focus theory of normative conduct: recycling 
the concept of norms to reduce littering in public places. Journal of personality and 
Social Psychology, 1990, 58(6), 1015–1026.
Cialdini, R. B., Trost, M. R. Social influence: Social norms, conformity and compliance, 
1998.
Coad, P., De Luca, J., Lefebre, E. Java Modeling in Color, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1999.
Cockburn A, Highsmith, J. Agile software development: the people factor. Computer 2001, 
34(11), 131–133.
Cockburn, A. Agile Software Development: The Cooperative Game. Boston: Addison-
Wesley, 2007.

70	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Collyer, S., Warren, C., Hemsley, B., and Stevens, C. Aim, fire, aim—Project planning 
styles in dynamic environments. Project Management Journal, 2010, 41(4), 108–
121.
Conboy, K. Agility from first principles: reconstructing the concept of agility in informa-
tion systems development. Information Systems Research, 2009, 20(3), 329–354.
Cooper, W. H., Withey, M. J. The strong situation hypothesis. Personality and Social Psy-
chology Review, 2009, 13(1), 62–72.
Darley, J. M., Latané, B. Norms and normative behavior: Field studies of social interdepen-
dence. Altruism and Helping Behavior, 1970, 83–102.
De Jong, B. A., Bijlsma-Frankema, K. M., Cardinal, L. B. Stronger Than the Sum of Its 
Parts? The Performance Implications of Peer Control Combinations in Teams. Orga-
nization Science 2014, 25(6), 1703–1721.
Deutsch, M., Gerard, H. B. A study of normative and informational social influences upon 
individual judgment. The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1955, 51(3), 
629.
Dingsøyr, T., Nerur, S., Balikepally, V., Moe, N. E. A decade of agile methodologies: 
towards explaining agile software development. Journal of Systems and Software, 
2012, 85(6), 1213–1221.
Doherty, A., Patterson, M., Van Bussel, M. What do we expect? An examination of per-
ceived committee norms in nonprofit sport organizations. Sport Management Review. 
2004, 7(2), 109–132.
Drach-Zahavy, A., Somech. A. Understanding team innovation: The role of team processes 
and structures. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 2001, 5(2) 111–
123.
Drucker, P. F. Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Newbridge: Newbridge Communications, 
1985.
Dutton, J. E., Dukerich, J. M., Harquail, C. V. Organizational images and member identifi-
cation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 1994, 239–263.
Dweck, C. S. Self-theories: Their Role in Motivation, Personality, and Development. 
Hove: Psychology Press, 2000.
Dweck, C. S., Sorich, L. A. Mastery-Oriented Thinking. Coping: The psychology of what 
works. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Dweck, C., Molden, D. C. Self theories. In Handbook of Competence and Motivation, 
Elliott, J. A., Dweck, C. (eds.). London: The Guilford Press, 2005, 122–140.
Dybå, T., Dingsøyr, T. Empirical studies of Agile software development: A systematic 
review. Information and Software Technology, 2008, 50(9), 833–859.
Ehrhart, M. G., Naumann, S. E. Organizational citizenship behavior in work groups: a 
group norms approach. Journal of Applied Psychology, 2004, 89(6), 960–974.
Elliot, A. J., McGregor, H. A. A 2×2 achievement goal framework. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 2001, 80(3), 501.
Erickson, J., Lyytinen, K., Siau, K. Agile modeling, agile software development, and 
extreme programming. Journal of Database Management, 2005, 16(4), 88–100.
Feldman, D. C. The development and enforcement of group norms. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 1984, 9(1), 47–53.

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
71
Flynn, F. J., Chatman, J. A. “What’s the norm here?” Social categorization as a basis for 
group norm development. In Research on Managing Groups and Teams. Polzer, J., 
ed. Stanford, CA: JAI Press, 2003, 135–160.
Foucault, M. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Vintage Books, 1977.
Fruhling, A., De Vreede, G.-J. Field experiences with eXtreme programming: developing 
an emergency response system. Journal of Management Information Systems, 2006, 
22(4), 39–68.
Gibbs, J. P. Norms: The problem of definition and classification. American Journal of 
Sociology, 1965, 60(5), 586–594.
Gollwitzer, P. M. Action phases and mind-sets. Handbook of Motivation and Cognition: 
Foundations of Social Behavior, 1990, 2, 53–92.
Hackman, J. R. Group Influences on Individuals in Organizations. Consulting Psycholo-
gists Press, 1992.
Hargadon, A., Sutton, R. I. Technology brokering and innovation in a product development 
firm. Administrative Science Quarterly 1997, 42(4), 716–749.
Harrison, S. H., Rouse, E. D. Let’s dance! Elastic coordination in creative group work: A 
qualitative study of modern dancers. Academy of Management Journal, 2014, 57(5), 
1256–1283.
Henderson-Sellers, B., Serour, M. K., Creating a dual-agility method: the value of method 
engineering. Journal of Database Management 2005, 16, 1–23.
Herscovitch, L., Meyer, J. P. Commitment to organizational change: extension of a three-
component model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 2002, 87(3), 474–487.
Higgins, E. T. Self-discrepancy theory: A theory relating self and affect. Psychological 
Review, 1987, 94, 319–340.
Highsmith, J. A. Agile Software Development Ecosystems (Vol. 13). Addison-Wesley Pro-
fessional, 2002.
Highsmith, J. Agile Project Management, Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2004.
Highsmith, J., Cockburn, A., Agile software development. 1. The business of innovation. 
IEEE Computer 2001, 34, 120–127.
Hirokawa, R. Y. The Role of Communication in Group Decision-Making Efficacy A Task-
Contingency Perspective. Small Group Research, 1990, 21(2), 190–204.
Hirst, G., Van Knippenberg, D., Zhou, J. A cross-level perspective on employee creativ-
ity: Goal orientation, team learning behavior, and individual creativity. Academy of 
Management Journal, 2009, 52(2), 280–293.
Hoegl, M., Gemuenden, H. G. Teamwork quality and the success of innovative projects: 
A theoretical concept and empirical evidence. Organization Science. 2001, 12(4), 
435–449.
Hülsheger, U. R., Anderson, N., Salgado, J. F. Team-Level Predictors of Innovation at 
Work: A Comprehensive Meta-Analysis Spanning Three Decades of Research. Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology, 2009, 94(5), 1128–1145.
Imai, K., Nonaka, I., Takeuchi, H. Managing the New Product Development Process: How 
Japanese Companies Learn and Unlearn. Division of Research, Harvard Business 
School, 1984.
Jackson, J. A conceptual and measurement model for norms and roles. Pacific Sociology 
Review 1966, 9(1), 35–47.

72	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Jasso, G., Opp, K. D. Probing the character of norms: A factorial survey analysis of the 
norms of political action. American: Review of Sociology. 1997, 62(6), 947–964.
Kallgren, C. A., Reno, R. R., Cialdini, R. B. A focus theory of normative conduct: When 
norms do and do not affect behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
2000, 26(8), 1002–1012.
Kandel, D. B. Drug and drinking behavior among youth. Annual Review of Sociology, 
1980, 235–285.
Kerr, N. L. Norms in social dilemmas. In: Social Dilemmas: Perspectives on Individuals 
and Groups. D. Schroeder (Ed.), Westport, CT: Praeger, 1995, pp. 31–48.
Key, V. O. Public Opinion and American Democracy. New York: Knopf, 1961.
Klein, H. J., Wesson, M. J., Hollenbeck, J. R., Wright, P. M., DeShon, R. P. The assessment 
of goal commitment: A measurement model meta-analysis. Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes, 2001, 85(1), 32–55.
Knoke, D., Wood, J. R. Organized for action: Commitment in voluntary associations. Rut-
gers University Press, 1981.
Larman, C. Agile and Iterative Development: A Manager’s Guide. Boston: Addison-Wes-
ley, 2004.
Larson, J. R., Christensen, C. Groups as problem-solving units: Toward a new meaning of 
social cognition. British Journal of Social Psychology, 1993, 32(1), 5–30.
Latané, B. Dynamic social impact: The creation of culture by communication. Journal of 
Communication, 1996, 46, 13–25.
Latané, B. The psychology of social impact. American Psychologist, 1981, 36(4), 343–356.
Latané, B., Nowak, A., Liu, J. H. Measuring emergent social phenomena: Dynamism, 
polarization, and clustering as order parameters of social systems. Behavioral Sci-
ence, 1994, 39(1), 1–24.
Liberman, N., Trope, Y. The role of feasibility and desirability considerations in near and 
distant future decisions: a test of temporal construal theory. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 1998, 75(1), 5–18.
Lindvall, M., Basili, V., Boehm, B., Costa, P., Dangle, K., Shull, F., Tesoriero, R., Zelkow-
itz, M. Empirical findings in Agile methods. Proceedings of the XP/Agile University 
2002; Second XP Universe and First Agile Universe Conference, Chicago: Springer-
Verlag, 2002.
Locke, E. A., Latham, G. P. A Theory of Goal Setting and Task Performance. Prentice-Hall, 
Inc., 1990.
Loughry, M. L., Tosi, H. L. Performance implications of peer monitoring. Organization 
Science. 2008, 19(6), 876–890.
Lumsden, C. J. Psychological development: Epigenetic rules and gene-culture coevolu-
tion. In Sociobiological Perspectives on Human Development. Springer New York, 
1988, pp. 234–267.
Lyytinen, K., Rose, G. M. Information System Development Agility as Organizational 
Learning, European Journal of Information Systems 2006, 15(2), 183–199.
MacNeil, M. K., Sherif, M. Norm change over subject generations as a function of arbi-
trariness of prescribed norms. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1976, 
34(5), 762.
Maier, N. R., Solem, A. R. Improving Solutions By Turning Choice Situations Into Prob-
lems. Personnel Psychology, 1962, 15(2), 151–157.

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
73
Manz, C. C., Sims Jr., H. P. Leading workers to lead themselves: The external leadership of 
self-managing work teams. Administrative Science Quarterly, 1987, 106–129.
Marini, M. M. Social values and norms. In Encyclopedia of Sociology, Borgata, E. F., Mon-
tgomery, R. J. V., eds. Macmillan, New York, 2000, 2828–2840.
Martin, R. C. Agile Software Development: Principles, Patterns, and Practices. Prentice 
Hall PTR, 2003.
Mele, A. R. Understanding and explaining real self-deception. Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences, 1997, 20(1), 127–134.
Modigliani, A., Gamson, W. A. Thinking about politics. Political Behavior, 1979, 1(1), 
5–30.
Moe, N. B., Dingsøyr, T., Dybå, T. Understanding self-organizing teams in agile software 
development. Proceedings of the Australian Software Engineering Conference—
ASWEC, 2008.
Moretti, M. M., Higgins, E. T. Own versus other standpoints in self-regulation: Devel-
opmental antecedents and functional consequences. Review of General Psychology, 
1999, 3(3), 188.
Morrow, P. C. The Theory and Measurement of Work Commitment. Jai Press, 1993.
Nerur, S., Balijepally, V. Theoretical Reflections on Agile Development Methodologies, 
Communications of the ACM 2007, 50(3), 79–83.
Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R., Mangalaraj, G. Challenges of migrating to agile methodologies. 
Communications of the ACM, 2005, 48(5), 72–78.
O’Reilly, C. A., Chatman, J. A. Culture as social control: Corporations, cults, and commit-
ment. Research in Organizational Behavior, 1996, 18, 157–200.
Oetting, E. R., Beauvais, F. Common elements in youth drug abuse: Peer clusters and other 
psychosocial factors. Journal of Drug Issues, 1987, 2, 133–l 51.
Oetting, E. R., Beauvais, F. Peer cluster theory: Drugs and the adolescent. Journal of Coun-
seling and Development, 1986, 65, 17–22.
Oldham, G. R., Cummings, A. Employee creativity: Personal and contextual factors at 
work. Academy of Management Journal, 1996, 39(3), 607–634.
Opp, K. D. The evolutionary emergence of norms. British Journal of Social Psychology, 
1982, 21(2), 139–149.
Perugini, M., Conner, M. Predicting and understanding behavioral volitions: The interplay 
between goals and behaviors. European Journal of Social Psychology, 2000, 30(5), 
705–731.
Pollis, N. P., Montgomery, R. L., Smith, T. G. Autokinetic paradigms: A reply to Alexander, 
Zucker and Brody. Sociometry, 1975, 358–373.
Rimal, R. N., Real, K. How behaviors are influenced by perceived norms a test of the the-
ory of normative social behavior. Communication Research, 2005, 32(3), 389–414.
Rivis, A., Sheeran, P. Descriptive norms as an additional predictor in the theory of planned 
behavior: A meta-analysis. Current Psychology, 2003, 22(3), 218–233.
Rogers, R. W. A protection motivation theory of fear appeals and attitude change. The 
Journal of Psychology, 1975, 91(1), 93–114.
Rosenstock, I. M. The health belief model and preventive health behavior. Health Educa-
tion Monographs, 1974, 2(4), 354–386.
Rosenthal, T. L., Zimmerman, B. J. Social Learning and Cognition. New York: Academic 
Press, 1978.

74	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Rubin, K. S. Essential Scrum: A Practical Guide to the Most Popular Agile Process. Addi-
son-Wesley, 2012.
Sarker, S., Munson, C., Chakraborty, S. “Assessing the Relative Contribution of the Facets 
of Agility to Distributed Systems Development Success: An Analytic Hierarchy Pro-
cess Approach, European Journal of Information Systems 2009, 18(4), pp. 285–299.
Schwaber, K., Beedle, M. Agile Software Development with Scrum, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2002.
Schwaber, K., Scrum Development Process, OOPSLA’95. Workshop on Business Object 
Design and Implementation. Springer-Verlag, 1995.
Schwartz, S. H. Normative Influences on Altruism. Advances in Experimental Social Psy-
chology, 1977, 10, 221–279.
Schwartz, S. H., Fleishman, J. A. Personal norms and the mediation of legitimacy effects 
on helping. Social Psychology, 1978, 306–315.
Searle, J. R. Collective intentions and actions. Intentions in Communication, 1990, 401.
Shalley, C. E., Zhou, J., Oldham, G. R. The effects of personal and contextual character-
istics on creativity: Where should we go from here? Journal of Management, 2004, 
30(6), 933–958.
Shin, S. J., Kim, T., Lee, J., Bian, L. Cognitive team diversity and individual team member 
creativity: A cross-level interaction. Academy of Management Journal, 2012, 55(1), 
197–212.
Siders, M. A., George, G., Dharwadkar, R. The relationship of internal and external com-
mitment foci to objective job performance measures. Academy of Management Jour-
nal, 2001, 44(3), 570–579.
Simons, R. How new top managers use control systems as levers of strategic renewal. 
Strategic Management Journal, 1994, 15(3), 169–189.
Simons, R. Strategic orientation and top management attention to control systems. Strate-
gic Management Journal, 1991, 12(1), 49–62.
Sorrels, J. P., Kelley, J. Conformity by omission. Personality and Social Psychology Bul-
letin, 1984, 10(2), 302–305.
Stapleton, J. DSDM: Dynamic Systems Development Method, Harlow, England: Addison 
Wesley, 1997.
Stewart, G. L., Manz, C. C., Sims, H. P. Team Work and Group Dynamics. New York, NY: 
J. Wiley, 1999.
Suchman, M. C. Managing legitimacy: Strategic and institutional approaches. Academy of 
Management Review, 1995, 20(3), 571–610.
Sutherland, J. The Roots of Scrum. How the Japanese Experience Changed Global Soft-
ware Development, 2010, Online: http://www.gbcacm.org/sites/www.gbcacm.org/
files/slides/5%20-%20Roots%20of%20Scrum.pdf (Accessed on 20 February 2014).
Swieringa, J., Wierdsma, A. Becoming a learning organization. Beyond the Learning 
Curve. Wokingham: Addison-Wesley, 1992.
Taggar, S. Individual creativity and group ability to use individual creative resources: A 
multilevel model. Academy of Management Journal, 2002, 45(2), 315–330.
Tajfel, H. Social psychology of intergroup relations. Annual Review of Psychology, 1982, 
33(1), 1–39.
Takeuchi, H., Nonaka, I. The new product development game. Harvard Business Review 
1986, 64(1), 137–146.

Self-Organizing Coordination and Control Approaches	
75
Terry, D. J., Hogg, M. A. Attitudes, behavior, and social context: The role of norms and 
group membership in social influence processes. In: J. P. Forgas & K. D. Williams 
(Eds.), Social Influence: Direct and Indirect Processes. Philadelphia: Psychology 
Press, 2001, pp. 253–270.
Terry, D. J., Hogg, M. A. Group norms and the attitude-behavior relationship: A role for 
group identification. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 1996, 22(8), 776–
793.
Tompkins, P. K., Cheney, G. Communication and unobtrusive control in contemporary 
organizations. Organizational Communication: Traditional Themes and New Direc-
tions, 1985, 13, 179–210.
Tuomela, R. The Importance of Us: A Philosophical Study of Basic Social Notions. Stan-
ford University Press, 1995.
VandeWalle, D. Development and validation of a work domain goal orientation instrument. 
Educational and Psychological Measurement, 1997, 57(6), 995–1015.
Venkatesan, M. Experimental study of consumer behavior conformity and independence. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 1966, 384–387.
Wageman, R. Interdependence and group effectiveness. Administrative Science Quarterly 
1995, 40(1),145–180.
West, D., Grant, T., Gerush, M., D’silva, D. Agile development: Mainstream adoption has 
changed agility. Forrester Research, 2010, 2, 41.
West, M. A. Reflexivity and Work Group Effectiveness: A Conceptual Integration. In: M. 
A. West (Ed.), Handbook of work group psychology. London: Wiley, 1996, pp. 525–
579.
West, M. A., Farr, J. L. Innovation and Creativity at Work: Psychology and Organizational 
Strategies. Chi Chester: Wiley, 1990.
Wilder, D. A. Some determinants of the persuasive power of in-groups and out-groups: 
Organization of information and attribution of independence. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 1990, 59(6), 1202–1213.
Williams, L., Cockburn, A. Guest Editors’ Introduction: Agile Software Development: it’s 
about feedback and change. Computer, 2003, 36(6), 39–43.
Woodman, R. W., Sawyer, J. E., Griffin, R. W. Toward a theory of organizational creativity. 
Academy of Management Review, 1993, 18(2), 293–321.


DIGITAL OPPORTUNITIES FOR 
FIRST-YEAR UNIVERSITY STUDENTS’ 
MOTIVATIONAL ENHANCEMENT
DACE RATNIECE
Distance Education Study Centre, Riga Technical University, 
Kronvalda Boulevard 1, Riga, LV 1010, Latvia; Faculty of Sciences and 
Engineering, Liepaja University, Liela Str.14, Liepaja, LV-3401, Latvia
CONTENTS
Abstract.................................................................................................... 77
4.1  Introduction..................................................................................... 78
4.2  Latvian Students’ Desire to Use Social Networks to the  
Learning Process—A Good Incentive to Carry Out Such  
Research in Universities................................................................. 81
4.3  Practical Evaluation Method and Results....................................... 82
4.4  Young People Motivation to Engage in Distance  
Learning Process............................................................................. 85
4.5  Conclusions..................................................................................... 88
Acknowledgment..................................................................................... 89
Keywords................................................................................................. 89
References................................................................................................ 89
ABSTRACT
Young people, who are the fundamental asset of our economies and soci-
eties across the world, face a real and increasing difficulties in finding a 
CHAPTER 4

78	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
decent job with each day. Three additional merging factors are worsening 
the youth employment crisis even further, causing challenges while tran-
siting to decent jobs, namely (i) numbers of discouraged youth, in other 
words, young people, who are neither in education nor in employment 
or training (NEETs) are increasing, (ii) unemployment among university 
graduates of tertiary education in general are rising and (iii) potential 
NEET group students, especially in the 1st year, who, apart from reduced 
study fees, require extra motivation and moral support from educators. The 
study aim—to find the e-learning and conventional learning as the opti-
mal ratio for 1st year students to increase motivation. Research methods—
during two academic years (2013/2014th and 2014/2015th.) the first year 
students of the course “Entrepreneurship (Distance Learning e-course)” 
were tested about quality of this course using different research methods. 
Students had been tested by: (i) survey about the course on “Entrepre-
neurship” (Distance Learning e-course) assessment; (ii) psychologist 
M.Lusher color test, based on the method of projection individual’s emo-
tional state of the diagnosis; (iii) the degree of risk appetite according to 
Schubert’s method of success; (iv) motivation after T.Elersa methods, fail-
ure avoidance motivation in correlation with T.Elersa method; (v) survey 
about optimal proportion between traditional and e-learning studies. The 
chapter contains analyzes of these results.
4.1  INTRODUCTION
Twenty-first century higher education paradigm is based on the teacher-
student mutual cooperation and direct-to-student. Unfortunately, Latvian 
for the sixth consecutive year, the number of students experiencing a 
downward trend. 2012/2013 academic year, together studied 94,474 stu-
dents at the Latvian higher education institutions. Compared to last year 
the number of students has decreased by 6% (Progress report on the Lat-
vian National Reform Program in the context of implementation Strategy 
“Europe 2020”). The number of students has decreased over the last four 
years due to demographic factors (demographic pit), as well as the eco-
nomic crisis and the general economic emigration, suggesting a decrease 
in access to higher education for economic reasons.

Digital Opportunities	
79
It is important to note that Latvian National Action Plan aims by 2020 
to ensure 34–36% of the population (30–34 age group) in higher educa-
tion. Ministry of Education and Science is responsible for the following 
key policies and measures with higher education population increase:
•	
modernization of higher education;
•	
the modernization of material and technical resources and resource 
efficiency in higher education institutions;
•	
higher education equal access opportunities;
•	
studies and research quality improvement activities;
•	
attraction of foreign students (Kapenieks, 2012).
European Commission document ‘Opening up education: innovative 
teaching and learning for all through new technologies and open educa-
tional resources’ /COM/2013/0654/ highlights that today’s students want 
to personalized treatment, greater cooperation and better links between 
formal and nonformal education, which can largely be implemented by 
school learning using digital technologies. In addition, in this respect, the 
European Union (hereinafter EU) risk falling further behind other regions 
of the world. United States and some Asian countries are investing in ICT 
strategies to transform education and training. These countries are trans-
forming their education systems, modernize and make it international, 
achieving remarkable results in schools and universities in access to edu-
cation and the cost of teaching practice and the teaching institutions glob-
ally renowned reputation or brand promotion. An example would be that a 
large portion of digital content provided by market participants from out-
side Europe, including educational institutions that offer training programs 
on a global scale through massive open online courses (hereinafter—the 
MOOC) (Progress report on the Latvian National Reform Program in the 
context of implementation Strategy “Europe 2020”, 2013).
In addition to increasing access to education, greater use of new tech-
nologies and open educational resources that can help reduce the costs of 
educational institutions and students, particularly disadvantaged groups. 
Thus MOOC should use the opportunity to:
•	
studies in universities embarked on, but unfortunately due to higher 
earning leavers students who work all day;
•	
school leavers NEET group of students (NEET—not in employ-
ment, education or training—a person who is not employed and 

80	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
is not involved in the educational process) (Progress report on the 
Latvian National Reform Program in the context of implementa-
tion Strategy “Europe 2020”, 2013);
•	
school prospective NEET group, especially in the 1st year, students 
who have no cost-cutting is a great need for motivation and moral 
support from educators.
All three target groups linked by a common need to deal with the prob-
lem—as soon as possible to gain experience or to provide educational 
opportunities to live and work stably. Are there any initiatives to remedy 
this situation, or so far they have been a success? Of course, there are also 
extreme making choices—the opportunity to migrate, but if it helps in the 
long run?
The 2013 summer EU higher education modernization high-level work-
ing group came up with 16 recommendations of teaching and learning to 
improve the quality of higher education in universities of the EU modern-
ization of high-level working group teaching and learning and improve the 
quality of the recommended use of new technologies. Latvian institutions 
of higher education new technologies are used in various stages of develop-
ment, but with university and government support for the EU is trying to 
help teachers to develop their teaching skills and online teaching and learn-
ing forms that have become available right now, in the digital era.
Higher education institutions should be encouraged, supported and also 
take into account the students’ feedback, if it could help detect problems 
in time teaching and learning environment, and quickly and efficiently to 
improve the environment. As noted by the majority of respondents from 
industry, higher education already takes into account student feedback 
on teachers’ work, for example, through surveys. Other recommendation 
requires that training programs should be developed and monitored by 
teaching staff, students, university graduates and labor market participants 
of discussing and cooperating. New teaching and learning methods in 
need of skills required facilities to help students find a job. Recommenda-
tion to improve the skills of university teachers to teach their subjects, 
to learn new teaching methods, forms and implement an interdisciplin-
ary approach to the development of students’ innovative thinking entre-
preneur, organized by each higher education institution in Latvian. Each 
teacher develops individual study methods of teaching.

Digital Opportunities	
81
The goal of the chapter is to make 1st year Higher Educational institu-
tions students’ problem analysis in order to understand their motivation to 
engage in distance learning process.
Research methods—a study was carried out in the lectures and final 
exam of course “Business (Distance Learning e-course)” during the 1st 
year students (respondents) participating on a voluntary basis. The follow-
ing Empirical data extraction method where used:
•	
a survey about course on “Entrepreneurship (Distance Learning 
e-course)” assessment, developed by D.Ratniece;
•	
psychologist M.Lüscher color test based on the method of pro-
jection of the individual psychoemotional diagnosis (Ņikiforovs, 
2008);
•	
methods for diagnostics of the degree of risk preparedness 
(Schubert), motivation to success (methods of diagnostics of the 
person on the motivation for success Т.Elersa) and motivation to 
avoiding failures (methods of diagnostics of the person on the 
motivation for avoiding of failures Т. Elersa) (Ņikiforovs, 2008).
4.2  LATVIAN STUDENTS’ DESIRE TO USE SOCIAL NETWORKS 
TO THE LEARNING PROCESS—A GOOD INCENTIVE TO 
CARRY OUT SUCH RESEARCH IN UNIVERSITIES
“Samsung’s future school” student survey, which took place in February 
2014, found that 75% of Latvian students in favor of using social networks 
to communicate not only with friends but also with teachers and learning 
useful information. This survey was conducted teacher training programs 
in digital “Samsung School Future” program (2014). Online “Draugiem.
lv” filled in a 713 pupils aged 12 to 18 years.
The most common social network “Facebook,” “Twitter,” “Draugiem.
lv” and another networks see the benefits of training of students in situa-
tions where for various reasons have impeded school hours and follow up 
remotely. In this way students can quickly learn the latest study material, 
get advice, teacher comments and information about homework. Also, stu-
dents would like to build a virtual environment of like-minded groups, 
discussions and “brainstorming,” discussing the subject matter and the 

82	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
common class entertainment. Almost a quarter of or 36% of the students 
assess the social networks as a good platform to look for learning useful 
reading material, view videos, photos and listen to audio reflections, or 
“podcasts.” A similar number of respondents in the social networks choose 
to play educational computer games, participate in after-school counseling 
and contact with different fields of expertise. However, only 13% of the 
students themselves are interested in building a digital learning materials.
Learning digital skills teachers can diversify teaching methods and to 
develop creative, innovative and curiosity-enhancing training materials. 
The students are interesting to perform tasks online and to operate in an 
unusual environment. Social networks help to motivate students to learn, 
and that is also good for data selection training, formulation of evalua-
tion and opinion. The challenge of teachers, however, is a task of social 
networking evaluation system developing, otherwise the pupils’ interest 
fades. Although students will be happy to communicate with teachers, 
social networks and one-third choose to follow his teacher, but the major-
ity of students (67%) would not want teachers to keep track of them. 
About a quarter of students surveyed believe that social networks have 
their private space, not intended for teachers and students do not want 
them to reveal their thoughts and views on personal issues.
Some years ago, U.S. researchers conducted a study on the basis of 
the results and concluded that the best way to build a digital technology-
based learning environment (Kim, 2009). Methods, which integrate digital 
technology may vary depending on the types of technologies available, 
teachers ‘expectations of pupils’ needs and academic research purposes. 
In a study designed to assess the fifth and eighth grade students’ reading 
skills, it was discovered that some students of literary and linguistic skills 
performance has improved, thanks to the enhanced use of digital technol-
ogy (Kim, 2009).
4.3  PRACTICAL EVALUATION METHOD AND RESULTS
From October till December of academy year 2013/2014th and academy 
year 2014/2015th author as the Assistant of Riga Technical University 
Professor A.Kapenieks, who provided the course “Business (Distance 

Digital Opportunities	
83
Learning e-course),” supplementing the lecture content, presenting her 
study entitled “Use of Social microblogging to motivate young peo-
ple (NEETS) to participate in distance education” to 1st year students. 
From October till December the course “Business (Distance Learning 
e-course)” was taken within two home works—“Business Ideas searches 
on the Internet” and “Your business idea.” The course was taken through 
Riga Technical Universities e-learning environment ORTUS. Author 
evaluated all home works in the e-learning environment ORTUS, added 
comments, encourage and motivate students to prepare business plans 
better till the final exam at the end of the semester. Each comment was 
prepared according to the content analysis. The assessment of the student 
homework was done by author concerning the seven criteria: (i) actual-
ity or viability of idea; (ii) technological solution or how to enforce; (iii) 
marketing—promotion of goods or services in the market; (iv) competi-
tion; (v) financial security (e.g., planned revenues, expenses, financial 
support for the company’s start-up and ongoing development (bank loan, 
other resources, etc.); (vi) the company’s ability to realize the idea; (vii) 
the potential risks.
Here are some author’s comments, contained in the RTU ORTUS e-learn-
ing environment after assessment of two home works of 130 students:
“It is a good idea and a good understanding of LV local economic prob-
lems and possible solutions.”
“The idea is great, your involvement and knowledge is felt. Descrip-
tion well-structured and well founded. Good luck to implement plans! If 
you intend to implement the idea in Latvia urge timely improvement Lat-
vian language. Based on your good vision I could not be left uncorrected 
Latvian spelling errors. I hope it will be a good support for your business 
plan. “
“Cannot be assessed, possibly innovative creative ideas, due to the 
stingy information. Please summon one’s strength and prepare the busi-
ness plan more seriously!”
“The idea is very innovative, as long as it has not been known before. 
Before two years one high school student team participated to the Junior 
Achievement Latvia competition with this great business idea. This stu-
dent team received a favorable assessment. As the company has fared 
forth, is not known. Have a good luck for you too!”

84	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
“You have already submitted almost a complete business plan! Good 
luck in implementing the ideas! Note that this region is largely popular 
among hunters organizations, which could be your potential customers 
will stay for a reasonable price.”
“Excellent idea in people’s everyday needs, while saving time and 
ensuring a truly preferred diet, finding the opportunity to learn about its 
health. Very wisely points out the potential risks. Just do not use the word 
‘tablet’ of the Latvian language in the text, as there may be a misunder-
standing. Consistently sticking to the same wording in Latvian. Have a 
nice time with this innovation to conquer the world, painting business 
image of Latvia!”
The author’s comments were made in positive, supportive and motiva-
tional manner supporting each student. During this period, RTU ORTUS 
e-learning environment could well be traced to the original falls for 1st 
year students. About one-third did more first homework than the second 
homework.
In order to establish whether and what are the factors hindering the 
continuing education of students, in the middle of the first semester of 
academy year 2013/2014th, the author carried out the above 1st year stu-
dent testing under a Swiss psychologist M.Lücher color test based on 
the method of projection of the individual psychoemotional diagnosis. 
Before testing of student, the author visited the lectures “Social psychol-
ogy course” of associate professor O.Ņikiforovs in Baltic International 
Academy for the design and preparation of test forms (Ņikiforovs, 2008).
The Lüscher color test is a psychological test invented by Dr. Max 
Lüscher in Basel, Switzerland. Max Lüscher believed that sensory per-
ception of color is objective and universally shared by all, but that color 
preferences are subjective, and that this distinction allows subjective states 
to be objectively measured by using test colors.
Lüscher believed that because the color selections are guided in an 
unconscious manner, they reveal the person as they really are, not as they 
perceive themselves or would like to be perceived (Ņikiforovs, 2008).
He believed that personality traits could be identified based on one’s 
choice of color. Therefore, subjects who select identical color combina-
tions have similar personalities. In order to measure this, he conducted 
a test in which subjects we shown 8 different colored cards and asked 

Digital Opportunities	
85
to place them in order of preference. On the other hand each color posi-
tion in the color line are analyzed. In this case, the first position of color 
down human goals and aspirations, but at last—the repressed needs and 
impulses. Test data results was sent to each student personally. After the 
collection of RTU’s color test data results it can be concluded that this test 
is necessary for the first year students to enhance motivation. Then, in time 
to determine the appropriate educational support the need for change in 
the learning process, balancing the traditional and e-learning form the vol-
ume to students that they can be customized according to the psychoemo-
tional condition moment.
4.4  YOUNG PEOPLE MOTIVATION TO ENGAGE IN DISTANCE 
LEARNING PROCESS
Methods for diagnostics of the degree of risk preparedness (Schubert), 
motivation to success (methods of diagnostics of the person on the moti-
vation for success Т.Elersa) and motivation to avoiding failures (methods 
of diagnostics of the person on the motivation for avoiding of failures 
Т. Elersa) have been tested for all students three times in the course in 
2014/2015th academic year: at the beginning, in the middle of course 
and at the end. There was correlation between risk level preparedness 
and course evaluation at the beginning 0.734, at the middle 0.633 and at 
the end 0.654. Coefficient decreasing and after raising characterizes that 
students in the beginning are higher motivated than in the middle of the 
course.
Many respondents indicate the success of the course learning objective 
and self-critically evaluated in the course gain the skills and knowledge 
of the business plan. A number of contributions respondents highlight lec-
tures existing friendly atmosphere, teacher through knowledge, positive 
attitude, responsiveness, interesting narrative. Tables 4.1 and 4.2 of the 
study about the use of the form efficiency is reflected in the students’ sup-
port for both traditional forms of study, as well as e-learning
Respondents very carefully study the two kinds of form of negative 
and positive aspects, since the completion of the training time person-
ally felt, why learning requires direct contact, and situations in which use 

86	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
e-learning opportunities. This questionnaire respondents reflected com-
ments for e-learning balance:
“E-learning is not a substitute for traditional studios at the moment, 
but they can be a good tool for learning.”
“E-learning is useful because it can get a lecture files and, if never 
been to a lecture, it’s a great help.”
“E-learning suitable for cost reduction and to provide a compelling 
learning environment. Traditional forms necessary to maintain interest in 
the course.”
“Traditional forms of studies must be more, because the presence of 
asking the teacher can better understand the subject matter.”
“E-learning should be available for all subjects, because it is very 
convenient.”
TABLE 4.1  Student Evaluation of the Course Business (Distance Learning Course) 
During the Study Assessing the Effectiveness of the Form (2013/2014th Academic Year)
Form of study 
Low rating 
Average rating
A high rating
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Lecture
 
 
 
3
6
16
34
29
11
6
Discussion 
 
 
2
3
5
13
18
35
21
8
Homework preparing and 
inserting in ORTUS system
 
 
1
 
7
11
19
35
15
17
Teacher comments in ORTUS 
system
 
 
1
2
7
12
15
33
17
18
e-Portfolio utility
9
5
6
3
10
16
26
16
10
4
TABLE 4.2  Student Evaluation of the Course Business (Distance Learning Course) 
During the Study Assessing the Effectiveness of the Form (2014/2015th Academic Year)
Form of study 
Low rating 
Average rating
A high rating
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Lecture
1
1
2
1
1
10
25
18
12
8
Discussion 
 
1
1
1
1
3
13
24
18
17
Homework preparing and 
inserting in ORTUS system
 
 
1
3
4
5
15
20
15
16
Teacher comments in ORTUS 
system
1
 
1
2
4
4
9
14
12
31
e-Portfolio utility
1
2
 
 
 
4
17
24
12
19

Digital Opportunities	
87
Respondents indicate that e-learning and traditional forms of study 
needs to be balanced, because e-learning provides a great advantage to 
learn anywhere, anytime, and successful conduct of the study process 
and quality education are important, however, is the work of a teacher. 
Respondents’ assessment of the teacher’s three core competencies are gen-
erally as follows:
•	
responsive, intelligent, good contact with the students, generous, 
sociable, demanding adequate heights of their knowledge, under-
standing, the ability to listen, motivate, etc.;
•	
wise with the knowledge economy, the ability to lead discussions, 
the ability to appeal to, the ability to prepare a training plan, a com-
prehensive understanding of different areas, a teaching of the sub-
ject with interest, etc.;
•	
is a specialist in their field, with good experience in his field, a 
great life experience, knowledge of foreign experience, etc.
The first competency among the three main teacher or educator compe-
tencies respondents indicate positive character traits, suggesting the need 
for the learning process to develop positive communication. Only then, as 
the next teacher competence, mostly referred to the professional qualities 
and experience.
Very important information is provided by respondents concerning 
data about student previously graduated from an educational institution. 
To above examination in RTU marked an interesting trend. RTU electron-
ics and telecommunications specialty is studying by number of the same 
educational institution graduates. So for a good and excellent education 
quality is preciously to mention a number of general secondary and sec-
ondary vocational educational establishments.
Author participated two times in the 1st year examination of students 
of three specialties. For that exam named “Commercial (Distance learning 
e-course)” students prepared presentations. Author evaluated content of 
students’ presentation and presentation skills. During the exam, the author 
conducted a survey of students, asking her to fill out a questionnaire pre-
pared by the 5 key questions:
•	
the course rating knowledge gained professional context of assess-
ing the low (by 1–3 points), moderate (4–7 points) or high (8–10 
points), as well as adding a comment;

88	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
•	
during the course of studies assessing the effectiveness of a form 
10-point rating system, by adding a comment;
•	
e-learning desired balance, indicating the relationship between tra-
ditional forms of study and e-learning forms, as well as adding a 
comment;
•	
the three main teacher competence, adding a comment;
•	
reference for a few details about yourself-gender, age, graduated 
educational institution.
During the exam are issued 107 questionnaires in 2013/2014th aca-
demic year, 69 questionnaires in 2013/2014th academic year. All ques-
tionnaires was filled by all respondents. Tables 4.1 and 4.2 includes the 
students’ evaluation of the course “Business Training Course (Distance 
Learning e-course).”
4.5  CONCLUSIONS
Higher education paradigm is based on the teacher-student mutual coop-
eration, which urges for personalized treatment of students, greater coop-
eration and better links between formal and nonformal education, which 
can largely be implemented by school learning using digital technologies.
According to learning and teaching quality assessment made by stu-
dents, it can be concluded that using of traditional forms and e-learning 
opportunities is necessary in similar proportions. Higher education institu-
tions should take into account the students’ feedback. They could help to 
detect problems in teaching and learning environment, as well as faster 
and more efficiently to improve the environment.
The determination of risk motivation degree is recommended for 
Higher Educational institutions’ 1st-year students. That is necessary to be 
able to predict the pedagogical support, balancing traditional and e-learn-
ing form of quantity.
First year students of psychoemotional condition for the determina-
tion of recommended M.Lücher color test at the beginning of the study, 
to allow timely and appropriate educational support to identify the need 
for change and balance the traditional and e-learning form the amount that 
students could be customized according to their psychoemotional state of 
necessity.

Digital Opportunities	
89
Educational institutions should be applied to traditional forms of study 
and e-learning, as an e-learning provides a great advantage to learn any-
where, anytime. Quality education play an important role in obtaining a 
teacher to direct contact with students.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly funded by European Social Fund, project “The 
development of doctoral studies in the University of Liepaja,” grant No. 
2009/0127/1 DP/1.1.2.1.2./IPIA/VIAA/018.
KEYWORDS
••
digital options
••
e-learning
••
NEET group
••
quality of education
••
teacher’s competence
REFERENCES
Kapenieks, A., Žuga, B., Štāle, G., Jirgensons, M. Internet, Television and Mobile Tech-
nologies for Innovative e-Learning. Society. Integration, Education: Proceedings of 
the International Scientifical Conference, May 25–26th Rezekne: Rezekne Higher 
Education Institution, 2012, Vol. I, pp. 303–311, ISSN 1691–5887.
Progress report on the Latvian National Reform Program in the context of implementation 
Strategy “Europe 2020”. 2013, Riga, pp. 56–57, Retrieved on 19 November 2014 
from http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/nd/nrp2013_latvia_lv.pdf.
Ratniece, D. Social microblog TWITTER use to motivate young people (NEETs) to 
involve in distance education. Society, Integration, Education: Proceedings of the 
International Scientifical Conference, May 24–25th, 2013, Vol. II, Rezekne: Reze-
kne Higher Education Institution, 2013, pp. 449–464, ISSN 1691–5887, Retrieved 
on 22 May 2015 from http://www.ru.lv/ckfinder/userfiles/RAweb/Saturs/zinatne/
zinatniskie_instituti/personas_socializacijas_petijumu_instituts/izdevumi/2013/
II%20da%C4%BCa.pdf.

90	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Kim, H. Y. A review of “interactive literacy education”: Facilitating literacy environments 
through technology. Language and Education, 2009, 23(3), 287–290.
Judson, E. Improving technology literacy: Does it open doors to traditional content? Edu-
cation Technology Research and Development, 2010. 58(3), 271–284.
Nikiforovs, O. Social Psychology. The Course, Baltic International Academy. Riga, 
2008, 6 p.
Samsung School for the Future, 2014, Riga https://www.linkedin.com/pub/eva-mezite/ 
23/1a9/a6b.

BUILDING A SUCCESSFUL 
INNOVATION PLATFORM 
FOR AFFORDABLE MEDICAL 
TECHNOLOGY IN LOW RESOURCE 
SETTINGS
RAMAKRISHNA PAPPU1 and JAGDISH CHATURVEDI2
1Business Associate, InnAccel, 5th Floor, Aanand Towers, 
Municipal No. 4, Rajaram Mohan Roy Road, Ward No. 77, 
Sampangiramanagar, Bangalore–560025, India
2Director Clinical Innovations, InnAccel, 5th Floor, Aanand Towers, 
Municipal No. 4, Rajaram Mohan Roy Road, Ward No. 77, 
Sampangiramanagar, Bangalore–560025, India
CONTENTS
Abstract.................................................................................................... 91
5.1  Introduction..................................................................................... 92
Keywords................................................................................................110
References...............................................................................................110
Appendices..............................................................................................111
ABSTRACT
The chapter emphasizes the need for an innovation platform for success-
ful accomplishments and taking the example of healthcare innovations, 
explores the different facets that need to be brought together to create an 
CHAPTER 5

92	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
innovation platform in the Medical Technology space and its use today to 
enable affordable medical technology in low resource settings.
The authors use various case studies of innovation platforms accessible 
to healthcare innovators and highlight the thought process behind devel-
oping such platforms (Stanford Biodesign, John’s Hopkins innovation 
platform, CAMtech innovation platform, InnAccel acceleration program, 
Government run incubation programs, etc.).
The chapter details a stage-wise process that begins with the identifi-
cation of gaps in the ecosystem through feasibility studies to setting up 
a physical Medical Technology innovation platform. Further, the authors 
highlight the need for incorporation of structured processes for needs 
identification and product development embedded within innovation plat-
forms. An overview of how this is being used today in different settings 
are described.
5.1  INTRODUCTION
“Innovation platforms are ways to bring together different stakeholders 
to identify solutions to common problems or to achieve common goals.” 
CGIAR and ILRI, in their brief on innovation platforms, provide a suc-
cinct definition of the terminology as it has come to be used today.
“An innovation platform is a space for learning and change. It is a 
group of individuals with different backgrounds and interests. The mem-
bers come together to diagnose problems, identify opportunities and find 
ways to achieve their goals” (http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/pdf/outputs/Water-
foodCP/Brief1.pdf).
Innovation platforms are used in various fields from agriculture to 
networks to medical technology to innovate new solutions, products, and 
technology to address problems faced by the community at large. These 
innovation platforms tackle challenges and opportunities at different lev-
els—from a city or across a country in a geographic setting, or through a 
value chain in an economic sector, and hence can be thought of as work-
ing on several levels. A platform based approach often works well in areas 
of high complexity—where the solutions to problems need a multidisci-
plinary approach, such as in medical technology innovation.

Building a Successful Innovation Platform	
93
Innovation platforms are created by different types of institutions 
and individuals. These could be in the private sector, by the govern-
ment, or even by developmental nonprofits. Typically, innovation plat-
forms have a focus that would bring different kinds of people together. 
The focus could vary from a specific technology to an industry vertical. 
Often, an important component of a successful innovation platform is 
the capacity building ability and opportunities available. These could 
be from basic training to develop its members skills to a programs that 
teach more complicated processes. But the goal is to enable more of 
its members and stakeholders to become problem-solvers to make the 
platform succeed.
Innovation platforms can be thought of as dynamic agents for system-
atic attempts to enable change in the ecosystem. At its core, innovation 
platforms, facilitate dialog and understanding among stakeholders and 
provides space to create a common vision and mutual trust (http://r4d.
dfid.gov.uk/pdf/outputs/WaterfoodCP/Brief1.pdf). Innovation platforms 
allow groups to come together to identify the problems faced by the com-
munity in the chosen focus area and to together develop solutions that 
would be beyond what an individual could themselves typically hope 
to accomplish. It can be argued that innovation platforms lead to better 
informed decisions in the innovation process as a result of more mem-
bers’ contributions. These lead to opportunities to create wider impact for 
the benefit of the community through demand-driven approaches to inno-
vative research and development. Innovation platforms enable collective 
contribution of its members to be greater than the sum of its members’ 
individual contributions.
Innovation platforms can’t be considered the solution to all problems, 
and could deter innovation in certain contexts and situations. The prog-
ress of the innovative work, through such innovative platforms, typically 
requires the buy-in of all the members in the group. Homann-Kee Tui et al. 
state that ‘members have to be willing to work together and trust each other. 
Social and institutional conflicts, lack of political will, and power structures 
can hinder the growth of the innovation platform’ (http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/
pdf/outputs/WaterfoodCP/Brief1.pdf). Innovation platforms often require a 
long-term perspective in its workings to become successful in its outputs. 
It could be difficult to monitor and evaluate such platforms systematically. 

94	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Hence, the appropriateness of innovation platforms to foster innovation 
in different areas would depend on the circumstances. Sometimes “other 
approaches, such as more traditional research coordination meetings, 
stakeholder consultations, or participatory research methods, may be 
more appropriate… (and) these methods can be used in conjunction with 
innovation platforms” (http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/pdf/outputs/WaterfoodCP/
Brief1.pdf).
One such innovation platform was created by InnAccel, a medical 
technology accelerator based in Bangalore, India. InnAccel is India’s 
first medical technology acceleration company focused on innovation 
for low and mid-income markets. It has built a proprietary innovation 
platform, and forged partnerships with national and global entities, to 
support startups and entrepreneurs. InnAccel is led by an experienced 
management team and advised by industry leading experts (http://www.
innaccel.com). However, before such an innovation platform was set up, 
the company conducted a feasibility study to understand the demand, 
the market, the stakeholders and the ecosystem at large, which would 
enable it to provide the most value to the members of its innovation 
platform.
The Feasibility Study done by InnAccel was conducted by an exter-
nal consultancy firm called Strategic Development Services that special-
izes in such infrastructural projects. It was conducted over 8-months and 
included extensive secondary as well as primary research. The primary 
market research included 35 in-depth, one-on-one interviews with a broad 
cross-section of stakeholders, and 15 focus group participants. Stakehold-
ers from academia, clinics, hospitals, government agencies, investors as 
well as large and small MedTech CEOs were interviewed from October 
2012 through April 2013.
The outcome of the research was that requisite services and infrastruc-
ture specific to MedTech innovation did not exist in India, and that there 
was a tremendous pent-up demand for such an ecosystem by MedTech 
startups. The respondents indicated that the ecosystem was suboptimal 
with key gaps that were barriers to success for MedTech startups. Some of 
the key gaps identified are in the Table 5.1.
Further analysis of the results revealed some of the key elements 
that InnAccel would need to provide in its innovation platform to be 

Building a Successful Innovation Platform	
95
successful. These key elements from the Feasibility Study are stated in 
Table 5.2.
The findings from the Feasibility Study were revalidated by the 
respondents, and viewed as barriers to success for start-up MedTech ven-
tures. The study indicated that InnAccel would be filling a huge gap in the 
market, and providing a sorely needed resource for innovators. An initial 
concept of the working of the innovation platform devised was tested out 
by different respondent groups. Further, a 100% of all respondent groups 
reacted positively to the concept and validated the demand for a MedTech 
Accelerator.  Not only the concept, but also the business model along with 
the revenue model was tested out on the so-called ‘customers’ of the accel-
erator—the startups and entrepreneurs working in Medical Technology. 
These startups and entrepreneurs provided strong validation for InnAc-
cel’s fee + equity stake model for acceleration services, with more than 
90% of respondents reacting favorably to the model, when accompanied 
with access to capital.
TABLE 5.1  Gaps Identified in the Indian Medical Technology Ecosystem
1.	 Access to clinical partners and technical resources.
2.	 Access to capital.
3.	 Product engineering, development, and regulatory expertise.
4.	 Access to labs and equipment.
5.	 Lack of ideas and understanding of clinical needs.
6.	 Lack of good team members and managers.
Source: Feasibility Study for a MedTech Accelerator, Strategic Development Services. 
June 2013.
TABLE 5.2  Key Elements for a Successful MedTech Accelerator in India
1.	 Clinical, academic and technical partner networks.
2.	 Capital and access to capital.
3.	 Product design, development, and regulatory support.
4.	 Physical lab infrastructure (including prototyping facilities).
Source: Feasibility Study for a MedTech Accelerator, Strategic Development Services. 
June 2013.

96	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Strategic Development Services, based on its expertise and experience, 
even provided a recommendation to InnAccel based on its analysis of the 
data collected from the study. It said, “Based on historical success in other 
geographies as well as our experience and information developed during 
the course of this study, we believe that the for-profit, investment portfolio 
model is best suited to the vision and mission of InnAccel.” It even identi-
fied that the experience, reputation and domain expertise of the principals 
was the key success factor, which it described as the ‘most critical element 
of success.’
Once it was concluded that the development of a MedTech Accelerator 
was not only feasible, but also sorely needed, some of the other recom-
mendations included are Table 5.3.
InnAccel then tried to understand the MedTech ecosystem in India 
and its extent. It found emerging MedTech clusters in several parts of 
India, and a growing interest in MedTech commercialization and innova-
tion by most academic institutions. There was some evidence of nascent 
cluster development in all of the major  population centers, but Bangalore 
continually emerged as the most logical choice for the initial location. 
Bangalore has a concentration of research institutions (both public and 
private), as well as the most advanced entrepreneurial culture in India, 
and a GDP of $83 billion. Bangalore is also recognized globally as a 
technology hub, and is one of the top preferred entrepreneurial locations 
in the world. About 70% of the top venture capital firms in India have a 
presence in Bangalore.
TABLE 5.3  Strategic Development Service’s Key Recommendations
1.	 Development of a 15–20,000 square foot accelerator facility, which will accommo-
date, and provide lab infrastructure, to 15–20 early stage MedTech firms.
2.	 Provide an engineering and prototype development platform.
3.	 Continue to develop strategic partnerships with sources of IP.
4.	 Provide MedTech-specific business support services.
5.	 Serve as the focal point for MedTech networks (mentors, advisors,  clinicians, 
service providers) and cluster development.
6.	 Provide additional sources regarding access to capital.
Source: Feasibility Study for a MedTech Accelerator, Strategic Development Services. 
June 2013.

Building a Successful Innovation Platform	
97
InnAccel decided that it would be highly selective regarding tenants 
for the Accelerator. Sources of potential tenants were to come primarily 
from academic and research institutions initially, and subsequently aug-
mented by various sources such as potential investors, hospitals, corporate 
spin-outs, independent research institutions, community MedTech entre-
preneurs and to a lesser degree, start-ups attracted from outside the Kar-
nataka region.
InnAccel has taken a holistic approach to MedTech innovation, and 
provides a complete bouquet of services and infrastructure specific to the 
MedTech industry.  The pillars of its innovation platform are in Figure 5.1:
InnAccel provides an 18–36 month acceleration program to selected 
entrepreneurs and teams. It helps teams convert ideas and concepts to 
market-ready and regulatory compliant medical products. It aims to do so 
while minimizing risk, cost, and time to market for the startup. InnAccel 
offers lab infrastructure at its Bangalore Accelerator, along with expe-
rienced management support, and access to capital to help the startups 
succeed. The model for this innovation platform is to partner with entre-
preneurs and provide physical infrastructure, clinical, engineering, and 
FIGURE 5.1  Multi-pronged acceleration model (Source: InnAccel’s Corporate Deck 
October 2015).

98	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
business expertise along with access to capital in exchange for an equity 
stake in the company.
InnAccel has formed strong partnerships and strategic relationships 
with a number of national and global entities including medical colleges 
and hospitals in various regions that enable startups to gain clinical input, 
conduct fieldwork, and carry out early testing of products. InnAccel’s rela-
tionships with leading academic institutes in the country provide access 
to students as well as strong engineering and technical expertise to our 
startups. In addition, the global partnerships enhance the flow of ideas, 
funds, and entrepreneurs to the innovation platform built in Bangalore. 
InnAccel’s Acceleration process is outlined in Figure 5.2.
The pathway to successful device development is cyclical and iterative 
as ideas are prototyped, tested, improved, retested, optimized and final-
ized. InnAccel has built a proprietary Product Engineering and Develop-
ment Platform, which coupled with acceleration support, enables startups 
to undergo the product development path successfully, identifying and 
managing risk effectively during execution.
One of the key elements of such an innovation platform is the selection 
of appropriate entrepreneurs and projects. Criteria such as in Table 5.4 
could be used to guide the selection process for an innovation platform.
FIGURE 5.2  InnAccel’s Acceleration process (Source: InnAccel’s Corporate Deck 
October 2015).

Building a Successful Innovation Platform	
99
One of the key facets of a successful innovation platform is capacity 
building. InnAccel, through its Entrepreneur in Residence program aims to 
train passionate individuals in this regard. InnAccel looks to support entre-
preneurs who have a passion to transform healthcare through MedTech 
innovation. Entrepreneurs could explore an innovative idea, clinical area, 
or preidentified clinical needs in a structured fashion. The Entrepreneur-in 
Residence program is custom designed for entrepreneurs—either working 
alone or in an existing team, and is typically completed in 4–6 months. 
This program helps entrepreneurs achieve a comprehensive understand-
ing of the clinical need and environment, explore different solutions to 
the identified need, and develop a viable business plan to develop and 
commercialize their solutions. The program culminates in a presentation 
of the business plan to InnAccel’s management team, which evaluates the 
entrepreneur for acceleration. The selected entrepreneurs are accepted into 
InnAccel’s acceleration program and become eligible for seed funding for 
their venture.
Another such innovation platform is CAMTech, which is the Consor-
tium of Affordable Medical Technologies, based out of the Massachu-
setts General Hospital in Boston. The CAMTech India program focuses 
on technologies for Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, and Child Health 
(RMNCH). It follows a public-private-partnership model that is “designed 
to accelerate medical technology innovation in order to improve RMNCH 
outcomes around preventable deaths in India and other low- and mid-
income countries” (http://www.massgeneralcenterforglobalhealth.org/
camtech/#mission). The program is funded by USAID, Bacca Founda-
tion, and Omidyar Network. CAMTech works with multiple stakeholders 
in the Indian Medical Technology ecosystem to not only develop new 
technologies in RMNCH but also to build local entrepreneurial capacity. 
TABLE 5.4  InnAccel’s Selection Criteria For Acceleration
1.	 Clinical need you are solving.
2.	 The technology solution you have developed, including Intellectual Property  
information.
3.	 The market and business opportunity estimates.
4.	 The team composition with team members’ backgrounds.
5.	 And the current status of the project.

100	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
CAMTech has a similar program in Uganda, with similar goals targeting 
the African ecosystem (Figure 5.3).
CAMTech conducts Clinical Summits, Medical Hack-a-thons, Innova-
tion Awards, along with setting up Co-Creation Labs. In addition, it has 
setup an Online Innovation Platform that aims to address a critical gap in 
the ‘MedTech ecosystem by providing expertise, resources and targeted 
support to global health innovators.’ This Online Innovation Platform 
would bring innovators in touch with experts, investors, clinical oppor-
tunities, other partners and resources necessary to accelerate the develop-
ment of the technology (http://camtechmgh.org/about) (Table 5.5).
Other successful innovation platforms in MedTech includes the 
Biodesign Program, which was created in 2001 at Stanford University 
using an unmet clinical need approach to drive innovation. It is a medi-
cal device innovation program and process that has been taught to 141 
Fellows, 900+ students, and 100 executives over the years. 38 compa-
nies have been formed by those trained in the Biodesign process, creating 
more than 600 jobs. These companies have raised close to $362 million 
in external capital (Figures 5.4 and 5.5).
An example is Kerberos Proximal Solutions, which has created a 
device that removes blood clot material in the treatment of coronary and 
peripheral artery blockages, reducing stroke complications and neuro-
logical deficits. The company was acquired by Foxhollow Technologies 
for around $32 million in 2006. Another is Acumen Medical, which has 
created a device for visualization and cannulating the coronary sinus to 
FIGURE 5.3  CAMTech activities (Source: CAMTech website: http://www.massgener-
alcenterforglobalhealth.org/camtech/).

Building a Successful Innovation Platform	
101
TABLE 5.5  Description of CAMTech’s Activities 
What is a Clinical Summit?
The CAMTech Clinical Summit brings together physicians, nurses, healthcare work-
ers, government and public health experts to identify pressing clinical needs and best 
practices in RMNCH care. This event serves as a pivotal activity to drive affordable 
medical technology innovation, including a “Technology Showcase” to preview early 
stage and newly marketed technologies that have the potential to improve healthcare.
What is a MEDTech Hack-A-Thon?
CAMTech’s hack-a-thons crowd-source solutions for critical clinical challenges in 
LMICs and foster entrepreneurship in the Medtech Space. Medtech hack-a-thons are 
two-day events that bring together engineers, clinicians, entrepreneurs and end-users 
to develop disruptive innovations to improve health in LMICs. Hack-a-thons provide 
a platform for engineers, clinicians, entrepreneurs and end-users to come together 
to advance knowledge-sharing across disciplines and catalyze better innovations for 
resource-constrained settings.
What is the CAMTech 100k Innovation Award Program?
The CAMTech Innovation Awards are part of a growing portfolio of health technolo-
gies supported by CAMTech’s mission to build entrepreneurial capacity and accelerate 
medical technology innovation for LMICs. Awards provide one year of research, devel-
opment and/or commercialization support to a research institution, NGO, or for-profit 
company. Through a competitive request for proposal process, CAMTech has gener-
ated a growing pipeline of technologies that have been evaluated across public health 
impact, technical innovation, and commercial viability.
What is an Accelerator?
CAMTech incubates medical technologies with targeted technical assistance to identify 
the fastest and most viable path to commercialization. For its portfolio technologies, 
CAMTech provides resources and identifies partners at critical stages of Medtech 
development.
Source: Recreated based on inputs from CAMTech’s website http://www.massgeneralcen-
terforglobalhealth.org/camtech/
facilitate LV Lead delivery. Medtronic acquired the company in 2009 for 
about $370 million. Oculeve, another Stanford Biodesign startup with a 
device to treat moderate to severe dry eye, was acquired by Allergen in 
2015 for $125 million.
The products developed by the Stanford Biodesign companies have 
together treated over 500,000 patients. The Stanford Biodesign program 
has sprung out 5 Global Programs, with 39 global fellows and 6 global fac-
ulty conducting these programs across the world in countries like Japan, 

102	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
FIGURE 5.4  Source: http://www.massgeneralcenterforglobalhealth.org/
camtech/
FIGURE 5.5  Source: http://www.massgeneralcenterforglobalhealth.org/
camtech/

Building a Successful Innovation Platform	
103
Ireland and Singapore. One such program is in India—the Stanford India 
Biodesign Program.
The Stanford Biodesign, in its global avatar, launched the Stanford 
India Biodesign Program (SIB) in 2007 in New Delhi. SIB is jointly run 
by AIIMS, IIT-Delhi, the Dept. of Biotechnolgy, and Stanford University 
and has trained 32 fellows since inception. Till date, it has led to the for-
mation of 6 companies working on India-specific unmet clinical needs. An 
example is Consure, which has developed a device to manage fecal incon-
tinence in bedridden patients. It recently raised Series A funding of $4.5 
million at a valuation around $15–20 million. The program has also led to 
the development of 7 other technology solutions that have been licensed 
out to industry players. Thorashield, a novel device for safer pleural tap-
ping was licensed to MecMaan Healthcare in December 2013 for devel-
opment, and is currently making initial limited sales to hospitals in North 
India. Another innovative technology, Bioscoop—for liver biopsies, was 
licensed to IndioLabs in 2013 for further development, and is currently 
undergoing safety testing at the beta-prototype stage.
The outputs of some of the successful medical technology incubators 
is captured in Table 5.6. Among 53 companies incubated by these incuba-
tors, a little more than half, went on to get acquired by others and nearly 
10% went public. The combined capital raised by these companies is a 
staggering $1.6 billion, and the impact created by the medical device solu-
tions on the healthcare systems around the world is significant.
ExploraMed in mountain view, California, is a private medical device 
incubator set up in 1995, largely to develop Dr. Josh Makower’s ideas 
into commercial entities. ExploraMed has led to the creation of 6 compa-
nies that have collectively raised close to $700 million in venture funding. 
Three of these companies have been acquired by other medical device 
companies, including Acclarent in the ENT space—that was sold to John-
son & Johnson in 2010 for around $785 million. Another ExploraMed 
company—transvascular, which developed several revascularization tech-
nologies, was bought by Medtronic in 2003 in a stock swap deal valued at 
around $59 million at that time. ExploraMed’s venture partner for all its 
companies is new enterprise associates.
Incube Labs was set up in 1995 in San Jose, California, by Mir Imran, 
one of the most prolific medical device innovators who holds over 250 

104	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
patents. It has sprung out 22 companies over the years, with 11 compa-
nies acquired and 4 companies that went public. An example is Percu-
Surge, which allows cardiologists and interventional specialists to capture 
embolic debris during interventional procedures to prevent vessel blockage 
and damage to the heart, was acquired by Medtronic for $225 million in 
2000. Another company, Physiometrix, which made noninvasive devices 
such as EEGs, raised around $20 million in an IPO in 1996 and was sub-
sequently acquired by Hospira in 2005 for about $23 million. Medtronic 
also acquired another Incube Lab company—Vidamed, for around $326 
million in 2001, when it was already public (IPO in 1995). Incube Labs 
is backed by Incube Ventures and VentureHealth and currently has three 
companies in its portfolio that are in the market, and five that are in the 
premarket stage.
The Foundry was set up in Menlo Park, California in 1998. Since then, 
it has incubated 15 MedTech companies, 9 of which have been acquired 
TABLE 5.6  Successful medical technology incubators outputs
MedTech 
Incuba-
tors:
Year 
Founded
# of 
Cpys 
Incu-
bated
# of Cpys 
Acquired
# of 
cpys 
IPO
Capital 
Raised 
by cpys 
($MM)
Signature 
Acquisitions
Explo-
raMed
1995
6
3
0
700
Acclarent to J&J 
for $785 MM in 
2010
Incube 
Labs
1998
22
11
4
Vidamed to 
Medtronic for 
$326 MM in 
2001
The 
Foundry
1998
15
9
1
500
Ardian to 
Medtronic for 
$800 MM in 
2011
The Inno-
vation 
Factory
1999
10
4
0
460
AqueSys to 
Allergan for 
$300 MM in 
2015
Total
53
27
5
1660
 
Source: Table recreated based on information from individual incubator websites.

Building a Successful Innovation Platform	
105
by larger medical device companies, and 1 has gone public. Collectively, 
these companies are valued at over $2 billion in the market. One of its 
incubate companies, Concentric Medical, which made products to treat 
acute ischemic strokes, was acquired by Stryker Medical for $135 million 
in 2011. Another company, Xtent, which made drug-eluting stent systems, 
went public in 2007, raising $75.2 million. It later sold its technology to 
JW Medical in 2009 that continued development. The Foundry, through its 
companies, has created employment for over 500 people since inception. 
It is backed by Venture Capital Funds such as Domain Associates, Mor-
genthaler Ventures, and Versant Ventures.
The Innovation Factory is a MedTech focused incubator in Duluth, 
Georgia. It was established in 1999 and has incubated 10 MedTech com-
panies since. Its companies have collectively raised around $460 million 
in external funding till date. Four of these companies have been acquired 
by other medical device companies. LipoSonix, which uses ultrasound 
technology to noninvasively bust up fat in the body, was sold to Medicis 
Pharmaceutical in 2008 for $150 million. As recently as September 2015, 
another of its companies, Aquesys, which makes surgical devices for the 
treatment of glaucoma, was acquired by Allergan for close to $300 mil-
lion. TIF’s venture partners include Accuitive Medical Ventures, Versant 
Ventures, and SV Life Sciences.
India, and most other developing nations today, face a key constraint 
in delivering affordable, quality healthcare to its citizens. This constraint 
is medical technology—or the devices, diagnostics, and equipment used to 
deliver healthcare. In India, like elsewhere, Western imports make up over 
65% of the medical technology market- and serve only the high-income, 
Tier 1, “global Indian” consumers. These technologies are not only unaf-
fordable by most Indians, but are also misaligned with the healthcare eco-
system (infrastructure, skill levels, etc.) prevailing outside of our Tier 1 
cities. What can the government do to support such innovation platforms 
in MedTech in India?
The government can enable the creation of this ecosystem, and cata-
lyze a whole wave of innovation, entrepreneurship and manufacturing in 
medical technology, in partnership with industry and academia. This pro-
cess can be initiated by the creation of a task force to assess the potential 
of this sector, and examine global best practices, to create an Assessment 

106	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
and Policy Support Report. This Report can be prepared by engaging an 
external agency with experience in this sector. The Report should provide 
concrete policy recommendations, backed by extensive analysis, to cre-
ate an innovation-led, medical technology industry in India. The Report 
should also provide a road-map to make India the R&D and manufac-
turing hub of affordable medical technology, preferably under a Public-
Private-Partnership model.
A preliminary analysis of policy initiatives in Israel and Singapore, 
backed by learning’s from other healthcare systems, suggest 6 near-term 
initiatives. These initiatives should ideally be managed by a dedicated 
entity (like the Office of Chief Scientist in Israel) to make quick decisions 
for investing, facilitating, and coordinating the recommended activities 
and programs. This autonomous entity would work in tandem with the 
Ministry of Health, the Department of Science and Technology, and the 
Ministry of Commerce and Trade, and be the nodal agency tasked with 
creating a thriving MedTech industry in India. These initiatives, described 
below, would require a total public investment of INR 1,200 crores (~USD 
200 Million) over 7 years. Most of this investment would generate attrac-
tive returns (@10–12% per annum) if the initiatives are successful. Much 
more importantly, this investment will catalyze the emergence of a thriving 
indigenous MedTech sector, which will transform healthcare for millions 
of Indians, reduce the import intensity (and the resultant foreign exchange 
burden) of our MedTech market, contribute to the nation’s Make in India 
thrust, and become an export powerhouse to rival the IT and pharma sec-
tors over the coming years.
1.	 Set up world-class medical technology incubators in India:
Set up 6 world-class medical technology incubators in India, in partnership 
with nationally recognized academic or medical institutes, at key innova-
tion clusters. These incubators would be 15,000–20,000 sq.ft. facilities, 
with state-of-the-art R&D infrastructure, product engineering and proto-
typing facilities, and office space for 15–20 startups.
Target: 6 dedicated medical technology incubators by 2017, with 
capacity to support 100 companies at a time.

Building a Successful Innovation Platform	
107
2.	 Set up a grant funding mechanism for early stage MedTech research:
Create a dedicated mechanism to fund idea-stage research (preproof of 
concept) in priority areas of medical technology. This fund should be for 
individuals, research teams, and small companies, and should be adequate 
to support 6–8 months of early stage research.
Target: 200 grants awarded for research in high-priority medical areas.
3.	 Provide seed-stage capital to incubated Startups:
Besides research infrastructure, and strong incubation support, MedTech 
startups also need seed funding (typically INR 2–3 crores or USD 
300,000–500,000) to develop well-engineered products for Indian needs, 
and raise venture capital for product launch and commercialization after 
incubation. The government should provide this funding, in partnership 
with private investors.
Target: Significant seed-funding with private investors in 100 Incu-
bated startups.
4.	 Support the creation of dedicated MedTech VC funds:
Dedicated MedTech venture capital funds, with the requisite investment 
expertise and the right timeframe, are missing in the investment ecosystem 
in India today. The government can enable creation of such funds by act-
ing as an anchor investor, and partnering with private fund managers to set 
up dedicated MedTech funds.
Target: INR 2000 crores (~USD 300 million) of venture capital raised 
to fund MedTech innovation.
5.	 Kickstart MedTech manufacturing in India by setting up  
manufacturing for 10–20 high-impact products in PPP mode:
The government can, in mission mode, identify several high-value and 
high-impact products that are primarily imported today, and are unafford-
able for 90%+ of potential consumers. These could include high-tech med-
ical imaging equipment (fMRIs), electromechanical implants (cochlear 
implants, LVADs, deep brain stimulators), or surgical systems (robotic 
surgery platforms). Identify global MedTech leaders to partner with the 
government, and develop and manufacture these products for emerging 
markets from India, in a PPP mode.

108	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Target: Indigenous manufacturing of 20 high-impact products for 
Indian and other emerging markets globally by 2020.
6.	 Support industry through tax breaks and preference in public 
procurement:
The indigenous MedTech industry can be supported through a favorable 
tax regime, much like the software sector was supported through STPI. 
Domestic manufacturing of products should be supported through subsi-
dies, and through rationalization of duty structures. Finally, preference in 
public procurement can be considered for indigenous MedTech compa-
nies—with some budgetary allocation for novel, IP-protected, products 
developed by Indian companies.
Target: Provide procurement support to 50 innovative, indigenous, 
products through public health procurement by 2022.
The government should target exiting the programs in 7 years, hav-
ing created an ecosystem that can be completely driven by private invest-
ment. Aligning with the government’s focus on outcomes vs. outlay, the 
above-mentioned initiatives should be evaluated on the basis of outcomes 
achieved.
Table 5.7 shows the tangible outcomes that the preliminary list of 
proposed outcomes that the government can use to measure the success 
of the initiatives.
This nascent industry can be supported through tax incentives, pref-
erential procurement in the public healthcare system, and manufacturing 
subsidies. Additionally, the government can Kickstart high-tech MedTech 
manufacturing by selecting 20 high-technology, high-impact products 
for domestic development and manufacturing, in partnership with global 
MedTech leaders. This would build domestic manufacturing expertise in 
the high-tech area of medical products, and support the Government’s 
Make in India initiative.
Globally, small private companies that have been funded through ven-
ture capital and research grants have led medical technology innovation. 
It is estimated that of the 10,000 unique product categories in MedTech, 
small private companies have developed two- thirds. Larger public com-
panies have a very active licensing and company acquisition strategies 

Building a Successful Innovation Platform	
109
to get access to these innovations and leverage their sales and marketing 
expertise to bring them to market.
This trend is particularly evident in the United States. The five years 
from 2007–2012 saw over 1,000 acquisitions of small private companies 
by global MedTech players. The industry is supported by a vibrant venture 
capital industry, which invests billions of dollars in startups that have iden-
tified an unmet need and are developing innovative products to meet the 
identified need. Technology incubators at universities, or private medical 
technology accelerators support many such startups. It is estimated that 
over a 1,000 such medical technology incubators and accelerators support 
companies each year.
Israel has also developed a thriving medical technology industry over 
the last 20 years. This was achieved by a comprehensive government pro-
gram to drive innovation and research by setting up 24 technology incuba-
tors to support startups in this space. These incubators were placed under 
private management and substantial early stage funding was made avail-
able for startups at these incubators through liberal grant funding, and 
technology venture capital funds. Today, Israel has a thriving MedTech 
sector, with over a 1,000 companies developing innovative products for 
the US and Western markets. Now, Singapore is replicating the Israeli 
TABLE 5.7  Proposed Outcomes To Measure Success
1.	 The setup of 6 dedicated medical technology incubators across the country by 
2017. 
2.	 Making 200 grant awards (INR 25 Lakh each or USD 50,000) for research in high-
priority areas by 2022.
3.	 Creating dedicated VC funds with INR 2000 crores of capital (~USD 300 million) 
by 2017.
4.	 Incubating and funding 100 incubated startups by 2022, and successful graduation 
of >50 companies to Series A funding. 
5.	 Launch of 50 indigenously developed, novel, products in the Indian market, from 
incubated startups, by 2025.
6.	 Launch 20 high-tech, high-impact global products for Indian and other emerging 
markets, in partnership with global MedTech leaders, by 2020.
7.	 Emergence of 5–10 domestic MedTech giants (with market capitalization of over 
$1 billion each) by 2025.

110	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
model through it’s A*STAR program to create a research-led MedTech 
industry.
Technology incubation, supported by research grants, and ample high-
risk venture capital for early stage, research-led companies, has been the 
model that has successfully created these global hubs of MedTech innova-
tion. This model can be effectively deployed in India to create the world’s 
first ecosystem for affordable MedTech innovation in 5–7 years, and tap 
the emerging global opportunity in affordable medical technology.
KEYWORDS
••
acceleration
••
biodesign
••
InnAccel
••
innovation platform
••
medical technology
REFERENCES
“CamTech: Consortium For Affordable Medical Technologies.” www.Massgeneralcenter-
forglobalhealth.org. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.
“CamTech Innovation Platform: Platform To Accelerate Disruptive Healthcare Innova-
tions.” www.Camtechmgh.org. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.
“InnAccel.” www.Innaccel.com. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.

Building a Successful Innovation Platform	
111
APPENDICES
APPENDIX 1:
InnAccel’s Proprietary Product Engineering and Development Platform 
Structure
APPENDIX 2:
InnAccel’s Vision, Mission, and Goals.
Vision
To be the global leader in enabling Affordable MedTech Innovation for 
India and other emerging markets
Mission
To provide a world-class technology acceleration platform to startups 
developing innovative medical devices and diagnostics for India and 
emerging markets

112	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Goals
•	
Accelerate 100+ startups through a national network of Medical 
Technology Accelerators
•	
Deploy INR 1000 crores in these startups towards research, prod-
uct development, and commercialization
•	
Deliver 25+ transformational medical technologies to low and 
mid-income consumers in India and globally
APPENDIX 3:
The following key needs were identified in the Feasibility Study in terms 
of what services InnAccel should provide, along with the number of 
respondents mentioning each service:
InnAccel proposed to provide all of the above services and support, 
either internally or outsourced. Although InnAccel cannot single-handedly 
develop the nascent MedTech cluster, it could act as a catalyst for more 
rapid development of the cluster in both the near and long-term.
In the focus group interviews, attendees were asked what types of busi-
ness assistance did you need, do you need, or do you expect to need? 
They were then asked to indicate the level of importance with 5 being 
very important, 1 being least important. (Responses are ranked in order of 
perceived value:

Building a Successful Innovation Platform	
113
APPENDIX 4:
CAMTech’s Innovation Platform in Graphical Depiction.
Source: http://www.massgeneralcenterforglobalhealth.org/camtech/


SOFT-FACTORS ENABLING 
INNOVATION
CHRISTINE G. KAPP
DataPsy, Inc., 1503 Ross Ave, Kissimmee, Florida 34744, USA, 
E-mail: ckapp@DataPsy.com
CONTENTS
  6.1  Introduction..................................................................................116
  6.2  Methods.......................................................................................116
  6.3  The Art of Innovation...................................................................117
  6.4  Personal Innovation Process........................................................118
  6.5  Visionary-Led Innovation Process...............................................118
  6.6  Enterprise Innovation Process..................................................... 122
  6.7  Factor 1: Type of Leadership...................................................... 125
  6.8  Factor 2: Culture and Climate..................................................... 126
  6.9  Factor 3: Human Mindset........................................................... 129
6.10  Factor 4: Innovation Management Process  
Design Capability........................................................................ 131
6.11  Factor 5: Contracts...................................................................... 135
6.12  Conclusion.................................................................................. 139
Keywords............................................................................................... 139
References.............................................................................................. 140
CHAPTER 6

116	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
6.1  INTRODUCTION
“Man cannot discover new oceans unless he has the courage to lose 
sight of the shore.” 
―André Gide
Process Models, idea generation platforms, and cognitive products are 
all necessary to improve an organizational innovation management pro-
cess. However, many soft factors provide the real key to innovation suc-
cess. It’s hard for any person to discover or notice something new, when 
they are embedded within current organizational operating processes, 
when they have worked on the same problem for many years, or when 
their role has been designed to be 95% reactive. This chapter describes 
some of the factors inherent in people and organizations that can inhibit 
innovation.
Companies have to nurture [creativity and motivation]—and have 
to do it by building a compassionate yet performance-driven corpo-
rate culture. In the knowledge economy the traditional soft people 
side of our business has become the new hard side. 
— Gay Mitchell 
Executive VP, HR, Royal Bank
This chapter begins by describing the art of innovation as an analogy 
that shows the exponential level of complexity when scaling innovation 
management processes from personal innovation to visionary-led innova-
tion and finally to enterprise/ecosystem innovation. Soft Factors to the 
innovation process are explained at each level, with the chapter emphasis 
being on enterprise-level factors with suggestions for overcoming them.
6.2  METHODS
The method used for developing this chapter was to leverage observa-
tion from personal management consulting history and entrepreneurial 

Soft-Factors Enabling Innovation	
117
experience. The observations were cleansed so individual clients cannot 
be identified, and common factors to innovation are documented. These 
observations were then organized, and grouped and practical examples 
added by including references to additional research and popular articles 
and providing additional references that illustrate current thought leader-
ship on the innovation management process.
6.3  THE ART OF INNOVATION
“Art is how I practice innovation. I see inspiration, then I imagine 
something and then I create it.”
—Violet
When stated this way, innovation seems amazingly simple, yet many 
organizations today struggle to innovate.
“There is no other organizational capability with such a gap 
between importance and performance. In the 2015 BCG survey, 
70% of executives replied that innovation was either the company’s 
top priority or among the top three. Other surveys by IESE, KPMG 
and The Conference Board confirm these numbers. Executives con-
sider innovation as the most critical capability for the future success 
of their companies.
But when asked about their satisfaction with the performance of 
innovation, less than 20% of the executives was happy based on a 
survey of our clients.”
—London School of Economics and Political Science, 2016
Using the artistic innovation process as a reference is one way to cre-
ate a framework within which you can design a successful organizational 
innovation process. It is a clean, simple example of a self-contained inno-
vation management process where one person is under complete control.

118	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
“When I create a new sculpture, I find something that I like and 
connect some concepts and things that I see in a sketch to guide the 
rest of the design. When I imagined “Sugar Dolphin,” I combined 
my love of Sugar Skulls with the concept of happiness and play. 
Sugar Dolphin is an 8 foot high creation made of metal bits and 
pieces inspired by Mexican Sugar Skulls on dia de los muertos. 
Water turns into confetti and the dolphin leaps in joy over confetti”
—Violet
6.4  PERSONAL INNOVATION PROCESS
A personal innovation process is always the same, whether you are creat-
ing a new work of art, or whether you are personally imaging a new busi-
ness offering that combines new technologies such as Natural Language 
Processing with eCommerce to improve customer engagement with your 
website. You, the individual designer are in complete and total control 
of your personal process. The output of your success process is limited, 
however, and it is only as good as the time you contribute to it without any 
input other than external influences (Figure 6.1).
6.4.1  SOFT FACTORS
1.	 Person’s mental framework has creativity, creates ides, and has 
willingness and passion to deliver on them.
2.	 Physical ability or personal funding needs to be able to produce the 
product or service.
6.5  VISIONARY-LED INNOVATION PROCESS
A visionary leader drives innovation by leveraging teams of skilled people. 
This can be illustrated by understanding at how a great artist works. Louis 
Comfort Tiffany leveraged organizations of skilled artisans to achieve his 
goals instead of personally creating art. He created prototypes, and guided 
the creative direction. In this way, he scaled up his innovation power to 

Soft-Factors Enabling Innovation	
119
use existing technologies that had been used in common practice to make 
new things.
“Louis Comfort Tiffany (1848–1933) began his work in glass with 
the same tools and ingredients that had been used by artisans for 
thousands of years before him. Tiffany took the science of glass-
making, however, and elevated it to an art form of new brilliance 
and beauty. Under his watch, teams of talented designers and crafts-
people translated Tiffany’s all-encompassing vision into some of 
the most memorable glass creations of our time. Tiffany’s studio 
system was not a simple enterprise; he needed specialized employ-
ees—a hierarchy of artists and artisans—to accomplish his goals.”
—(Morse Museum of Art, 2016)
FIGURE 6.1  The personal innovation process.

120	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
“Innovative leaders are creative visionaries who have big ideas and, 
most importantly, can motivate people around them to turn those 
ideas into reality.”
—(InnmovationManagement.se, 2015).
This level of innovation is limited by the mental process of this 
individual, inspirational leader and their ability to recognize or imag-
ine great ideas, then act to inspire and drive people in the organization 
they lead to validate, then create their vision. This is illustrated in (Fig-
ure 6.2) as the questions and ideas are formed by the visionary leader, 
driven down into the organization to create, and then the organization 
produces the result.
FIGURE 6.2  The visionary-led innovation process.

Soft-Factors Enabling Innovation	
121
6.5.1  REAL-WORLD MEDIUM SIZED COMPANY EXAMPLE
Many descriptions of innovation refer to obvious, famous entrepreneurs, 
such as Steve Jobs as visionary leaders. However, there are many vision-
ary leaders performing this function within smaller organizations on a 
regular basis. The pattern of the process is the same for all visionaries.
The next example illustrates visionary leadership within a medium-
sized information technology consulting company and creation of a regen-
erative innovation management process to sustain this business even as 
the world changed around it after 9/11. This leader’s role was to plan 
how to streamline a $27 million company that had been formed through 
a roll-up of 20 disparate IT consulting companies. The Service offerings 
in the companies included managed network services, web development, 
custom application development and distance learning. She observed the 
companies slow response to proposals, and inconsistent delivery ability 
after winning a proposal. She imagined a different situation, where any 
sales person or any area service manager would have at their fingertips 
the credentials and skills of anyone else in the company. Any sales person 
in any region would have access and knowledge of detailed information 
about other regions’ “wins,” and any technical person could easily find a 
more informed expert to collaborate with to sell a deal. She also imagined 
a situation where all of the needed resources would be easy and quick to 
locate to respond to customer requirements. Not just the letters showing 
the technical people’s ability to fit into the box of a particular job role, but 
knowledge of their ability to think cognitively and deliver solutions. She 
designed a system comprised of people, processes, and information sys-
tems to support this consulting company’s continuous ability to respond to 
changing technology and customer demands, and define or refine service 
offerings to continue to be successful. This system was a complex system.
In order to achieve this, she elicited ideas from the area service manag-
ers and sales people to learn what they needed, and found ways to provide 
what the teams needed to participate in the system. As a result, many of 
the tools that the company operated changed: Job Descriptions, Compen-
sation Plans, and Support Systems were all modified to encourage rev-
enue renewal and collaborative selling. A regenerative process was created 
to continually gather feedback from the regions and incorporate it into 

122	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
the shape of the overall company service offerings on an ongoing basis. 
The success of the overall process depended on participation of all of the 
regional leaders, their consultants, and their sales people. It was refresh-
ing to many staff, to be able for the first time to have resources available 
to create innovative regional business plans and consistently be able to 
deliver.
6.5.2  SOFT FACTORS
There are several factors to success in this form of innovation management.
1.	 The leader has to have the capability to recognize or imagine 
actionable ideas
2.	 The leader needs to be able to motivate the organization to deliver 
on the idea.
3.	 The leader needs to create an innovation management process 
in order to keep the actionable ideas and new products/services 
flowing out.
4.	 The organization needs the resources to be able to deliver on the 
idea such as funding, human capital, and physical assets.
6.6  ENTERPRISE INNOVATION PROCESS
Enterprise innovation management processes are exponentially more 
complex than Visionary-led innovation management processes. The num-
ber of actors that participate in the overall innovation management process 
is far greater, and the leadership skills required to define the means for 
the actors to collaborate requires higher-level business and human capital 
management skills.
“The innovativeness of a company is defined as the proven capabil-
ity to systematically collect ideas, inventions, and other input from 
a broad range of versatile channels, and to exploit this information, 
together with the company internal/external competencies, in order 
to find a new solution to a problem, based on which, to bring up 

Soft-Factors Enabling Innovation	
123
commercially new products and/or services, or other valuable gains 
with measurable impact, in a timely manner.”
—(Rintala, 2011)
Breaking down this definition still shows that the overall innovation man-
agement process remains simple, even though it is exponentially more com-
plex to implement than the prior two leadership approaches to innovation 
(Table 6.1).
The vision in an enterprise innovation process now comes from the 
entire organization, instead of from a single person. The leader needs to 
transform into an organizational coach, innovation management process 
facilitator, or and guide. Figure 6.3 illustrates how multiple ideas, ques-
tions and inspiration flow into all contributors in the organization, com-
bine together, then other parts of the organization work together to deliver 
the new product or service. This is a regenerative process, since when fully 
operating, it will continually renew itself, even as the individual actors, 
participants and organizational structure continues to change and improve.
As a different frame of reference, imagine that the organization is a 
living being, with a collective consciousness. It would be able to leverage 
all of the knowledge in all of the minds contained within in the organiza-
tion and their trusted partners, as well as to exploit their openness and 
perception of the new external forces they collectively see. The organiza-
TABLE 6.1  The Simple Process Within the Complex Enterprise Innovation Process
Enterprise Innovation Management Definition
Simple Definition
Proven ability to systematically collect ideas, inven-
tions, and other input from a broad range of versatile 
channels.
Seeing the idea 
Exploit this information, together with the company 
internal/external competencies.
Refine, design, fund in the orga-
nization’s context
Find a new solution to a problem, based on which, 
to bring up commercially new products and/or 
services, or other valuable gains with measurable 
impact, in a timely manner.
Create
Adapted from Source: Rintala, Pekka. Agile Innovation Management—A Proposal for an 
Express Assessment Tool. Master’s Thesis, Helsinki Metropolia University of Applied 
Sciences, Helsinki, Finland, 2011. With Permission.

124	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
tion would be capable of connecting ideas from multiple perspectives and 
departments together with inspiration from outside sources to create new 
ideas. It would also be able to test them out, break them down, and then 
recombine them into a new solution.
But today, organizations are not living beings and they don’t have col-
lective consciousness.
6.6.1  SOFT FACTORS
There are key success factors that lead to an innovation process. “The 
analysis suggests that fundamental building blocks for a successful inno-
vation process can be categorized under five leading themes. First, a cul-
ture and climate that support innovation; second, a strategy that facilitates 
the innovation process to serve a purpose; third; resources that enable 
implementation of the plan; fourth, networks that link the internal and 
external realities; and fifth, the process that brings structure, measurability 
and controllability into the system (Rintala, 2005).
FIGURE 6.3  A regenerative innovation management process.

Soft-Factors Enabling Innovation	
125
Table 6.2 associates building blocks to the soft factors that support 
innovation. There are more things associated with each building block, 
such as tools that would enable networks, or business strategy definition 
and some of these are also illustrated.
6.7  FACTOR 1: TYPE OF LEADERSHIP
The best executive is the one who has sense enough to pick good 
men to do what he wants done, and self-restraint to keep from med-
dling with them while they do it.”
—(Theodore Roosevelt)
In many organizations, leaders have been trained to create a vision, 
request budget and then leverage their subordinates to achieve their 
vision. In a sense, they are trained to be visionary leaders. When creating 
TABLE 6.2  Building Blocks Cross Referenced to Soft Factors and Structural/Process 
Elements
Building Block 
Soft Factor 
Culture and Climate that support innovation
Factor 1: Type of Leadership
Factor 2: Culture and Climate 
Factor 3: Human Mindset 
Strategy that facilitates the innovation 
process 
Factor 4: Innovation Management  
Process Design Capability 
Resources that Enable Implementation of 
the Plan 
Structural and process elements, such as 
Job Descriptions, Governance Structure, 
Organization Structure, Compensa-
tion Plans, Contracts, Human Capital 
Management
Networks that link the internal and external 
realities 
Factor 6: Contracts
Process that brings structure, measurability 
and controllability into the system
Factor 4: Innovation Management  
Process Design Capability 
Adapted from Source: Rintala, Pekka. Agile Innovation Management—A Proposal for an 
Express Assessment Tool. Master’s Thesis, Helsinki Metropolia University of Applied 
Sciences, Helsinki, Finland, 2011. With Permission.

126	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
a sustainable ecosystem that will lead to innovation, a different type of 
leader is required.
In the book “Collective Genius the authors illustrate that “truly inno-
vative groups are consistently able to elicit and then combine members’ 
separate slices of genius into a single work of collective genius. Creating 
and sustaining an organization capable of doing that again and again is 
what we saw our leaders do (Hill, et. al., 2014).” A major lesson stated in 
the book was, “You can’t plan for innovation or tell people to innovate, but 
you can organize for it. Leading innovation is about building an organiza-
tion where individual slices of genius come together to create collective 
genius through collaboration, discovery-driven learning, and integrative 
decision making (Hill et al., 2014).” They further state that the leader 
needs to create an environment with a sense of shared purpose, values, 
and create a situation where people are able to do the work of innovation.
This observation of success is echoed by Sarah Miller Caldicott, 
MBA in her Power Patterns blog. She relates an observation of Dr. Carol 
Pletcher, former Chief Innovation Office at Cargill (PowerPatterns.com, 
2009). “Cargill’s experience has been that recognizing innovation at the 
highest management levels and creating a networked program that reaches 
deep into the grass roots of the organization delivers a high index of suc-
cess over the long-term.” As she states “The challenge in organizational 
innovation is in creating the environment that permits the multiple people 
to come together and create new, operationally sound ideas.”
6.8  FACTOR 2: CULTURE AND CLIMATE
The culture and climate of the organizations and the individual participants 
in the innovation process is vital to the overall process operation. “Desig-
nate intrapreneurs. Create models and practices that don’t just encourage 
novel thinking but also offer channels and forums to openly challenge 
leadership.” (Steep, 2014)
Google uses a 70/20/10 model as support for their innovative culture. 
70% of their projects are dedicated to their core business, 20% of the proj-
ects are related to their core business, and 10% of the projects are unre-
lated to the core business. They use this to support a culture of “yes” or 
“how can I?”

Soft-Factors Enabling Innovation	
127
Culture is not one of those soft matters to be dealt with when the real 
business is done. Culture is a complement to the formal, established rules 
of doing business. An understanding of and commitment to the organiza-
tion’s mission will guide employees when confronted by the unexpected 
for which no rules exist.
It is all too easy for organizations to fall into the analysis trap and focus 
on left-brain skills like process, measurement, and execution. Sustained 
innovation enterprises embrace right-brained skills: creativity, imagina-
tion, analogy, and empathy. Unlike most organizations that separate these 
individuals into silos (such as marketing versus engineering), innovative 
enterprises build teams that morph as new processes and ideas unfold. 
This results in the creation of focus during ideation and analytical empha-
sis as market growth accelerates. (Google, 2016).
Table 6.3 shows climate characteristics of organization as created by 
Ekvall (Rintala, 2011) The characteristics of innovative organizations are 
TABLE 6.3  Climate characteristics of more and less innovative organization (Innovation 
Centre, Europe, 2011)
Innovative
Stagnated
More open and trusting relationships
Fewer open and trusting relationships
Fewer personal conflicts
Higher frequency of personal conflicts
Higher frequency of debates and discussion 
about ideas
Fewer debates and less discussion
More likely to take risks (e.g., introducing 
new procedures
Less likely to take risks 
More personal freedom in doing the job
Close and conspicuous supervision
More time to spend in idea generation/evalu-
ation
Less time to spend in idea generation/
evaluation
New ideas received favorably by senior 
people and encouraged
New ideas ignored or discouraged 
Committed people highly involved in their 
work 
Less commitment and involvement 
More fun
Less fun 
Workplace more exciting/dynamic
Workplace less exciting/dynamic 
Source: Rintala, Pekka. Agile Innovation Management—A Proposal for an Express 
Assessment Tool. Master’s Thesis, Helsinki Metropolia University of Applied Sciences, 
Helsinki, Finland, 2011. With Permission.

128	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
TABLE 6.4  Dolphin Index Innovation Climate Dimensions (Innovation Centre, Europe, 
2011)
Dimension
Description
Commitment
The extent to which people are committed to the organization 
and work is viewed as stimulating and engaging.
Freedom
High freedom work environments are those in which people 
are empowered to make their own decisions, for example 
about prioritizing their work. In low freedom environments 
there is close and conspicuous supervision. 
Idea Support
Refers to organizational support and encouragement for the 
development of new ideas and suggestions for improvements.
Positive relationships
Refers to the extent to which there are positive, trusting, 
friendly, interpersonal relationships between people, rather 
than negative (e.g., hostile, conflicting ones).
Dynamism
Refers to whether work is exciting and dynamic, or static and 
boring.
Playfulness
Refers to levels of light-heartedness and fun in the work place. 
Work environments low on playfulness may be seen as dour 
and humorless.
Idea Proliferation
Refers to the extent to which other people in the work envi-
ronment are perceived as having innovative ideas about, and 
varied perspectives towards, their work.
Stress
High stress work environment are defined as those in which 
other individuals are observed to be highly stressed and 
encountering heavy workloads.
Risk Taking
High risk taking environments are thought to promote the 
speed at which new ideas are implemented. Low risk taking 
environments are likely to be characterized by excessive use 
of formal rules and procedures.
Idea Time
Refers to the extent to which employees perceive that there is 
time for producing and developing new ideas.
Shared View
Refers tot the extent to which there are open and adequate 
communications between more and less senior employees. 
Work environment where there is an ‘us’ culture rather than an 
‘us and them’ culture.
Work Recognition
Do people feel that they receive credit and praise for their 
achievements? Or do they feel undervalued?
Pay Recognition
Refers to satisfaction with pay and conditions. Do people feel 
fairly remunerated for their work—or at worst, feel exploited.

Soft-Factors Enabling Innovation	
129
representative of a collection of open minds, while a stagnated climate 
exhibits more symptoms of a trust-less environment.
In fact, the Dolphin Index contains a number of dimensions that mea-
sure the organizations’ internal culture (Table 6.4). If the innovation eco-
system contains multiple enterprises, then each of them would need to 
have similar characteristics in order for the collaboration endeavor to be 
sustainable over time.
6.9  FACTOR 3: HUMAN MINDSET
It isn’t the incompetent who destroy an organization. The incom-
petent never get in a position to destroy it. It is those who achieved 
something and want to rest upon their achievements who are for-
ever clogging things up.
— F. M. Young
Innovation is dependent on open and creative idea flow. In the col-
lective consciousness model, the minds participating in the collaboration 
need to develop the skills to know how to interact on a personal level with 
others in addition to whatever governance model guides and supports their 
participation in the process.
6.9.1  PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY TO REMAIN OPEN TO NEW 
IDEAS
Responsibility means being accountable for what we each personally 
think, say, and do. Personal responsibility involves working on our own 
character and skill development instead of blaming others for situations 
and circumstances.
Although corporate executives have responsibility to create the cul-
tural environment that produces and sustains a more innovative environ-
ment, it is each individual participant’s responsibility to contribute within 
that framework to the overall goal of innovation.

130	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
When someone is seeking,” said Siddhartha, “It happens quite eas-
ily that he only sees the thing that he is seeking; that he is unable to 
find anything, unable to absorb anything, because he is only think-
ing of the thing he is seeking, because he has a goal, because he is 
obsessed with his goal. Seeking means: to have a goal; but finding 
means: to be free, to be receptive, to have no goal. You, O worthy 
one, are perhaps indeed a seeker, for in striving towards your goal, 
you do not see many things that are under your nose.”
―Hermann Hesse, Siddhartha
6.9.2  CERTIFICATIONS
Certifications are an excellent measure of competence. They measure 
people’s knowledge and skills against industry- and vendor-specific 
benchmarks to prove to employers that they have the right mix of skills, 
knowledge, and expertise to perform a specific task. Using the information 
technology world as an example, certifications such as PMP for Project 
Managers, Certified Scrum Masters, or Agile Certified Practitioners are 
prevalent. So are ITIL certifications for support organizations, and archi-
tecture certifications such as TOGAF, Zachman or the IASA Foundation. 
There are at least ten cloud computing certifications. Certifications save 
organizations time and money in evaluating candidates and help human 
resource departments identify the right people for the roles.
However, rewarding job-specific knowledge alone has a detrimental 
effect on innovation because it narrows the field of thought for a particular 
individual who is part of the collaboration.
We all operate in two contrasting modes, which might be called 
open and closed. The open mode is more relaxed, more receptive, 
more exploratory, more democratic, more playful and more humor-
ous. The closed mode is the tighter, more rigid, more hierarchical, 
more tunnel-visioned. Most people unfortunately spend most of 
their time in the closed mode. Not that the closed mode cannot be 
helpful. If you are leaping a ravine, the moment of takeoff is a bad 
time for considering alternative strategies. When you charge the 

Soft-Factors Enabling Innovation	
131
enemy machine-gun post, don’t waste energy trying to see the funny 
side of it. Do it in the “closed” mode. But the moment the action is 
over, try to return to the “open” mode—to open your mind again 
to all the feedback from our action that enables us to tell whether 
the action has been successful, or whether further action is need to 
improve on what we have done. In other words, we must return to 
the open mode, because in that mode we are the most aware, most 
receptive, most creative, and therefore at our most intelligent.
— John Cleese
6.10  FACTOR 4: INNOVATION MANAGEMENT PROCESS 
DESIGN CAPABILITY
Within an organization that knows how to innovate, an innovation man-
agement process exists. The process may have developed accidentally, 
because of the way the organizational leaders operated, or it could have 
been designed intentionally, by a complex system designer skilled in busi-
ness, people and technology. In this chapter, we are referring to the initial 
design of the innovation management process as the innovation process 
management process (IPMP)
Just like any large complex system, the IPMP will have an initial startup 
phase, after which time it will reach steady-state operation. Steady-state 
operation will include the ability to continuously respond and improve 
with respect to changes inside the organization, or changes outside the 
organization.
By design, business outcomes that include new products and services 
will occur as a result of the innovation process management activities that 
do not exist in the original design of the organization or even in the inno-
vation process management process. As time moves forward, the partici-
pants in the process change, the organization changes, and external market 
forces and technology change.
There is not yet a prescriptive design methodology on exactly how to 
design an IPMP, however, it is useful to think of an IPMP as a complex 
system of systems. The field of System of System (SoS) design provides 
us with a design starting point. “Two primary traits, evolutionary and 

132	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
emergent behavior are highlighted since they call attention to a network-
of-systems, dynamic-behavior focus as opposed to an individual system, 
static-behavior focus (DeLaurentis, 2005).” Table 6.5 provides some dis-
tinguishing traits of System-of-Systems (DeLaurentis, 2005) that have 
been correlated with soft factors enabling innovation and aspects of IPMP 
design process. This table has been augmented with some of the innova-
tion factors that are related to the SoS traits.
TABLE 6.5  Traits of System-of-Systems and Innovation Management Systems
Trait
Description
Soft Factor
Operational 
and Managerial 
Independence
Constituent systems are useful in their 
own right and generally operate inde-
pendent of other systems (i.e., with 
unique intent provided by the owner/
operator)
Factor 1—Type of Leader-
ship 
Geographic 
Distribution
Constituent Systems are not physically 
colocated; but, they be in communica-
tion
Factor 4—Innovation 
Management Process 
Design Capability
Evolutionary 
Behavior
The SoS is never completely, finally 
formed, constantly, changes and has a 
“porous” problem boundary; i.e., is a 
living system 
Factor 4—Innovation 
Management Process 
Design Capability
Emergent 
Behavior
Properties appear in the SoS that are 
not apparent (or predicted) from the 
constituent systems 
Factor 4—Innovation 
Management Process 
Design Capability
Networks
Networks define the connectivity 
between independent systems in the 
SoS through rules of interaction 
Factor 6—Contracts and 
Agreements (business and 
technical) 
Heterogeneity
Constituent systems are of signifi-
cantly different nature, with different 
elementary dynamics that operate on a 
different time scale
Factor 6—Contracts and 
Agreements
Trans-Domain 
(Proposition) Effective Study of SoS 
requires unifying knowledge across 
fields of study: engineering, economy, 
policy, operations 
Cross-Functional knowl-
edge
Factor 3—Mindset 
Adapted from Source: DeLaurentis, Daniel. Understanding Transportation as a System-
of-Systems Design Problem, 43rd AIAA, Aerospace sciences meeting, Reno, Nevada, 
January 10–13, 2005; AIAA-2005-0123. With Permission.

Soft-Factors Enabling Innovation	
133
The IPMP needs to be designed so that it will simultaneously produce 
ideas within an ecosystem comprised of one or more organizations. Com-
ponents of the system will include organization structure, well defined 
roles and responsibilities, ways to reinforce collaboration between orga-
nizational units, ways to require collaboration by suppliers bound by con-
tracts, and any information technology or physical support systems needed 
for the whole process to work.
Importantly, this innovation strategy must have consistent man-
agement support throughout all business cycles, and it should also 
cover alternative paths for ideas that have merits but do not fit the 
prevailing corporate strategy. Next, the process must be clearly 
defined and communicated. Furthermore, the process must have 
owners and coaches. Well-structured incentive plans are also an 
important element, if any longer lifetime and support for the pro-
cess is desired; but careful planning is vital. Incentives are obvi-
ously linked to metrics, but these seem to be very company and 
time specific, and defining generally valid and useful metrics is not 
considered to be a relevant or even possible target.
—(Rintala, 2011).
Consider what makes innovation managers successful. “We have 
seen CIOs continue to act as guardians of the stage gate process and 
related metrics, all things which most of the companies do pretty 
well and where the leverage for impact is minimum. Companies 
are really struggling on capabilities for discontinuous innovation. 
Successful leaders create the right environment for discontinuous 
ideas to be generated across the company and to nourish them up 
to the concept stage when the risk is lower and the idea/project can 
be transitioned back to the business units and standard development 
process.”
—(Di Fiore, 2016).
Some say they see poetry in my paintings. I see only Science.
—Georges Seurat

134	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
The struggle to innovate can be alleviated if the leaders take a step back 
and look at their organization from the outside. Start with a high-level 
view of interactions between the organization in context of its interactions 
with its customers, suppliers, competitors provides a simple view of and 
changing technological innovations. Then drill down into the interactions 
between each organization and its supporting systems. Then think about 
how to make that system innovate. Taking a look from that perspective 
makes the high-level IPMP process visible. A simple way to get the con-
cept is to go to a museum and look at Georges Seurat pointillism painting. 
In this painting style, the picture is comprised of tiny dots of color, which 
when viewed from a distance provide “the big picture.” Looking up close, 
all you see is dots, stepping back, all you see is a beautiful painting.
6.10.1  PROTO METHOD RELATED TO IPMP DESIGN
The soft skills related to the ability to designing a complex system-of-
systems environment require the ability to see all of the component parts, 
as well as the interactions between them.
A system-of-systems is an assemblage of components which indi-
vidually may be regarded as systems, and which possess two additional 
properties:
Operational Independence of the Components: If the system-of-system 
is disassembled into its component systems the component systems must 
be able to usefully operate independently. That is, the components fulfill 
customer-operator purposes on their own.
Managerial Independence of the Components: The component systems 
not only can operate independently, they do operate independently. The 
component systems are separately acquired and integrated but maintain 
a continuing operational existence independent of the system-of-systems 
(Maier, 1998).
A starting point to think about how to design a system that supports 
innovation is borrowed from a proto-method System-of-Systems lexicon 
(DeLaurentis, 2005). Table 6.6 leverages two columns from this lexicon, 
categories and descriptions, and shows business entities and processes 
whose contributions need to be considered in the initial design.

Soft-Factors Enabling Innovation	
135
6.11  FACTOR 5: CONTRACTS
Many organizations have now adopted outsourcing models where all or 
part of their business services are provided by third party companies. This 
means their ecosystem and their innovation management process, con-
tains other business partners whose objectives are to provide contractual 
services.
These relationships are typically governed by contract which can 
include fixed price contracts, time and materials contracts, or joint venture 
contracts. Measurement of these contracts is performed through measure-
ment of specific service targets depending on the service being measured. 
Incident response and resolution metrics are common, as are financial pen-
alties to suppliers when measures have not been met.
Sometimes factors to innovation are crystallized within outsourcing 
contracts. Many information technology outsourcing contracts today are 
structured based on contractual towers of service management responsi-
bilities (Oshri and Kotlarsky, 2012). Typically in information technology 
towers are organized around types of technology in the stack, as opposed 
to a business process delivery process.
TABLE 6.6  Key Categories, and Descriptions Correlated with Fundamental Building 
Blocks of Innovation Management Systems
Categories
Descriptions
Innovation Management 
Systems 
Resources
The entities (systems) that give physical 
manifestation to the system-of-systems 
Supporting information 
systems
Economics
The nonphysical entities (stakeholders) 
that give intent to the SoS operation
Companies, partners, sup-
pliers, competitors, funding 
sources
Operations
The application of intent to direct the 
activity of physical & Non-physical 
entities 
Operational Leadership
Policies
The external forcing functions that impact 
the operation of physical and nonphysical 
entities
Governance and Contracts
Adapted from Source: DeLaurentis, Daniel. Understanding Transportation as a System-
of-Systems Design Problem, 43rd AIAA, Aerospace sciences meeting, Reno, Nevada, 
January 10–13, 2005; AIAA-2005-0123. With Permission.

136	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
6.11.1  EXAMPLE: MULTIVENDOR OUTSOURCED 
ENVIRONMENT
In this simplistic example, we have organized an information technology 
organization into three organizations. The Software delivery organization 
produces new software. The Application Service Management organiza-
tion manages availability of corporate applications. The infrastructure 
service management team manages availability of hardware and network 
services. The Software delivery team uses internal resources and one exter-
nal vendor. The Application service management team is responsible for 
monitoring and managing the level of service provided to support existing 
applications such as ERP, and multiple line of business applications. This 
application service management team has two MSP’s that manage dif-
ferent applications. The infrastructure team has two different MSP’s that 
focus on server infrastructure and network infrastructure (Figure 6.4). All 
of these services are measured by traditional means including root cause 
analysis, change management success rates, incident handling metrics and 
more. The contracts for Vendor 1, MSP1, MSP2, MSP3 and MSP4 are all 
FIGURE 6.4  Example of Corporate Managed Outsourced Services.

Soft-Factors Enabling Innovation	
137
on different timeframes, meaning their contract start time and contract end 
times are different.
6.11.2  INTRODUCING A COMPANY-GENERATED 
INNOVATION
Now let’s introduce an innovation to this structure and look at the response. 
As a new innovative contribution to the organization, an idea has been cre-
ated that will leverage natural language processing to be used in dialog 
with a customer emergency response team. The new customer response 
mobile and web application will answer questions from customers and 
provide responses based on what the application “knows” from reading 
the corporate knowledge base. This will eliminate 80% of the initial calls, 
so that only the higher skilled customer service agents will be needed in 
the organization. The technology is implemented in such a way that MSP1 
will be supporting the mobile application, but MSP2 will be supporting the 
part of the application that “knows” the answer to the customer’s question. 
In addition, the solution will be hosted on a cloud platform not yet sup-
ported by either MSP3 or MSP4.
In this example, when the innovation comes to fruition, and depend-
ing on how the initial contract language was written with MSP1, MSP2, 
MSP3 and MSP4, there may need to be four new contracts negotiated. 
While this is not a deal-breaker, it can cause the implementation time of 
the innovation to increase if not planned for initially.
6.11.3  INHERENT OBSTACLE TO MULTI-SOURCING 
GOVERNANCE
“The basic obstacle to effective multisourcing governance is the way that 
outsourcing contracts are traditionally negotiated. Providers tend to focus 
on their particular scope of responsibility, and to be very specific about 
what they are and aren’t responsible for (CruxialCIO, 2014).” In each 
contract, metrics are provided to keep the MSP’s accountable to the busi-
ness. MSP’s manage their scope of responsibility tightly, because “the vast 
majority of the firms are using fixed price contracts (78%). Only 42% are 

138	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
using time and materials contracts and 21% are using joint venture with a 
profit sharing clause (Oshri, et al. 2012).”
Using the same structural example, let’s assume that MSP2 is sup-
porting an application that is running on MSP4’s hardware and MSP3’s 
network (Figure 6.5). MSP4 is, in turn, dependent on the organizations 
internal maintenance department to support the facility that MSP4’s equip-
ment is located in. One day, the organizations internal maintenance depart-
ment causes an outage that breaks MSP4’s entire hardware infrastructure. 
This causes the application supported by MSP2 to become unavailable for 
an extended period of time. Both MSP2 and MSP4 are liable for a penalty 
because of the service unavailability. However, MSP2 will ask for relief 
from penalty because it was MSP4’s fault, and MSP4 will ask for relief 
because it was the customers fault. In the end, both MSP’s will not be 
liable for the penalty and much time will have been wasted.
The contractual arrangements create a culture of blame between 
the MSP’s instead of a culture of collaboration. The contracts could be 
amended to include clauses related to cross-MSP collaboration, not just 
in a reactive situation like this, but in a situation that requires innovation. 
Or alternatively, the contracts could be focused around business process 
FIGURE 6.5  Illustration of multi-vendor outsourcing responsibility crossing organizational 
boundaries.

Soft-Factors Enabling Innovation	
139
delivery instead of technology stacks. There are many potential solutions 
to eliminating this factor, which require rethinking in contract structure.
The outsourcing context poses additional challenges to achieving 
innovation between a client firm and a vendor. One of the main reasons 
often cited by CIOs for failing to achieve innovation in outsourcing is the 
uncertainty about the nature of innovation desired from the vendor, and 
also the inability to design a contract that is on the one hand mitigating 
client’s exposure to be exploited by the vendor and at the same time offers 
compensation for extra work and innovation delivered by the vendor. Put 
simply, most outsourcing contracts do not accommodate these often con-
tradicting requirements properly (Oshri, 2012).
6.12  CONCLUSION
In conclusion, this chapter presented the soft factors that impact innova-
tion in the context of three distinct sizes of innovating organizations. Per-
sonal innovation is within the individual innovators’ control. Visionary 
innovation requires all of the same factors as personal innovation, but adds 
the requirement that the visionary be able to direct and manage people 
towards a goal. With enterprise innovation, the game changes. With enter-
prise innovation, a process and supporting systems exist or are structured 
within the organization. An IPMP supports the ability of the people within 
the organization to collaborate, identify ideas, refine them and produce 
new marketable products and services, while keeping the lights on every 
day. Factor management grows exponentially with large-scale leadership 
and includes the right leadership, the right culture, the right participant’s 
mindset, and the elimination of contractual barriers.
KEYWORDS
••
art of innovation
••
factors to innovation
••
innovation
••
system-of-systems

140	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
REFERENCES
DeLaurentis, Daniel. Understanding Transportation as a System-of-Systems Design Prob-
lem, 43rd AIAA, Aerospace sciences meeting, Reno, Nevada, January 10–13, 2005; 
AIAA-2005-0123.
Google. Creating a Culture of Innovation. Eight ideas that work at Google. https://apps.
google.com/learn-more/creating_a_culture_of_innovation.html# (accessed January 
25, 2016).
Hill, Linda; Brandeau, Greg; Truelove, Emily; Lineback, Kent. Collective Genius, The Art 
and Practice of Leading Innovation,” Harvard Business Review Press, 2014.
Ilan Oshri, Julia Kotlarsky, Innovation in Outsourcing: A Study on Client Expectations 
and Commitment, Warwick Business School and Rotterdam School of Management. 
http://innovationmanagement.se/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/Cognizant-WBS-
innovation-report-FINAL.pdf.
Innovation Management. What Is Innovation Leadership? http://www.innovationmanage-
ment.se/imtool-articles/what-is-innovative-leadership/ (accessed January 25, 2016).
London School of Economics and Political Science. What Makes Innovation Managers 
Successful? http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/2016/01/08/what-makes-innova-
tion-leaders-successful/ (accessed January 25, 2016).
Maier, M. W. (1998). Architecting principles for systems-of-systems. Syst. Engin., 1: 267–
284. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1520–6858(1998)1:4<267::AID-SYS3>3.0.CO;2-D.
Morse Museum of Art. Secrets of Tiffany Glassmaking. http://www.morsemuseum.org/
on-exhibit/secrets-of-tiffany-glassmaking (accessed January 25, 2016).
Multi-Sourcing Offers Big Rewards, Carries Big Risks. http://www.cruxialcio.com/
multi-vendor-outsourcing-can-yield-it-innovation-only-if-its-well-managed-4377 
(accessed January 25, 2016).
Oshri Ilan, & Kotlarsky Julia. Innovation in Outsourcing: A Study on Client Expectations 
and Commitment. Warwick Business School and Rotterdam School of Management, 
2012. 
http://innovationmanagement.se/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/Cognizant-
WBS-innovation-report-FINAL.pdf (accessed January 20, 2016).
Power Patterns™ Igniting Innovation. Rewarding vs. Recognizing Innovation—Which 
is Better. http://powerpatterns.com/Articles/NewsletterArchives/2009_12 (accessed 
January 20, 2016).
Rintala, Pekka. Agile Innovation Management—A Proposal for an Express Assessment 
Tool. Master’s Thesis, Helsinki Metropolia University of Applied Sciences, Helsinki, 
Finland, 2011.
Steep, Mike. How to Create Innovation Cultures That Keep Working, Forbes, September 
3, 2014. http://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesleadershipforum/2014/09/03/how-to-
create-innovation-cultures-that-keep-working/2/#2715e4857a0b754bb7c33fa3.

IOT AND M.E.S.: ARE YOU READY 
FOR THE NEXT INDUSTRIAL 
REVOLUTION?
SELEM CHARFI
HD Technology, Europarc du Chêne, 8 rue Pascal-BP90, 69672 
BRON Lyon, France, E-mail: Selem.Charfi@hdtechnology.fr
CONTENTS
Abstract.................................................................................................. 141
7.1  Introduction................................................................................... 142
7.2  Definition...................................................................................... 143
7.3  MES and IoT: The Benefits.......................................................... 147
7.4  Incoming Challenges.................................................................... 150
7.5  IoT, What Else?............................................................................. 153
7.6  Concluding Remarks and Perspectives......................................... 153
Keywords............................................................................................... 154
References.............................................................................................. 155
ABSTRACT
This chapter presents the impact of the Internet of the Things (IoT) con-
cept on the manufacturing systems and the challenges to which will be 
faced the R&D actors in order to anticipate on the future evolution. The 
author first present the general concepts related to IoT and Manufactur-
ing Executing Systems (M.E.S.). Then the announced benefits from this 
CHAPTER 7

142	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
exposition are presented. These benefits won’t be priceless. We will then 
present the major challenges to be expected from this change.
7.1  INTRODUCTION
By 2020, experts expect more than 50 billion of sold objects of the inter-
net of things (Sundmaeker et al., 2010). Such revolution is announced 
as imminent and certain. Then, different field experts and researchers 
are working to anticipate the related consequences and challenges. The 
expected impact is anticipated to cover energy, healthcare, manufacturing, 
public sector, transportation and related industrial systems (IIC, 2015).
One of the areas that will not certainly stay indifferent to IoT wave is 
the industrial area. In fact, nowadays a new concept that is becoming more 
and more current: the fourth industrial revolution “Industry 4.0” (Bloem 
et al., 2014).
Remember that the first revolution occurred by the 18th century by 
integrating mechanical production (essentially through steam engine). 
The second was guided by the introduction of the electric engine from the 
beginning of the twentieth century (assembly line mass production). The 
third one was dictated by the computing and networking for automating 
the manufacturing process. The fourth revolution is accelerated mainly by 
the M2M and the industrial Ethernet.
Note that the Machine-to-Machine (M2M) represents a future where 
billions to trillions of everyday objects are interconnected and managing 
a wide range of devices, networks, and servers (Geng et al., 2011). “M2M 
refers to those solutions that allow communication between devices of 
the same type and a specific application all via wired or wireless commu-
nication networks. M2M solutions allow end-users to capture data about 
events from assets, such as temperature or inventory levels. Typically, 
M2M is deployed to achieve productivity gains, reduce costs and increase 
safety of security” (Höller et al., 2014).
Many works and organization are proposed in order to guide this revo-
lution such is Industrial Internet Consortium (IIC).
The M.E.S., a must part of supervising and optimizing manufacturing 
process performance, is not immune toward the IoT “tsunami.” The main 
goal of this chapter is to present the resulting challenges and the expected 
future features of M.E.S.

IoT and M.E.S.: Are You Ready for the Next Industrial Revolution?	
143
The remainder of this chapter is structured as follows. First, we intro-
duce the most relevant notions of M.E.S. systems and IoT. Second, we will 
present the expected M.E.S. evolution in the future. Next, the incoming 
challenges are introduced. Finally, we conclude this chapter by concluding 
remarks and some perspectives.
7.2  DEFINITION
7.2.1  M.E.S.: DEFINITION AND CONCEPT
Since their beginning in the mid-1990s, the M.E.S. have been significantly 
evolving. The M.E.S. were proposed for industrial need for optimizing the 
manufacturing process reactivity, the manufacturing quality, the standards 
respect, and mainly reducing cost and deadlines (Ugarte et al., 2009).
They were first intended for only storing and analyzing data for manu-
facturing and mainly in an offline mode. Then, they are actually operat-
ing in real time for storing and analyzing data. They evolved from simple 
supervision software to integrated software applications at the paste of 
computing technologies to supporting the manufacturing process from the 
production order to the delivery of finished products. However, the manu-
facturing actors are expecting more from M.E.S. to support in the future 
the planning of future process and to integration functionalities to antici-
pate in the future possible process deviation.
Note that in 1997, the MESA organization proposed the first step for 
the standardization of the M.E.S. The MESA defined clearly the expected 
functionalities from M.E.S. The M.E.S. functional areas are:
1.	 Labor management: Provides the status of different human 
resources involved in the manufacturing process. It also provides 
statistics and reporting about the manufacturing staff activities 
(realized and scheduled). It enables labor tracking and scheduling. 
The M.E.S. might interact with resources allocation to optimize the 
manufacturing process.
2.	 Resource allocation: Manages the different manufacturing physi-
cal resources: machines, devices, material, tools and other equip-
ment. The M.E.S. can provide documents about the history of each 
resource. This functionality is important to enable dispatching the 
work orders on the different physical resources.

144	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
3.	 Dispatching: Although dispatching and scheduling the Product 
Orders on the manufacturing machines is communicated from 
the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), the M.E.S. can dispatch 
the order differently since it has a better overview of the available 
machines. The M.E.S. support the manufacturing priorities, the 
BOM (the recipe for manufacturing), and the production charac-
teristics. Then, the M.E.S. can provide manufacturing alternatives 
to ERP ones.
4.	 Product tracking: The M.E.S. support the visibility of the pro-
duction by the time and the physical resource axes. For a given 
product, the M.E.S. indicate about the material batches used for 
producing this product (serial number, quantity, etc.), the allocated 
physical resources for manufacturing this product and the human 
operators responsible of its manufacturing. These data are stored 
for a long time, especially for food and drug manufacturing.
5.	 Quality management: This functionality consists of reporting in 
offline and online analysis of the product quality. This reporting is 
established via different measurements collected manually or auto-
matically from manufacturing.
6.	 Performance analysis: Provides a real-time overview of actual 
manufacturing operations’ results. This overview can be coupled 
with historical data in order to establish comparison and for bench-
marking purposes. This overview is based on periodically or on 
demand measurements. The provided analysis can be: production 
rate, conformance to scheduled manufacturing, availability of raw 
products, resource status (temperature, pressure, etc.). The analysis 
can be as numerical data, personalized widgets, control charts, pdf 
report, web reports, etc.
7.	 Process management: The M.E.S. monitor the manufacturing 
process to automatically correct or provide decision support to face 
the process derivation or to improve the manufacturing process.
8.	 Scheduling: To schedule the manufacturing process: the prod-
uct order, the batches, the scheduled tasks, etc. This functionality 
consists of dispatching the information received from ERP on the 
manufacturing resources. As the scheduled work can change at any 
time, the M.E.S. ensures rescheduling the manufacturing activities.

IoT and M.E.S.: Are You Ready for the Next Industrial Revolution?	
145
FIGURE 7.1  The M.E.S. functionalities.

146	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
9.	 Document control: The M.E.S. support documentation about the 
manufacturing recipe, the manufacturing instructions, operation 
procedures, batch records, engendering notices, etc. It considers 
also factors related to environment, staff safety and health. There 
are many regulations and recommendations to be considered fol-
lowing the kind of manufacturing sector: The GAMP (2001), 21 
CFR Part 11 (2003), etc.
10.	Maintenance management: In order to maintain a good manufac-
turing flow, the operator has to proceed frequently with maintenance 
operations in order to warranty the resource ability, availability and 
capability to ensure the scheduled tasks. The M.E.S. can manage 
the maintenance tasks’ or prevent the operator for the scheduled or 
required maintenance task.
Further works were proposed for better standardization, such is the ISA 
effort in order to formalize the exchange interface with ERP (B2 MML1).
Many references define the M.E.S. as an intermediate layer between 
the office planning systems (mainly the ERP) and the shop floor (Owen 
and Parker, 1999; Koch, 2001).
In other words, The M.E.S. aims to collect, organize, analyze, inte-
grate, record, and present the data (mainly measurements) issued for the 
industrial production, so that employees have better insights into processes 
and can react quickly, leading to predictable manufacturing processes.
7.2.2  IOT
The term “Internet of Things” was used the first time by the end of the 
1990 by Kevin Ashton. He used this term concerning the use of RFID tags 
in Supply chain. Nowadays, it is introduced as a promising field.
Although there is a universal definition about the IoT, the existing defi-
nitions define it as a network of physical objects, devices, building, and all 
things that can be embedded with software’s and sensors supporting net-
work connectivity in order to interchange data collected by these objects 
1 Business to Manufacturing Markup Language: is an XML implementation of the 
ANSI/ISA-95 standards (ISA-95). It consists on an XML schema (XSD) to define a 
common data definition to formalize the exchanged data between ERP and manufac-
turing systems (MESA, 2016).

IoT and M.E.S.: Are You Ready for the Next Industrial Revolution?	
147
without human intervention. The IoT concept is strongly related to the 
internet and its proliferation is related to the internet proliferation.
7.3  MES AND IOT: THE BENEFITS
In this section, we will present the different benefits for M.E.S. actors 
through integrating the IoT.
7.3.1  MORE FLEXIBILITY: THE AGILITY OF M.E.S. 
EXPLOITATION
As the M.E.S. are intended for optimizing the manufacturing process and 
resources, they have to be connected to the different measurement devices 
and the different parts of the manufacturing system.
One of the major concerns of M.E.S. actors is how to easily face to the 
manufacturing environment that were qualified for a long time as a static 
one and now migrating to a dynamic one to quickly respond to customer 
and market queries. This change is mainly due to the often the market 
demand change and the highly competitive atmosphere of the global mar-
ket. This change is characterized by the increasing frequency of the custom 
production orders. Then, the traditional M.E.S. systems have to improve 
their ability to respond easily and quickly to the different changes.
The M.E.S. have to be more flexible in terms of supported function-
alities. Two major alternatives are proposed. The first one consists one 
adopting a full web solution; a solution based as SaaS2 one. However, this 
solution presents some inconveniences that are:
•	
Security aspects of exposing manufacturing data on the net,
•	
Performance lost as the gathered data has to be uploaded on the net, 
analyzed and then, and load it to manufacturing dashboard.
The second alternative is the preferred one: the workflow3. It has mainly 
the advantage to integrate flexible alternative for invocating alarms such is 
2 Software as a service is a software licensing and delivery model in which software is 
licensed on a subscription basis and is centrally hosted (Dan Ma, 2007).
3 Workflow: An automation of a business process, in whole or part, during which 
documents, information or tasks are passed from one participant to another for action, 
according to a set of procedural rules (see, WFMC).

148	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
the case of mail and Short Message Service (SMS) notifications. However, 
the actual M.E.S. need further work in order to be adopted by the work-
flow engine. This alternative is estimated as a promising as it provides the 
user with the possibility to specify new manufacturing Key Performance 
Indicators (KPIs)4 and to adjust the M.E.S. for the possible changes occur-
ring on the shop floor. Furthermore, many M.E.S. actors are working on 
proposing out-of-the-box versions that can be used immediately by the 
user without changing the system and without requiring integrators for 
setting up the M.E.S.
The main area that is intended to be flexible and supported by the 
workflows are:
1.	 elementary data storage,
2.	 the data return,
3.	 the relevant data selection (KPI),
4.	 the decision model design,
5.	 the decision evaluation, and
6.	 the selection and choice of a solution.
7.3.2  REACTIVITY: FASTER MARKET TIME
The incoming industrial revolution is intended to lead more fluid com-
munication flows. The implicated actors to the manufacturing can access 
easily to the information. The dashboard is not only, as it had been for a 
long time, screens including great amount of metrics that are used while 
operating on the production line. These user interfaces are exported now 
to innumerable devices (e.g., smart phones, tablets, smartwatch) that offer 
accessibility to them and consequently contribute to boost the reaction 
time to potential line state change or client requirement.
In terms of Business Intelligence, the expert can have further informa-
tion to proceed to a deeper predictive analysis and then to better assist the 
decision maker in short delays.
The sales management generally introduces the M.E.S. as real time data 
processing. This is in accordance with the announced objective with the 
4 Key Performance Indicator: A type of performance measurement. It enables the eval-
uation of an organization or an activity.

IoT and M.E.S.: Are You Ready for the Next Industrial Revolution?	
149
MESA. However, the reality seems different from the announced objec-
tive. In fact, the processing the data is generally articulated through three 
categories: (i) acquisition from the shop floor and planning systems, (ii) 
analyzing data, and (iii) saving the data (raw data and/or aggregate data).
The two first categories often take time to be finished and generally the 
final result needs several seconds or minutes or delay. Comparing the time 
requested of many ERP, and many old shop floor, the M.E.S. is considered 
by many as a real time system. One of the expected solution, provided 
by IoT, is to gather and to analyze data at the same time. This can surely 
improve the M.E.S. time execution performances.
One related issue to improve the scalability of M.E.S. for better context 
adaptation to support small and huge manufacturing systems.
7.3.3  SMART FACTORY
Based on cyber-physical systems, the smart factory has been for a long 
time the dream of the manufacturer as it is intended to provide high flex-
ibility and intelligence. The data processing is distributed following the 
related resource in real-time (Lucke et al., 2008).
7.3.4  OPTIMIZATION
The IoT universe offers the ability to manufacturer to enable access to 
the information independently of their geographical location. This lead to 
faster control process and more effective management and supervision of 
the manufacturing process.
The concept of Smart Factory was introduced first in 1991 by Mark 
Weiser. This concept is based on the Ubiquitous Computing one. It was 
boosted through the mobile phone evolution. It is based mainly on shorter 
and reactive manufacturing cycles. The smart factory includes design-
ing, setting up, piloting, and supervising the factories. The impact on the 
M.E.S. will lead to more flexible and configurable M.E.S. to support the 
flexible aspects of the Smart Factories. The M.E.S. will turn from a static 
management of the manufacturing system to an adoptive one.

150	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
7.3.5  MANUFACTURING IMPROVEMENT
The business and manufacturing leaders are optimists to the idea to 
improve their business ability by interconnecting simultaneously het-
erogeneous and dispatched objects over the internet network. The main 
goal to reach is to support manufacturing process adaptability and flex-
ibility to face the rapid market growth and rapidly changing customer 
requirements.
By distributing the manufacturing process tasks and subtasks, the man-
ufacturing system is more persistent to communication flows communi-
cation temporary shutdown. It promotes offline processing thanks to the 
smart aspect of manufacturing resources.
7.4  INCOMING CHALLENGES
7.4.1  BIG DATA
Manufacturing environment is evolving from simply physical resource 
manufacturing system managing to heterogeneous and various informa-
tion management system. It is mainly due to the last generation of smart 
sensors and connected devices and machines. Despite improving the man-
ufacturing systems performances, the M.E.S. leaders are according par-
ticular interest to the increasing data volume.
Nowadays leading DBMS are reaching high and promising perfor-
mance dealing with a great amount of data. The new DBMS genera-
tion based on NoSQL5 (Leavitt, 2010) is announced as a promising 
solution to handle such data. This goal can be reached through the 
Cloud based application that offer the possibility to store and exploit 
data more efficiently.
About 70% of manufacturing executives are focusing on plant-floor 
data initiatives to drive operational and business excellence, faster time to 
market, and immediate access to data from machines on the factory floor 
(see, Aberdeen Group).
5 NoSql: Not Only SQL: refers to Database Management Systems that are not based 
on the classical relational architecture. 

IoT and M.E.S.: Are You Ready for the Next Industrial Revolution?	
151
7.4.2  NETWORKING AND SECURITY
The cloud-based applications are announced as a magic solution for the 
next information era by providing better connectivity. It enables to inter-
connect everything to everything. Although the potential of the cloud-
based applications and the positive user experience, the customer still feel 
anxious toward security problems. Despite the many proposed works for 
improving the security aspect, no one can actually warranty the security 
aspects.
The existing automation client server protocols are not estimated to be 
enough sufficient and performant to support the emerging wave of IoT in 
terms of data quantity and frequency. The isolated and single factories turn 
to interconnected factories.
In order to adopt and exploit the coming industrial revolution, the 
M.E.S. have to be more efficient, to handle Big Data, and to provide an 
opening to the internet (Cloud Computing) to support connectedness and 
interaction. This leads to new interfaces with other systems and devices.
The fact of interconnecting billions of devices, exponentially raises the 
questions toward the security aspect. One of the current research efforts 
concerns the “security and chip.”
A major challenge to which are faced IoT promotors is cybersecurity. 
As there is not any universal solution that does not present any potential 
threat. This delicate aspect does not clearly motivate manufacturing decision 
maker to follow the new wave. This is due to the fact that they surely do not 
want to expose their customer database, their production composition, etc.
7.4.3  CLOUD COMPUTING
The proliferation of Mobile internet in all sectors and the continuous 
improvement in terms of chipset cost and poser consumption.
Moreover, the factory of the future is not expected as many devices 
each one acts alone by many devices processing together. This lead to a 
complex and multivariable processing that is executed as a distributed pro-
cessing. Handling a huge amount of data, ensuring the processing of sev-
eral devices, lead making the right decision as fastest as possible certainly 

152	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
lead to the Cloud connected devices. It is even considered of an essential 
value of the IoT (Geng et al., 2011).
7.4.4  ARCHITECTURE
One of the major barriers of migrated to interconnected manufacturing fac-
tories is the warranty about the stability and the effectiveness of such choice. 
In fact, it requires valid architecture to integrate effectively and easily the 
different connected objects. The architecture requires greater effort to sup-
port an intuitive translation from the physical world to a computerized and 
logical format that can be easily exploited for better Industry 4 adoption.
•	
The architecture has also to distinguish clearly of two layers: 
the business layer (process) and the physical one (product and 
resources). This distinction is delicate to establish due the fact that 
IoT are devices, that when integrated into the manufacturing pro-
cess, are considered as an integrated sub process.
•	
Another important aspect is the mapping of two kinds of flows: 
physical flow and information one.
In Meyer (2013), the authors pointed the lack of modeling concepts 
to represent sensors and actuators of the IoT in a business process model. 
They consider it as a significant obstacle to successfully include real-world 
resources in traditional ERP systems business processes.
7.4.5  PLATFORM INDEPENDENT
The computer science community is often faced to long and endless 
debates about the computing platform: which is better Linux distribution 
or Windows one? Which is more reliable in terms of performance Mac OS 
or Windows?…
Such debates are not frequent in the industrial side: Windows server is 
a mostly used in manufacturing sites.
One of the advantages of IoT is the fact that they are based on cloud 
computing architecture and operate independently of the running plat-
form. Such aspect can facilitate the migration and the opening to other 
platforms easily and not costly (in terms of deployment time, allocated 
material resources, and required human resources).

IoT and M.E.S.: Are You Ready for the Next Industrial Revolution?	
153
7.4.6  FASTER PROCESSING REQUIREMENT
No one can deny the fact that users (particular and industrials) are greedier 
than ever in terms of systems’ performances. This is the main engine for 
the R&D placements in order to attract customer and consumers.
Similarly, as evolving manufacturing environment (c.f 5.1), the manu-
facturing machine ensured functionalities are evolving too. They evolve 
from simply executing programmed task to more independent machines 
endue with more independence, autonomy, collaboration, and intelligence. 
One promising issue is to process to corrective and preventive action in 
order to minimize the damages and waste.
7.5  IOT, WHAT ELSE?
7.5.1  HCC HUMAN COMPUTER CONFLUENCE
The SCADA dashboards are no more user interfaces, including several 
metrics for supervising the production process. It evaluates to more usable 
and useful interfaces. This is essentially motivated by the fact that the User 
Interface is now a quality factor. The SCADA professionals propose now 
more accessible and usable user interface by adapting the supervision pro-
cess into smart phones, tables, user interfaces to offer better interaction.
One of the announced and expected features of IoT is to promote com-
munication and connectivity.
As HCI professionals expect a new HCI era that is presented as Human-
Computer Confluence (e.g., wearable interfaces for example, this HCI 
evolution will surely impact the manufacturing area via new dashboard 
offering flexibility, connectivity and mainly ease of use for supervision 
and piloting purposes.
7.6  CONCLUDING REMARKS AND PERSPECTIVES
The present chapter presents an overview about the actual perception 
of the M.E.S. and the expected evolution in this sector. This evolution 
will mainly be paced by the fourth industrial revolution. The customer 

154	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
expectation is evolving from a simple tool for gathering, analyzing and 
storing data to a system taking part of the decision process. Furthermore, 
the M.E.S. have to be more flexible to easily adopt the different changes 
having in the manufacturing process or the managerial one.
The new M.E.S. that is announced to support the smart factories 
and the IoT is expected to be the engine of a revolution in manufactur-
ing areas. However, in many manufacturers this challenge seems to be 
unreachable since the used physical resources are quite old fashioned 
and needs huge amounts of money to replace the existing installation 
with a newer one.
One of the announced perspectives, concerns the Internet of Every-
thing: People, Process, Data, and Things. The IoT is far from to be a final 
step. It is considered as a departure point for another concept that is the 
Internet of Everything. In fact, the smart sensors offer the possibility for 
context awareness and support energy independence. Another factor is 
promising; it concerns the processing power constant evolution. Then, we 
can predict the imminent second phase of the fourth revolution: Internet 
of Everything. It is supposed to combine information related to: people, 
process, data, and things.
This perspective implicates further work on the mentioned challenged 
to which are facing the M.E.S. leaders. Indeed, the IoE is presented as a 
network of networks where we predict trillions of connections related to a 
manufacturing sector.
KEYWORDS
••
Agile Manufacturing
••
Big Data
••
Industry 4.0
••
IOT
••
Manufacturing Execution System (MES)
••
Smart Factory

IoT and M.E.S.: Are You Ready for the Next Industrial Revolution?	
155
REFERENCES
Aberdeen Group [http://www.aberdeen.com/].
Bloem, Jaap, Doorn, M. V. “The Fourth Industrial Revolution.” Things to Tighten the 
(2014).
CFR. Part 11: Electronic Records, Electronic Signatures [http://www.fda.gov/ora/compli-
ance_ref/part11/].
Dan Ma. The Business Model of “Software-As-A-Service,” Services Computing, 2007. 
SCC 2007. IEEE International Conference on 9–13 July 2007, pp. 701–702, doi: 
10.1109/SCC.2007.118.
GAMP. The Good Automated Manufacturing Practice Guide for Validation of Automated 
Systems, GAMP 4 (ISPE/GAMP Forum, 2001), 2001, (http://www.ispe.org/gamp/).
Geng, W., Talwar, S., Johnsson, K., Himayat, N., Johnson, K. D., M2M: From mobile to 
embedded internet. Communications Magazine, IEEE, 2011, 49(4), pp. 36–43, 2011.
Höller, J., Tsiatsis, V., Mulligan, C., Karnouskos, S., Avesand, D. Boyle: From Machine-
to-Machine to the Internet of Things: Introduction to a New Age of Intelligence. 
Elsevier, 21014, 2014, ISBN 978-0-12-407684-6.
IIC, Industrial Internet Consortium, 2015, http://www.iiconsortium.org/.
Koch, C., Why your integration efforts end up looking like this… CIO Magazine, 2001, 
15, 98–108.
Leavitt, N. Will NoSQL databases live up to their promise? Computer, 2010, 43(2), 12–14.
Lucke, D., Constantinescu, C., Westkämper, E. Smart factory—a step towards the next 
generation of manufacturing. In Manufacturing Systems and Technologies for the 
New Frontier. Springer London, 2008, pp. 115–118.
MESA, MESA Model [online]. MESA International. Available from: http://www.mesa.
org/en/modelstrategicinitiatives/MESAModel.asp [Accessed December 5th 2016].
Meyer, S., Ruppen, A., Magerkurth, C. Internet of Things-Aware Process Modeling: Inte-
grating IoT Devices as Business Process Resources. In Advanced information sys-
tems engineering (CAiSE). Vol. 7908. Edited by Camille B. Achour-Salinesi, Moira 
C. Norrie and Oscar Pastor, 84–98, 7908. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2013.
Owen, T., Parker, K. One app’s ceiling is another app’s floor. Manufacturing Systems, 
1999, 17(10), 6.
Saenz de Ugarte, B., Artiba, A., Pellerin, R. Manufacturing execution system–a literature 
review. Production Planning and Control, 2009, 20(6), 525–539.
Sundmaeker, H., Guillemin, P., Friess, P., Woelffle, S. Vision and challenges for realizing 
the internet of things. European Commission Information Society and Media, Tech. 
Rep, March 2010. Available from: http://www.internet-of-things-research.eu/pdf/
IoT_Clusterbook_March_2010.pdf.
Tenhiälä, A., Helkiö, P. Performance effects of using an ERP system for manufacturing 
planning and control under dynamic market requirements, Journal of Operations 
Management, Volume 36, May 2015, pp. 147–164, ISSN 0272-6963.
WFMC, Workflow Management Coalition [http://www.wfmc.org/].


A STRUCTURED PROCESS TO 
GENERATE IDEAS IN MEDTECH
JAGDISH CHATURVEDI1 and RAMAKRISHNA PAPPU2
1Director Clinical Innovations, InnAccel, 5th Floor, Aanand Towers, 
Municipal No. 4, Rajaram Mohan Roy Road, Ward No. 77, 
Sampangiramanagar, Bangalore–560025, India
2Business Associate, InnAccel, 5th Floor, Aanand Towers, 
Municipal No. 4, Rajaram Mohan Roy Road, Ward No. 77, 
Sampangiramanagar, Bangalore–560025, India
CONTENTS
Abstract.................................................................................................. 157
8.1  Introduction................................................................................... 158
8.2  Stages of an Innovator’s Journey.................................................. 162
8.3  Appendices.................................................................................... 174
Keywords............................................................................................... 181
References.............................................................................................. 181
ABSTRACT
The chapter provides an overview of the various methods used today 
for identifying unmet needs and developing products. The healthcare 
domain is chosen as the medium for the description. The Biodesign pro-
cess as developed at Stanford University is described, along with multi-
ple off-shoots and adaptations of the process; specific to the adoption of 
CHAPTER 8

158	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
the process in various countries is described. Success stories and short-
comings of the process with case studies are highlighted. The chapter 
analyzes other processes—examining the critical factors that lead to the 
success of these programs. It also analyzes through examples of medical 
device and medical technology developments, where lack of a structured 
process has led to ‘failures’ and the key learning from these case studies.
8.1  INTRODUCTION
The key to MedTech entrepreneurship is to develop a product that addresses 
a clear unmet clinical need. Identifying and understanding an unmet need 
requires diligence; comprehensive clinical, technical, and market under-
standing. To address this need an appropriate solution concept must be 
formulated. The concept must take into account different parameters like 
regulatory considerations, intellectual property, business models and 
technical feasibility. The conceptualization process will culminate with 
the selection of the “strongest” solution concept. Transforming the cho-
sen concept into a functional prototype and finally a usable product is the 
endpoint. Medical Device development has become increasingly complex 
with the constant influx of newer technologies and stricter regulatory and 
safety requirements. The final step in the developmental process is ensur-
ing that the product meets all the necessary clinical, safety and user needs.
There is a difference between a “problem” and an “unmet need.” For 
example, the WHO states that 4 million newborn babies die each year. 
This is a problem. The unmet need here would be for a way to prevent 
or reduce the number of newborn deaths each year. However, being able 
to say that a mother’s lack of knowledge of newborn warming care is the 
primary cause of certain number of neonatal deaths due to hypothermia 
is a more specific and addressable issue. A method (program or tool) to 
teach pregnant women how to maintain the warm chain for newborns in 
order to reduce the incidence of mortality from environmentally induced 
hypothermia could be one of the solutions. Thus it is evident that there is 
a significant difference between a “problem” and an “unmet need” and 
a “solution.” By addressing real needs many problems can be solved or 
indeed prevented.

A Structured Process to Generate Ideas in MedTech	
159
Perspective on Global Medical Technology Innovation—Globally, 
small private companies that have been funded through venture capital 
and research grants have led medical technology innovation. It is esti-
mated that of the 10,000 unique product categories in MedTech, small pri-
vate companies have developed two-thirds. Larger public companies have 
a very active licensing and company acquisition strategy to get access to 
these innovations and leverage their sales and marketing expertise to bring 
them to market.
This trend is particularly evident in the United States. The five years 
from 2007–2012 saw over 1,000 acquisitions of small private companies 
by global MedTech players. The industry is supported by a vibrant venture 
capital industry, which invests billions of dollars in startups that have iden-
tified an unmet need and are developing innovative products to meet the 
identified need. Technology incubators at universities, or private medical 
technology accelerators support many such startups. It is estimated that 
over a 1,000 such medical technology incubators and accelerators support 
companies each year. Israel has also developed a thriving medical technol-
ogy industry over the last 20 years. This was achieved by a comprehensive 
government program to drive innovation and research by setting up 24 
technology incubators to support startups in this space. These incubators 
were placed under private management and substantial early stage funding 
was made available for startups at these incubators through liberal grant 
funding, and technology venture capital funds. Today, Israel has a thriv-
ing MedTech sector, with over a 1,000 companies developing innovative 
products for the US and Western markets.
Now, Singapore is replicating the Israeli model through it’s A*STAR 
program to create a research-led MedTech industry. Technology incuba-
tion, supported by research grants, and ample high-risk venture capital for 
early stage, research-led companies, has been the model that has success-
fully created these global hubs of MedTech innovation. This model can 
be effectively deployed in India to create the world’s first ecosystem for 
affordable MedTech innovation in 5–7 years, and tap the emerging global 
opportunity in affordable medical technology. As described, the need to 
follow a process to identify unmet needs in medical technology innovation 
is self evident. But does everyone in the innovation ecosystem, at least for 
medical technology, follow a process? That yet remains to be seen.

160	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Broadly, the different stages of an innovation process—either formal 
or informal, contains several common features looked at by entrepreneurs. 
More often than not, the innovation and entrepreneurial journey begins 
with an idea. This idea could be a result of the individual or group of indi-
vidual’s experience of working in a particular industry or field; it could be 
the result of an observation made by an individual; or it could even be the 
result of an ‘aha’ moment where the individual discovers some hitherto 
undiscovered information.
What is the significance of getting an idea? Why is the idea given so 
much importance in the innovation process? The idea becomes important 
as it is addresses or seeks to address an underlying need. This underlying 
need might be based in reality and factually evident, it might be a percep-
tion of the innovator, or it might be something evident to only a few who 
understand the need’s intricacies and complexities. Nevertheless, the idea 
more often than not seeks to solve a problem that was faced by someone 
or a group of people.
By just having an idea is never enough is it? The innovator, to be called 
an innovator, would need to act on the idea—rather, build a solution that 
would solve this underlying problem. The solution would obviously depend 
on a whole host of factors—from what is the best technology to use in the 
solution, to the skills and ability of the innovator, to the resources available 
to develop this solution, to what is perceived to be required or demanded 
by the users of this solution—the list goes on. The next stage after iden-
tifying an idea, flushing out its details, and building a concept that could 
work, is to validate it. Often described in different ways—concept valida-
tion, proof of concept, etc. The goal is to get evidence of the working of 
the concept (now more than just an idea). This evidence could be exter-
nal or internal. Innovators could get feedback from external users, buyers, 
technical experts, etc.—essentially stakeholders who might provide some 
feedback on the efficacy of such an idea. The concept could even be vali-
dated internally by the innovator, and by that, we mean through a set of 
laboratory tests designed to show the efficacy of the principle used to sup-
port the idea. Often called establishing the proof of concept in engineering 
terms, this could be done via setting up a test bed, or even using software 
to determine the workings of the concept in theory.

A Structured Process to Generate Ideas in MedTech	
161
Validating the concept is not enough for the innovator, is it? The golden 
million dollar (or billion?) idea is still in a concept stage, though some 
degree of its efficacy has been established, it still remains as a theoretical 
phenomenon. The innovator’s job is not done yet. Developing the proof 
of concept to a prototype stage is always a challenge. There are multiple 
iterations of the prototype and different innovators use differing terminol-
ogy to describe the various stages of their iterations. Looks-like prototype, 
alpha prototype, functional prototype, beta prototype, etc. are common 
ways to describe the stage of development to others—often these terms 
are used in different ways depending on the engineering background of 
the audience. However, the point remains that prototype is undergoing 
change and moving towards what would be essentially a final product. 
What started out as an idea and was serially changed in aspect, content and 
shape over time, is heading towards a final product. The essential aspect of 
this metamorphosis is technology development.
A final product needs to meet certain criteria before it is accepted in the 
market. Often these criteria vary depending on the type of solution—from 
regulatory certifications to intellectual property rights. These criteria are 
important to not only drive adoption by buyers and scale the business, but 
also to legitimately sell the product in the first place. Regulatory approval, 
depending on the geography, is essential to be able to market and sell the 
final product. Especially for medical devices, the safety of the patient is 
paramount. This is echoed by regulatory bodies, most notably the US FDA 
and European CE, which sets standards and evaluates the product for use 
in the clinical setting. In most countries, an innovator (now an entrepre-
neur), would need the approval of either these regulatory agencies, or the 
relevant agency of the country to be able to get the final product used in 
the clinical setting.
Another important aspect in the innovator’s journey is to deal with the 
intellectual property rights and implications of the novel solution being 
built. Innovators often struggle with questions such as—is what we are 
doing considered novel by law? Can we file a patent for this? Do we want 
to file a patent for this? Where do we file a patent? How do we go about 
it? Is it expensive? Where does the patent apply? Do we have patent rights 
internationally? The answers to these questions obviously depend on the 

162	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
specific situation that the innovator is in and the plan that the innovator 
has going forward.
With the final product developed, with regulatory approval considered, 
with intellectual property implications thought of, is it enough to move 
forward to the next stage? Somewhere in this development process, the 
business aspect has to be evaluated. Firstly, at the initial idea stage—does 
this idea even have a market potential? Does this new technology solution 
make business sense? Answering some of those questions—either exter-
nally or internally, gives the innovator some confidence to move ahead. 
Given that there is market potential for this new solution, what is the best 
way to go about it? What is business model? How big is the market in 
monetary terms? In number of units and buyers? And what strategy does 
one use to go about ensuring that this idea, nay final product, sees the light 
of day and is actually used to solve someone’s problem?
8.2  STAGES OF AN INNOVATOR’S JOURNEY
Innovation theorists often state that before taking on a technically challeng-
ing project to develop a product, it is essential to take a step back and under-
stand what is required. Lenk et al. (2000) state that there are essentially 
three processes to get from an idea to a product—“concept development, 
technology development, and product development.” These processes are 
not isolated, but feed directly feed into each other (Figure 8.1).
“Some ideas feed directly into product development, while others 
require technical development to be feasible. Technology development 
provides solid technologies for incorporation into the product develop-
ment process, and it also spurs new ideas. The product development pro-
cess itself may even generate new concepts or illustrate the need for new 
technology.”
They add that the key to develop successful and innovative medical 
devices is to understand the unique characteristics of these three pro-
cesses, how they interact with one another, and to manage them appropri-
ately. This, according to the authors is the key to ensure that the product 
development process in efficient and capable of producing innovative and 
successful products.6
6 http://www.mddionline.com/article/beyond-product-development-creating-process-
drives-innovation

A Structured Process to Generate Ideas in MedTech	
163
Innovation in medical devices occurs in the technology innovation of 
the product, the manufacturing processes, the method of distribution and 
adoption among others. MedTech innovation comprises of new inventions 
of medical devices or modifications of existing devices to better serve the 
patients, doctors, and other stakeholders. Further, these innovations can 
be considered either radical or incremental. Radical innovations are those 
that “introduce dramatic new capabilities,” while incremental innova-
tions are take place in existing products and processes. Innovation from 
scratch does take place, but over the years, the definition of innovation has 
come to include “modifying, upgrading, and improving existing devices.” 
Loosely defined, innovation could also be taken in an adoption context, 
where “a device that (was) …developed previously… (is) apply(ed)…
to a different situation.” Innovation can be looked at as a way to apply 
new scientific research or knowledge, or even as an “engineering problem 
solving, in which existing knowledge or techniques are applied to newly 
defined problems.”7
Typically, innovation in medical devices is “based on engineering 
problem solving by individuals or small firms, is often incremental rather 
than radical, seldom depends on the results of long-term research in the 
basic sciences, and generally does not reflect the recent generation of fun-
damental new knowledge.”7 But who is it that brings about medical device 
innovations? In the study published by Edward Roberts, he found that 
7 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK218293/
FIGURE 8.1  Stages of an Innovator’s Journey.

164	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
individuals in the academic and clinical setting, at least in the West, largely 
dominate MedTech innovation. In addition, he found that the role of the 
big medical device manufacturers tended to be more ‘secondary’ with a 
focus on the distribution and commercialization aspects. However, is this 
still the case today?
India is an example of an emerging economy with a nascent, albeit fast 
growing, innovation ecosystem in medical technology. Medical Technol-
ogy innovation in these early years in India is dominated by groups of 
individuals, or startup companies, who have sprung up in the past decade 
to create novel solutions to a host of MedTech problems specific to India 
and other developing countries. Another key finding of the Roberts’ study, 
which is evident even today, is that “the degree of clinical contact between 
… companies and, particularly, teaching hospitals was strongly correlated 
with the degree of technological innovation embodied in the products that 
the companies developed.” As he aptly puts it, “it is nearly impossible for 
a biomedical company to be successful if it does not retain close ties to a 
clinical environment.”8
It is important for the innovators to look at the technology strategy that 
would be used to further the technology development through the various 
iterations of prototypes. Lenk et al. claim that, “without a clear technol-
ogy strategy, development projects may not align with product strategy, 
leading to wasted development efforts or unsuccessful technology transfer 
attempts.”9 Over the course of figuring out the technology strategy for 
the startup, some important questions to consider would be: What is the 
potential of this technology? How can the startup develop this or obtain 
the necessary technologies? The authors add, “The technology strategy 
should support the product strategy, but may (also) extend beyond it.”9
Lenk et al. add that the “benefits of managing strong front-end pro-
cesses in concept and technology development are lost without a good 
product development process to bring new ideas and technologies to 
commercialization.” They suggest that to develop new concepts and 
technologies into successful products, the team should focus on, what 
they describe as, ‘product development project excellence.’ This consists 
of four elements:
8  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK218293/
9  http://www.mddionline.com/article/beyond-product-development-creating-process-
drives-innovation

A Structured Process to Generate Ideas in MedTech	
165
1.	 Core Teams;
2.	 Structured Development Process;
3.	 Decision-Making Reviews and Process;
4.	 Development Tools and Techniques.
A detailed description of these components of project excellence can 
be found in the Appendix.
“Concept development is the fountain that feeds both technology 
development and product development.”
Taking an idea forward, flushing out its details, creating a workable 
concept, all require a mechanism that would ‘routinely capture, organize, 
develop and screen ideas.’ Concept development can be thought of as 
routine ideation, which makes attempts to capture spontaneous ideas, and 
directed ideation, which via established methods enables focused ideation. 
Routine ideation looks to capture the ‘breadth and volume of ideas’ from 
a large number of sources with little effort and time spent on each aspect. 
Whereas, directed ideation involves spending more time and energy on 
specific aspects. Both these ideation methods are complementary and used 
in concept generation and brainstorming. It is the diverging and converg-
ing techniques of using these ideation methods that would lead a well 
thought out innovative concept. More information about Routine Ideation 
and Directed Ideation can be found in the Appendix.10
For an idea to become a successful product is essential that it com-
prises a clear and consistent focus on delivering differentiated value and 
performance to the final customers. Michael Raynor and Mumtaz Ahmed, 
in their 2013 book The Three Rules, describe this phenomenon over time 
that it makes it more challenging and forces innovators to think and rethink 
the differentiated value proposition being provided to the end customers.11 
The three rules (Figure 8.2) according to the authors are better before 
cheaper, revenue before cost, and there are no other rules.
In the words of the authors, Medical Technology innovation is inher-
ently oriented to and does focus on these rules.
“Better before cheaper: Market dynamics encourage MedTech com-
panies to add as much value to their products as possible.
10 http://www.mddionline.com/article/beyond-product-development-creating-process-
drives-innovation
11 http://dupress.com/articles/three-rules-medical-technology/

166	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Revenue before cost: Companies invest in innovation, incurring 
higher costs to generate long-term sustainable revenue. These characteris-
tics have positively impacted the industry’s overall performance.”
This is best exemplified by companies such as Medtronic and Stryker, 
which according to Raynor and Ahmed are ‘exceptional companies’ that 
have adopted these rules, especially the companies’ focus on ‘better before 
cheaper.’
The Deloitte University Press published an article, written by Snyder et 
al. (2013) that look at these three rules in MedTech Innovation (Figure 8.3). 
The article borrows these rules from Raynor and Ahmed and also adds its 
own ‘Pillars’ that would lead to the transformation of the industry. The first 
Pillar, Pillar One, is to have a ‘broader view of innovation—one that would 
offer value beyond product attributes.’ This expands on the better before 
cheaper rule, as it looks to increase the innovation horizon beyond the focus 
purely on quality of a single product, to a more ‘difficult-to-replicate sys-
tem.” The focus shifts from a product, to a pipeline of products. In addition, 
it includes the service aspect, which was hitherto not in focus, to provide 
increased ‘clinical and economic value.’12
The Deloitte University Press outlines three ways a company can drive 
innovation. These are:
12 http://dupress.com/articles/three-rules-medical-technology/
FIGURE 8.2  The three rules.

A Structured Process to Generate Ideas in MedTech	
167
1.	 Innovation can be generated internally through the company’s own 
Research and Development divisions.
2.	 Companies can buy and integrate innovations via licensing deals 
and acquisitions.
3.	 Companies could participate in the external innovation ecosystem 
with collaborations with academic, venture and startup communities.
Additionally, an innovation consulting firm called Doblin that has cre-
ated its own format builds on these pillars with four key building blocks of 
innovation capability. These are:
1.	 New approaches to the processes and methods used to create inno-
vations.
2.	 New interfaces (and even structures) in the organization to house 
the capability.
3.	 New funding mechanisms, employee skills, and other resources 
and competencies to fuel the work.
4.	 New metrics and incentives to align action.
These building blocks enable innovators to think about ‘carefully 
designing, orchestrating, and implementing’ further aspects in the innova-
tion lifecycle to improve the ability to innovate, not just ‘reliably but also 
FIGURE 8.3  Commercial capabilities for today’s MedTech market.

168	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
routinely.’ The second pillar, Pillar Two, looks at ‘engaging new influenc-
ers and adapting to heterogeneity via new commercial models.’ Primarily, 
this builds on the revenue before cost aspect and seeks to rework exist-
ing commercial models in order to better interact with various stakehold-
ers. The third pillar, Pillar Three, relies on ‘Effective Value Articulation.’ 
This involves communicating not only the differential value proposition 
but also the impact on the economics effectively. Lastly, Pillar Four looks 
at Advanced Pricing, which involves developing better pricing capabili-
ties to compete effectively. Essentially, it suggests that pricing strategies 
should be crafted that would generate economic value for the healthcare 
system and returns for the company.
One of the most widely used and well respected processes to develop 
Medical devices, called Biodesign, was created in 2001 at Stanford Uni-
versity. Biodesign is “both a program and a process.”13 It aims to cre-
ate new and cost-effective medical devices in order to improve patient 
care via a collaborative multidisciplinary approach. The approach focuses 
heavily on the ‘needs of patients, physicians and the healthcare industry as 
a whole.’ (Biodesign, 2015). The process has been taught to 900+ students, 
141 fellows, 100 executives since inception, spurring 37 companies that 
raised $325 million and have impacted the lives of over 275,000 patients 
so far.14
An interdisciplinary team, comprising engineers, clinicians and prod-
uct designers, undertakes the Biodesign Program, undergoing a process to 
identify and characterize unsolved clinical needs before building technol-
ogy solutions. Each year, a new focus area is selected, in which clinical 
needs are identified by spending time at clinical settings making ‘observa-
tions.’ The program’s mantra is “a well-characterized need is the DNA of 
a great invention.” The textbook ‘Biodesign: the Process of Innovating 
Medical Technologies’ has also become a standard and the definitive guide 
to medical device innovators around the world, with a second edition pub-
lished in 2014.15
One of the authors of Biodesign and Founding Director’s of the Bio-
design Program at Stanford, Dr. Paul Yock mentions that “in healthcare 
it is really easy to fall in love with the first need that comes across your 
13 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/about.jsp
14 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/news/annualreports/2014AnnualReport.pdf
15 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/global/japan.jsp

A Structured Process to Generate Ideas in MedTech	
169
transom…we teach a process of tough love—making sure that the clinical 
need is really important before spending the time, energy and money to 
invent and develop a solution.”16 The process follows three stages—Iden-
tify, Invent, and Implement. The Identify stage begins with making obser-
vations of unsolved clinical needs and documenting it through a ‘needs 
statement.’ This needs statement is a one-line description of the need cap-
turing the essential elements of the problem to be solved. Over the clinical 
immersion, these needs are compiled and then filtered based on parame-
ters set forth by the team. At the end of the immersion, teams usually have 
around 200 needs statements listed. These parameters typically include 
epidemiology and market data where available. Using these filters the list 
is condensed to the top 3 or 5 needs. These needs are researched in more 
detail, with a detailed document, called the need specification document 
created. This document includes all the information around the need that 
an innovator would need to come up with solutions in a brainstorming ses-
sion. The document would include disease state analysis, market analysis 
and also the competitors already operating in that space. This concludes 
the identify stage and teams move on to the invent stage.
The invent stage builds on the information learnt through the process of 
creating the needs specification document. Multiple brainstorming sessions 
are conducted; with each of the team members moderating the sessions 
to ensure a conducive brainstorming session. Concepts are bucketed into 
different approaches for each of the needs and even some early rough pro-
totyping to communicate the concepts is encouraged. Different aspects of 
the approaches are analyzed, debated and evaluated by the team, till there is 
consensus on the best approach for each of the needs. At this stage, the team 
decides which need it wants to work on and begins flushing out the solu-
tion in more detail. There are multiple iterations of the prototype and the 
intellectual property (patent) is also filed at this stage if the team so decides.
The third phase—implement begins with determining the path forward 
and elements such as the development strategy, regulatory, marketing, etc. 
are thought through. Following this a product development plan is created 
all the way to manufacturing. This would also involve understanding and 
analyzing the stakeholders in the ecosystem and creating a business plan 
to take the technology developed forward.
16 http://news.stanford.edu/features/2015/biodesign/

170	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Stanford University not only conducts annual Fellowship programs but 
it also offers its graduate students courses covering different aspects of 
the Biodesign process. The ‘Innovation Course’ is a two-quarter sequence 
course students learn the Biodesign process17, while the ‘Global Biode-
sign’ is a spring quarter course where a global version of the Biodesign 
process is taught.18 Other Biodesign courses include a ‘Biodesign for 
Mobile Health, a ‘Biodesign Capstone’ for undergraduate level students 
as well as an Executive Education course on Biodesign.192021 The Bio-
design program at Stanford University includes a Biodesign Innovation 
Fellowship22 based at Stanford as well as Global Biodesign fellowships 
(Singapore-Stanford Biodesign Fellowship)23 and an FDA Fellowship at 
the Center for Devices and Radiological Health at the FDA.2425
One of the offshoots of Stanford Biodesign is the Stanford India Bio-
design (SIB), which was established in 2007 in New Delhi, India. The 
goal was to train ‘the next generation of medical technology innovators 
in India.’ The program was administered as collaboration between Stan-
ford University, the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, and the All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in partnership with the Indo-US 
Science and Technology Forum (IUSSTF). The program conducted annual 
yearlong Fellowships, similar to the Biodesign Innovation Fellowships 
at Stanford comprising a team of a clinician, engineer, product designer, 
and scientist. This team would spend six months at Stanford University 
learning the process and identifying needs. The other six months it would 
identify needs in Indian clinical settings and would then filter these needs, 
finally working on the top need selected through a similar filtering process. 
SIB also conducts internship programs, where individuals are taught the 
process by the Fellows and faculty in New Delhi, following which they are 
put into teams and follow the process to work on needs already identified 
17 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/courses/bioe374.jsp
18 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/courses/bioe371.jsp
19 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/courses/
20 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/courses/bioe273.jsp
21 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/courses/bioe141.jsp
22 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/fellowships/bif.jsp
23 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/singapore/index.jsp
24 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/career/fda.jsp
25 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/fellowships/

A Structured Process to Generate Ideas in MedTech	
171
by the Fellows.26 Five companies have been formed resulting from this 
program in India.27 2015 onwards, the program operates as the School of 
International Biodesign.28
Singapore-Stanford Biodesign (SSB), based in Singapore, is a col-
laboration between Singapore’s A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technol-
ogy and Research), the Singapore Economic Development Board (EDB), 
and Stanford University. SSB states that its goal is to ‘nurture and train 
the next generation of Asian medical device innovators in Singapore for 
the world.’29 The teams undergoing the Singapore-Stanford examine needs 
within clinical settings typical in Singapore and other Asian countries, and 
then invent the solution, prototyping and developing the technology. The 
SSB also taps its existing network of experts from medical technology 
industry, from legal and investment areas around the world to assist these 
teams.30
Stanford Biodesign established a ‘Biodesign Global Affiliate’ designa-
tion for ‘Biodesign-like’ programs across the world. Stanford describes 
these as ‘independent programs that align with the training’ process at 
Stanford.31 One of the more famous Biodesign Global Affiliates is the 
BioInnovate program based in Ireland. BioInnovate too provides a Fel-
lowship program and an Industry Training program for its fellows. Bio-
Innovate describes itself as a ‘national medical technology innovation 
training program that aims to act as a neutral territory in which aca-
demia, clinicians and industry can collaborate to develop novel medical 
technologies.’ The program is a partnership between the universities of 
NUI Galway, University of Limerick and University College Cork, with 
numerous hospitals across the country, and is supported by industry spon-
sors including Enterprise Ireland and IMDA among others.32 The Fellow-
ship program focuses on different therapeutic areas each year, with the 
recent programs conducted in the areas of ENT, Respiratory Medicine 
26 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/india/
27 http://news.stanford.edu/features/2015/biodesign/
28 http://sibiodesign.net
29 http://www.ssbiodesign.com.sg/about/about-ssb
30 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/singapore/
31 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/global/affiliates.jsp
32 http://www.bioinnovate.ie

172	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
and Gastroenterology.33 The process followed is similar to the Biodesign 
process at Stanford, with the process following the ‘identify, invent, and 
implement’ stages to develop impactful medical devices. So far, BioInno-
vate has trained 28 Fellows, 32 graduate students and 40 industry profes-
sionals and have collated over 1000 unmet or under-met clinical needs. 
BioInnovate has also resulted in 8 technologies, with one Startup Com-
pany and one technology licensed out.
A recent program launched by Stanford Biodesign is the Japan Biode-
sign, which has been setup to train people in Japan in the Biodesign pro-
cess. The program is a collaboration between Osaka University, Tohoku 
University, the University of Tokyo, the Japan Federation of Medical 
Devices Associations (JFMDA) and the Stanford Biodesign. Currently 
the faculty of the program is undergoing training before the first Fellow-
ships begin.34
Several Biodesign-like programs are conducted around the world 
at different universities and institutions, most of which were not setup 
by Stanford, but by individual entities wishing to adapt and follow the 
Biodesign process to develop medical devices (Figure 8.4).35 A detailed 
list of such programs can be found in the Appendix. For each of these 
programs—Biodesign, Biodesign affiliated, and Biodesign-like, the key 
feature is the focus on an interdisciplinary team identifying needs in the 
clinical area before thinking about the solution. Through the process, an 
educational goal is to look for ‘translational opportunities in areas that 
are considered basic science domains’—for example, nanotechnology and 
cellular and molecular biology (Table 8.1).36
A comparison of the Stanford Biodesign and IEB process show that, as 
opposed to the Biodesign program, the IEB, after performing a thorough 
characterization of the technology seeks to match it with possible unmet 
clinical needs. This is a technology driven approach as opposed to the 
need driven approach practiced and preached by the biodesign process.
The focus here in IEB is on the technology application. They make 
“Calls for Technologies” where they ask for current technologies being 
33 http://www.bioinnovate.ie/programmes/fellowship-programme.html
34 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/global/japan.jsp
35 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/otherprograms.jsp
36 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/perspective.jsp

A Structured Process to Generate Ideas in MedTech	
173
worked on/completed at the University (of Porto) to be commercial-
ized. This stems from the program’s prior experience (and expertise) in 
technology commercialization and finding an application, after doing 
thorough research on the landscape. Similar to the Biodesign process, 
here too, there is a strong focus on the need statement, the disease state 
FIGURE 8.4  Outlining the different stages of the Biodesign process (Source: Course 
Outline—Case Western Reserve University Biodesign course).
TABLE 8.1  Comparison of Inputs, Contents, and Outputs Between Biodesign Innovation 
and IEB

174	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
fundamentals, the (present) treatment options, a stakeholder analysis, a 
market analysis, understanding the patent landscape, and finally decid-
ing on a suitable business model. Concept generation is similar across 
both. But steps similar to the Biodesign process, originating from dif-
ferent perspectives about the generation of ideas–one originating from a 
user driven pull factor, the other a market oriented push factor. However, 
one problem remains true across both the processes–adequate access to 
clinical sites for each process.37
There are numerous processes that can be followed for idea generation, 
each offering something important in its own way. It is important to fol-
low a process for idea generation however the choice of the process can 
be made by taking into consideration the geographical location, resources, 
skills and strengths of the team.
8.3  APPENDICES
APPENDIX 1:
Detailed Description of Project Excellence—Thomas J. Lenk, Arit-
omo Shinozaki, and Christina Hepner Brodie
1.	 Core Teams. A cross-functional team should be formed to focus on 
a project and empowered to deliver results. Both the team’s author-
ity and the expected results must be clearly defined.
2.	 Structured Development Process. A common framework should 
be designed to guide repeatable product development activi-
ties. Deliverables should be clearly defined, activities should be 
grouped into distinct phases, and the project should be reviewed at 
the completion of each phase. By grouping the activities properly, 
it is also possible to coordinate the phases with the completion of 
requirements for design control reviews.
3.	 Decision-Making Reviews and Process. A senior management 
product approval committee should review projects at the comple-
tion of each phase of product development. Both project progress 
and business potential must be evaluated. The project team receives 
a crisp decision of go (continue the project to the end of the next 
37 http://venturewell.org/open2014/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/MAIA.pdf

A Structured Process to Generate Ideas in MedTech	
175
phase), no go (end the project), or redirect (change the goals and 
scope of the project).
4.	 Development Tools and Techniques. Working tools like check-
lists and templates for standard communications should be pro-
vided so that teams can focus their energy on project progress and 
the content—rather than the format—of reports and presentations. 
Clear metrics, such as due-date slippage or turnover on core teams, 
allow the process to be monitored for early detection and correc-
tion of problems.
APPENDIX 2:
Case Study: Medtronic (Extracted from Raynor and Ahmed)38
Medtronic has created value across multiple markets with a common prod-
uct platform and by diversifying its portfolio with innovative offerings. 
It leveraged the electro-mechanical technology of modulating physiology 
though electrical current to address spinal, gastrointestinal, and neuro-
logical disease. Though Medtronic’s product portfolio has always been 
anchored in cardiac rhythm disease management (CRDM), it has diversi-
fied into other areas to tap additional growth. In 1975, roughly 80% of 
Medtronic’s $100 million in revenue was generated from CRDM. That 
same year, Medtronic officially formed its neurological division to begin 
to differentiate its offerings. Today, CRDM represents 30% of a $16.6 bil-
lion revenue base.
APPENDIX 3:
Case Study: Stryker (Extracted from Raynor and Ahmed)39
“…One of the driving forces behind Stryker being considered “excep-
tional” was its eventual move upmarket from medical products (such as 
stretchers and hospital beds) to implants (such as hip, knee, and spinal 
implants). Stryker originally concentrated on relatively low-tech products 
such as mobile hospital beds and cast cutters, where clever design and 
close attention to the minutiae of daily use made the difference. This led 
38 http://dupress.com/articles/three-rules-medical-technology/

176	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
to great success for the company and continues to drive substantial value 
today—but Stryker’s exceptional performance over the last decade can be 
tied to its shift in position from a maker of medical products into a high-
tech implantable MedTech player (Figure 8.3). The therapeutic nature of 
these products, the margins they command, and, until recently, the mini-
mal price pressure of its market have helped Stryker achieve impressive 
financial results…”
APPENDIX 4:
Case Study 3: Medtronic’s acquisition of Cardiocom in 2013 
(extracted).
“…Medtronic’s 2013 acquisition of Cardiocom showcases the company’s 
ability to innovate in product systems, service, and customer engage-
ment—three types of innovation directed toward one market solution. With 
the Cardiocom acquisition, Medtronic is seeking to expand into disease 
management. Cardiocom had a portfolio of tele-health offerings such as 
home glucose monitors and scales to help doctors remotely monitor indi-
cators of patient health. By integrating diagnostics, therapies, and patient 
management solutions, Medtronic can offer an innovative disease manage-
ment service to help reduce readmission rates and save hospitals money.
Medtronic saw in Cardiocom a platform that could be applied to mul-
tiple chronic diseases. In fact, Medtronic plans to create a disease manage-
ment platform around heart failure—a disease Medtronic is familiar with 
because of its implantable heart rhythm products. The platform also gives 
Medtronic the ability to complement its own suite of products and offer 
differentiated economic value to hospitals by helping to reduce readmis-
sion rates through chronic disease management…”
APPENDIX 5:
Routine Ideation: Idea Collection and Screening
For medical manufacturers, there is a wealth of potential idea sources that 
could lead to product improvements or new product concepts. Sales per-
sonnel routinely interact with customers; applications specialists, service 

A Structured Process to Generate Ideas in MedTech	
177
technicians, and call-center operators continuously interface with custom-
ers as part of their jobs; engineers and marketers may find themselves 
troubleshooting or visiting customers. If these people are trained to iden-
tify the problems they see and to listen for opportunities, then useful ideas 
will be generated. Outside inventors and creative thinkers within the com-
pany may also spark ideas that can be added to the pool. To mine this ready 
source, the firm’s system must be designed to facilitate documenting and 
screening of ideas.
Some of the major requirements for an effective system are that it is 
easily accessible, that it has a well-defined screening process run by a small 
cross-functional team, that it provides acknowledgment to all contributors, 
and that it recognizes and rewards people who submit promising ideas.
Directed Ideation: Voice of the Customer
The concept sounds easy enough. Team members go out and talk to cus-
tomers, using what the customers say to better understand a new product’s 
requirements. To productively obtain, analyze, and act on the voice of the 
customer, however, a company must put together the right team and follow 
the right approach.
A voice-of-the-customer team should consist of a cross section of per-
sonnel from the key functions that are responsible for defining, develop-
ing, marketing, selling, and servicing a product. Since the members of 
the project team carry on direct discussions with the customers, it is each 
team member’s frame of reference—built from years of experience in a 
given company or industry—that allows him or her to listen in a distinc-
tive and penetrating way. It is the combination of what the interviewer and 
the interviewee bring to the discussion that determines the value of the 
interview content.
APPENDIX 6:
Intellectual Property Strategy. Extracted from http://www.mddion-
line.com/article/beyond-product-development-creating-process-drives-
innovation.
There are several IP Strategy options for a company, each with its own 
benefits and constraints, as follows:

178	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Exclusionary Enforcement. Companies maintain competitive advan-
tage by denying access to technology and patents. This is a common mode 
of operation in the medical device industry, where high development and 
testing costs require a high return on an investment in new technology.
Return on Investment. Balancing internal-use and licensing agree-
ments can generate additional revenues beyond product sales. Tracking 
of agreements often results in greater IP management costs, however, and 
there must be a clear technology strategy to guide which technologies are 
suitable for licensing and which should be retained exclusively.
Freedom of Action. Broad cross-licensing results in high product 
design flexibility by providing access to a broad range of technologies, 
but it comes in exchange for a lower ability to exploit technological supe-
riority. This can be effective in high-volume industries where a firm can 
exploit manufacturing and design engineering expertise.
Benign Neglect. Benign neglect results when there is no effort toward 
cross-licensing or patent enforcement. This usually leads to fast time to 
market and low IP management costs, albeit with higher risk and lost 
opportunities for maximizing technology benefits. It is most suitable for 
technologies that are easily innovated around or otherwise difficult to 
defend.
APPENDIX 7:
S. No.
Name
Location
Programs
1.
Monterrey Institute of Technol-
ogy and Higher Education 
(ITESM)
Monterrey, 
Mexico
Independent Biodesign-
like fellowship
2.
University of California—
Berkley and University of 
California—San Francisco
San Francisco
Venture Innovation pro-
gram
3.
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, 
Minnesota
Innovation Fellows Pro-
gram, Medical Devices 
Center
4.
University of Missouri—
Columbia
Columbia, 
Missouri
Biodesign and Innovation 
Fellowship
5.
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, 
Michigan
Medical Innovation Center

A Structured Process to Generate Ideas in MedTech	
179
S. No.
Name
Location
Programs
6.
Karolinska Institute, The Royal 
Institute of Technology and 
Karolinska University Hospital
Stockholm, 
Sweden
Center for Technology in 
Medicine and Health
7.
North-western University
Evanston, 
Illinois
NuVention
8.
Washington University
St. Louis, 
Washington
Biodesign-like program
9.
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, 
Maryland
Masters Program
10.
Aarhus University
Finland
InnoX Healthcare Program
11.
Purdue University
Biomedship Program
12.
University of Toronto
Toronto
Biomedical Device Inno-
vation Fellowship
13.
University of Wisconsin- 
Madison
Bio Innovations and 
Opportunities in Medicine 
and Engineering (BIOME)
14.
University of Cincinnati
Medical Device Innova-
tion Program
15.
Case Western University and 
Cleveland Clinic
Biodesign Course
16.
University of Chicago
Chicago, 
Illinois
MedTech Innovation 
Program
17.
University of Kentucky
Von Allmen Center for 
Entrepreneurship
18.	
MedStar Institute for Innova-
tion 
Baltimore, 
Maryland
Not for profit setup col-
laborating between aca-
demic engineering groups 
and industry
19.
University of Southern Cali-
fornia
Los Angeles, 
California
Health, Technology, and 
Engineering (HTE@USC)
20.
BioCat
Catalonia, 
Span
Design Health (d.health)
21.
UT South-western Medical 
School
Dallas, Texas
Biodesign like course for 
medical students
22.
University of California—Los 
Angeles
Los Angeles, 
California
Course and fellowship 
offered jointly by schools 
of medicine and  
engineering

180	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
S. No.
Name
Location
Programs
23.
Harvard University
Cambridge, 
Massachus-
setts
Harvard Biodesign Lab
24.
Cornell University’s School of 
Medicine
Ithaca, New 
York
Innovation Course
25.
University of California—San 
Diego
San Diego, 
California
Fellowship program
26.
NhIce (Nice health Innovation 
Concept)
Nice, France
Biodesign-like program
27.
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania
Graduate level courses 
offered by Center for 
Medical Innovation
28.
University of Hawaii
Biodesign Innovation 
Course
29.
Rowan University
New Jersey
Bioengineering Scholars 
Program
30.
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, 
Denmark
Health Design Program
31.
McGill University, the Ecole 
de Technologies Superieure 
and Concordia University
Montreal, 
Canada
Surgical Innovation 
Program
32.
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, 
Canada
Engineers in Scrubs 
Program
33.
InnAccel
Bangalore, 
India
Entrepreneur in Residence 
Program, Affordable 
Innovation in MedTech 
Entrepreneurship Program
Table is recreated based on information from http://biodesign.stanford.
edu/bdn/otherprograms.jsp 39
APPENDIX 8:
IEB Worksheet Example
39 http://biodesign.stanford.edu/bdn/otherprograms.jsp

A Structured Process to Generate Ideas in MedTech	
181
TABLE 8.2  Worksheets Used in IEB
KEYWORDS
••
affordable healthcare
••
biodesign
••
InnAccel
••
innovation
••
medical technology
REFERENCES
“Beyond Product Development: Creating a Process That Drives Innovation | MDDI Medi-
cal Device and Diagnostic Industry News Products and Suppliers.” http://Mddion-
line.com. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.
“Biomedical Innovation Takes Off in India, With Stanford Roots.” http://News.stanford.
edu. N.p., 2015. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.
“Global Stanford Biodesign Programs.” http://Biodesign.stanford.edu. N.p., 2016. Web. 
12 Mar. 2016.
National Institute (US), and Karen Ekelman. “Technological Innovation And Medical 
Devices.” National Academies Press (US) (1988): N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.
“School of International Biodesign.” http://Sibiodesign.net. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.
“Singapore-Stanford Biodesign.” http://Biodesign.stanford.edu. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 
2016.

182	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
“Stanford Biodesign—About.” http://Biodesign.stanford.edu. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 
2016.
“Stanford Biodesign—Courses.” http://Biodesign.stanford.edu. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 
2016.
“Stanford Biodesign—Fellowships.” http://Biodesign.stanford.edu. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 
Mar. 2016.
“Stanford Biodesign—Medical Device Innovation Fellowships.” http://Biodesign.stan-
ford.edu. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.
“Stanford-India Biodesign.” http://Biodesign.stanford.edu. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.
“The Three Rules in Medical Technology: The Transformation of an Industry.” Deloitte 
University Press. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.
Training, Fellowship, Industry Training, and Meet Fellows. “Home—Bioinnovate Ire-
land—Innovative Medical Device Training.” http://Bioinnovate.ie. N.p., 2016. Web. 
12 Mar. 2016.
User, Super. “About SSB | About.” http://Ssbiodesign.com.sg. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 
2016.
User, Super. “Fellowship Program—Bioinnovate Ireland—Innovative Medical Device 
Training.” http://Bioinnovate.ie. N.p., 2016. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.

LOGIC-BASED MEDICINE VERSUS 
EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE FOR 
MODELING QUALIFIED-SELF 
HEALTH KITS
PATRIK EKLUND
Umeå University, Department of Computing Science, SE-90187 
Umeå, Sweden
CONTENTS
9.1  Introduction................................................................................... 183
Keywords............................................................................................... 186
References.............................................................................................. 187
9.1  INTRODUCTION
In this chapter we propose to use formal logic in order to bridge the gap 
between information management in Qualified-Self apps and information 
classification and structures residing within health and healthcare ontology. 
Lative logic40 embraces signatures, terms and sentences arising from monads 
and functors in category theory, and can be arranged in order to enable well-
founded logical and ontology representation. modeling uses these theoretical 
notions in order to extend the logical structure of classifications of health. 
40 http://www.glioc.com
CHAPTER 9

184	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Our focus is on Active and Healthy Ageing (AHA) including aspects of 
assessment (Eklund, 2009) and classification.
Qualified-self aspects within AHA requires having emphasis on 
empowerment and how citizens as individuals and patients can manage 
their own data, in particular for self-monitoring purposes. For this man-
agement to meet reply properly to the societal grand challenge of AHA, 
there is the need to shift from society owning all individual health data 
to individuals themselves owning their data. Another aspect is that the 
Quantified-Self movement is still rooted mostly in wellness and even fit-
ness, and as having various apps at their disposal. Focus is then not always 
just on health but on performance more in general.
Apple’s Health Kit was launched to promote such self-qualification, 
and is made at least for the purpose of further promoting the use of 
Apple’s mobile phone. Various technology partners have been foreseen to 
become included, in particular as far as medical record systems and other 
related registries are concerned. The GoogleFit and Samsung’s Sami fol-
low similar ambitions and potential bindings. Google’s approach is more 
device oriented than in Apple’s approach, and so is Sami, but Samsung’s 
approach is integrated to their overall scope of medical devices. Samsung 
has been working on medical devices already for a long time and is in fact 
in the same league e.g. as Philips, Siemens and GE. Microsoft’s Health-
Vault is closer to HealthKit but the ambition is broader obviously since 
the Microsoft Health unit has been around for quite a while. Microsoft 
appears to comprehend health records better than Apple, and Microsoft 
indeed is operating systems and computer languages more than as com-
pared to Apple, and more than Samsung.
Another aspect here is the emerging mHealth market, where mobile 
medical devices and solutions will eventually need to go down the same 
path of approvals (FDA) as compared to other medical devices and drugs. 
The approval procedures are, however, yet to be defined. The distinction 
between wearable and nonwearable will be important, as compared to 
being obtrusive or unobtrusive. In situations involving clinical situations 
all these platforms run into difficulties as the clinical side defends the pro-
fessional view on managing health and medical data. However, inclusion 
of healthy lifestyle interlinked with disease management will promote fur-
ther use of approaches by Apple, Google, Microsoft and Samsung.

Logic-Based Medicine versus Evidence-Based Medicine	
185
The question is obviously how the market responds concerning inter-
links and as related to maintaining integrity with the health records. 
Qualified-Self solutions still overlook and neglect nomenclature and 
ontology.
Within analytics and computation, evidence-based medicine (EBM) 
uses the notation and language of probability and statistics in order to 
analyze observation of outcomes of individuals in need of care, where we 
expose individuals to certain treatments or contexts. Logic-based medi-
cine41 (LBM) explains how terminology and nomenclature in medicine 
can be logically formulated by means of underlying signatures, which in 
turn leads to the possibility to construct formal terms and sentences, and 
as they eventually appear within reasoning mechanisms. LBM thereby 
opens up a logic foundation of probability theory, where notions in prob-
ability theory and statistics are enriched with concept used in formal 
logic.
Logic, as a structure, contains signatures, terms, sentences, theoremata 
(as structured sets of sentences, or ‘structured premises’), entailments, 
algebras, satisfactions, axioms, theories and proof calculi (Eklund et al., 
2014). Lative logic produces a huge potential of applications using termi-
nology, nomenclature and ontology in particular in social and healthcare. 
WHO classifications are logically lative (Eklund, 2016). The reference 
classifications ICD and ICF then appear in structured relation with each 
other. Similar transformations can be made for the derived classifications 
as well as for the related classifications ICPC-2, ICECI, ISO9999, ATC/
DDD and ICNP.
Formal mappings, e.g., between ICD and ICF are rare, and this is 
mostly due to a lack of understanding terminology and nomenclature as 
terms in a logic. ATC/DDD for drugs embraces ‘dose’ but not ‘interven-
tion,’ which means that drug-drug interactions are possible to describe 
whereas drug-condition is more complicated. IHTSDO’s SNOMED CT 
subdivides concepts within its hierarchy consisting e.g. of clinical find-
ings disorders, body structure, pharmaceutical/biologic product, social 
context, staging and scales, and qualifier values, but has been devel-
oped only with intuitive connections with WHO classifications. Fur-
ther, SNOMED’s assumption that “health ontology” needs the same or a 
41 http://www.glioc.com/logic/health/lbm/

186	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
similar underlying logic as web ontology, is a fatal mistake not promot-
ing the dialog and interrelation of classifications and nomenclature in 
useful application oriented directions. It is also all too narrow to assume 
that description logic will suffice as a logic for health ontology even if 
it is suggested to support web ontology.
All this information management is then not just about data and infor-
mation but indeed about information and process. Information as structure 
and logic is nomenclature and ontology based, and processes similarly 
require language far beyond just drawing circles and arrows. Specifically, 
encoding processes in a more formal and logical manner will need to make 
use of modeling standards like UML, SysML and BPMN.
For prediction purposes, there is a distinction to be made between a 
computational algorithm, which includes pattern recognition, neural and 
Bayesian networks, and similar computational/numerical methods, and 
logical algorithm, the latter involving inference mechanisms for reasoning 
is some selected logic, where sentences and statements are based on terms 
which in turn are founded on nomenclature and ontology. Logical infer-
ence manages uncertainty in a different way as compared to computational 
methods (Eklund et al., 2016). Type theoretical innovations are needed 
because nomenclature constructions appear in logic as a natural ingredi-
ent, but not per se in intelligent computing. A condition is also more of a 
matter of truth than just a matter of value.
KEYWORDS
••
ageing
••
care process
••
category theory
••
health ontology
••
lative logic
••
mobile health

Logic-Based Medicine versus Evidence-Based Medicine	
187
REFERENCES
Eklund, P. Assessment Scales and Consensus Guidelines Encoded in Formal Logic, Jour-
nal of Nutrition, Health and Aging (19th IAGG World Congress of Gerontology and 
Geriatrics, Paris, 2009). 13 Suppl 1, S558–S559.
Eklund, P. Lative Logic Accommodating the WHO Family of International Classifications.
Eklund, P., Galán, M. A., Helgesson, R., Kortelainen, J. Fuzzy Terms, Fuzzy Sets and Sys-
tems 2014, 256, 211–235.
Eklund, P., Höhle, U., Kortelainen, J. Non-Commutative Quantales for Many-Valuedness 
in Applications, in preparation.
Encyclopedia of E-Health and Telemedicine (Eds. Maria Manuela Cruz-Cunha, Isabel 
Miranda), IGI Global, 2016 (in print). URL: http://www.igi-global.com/book/ency-
clopedia-health-telemedicine/141916.


VIRTUAL MOBILE INTERFACES, 
BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE, AND 
ANALYTICS CONTENT PROCESSING
CYRUS F. NOURANI
Research Professor, Simon Fraser University, British Columbia, 
Canada
CONTENTS
Abstract.................................................................................................. 189
10.1  Introduction................................................................................. 190
10.2  The Visual Dynamics.................................................................. 192
10.3  Content Management and Processing......................................... 194
10.4  A Visual Content Logic............................................................... 200
10.5  Heterogeneous Computing and Models...................................... 204
10.6  Content Models and Views—A Specific Design Prototype....... 213
10.7  Business Intelligence and Mobile Content................................. 217
10.8  Conclusions................................................................................. 219
Keywords............................................................................................... 220
References.............................................................................................. 220
ABSTRACT
Intelligent business interfaces are designed with intelligent multitier, inter-
faces applying agents, and intelligent business objects with applications 
CHAPTER 10

190	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
to intelligent WWW. Basic intelligent content management with multitier 
designs for interfaces is presented. The field of automated learning and 
discovery has obvious financial and organizational memory applications. 
There are basic applications to data discovery techniques with agent mul-
tiplayer game tree planning. The computing techniques, the Morph Gent-
zen deductive system and its models are applied towards designing an 
active multimedia intelligence database. The computing model is based on 
novel competitive learning techniques with model discovery and custom-
izing interface design. Intelligent visual computing paradigms are applied 
to define the multimedia computing paradigm and active databases. The 
Intelligent Multimedia paradigms are applicable to databases and query 
processing, illustrated with applications to stock forecasting analytics. A 
view-model-controller design prototype for mobile business platforms 
with content processing specifics are presented.
10.1  INTRODUCTION
The chapter addresses how to questions on intelligent interfaces to 
mobile business from the design, modeling, and the application perspec-
tive? The design tier-layers, intelligent databases, content processing 
and web-interfaces with new specific logics are presented as bases to 
paradigms that render realistic rapid response systems. Intelligent busi-
ness interfaces might apply automated learning and discovery—often 
called data mining, machine learning, or advanced data analysis—has 
new w-interface relevance. There are obvious financial and organiza-
tional memory applications applied at times in our projects. E-com-
merce, e-business, trust, trustworthiness, usability, human-computer 
interaction, cognitive ergonomics, user interface design, ease of use, 
interaction design, and online marketing are the business user model-
ing issues addressed in this chapter. Financial companies have begun to 
analyze their customers’ behavior in order to maximize the effectiveness 
of marketing efforts. There are routine applications to data discovery 
techniques with intelligence databases. Management process controls at 
times calls on warehouse data and relies on organizational memory to 
reach decision. Recent research has led to progress—both in the type 

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
191
methods—that are available and in the understanding of their character-
istics. The broad topic of automated learning and discovery are inher-
ently cross-disciplinary in nature. As there is increased reliance on visual 
data and active visual databases on presenting and storing organizational 
structures, via the internet and the WWW, the role of data discovery 
and intelligent multimedia active databases become essential. Knowl-
edge management (KM) and organizational memory (OM) are the areas 
where model discovery with active Intelligent Databases applying pre-
dictive logic (Nourani, 1995a, 1999a,g, 2000). KM is one of the key 
progress factors in organizations. In an organization, know-how may 
relate to problem-solving expertise in functional disciplines, experi-
ences of human resources, and project experiences in terms of project 
management issues, design technical issues and lessons learned. Corpo-
rate memory (CM) or OM is regarded as the central prerequisite for IT 
supports of KM. It is the means for knowledge conservation, distribu-
tion, and reuse. Identification and analysis of a company’s knowledge-
intensive work processes (e.g., product design or strategic planning, 
using KM and OM are data discovery and data warehousing intensive 
operations. A new computing area is defined with Intelligent Multime-
dia principles with business applications (Nourani, 1999a). The area for 
which the chapter provides a foundation where multimedia computing is 
bound to be applied at dimensions and computing phenomena unimag-
ined; thus, yet inevitable with the emerging technologies. The principles 
defined are new practical multimedia artificial intelligence business 
applications. Multimedia AI systems are proposed with new computing 
techniques are defined. Multimedia objects and rules, and multimedia 
programming techniques are presented via a new language (Nourani, 
1999c, 2000). The concept of Hybrid Picture is the start to define intel-
ligent multimedia objects automatic hybrid picture transformation with 
a multimedia language in the author’s projects. A preliminary mathe-
matical basis to the Morph Gentzen computing logic are presented in 
Nourani (1999a,c,e, 2000). The foundations are a new computing logic 
with a model theory and formal system. Multimedia objects and rules 
are presented and shown in programming applications. Intelligent Mul-
timedia context defines the applications. Practical Multimedia Design is 
illustrated by pictorial examples. The project has applications to topics 

192	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
dealing with usability engineering, culture and design, international dif-
ferences in software user training, and case studies on international user 
interface design as in Del Galdo and Nielsen (Nourani, 2006). A practi-
tioner for developing usable interfaces can apply intelligent multimedia 
to the practical designs (Nourani, 2005).
10.2  THE VISUAL DYNAMICS
10.2.1  WHY MULTIMEDIA DATABASES?
Defining compatibility and visual effects relations allows objects to be 
selected and applied to design and compare customized views. Multime-
dia programming is combined with visual multiagent objects to define 
specific visual compatibility for customized active databases. Active data-
bases deploy certain computing which lend themselves naturally to the 
Intelligent Multimedia principles (Nourani, 1999c). The concept of active 
intelligent objects and “events” are embedded by computing defined on 
IM as a basic computing with intelligent trees, intelligent objects, and 
hybrid pictures. The characteristics of an Active DMBS, or ADMBS (Bai-
ley, 1995) supports definition and management of ECA rules, for exam-
ple, event, condition, and action. Hence, an ADMBS must have means to 
define ECA’s. An ADBMS must support rule management and rule-base 
updates. It must carry out actions and evaluate conditions. An ADBMS 
must represent information in ECA-rules in terms of its data models. 
The IM computing paradigm provides a basis for designing multimedia 
ADBMS’s. The IM computing paradigm allows the design for multimedia 
ADBMS (Nourani, 2000) to apply agent computing to ADBMS, to base 
an ADBMS on multimedia agent computing, and to carryout meta-level 
reasoning and KB with multimedia intelligent objects.
10.2.2  KR AND DIAGRAMS FOR RELEVANT WORLD MODELS
Let us brief on knowledge representation with G-diagram models (Nourani, 
1995a, 1999a) and applications to define computable models and relevant 
world reasoning. G-diagrams are diagrams defined from a minimal set of 

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
193
function symbols that can inductively define a model. Generic diagrams 
are applied to relevance reasoning with model-localized representations 
for a minimal efficient computable way to represent relevant knowledge 
for localized AI worlds. We show how computable AI world knowledge 
is representable. G-diagrams are applied towards KR from planning with 
non-determinism and planning with free proof trees to partial deduction 
with predictive diagrams applied in Nourani (1999a,c,g). The applications 
to proof abstraction and explanation-based generalization by abstract func-
tions are alluded in Nourani (1995a). A brief overview to a reasoning grid 
with diagrams is presented in the above referenced papers. Generalized 
diagrams are used to build models with a minimal family of generalized 
Skolem functions. The minimal sets of function symbols are functions 
with which a model can be built inductively. The functions can correspond 
to objects defining shapes and depicting pictures. We cannot formalize the 
real world, however, the relevant descriptions for problem solving can be 
specified. Knowledge representation has two significant roles: to define a 
model for the AI world, and to provide a basis for reasoning techniques to 
get at implicit knowledge. An ordinary diagram is the set of atomic and 
negated atomic sentences that are true in a model. Generalized diagrams 
are diagrams definable by a minimal set of functions such that everything 
else in the model’s closure can be inferred, by a minimal set of terms 
defining the model. Thus providing a minimal characterization of mod-
els, and a minimal set of atomic sentences on which all other atomic sen-
tences depend. To prove Gödel’s completeness theorem, Henkin defined 
a model directly from the syntax of the given theory. This structure is 
obtained by putting terms that are provably equal into equivalence classes, 
then defining a free structure on the equivalence classes. The comput-
ing enterprise requires more general techniques of model construction 
and extension, since it has to accommodate dynamically changing world 
descriptions and theories. Let us define a simple language L = <{tweedy}, 
{a}, {bird}, predicate letters at first order logic- FOL>. A model may con-
sist of {bird(tweedy), penguin(tweedy) (bird(tweedy), bird(tweedy) v ( 
bird(tweedy), …}, others may consist of {p(a), (p(a) ( p(a), p(x), p(a) v 
p(x) v p(y), …}. Because we can apply arbitrary interpretation functions 
for mapping language constructs into worldviews, the number of mod-
els for a language is infinite. Although this makes perfect sense from a 

194	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
theoretical and logical point of view, from a practical point of view, this 
notion of model is too general for our applications. Since for AI we want 
models that could be computed effectively and efficiently. Thus, it is use-
ful to restrict the types of models that we define for real world applica-
tions. Primarily, we are interested in models with computable properties 
definable from the theory. The generic diagram, G-diagram for models 
(Nourani, 1991, 1995a, 1999g) is a diagram in which the elements of the 
structure are all represented by a minimal family of function symbols and 
constants. Thus it is sufficient to define the truth of formulas only for the 
terms generated by the minimal family of functions and constant symbols. 
Such assignment implicitly defines the diagram. This allows us to define 
a canonical model of a theory in terms of a minimal function set. The fol-
lowing sections apply KR with visual business objects and Section 10.5 
presents the applications to heterogeneous computing and model discov-
ery on business data.
10.3  CONTENT MANAGEMENT AND PROCESSING
Current content processing, e.g., Google and search engines industry relies 
on processing ‘content’ based on web address, tags, and indices.  Exist-
ing web extraction techniques are either tag-based or tree based with heu-
ristics applied to solve the semantics problems. Structure augmented tag 
techniques with a specific algorithm to accomplish the structuring are pre-
sented. Templates are applied to do match web pages. Sequence matching 
algorithm and a preprocessing grouping algorithm to the tree matching 
part. On meta-model based approach for extracting ontological relations 
OWL-encoded ontologies from transformations from UML descriptions. 
Rules are defined for extracting ontological semantics. The transforma-
tion rules are XML-based implemented. OWL encoded ontology id con-
structed for UML designs.
The content management arena is encompassed as follows:
•	
Enterprise Content Enterprise Content
•	
Web Content: Server’s side processing and content side processing 
and content
•	
Content and Databases

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
195
•	
Multimedia Content Processing
•	
Content Presentation Languages
•	
Real Content and MPEGs Res
Content management is a broad term used to describe many different 
ways of organizing many different types of information. Example areas 
are: how to identify content that is appropriate for a platform or user group, 
appropriate for; how to load and modularize a document are important 
areas to address in a content management system. That increases the use of 
the information in an enterprise and relieves the IT resources. For example, 
linking up business partners and employee directly via Internet can opti-
mize available expertise for business processes. Further it facilitates how 
to administer information and data, independent of format, model enter-
prise centrally, and to generate synergies. Besides, the system saves costs, 
since many locations can be standardized with external employees that 
are systematized. Basic systems can be extended, instead of a complete 
solution for all conceivable requirements, according to topical and future 
needs individually that are modular. Thus system can present advantages 
with lasting positive influence on productiveness at organizations.
10.3.1  ENTERPRISE CONTENT MANAGEMENT
The World Wide Web was originally built for human consumption. 
Although everything on it is machine readable, this data is not machine 
understandable. It is very hard to automate everything on the Web, and 
because of the volume of information the Web contains, it is not possible to 
manage it manually. The solution proposed is to use metadata to describe 
the data contained on the Web. Metadata is “data about data” (e.g., a 
library catalog is metadata, since it describes publications) or specifically 
in the context of this specification “data describing Web resources.” The 
distinction between “data” and “metadata” is not an absolute. It is a dis-
tinction created primarily by a particular application, and many times the 
same resource will be interpreted in both ways simultaneously. Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) is a foundation for processing metadata; 
it provides interoperability between applications that exchange machine 
understandable information on the Web. RDF emphasizes facilities to 

196	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
enable automated processing of Web resources. RDF can be used in a 
variety of application areas; for example, in resource discovery to provide 
better search engine capabilities, in cataloging for describing the content 
and content relationships available at a particular Web site, page, or digi-
tal library, by intelligent software agents to facilitate knowledge sharing 
and to exchange, in content rating, in describing collections pages that 
represent a single logical “document,” for describing intellectual property 
rights of Web pages, and for expressing the privacy preferences of a user 
as well as the privacy policies of a Website RDF with digital signatures 
will be key to building the “Web of Trust” for electronic commerce, col-
laboration, and other trust for applications.
10.3.2  WEB CONTENT
Web interfaces and information systems are the decade’s newest essential 
technology to business, engineering, sciences, and all sectors where rapid 
extrapolation is important. The proceedings preliminaries are three key-
notes that address management the web information systems technologi-
cal state and the technological change implications. The push-pull effect 
of web environments on the data management requirements and the under-
lying technological changes drives the next generation search engines, 
e.g., ambient multimedia content search, onto domain independent plat-
forms. Search methodology and for the most part academic systems, 
deploy real-time correlations among keywords to generate queries based 
on specific known relations. Object level vertical searches: there are lack-
ing deep or are incomplete relations to link-up. Innovations include que-
ries composed from schema instances based on page levels, or manifold 
ranking algorithms on webpage blocks that the initially retrieved pages 
based on Cosine measures and vision-based page segmentation. Prefer-
ence-based search techniques based on modeling user preference to find 
a best match with preference elicitation is a newer area with hill climbing 
techniques applying Pareto optimality to choose options. Problem solving 
PMS is represented with OWLs and Horn-like rules are applied. Front-
end applications, at times apply web component presentation models like 
GUI widgets resembling WebXML. Hierarchical image semantics struc-
ture captures image semantics from ontology trees with visual features 

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
197
as semantic domains. Sematic domains are wavlet transformations effec-
tively generate representation of visual features. Similarity is computed 
from image scans. The above areas benefit from the present invention.
Example Web Content Management offered on systems is as follows:
Product | Usage | References | Partner | Services | Home
Product > Web Content Management
Product Web > Web Content
Content Management
SmartEdit
Asset > Asset Manager
Site Manager > Site Manager
Translation > Translation Editor > Editor
Translation > Translation Manager > Manager
Web > Web Compliance > Compliance Manager > Manager
Archive > Archive
Import Manager
CMS > New Features CMS 7.0 > 10 CMS Tips 10 CMS Tips
Enterprise > Enterprise Content > Content Management
Personalization
Download
Product film
Modules > Module
SmartEdit > Technology Actualization
Asset Manager > Corporate Design
Site Manager Site Manager
Help > IT-Experts
Specialization
Websites, Portals, Intranets Portals
Translation Editor
Additional Modules
Web Compliance Manager
10.3.3  XML CONTENT
How can we provide a mechanism that allows additional elements to be 
added into existing content models?

198	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Problem: At the time of designing the document type, the designer 
may not be able to foresee all of the uses and situations where document 
instances will be used. To provide for flexibility, the contents of elements 
can be made to be definable by the document instance.
Context: This is a very general mechanism that can be used anytime 
additional flexibility is needed.
Forces: Flexibility is often required for a document type to be able to 
be used effectively. Flexibility, however often makes processing of the 
documents more difficult. Customization of software is often needed to 
deal with the flexibility.
Solution: The designer of the document can add a mechanism to allow 
the author of a document instance to extend an element definition from the 
document type.
Example System: Adobe Premiere APIs provide access to all points of 
the video-editing pipeline: import, video and audio filtering, playback, and 
output can all be performed.
10.3.4  ADOBE EXAMPLE CONTENT
Adobe Premier Plug-ins
Premiere API Plug-in Types
Media Abstraction Layer
Record Records from an external (usually hardware) source. Import 
media types into premiere beyond those it supports. Synthetic import-
ers, a subset, dynamically generate media. Synthetic importers, a subset, 
dynamically generate media.
Playback Accelerate video playback by controlling the timeline. Play-
back Accelerate video playback associated with a playback module to 
form an Editing Mode.
Filters: Filters Video Process a series of frames. Parameters are Video 
Process a series of frames. Parameters are animatable over time.
Audio Process Audio Clips: Parameters are Audio Process audio clips. 
Parameters are animatable over time.
Transition Blend: Blends one movie clip into another over time.
Edit Decision List Export: Create a text based EDL file to use in Edit 
Decision List, Device Control and external device (VCR, camera, etc.).

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
199
The SDLT: Separate layout and content templates.
Documentation Layout Templates: SDLT produced in set of generic 
and comprehensive set of Adobe FrameMaker templates, for formatting 
technical software documentation. Sample material for different types 
of document is provided separately, as content templates themselves for-
matted using the SDLT. This separation (of layout and content templates) 
offers the following advantages: visual consistency across the various doc-
uments for a project can be achieved in a manageable way, and requires 
the maintenance of only one set of layout templates. Simplification on 
only templates: adding a template for a particular document type requires 
only the creation of a content template, consisting only of content specific 
sample material.
Some features of the SDLT are: comprehensive predefined formats 
for all typical software documentation; predefined formats in the SDLT 
FrameMaker paragraph catalog for the SDLT chapter template, for the 
SDLT chapter template, showing paragraph tag names for list items, 
levels 1, 2 and 3. The showing paragraph tag names SDLT define cat-
alogs of tagged format definitions for paragraph, characters, master 
pages, reference pages, cross-references, variables and tables contains 
only the formats required by that template file, for example, the front 
matter and chapter template each contain a set of predefined formats, 
but each only contain what is necessary to format the front matter and 
chapters, respectively.
HTML, SQL, PHP & MySQL are the most widely used open source 
database and scripting open source technologies on the Web today. A start-
ing point in your journey is to creating dynamic websites and setting up 
relational databases. Building Your Own Database Driven Website using 
BPHP & MySQL: there are a practical hands on guide to learning all the 
tools, principles and techniques needed to build a fully functional database 
driven Website using PHP & MySQL SQL.
10.3.5  ANALYTICS AND BIG DATA
Big Data is a popular term used to describe the exponential growth and 
availability of data, both structured and unstructured. And big data may be 

200	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
as important to business—and society—as the Internet has become. Why? 
More data may lead to more accurate analyzes. More accurate analyzes 
may lead to more confident decision making. Better decisions can mean 
greater operational efficiencies, cost reductions and reduced risk. Good 
data governance only multiplies the value of big data. Big Data has big 
value, it also takes organization’s big effort to manage well and an effec-
tive governance discipline can fulfill its purpose, facing big data exponen-
tials, content, and applications: Aps.
Consumers have been pledging their love for data visualizations for a 
while now, and data mining with multimedia discovery is the area being 
explored. There is emerging a debate about the relative importance of 
ever-bigger data versus ever better predictive techniques to avoid bigger 
data. Not enough people have the necessary skills to make rigorous use 
of data. It’s been more than 70 years since American national technology 
policy that Vannevar Bush famously declared “there is a new profession of 
trail blazers that find delight in the task of establishing useful trails through 
the enormous mass of the common record.”
10.4  A VISUAL CONTENT LOGIC
A problem-solving paradigm is presented in the Double Vision Comput-
ing paper (Nourani and Grace, 1999). The basic technique to be applied 
is viewing the televised scene combined with the scripts as many possible 
worlds. Agents at each world that complement one another to portray a 
stage by cooperating. The A.I. techniques can be applied to define interac-
tions among personality and view descriptions. Object coobject pairs and 
agents solve problems on boards by cooperating agents. The Intelligent 
Multimedia computing paradigm define multiagent computing with mul-
timedia objects and carry on artificial intelligence computing on boards. 
The IM Hybrid Multimedia Programming techniques have a computing 
mathematical logic, with a Gentzen (1943) or natural deduction Prawitz 
(1965) system defined by taking multimedia objects coded by diagram 
functions. By transforming hybrid picture’s corresponding functions a 
new hybrid picture is deduced. Multimedia objects are viewed as syntactic 
objects defined by functions, to which the deductive system is applied. 

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
201
Thus we define a syntactic morphing to be a technique by which multi-
media objects and hybrid pictures are homomorphically mapped via their 
defining functions to a new hybrid picture. The deduction rules are a Gent-
zen system augmented by Morphing, and Trans-morphing.
The logical language has function names for hybrid pictures. The 
Morph Rule—An object defined by the functional n-tuple <f1, …, fn> 
can be morphed to an object defined by the functional n-tuple <h(f1), …, 
h(fn)>, provided h is a homomorphism of intelligent objects as abstract 
algebras, and h(f) is the corresponding structure to what f selects, at the 
morphed world. The Trans-Morph Rules—A set of rules whereby com-
bining hybrid pictures p1, …, pn defines an Event {p1, p2, …, pn} with a 
consequent hybrid picture p. Thus the combination is a morph sequencing 
initiating event. The deductive theory is a Gentzen system in which hybrid 
pictures are named by parameterized functions; augmented by the MIM 
morph and transmorph rules. The formal AI and mathematics appear in 
the first author’s mathematical logic publications since 1997 and applied 
to business areas (Nourani, 1999c,g). The intelligent syntax languages are 
applied with Morph Gentzen (Thrun et al., 1998).
10.4.1  THE MODELS
A computational logic for intelligent languages is presented in brief with 
a soundness and completeness theorem from Nourani (1994, 1999a) and 
applied to intelligent business object computing. A brief overview to con-
text abstraction shows how context free and context sensitive properties 
might be defined with agents. Agents are in the sense defined in Thrun 
et al. (1998) and the A.I. foundations Genesereth (1987). A set of func-
tion symbols in the language, referred to by Agent Function Set, is the 
set of function symbols that are modeled in the computing world by AI 
Agents. The idea is to characterize computation with abstract syntax trees 
without grammar specifics. As an example, suppose you are told there is 
an academic department with a faculty member which is Superman, and 
two faculty members which are Swedish speaking, and three which do 
not talk to anybody not in their expertise area. Without telling you any-
thing else about what they do, abstract syntax properties can be defined. 

202	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
When the signature’s specific agent functions are defined, it implies the 
signature has defined message paths for them. From the signature Intel-
ligent Models are defined for abstract syntax trees. An abstract language 
that is capable of specifying modules, agents, and their communications 
expresses the computation. The implementing agents, their correspond-
ing objects, and their message passing actions can also be presented by 
the two-level abstract syntax. The agents are represented by function 
names that appear on the free syntax trees of implementing trees. A sig-
nature defines the language tree compositionality degree and defines the 
abstract syntax.
10.4.2  RELEVANT KR AND VISUAL BUSINESS OBJECTS
Knowledge representation has two significant roles: to define a model 
for the AI world, and to provide a basis for reasoning techniques to get at 
implicit knowledge. An ordinary diagram is the set of atomic and negated 
atomic sentences that are true in a model. Generalized diagrams are dia-
grams definable by a minimal set of functions such that everything else 
in the model’s closure can be inferred, by a minimal set of terms defin-
ing the model. Thus providing a minimal characterization of models, and 
a minimal set of atomic sentences on which all other atomic sentences 
depend. We want to solve real world problems in AI. Obviously for auto-
mating problem solving, we need to represent the real world. Since we 
cannot represent all aspects of a real world problem, we need to restrict 
the representation to only the relevant aspects of the real world we are 
interested in. Let us call this subset of relevant real world aspects the Rel-
evant World for a problem. AI approaches to problem solving represent 
the knowledge usually in some kind of first-order language, consisting 
of at least constants, functions and predicate symbols. Our primary focus 
will be the relations among KR, AI worlds, and the computability of mod-
els. Truth is a notion that can have dynamic properties. To keep the mod-
els, which need to be considered small and to keep a problem tractable, 
we have to get a grip on a minimal set of functions to define computable 
models with. The selector functions are applied to create compound busi-
ness objects.

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
203
10.4.3  LEARNING FROM MULTIMEDIA DATA
Many datasets contain more than just a single type of data. The existing 
algorithms can usually only cope with a single type data. How can we 
design methods that can take on multimedia data from multiple modali-
ties? Are we to apply separate learning algorithms to each data modality, 
and combine their results, or are there to be algorithms that can handle 
multimedia multiple modalities on a feature-level. Learning casual rela-
tionships among visual stored data is another important area, which can 
benefit from our project. Most existing learning algorithms detect only 
correlations, but are unable to model causality and hence fail to predict 
the effect of external controls. Visualization and interactive discovery data 
mining is a process, which involves automated data analysis and control 
decisions by an expert of the domain. For example, patterns in many large-
scale business system databases might be discovered interactively, by a 
human expert looking at the data, as it is done with medical data. Data 
visualization is specifically difficult when data is high dimensional, spe-
cifically when it involves non-numerical data such as text. The projects 
might be a basis for designing interactive business tools.
10.4.4  COMPUTABLE WORLD MODELS
The technique in Nourani (1991, 1995a, 1999g) for model building as 
applied to the problem of AI reasoning allows us to build and extend mod-
els by diagrams. This requires us to define the notion of generalized or 
generic diagram. The G-diagrams are used to build models with a mini-
mal family of generalized Skolem functions. The minimal sets of function 
symbols are those with which a model can be built inductively. We focus 
our attention on such models, since they are computable (Bailey et al., 
1995). The G-diagram methods applied and further developed here, allow 
us to formulate AI world descriptions, theories, and models in a mini-
mal computable manner. It further allows us to view the world from only 
the relevant functions. Thus models and proofs for the specified problems 
can be characterized by models computable by a set of functions. The 
G-diagram functions can define IM objects and be applied with the Morph 
Gentzen logic.

204	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
10.5  HETEROGENEOUS COMPUTING AND MODELS
10.5.1  HETEROGENEOUS COMPUTING
In Nourani (1998) we present new techniques for design by software 
agents and new concepts entitled Abstract Intelligent Implementation 
(AII) of AI systems. Objects, message passing actions, and implement-
ing agents are defined by syntactic constructs, with agents appearing as 
functions. The techniques have been applied to design intelligent business 
objects in Nourani (1998). AII techniques have been applied to Heteroge-
neous KB Design and implementation. The application areas include sup-
port for highly responsive planning. AII techniques are due to be an area of 
crucial importance as they are applied gradually to the real problems. The 
applied fields are, for example, intelligent business systems, aerospace, AI 
for robots, and multimedia.
10.5.2  KNOWLEDGE BASES AND VISUAL MODEL DISCOVERY
Model diagrams allow us to characterize incomplete KR. To key into the 
incomplete knowledge base we apply generalized predictive diagrams, 
whereby specified diagram functions on a search engine can select onto 
localized data fields. The predictive model diagrams (Nourani, 1995a, 
1999a) could be minimally represented by the set of functions {f1, …, fn} 
that inductively define the model. Data discovery from KR on diagrams 
might be viewed as satisfying a goal by getting at relevant data which 
instantiates a goal. The goal formula states what relevant data is sought. 
We propose methods that can be applied to planning (Nourani, 1991) with 
diagrams to implement discovery planning. In planning with G-diagrams 
that part of the plan that involves free Skolemized trees is carried along 
with the proof tree for a plan goal. Computing with diagram functions 
allows us to key to active visual databases with agents.
10.5.3  PREDICTION AND DISCOVERY
Minimal prediction is an artificial intelligence technique defined since the 
author’s model-theoretic planning project. It is a cumulative non-mono-

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
205
tonic approximation attained with completing model diagrams on what 
might be true in a model or knowledge base. A predictive diagram for 
a theory T is a diagram D (M), where M is a model for T, and for any 
formula q in M, either the function f: q{0,1} is defined, or there exists 
a formula p in D(M), such that T U {p} proves q; or that T proves q by 
minimal prediction. A generalized predictive diagram, is a predictive dia-
gram with D(M) defined from a minimal set of functions. The predictive 
diagram could be minimally represented by a set of functions {f1, …, 
fn} that inductively define the model. The free trees we had defined by 
the notion of provability implied by the definition, could consist of some 
extra Skolem functions {g1, …, gl} that appear at free trees. The f terms 
and g terms, tree congruences. Predictive diagrams then characterize par-
tial deduction with free trees. The predictive diagrams are applied to dis-
cover models for the intelligent game trees. Prediction is applied to plan 
goal satisfiability and can be combined with plausibility (Nourani, 1991), 
probabilities, and fuzzy logic to obtain, for example, confidence intervals. 
The author has applied minimal prediction to simply encode knowledge 
with model diagrams to carry on automated deduction as Loveland and 
Poole’s automated deduction system intended. Modeling with virtual tree 
planning (Nourani, 1999f) is applied where uncertainty, including effector 
and sensor uncertainty, are relegated to agents, where competitive learning 
on game trees determines a confidence interval. The incomplete knowl-
edge modeling is treated with KR on predictive model diagrams. Model 
discovery at KB’s are with specific techniques defined for trees. Model 
diagrams allow us to model-theoretically characterize incomplete KR. 
To key into the incomplete knowledge base we apply generalized predic-
tive diagrams whereby specified diagram functions a search engine can 
select onto localized data fields. The predictive model diagrams could be 
minimally represented by the set of functions {f1, …, fn} that inductively 
define the model. Data discovery from KR on diagrams might be viewed 
as satisfying a goal by getting at relevant data which instantiates a goal. 
The goal formula states what relevant data is sought. We propose methods 
that can be applied to planning (Nourani, 1991) with diagrams to imple-
ment discovery planning. In planning with G-diagrams that part of the 
plan that involves free Skolemized trees is carried along with the proof 
tree for a plan goal. Computing with diagram functions allows us to key to 
active visual databases.

206	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
10.5.4  TAIM* AND DISCOVERY COMPUTATION FROM 
WAREHOUSED DATA
The morphing Transformer Active Intelligent Database designs outline in 
the chapter is abbreviated as TAIM henceforth. Data discovery from KR 
on diagrams might be viewed as satisfying a goal by getting at relevant 
data which instantiates a goal. The goal formula states what relevant data 
is sought. We have presented planning techniques, which can be applied 
to implement discovery planning. In planning with G-diagrams that part 
of the plan that involves free Skolemized trees is carried along with the 
proof tree for a plan goal. The idea is that if the free proof tree is con-
structed then the plan has a model in which the goals are satisfied. The 
model is the initial model of the AI world for which the free Skolemized 
trees were constructed. Partial deductions in this approach correspond to 
proof trees that have free Skolemized trees in their representation. While 
doing proofs with free Skolemized trees we are facing proofs of the form 
p(g(….)) proves p(f(g(….)) and generalizations to p(f(x)) proves for all x, 
p(f(x)). Thus the free proofs are in some sense an abstract counterpart of 
the SLD. Let us see what predictive diagrams do for knowledge discovery 
knowledge management. Diagrams allow us to model-theoretically char-
acterize incomplete KR. To key into the incomplete knowledge base
Figure 10.1 depicts selector functions Fi from an abstract view grid 
interfaced via an inference engine to a knowledge base and in turn onto a 
database.
Generalized predictive diagrams are defined, whereby specified dia-
gram functions and search engine can select onto localized data fields. A 
Generalized Predictive Diagram is a predictive diagram where D (M) is 
defined from a minimal set of functions. The predictive diagram could 
be minimally represented by a set of functions {f1, …, fn} that induc-
tively define the model. The functions are keyed onto the inference and 
knowledge base to select via the areas keyed to, designated as Si’s in 
Figure 10.1 and data is retrieved (Nourani, 1999f). Visual object views to 
active databases might be designed with the above. The trees defined by 
*TAIM is the trade name for the Active Intelligent Database design and is the techni-
cal property of the authors computing business. Applications must be with permission 
and venture partnerships

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
207
FIGURE 10.1  Keyed KR, inference, and visual discovery.

208	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
the notion of provability implied by the definition might consist of some 
extra Skolem functions {g1, …, gn}, that appear at free trees. The f terms 
and g terms, tree congruences, and predictive diagrams then character-
ize deduction with virtual trees (Nourani, 1999b) as intelligent predic-
tive interfaces. Data discovery from KR on diagrams might be viewed 
as satisfying a goal by getting at relevant data which instantiates a goal. 
The goal formula states what relevant data is sought. We have presented 
planning techniques, which can be applied to implement discovery plan-
ning. In planning with G-diagrams that part of the plan that involves free 
Skolemized trees is carried along with the proof tree for a plan goal. The 
idea is that if the free proof tree is constructed then the plan has a model in 
which the goals are satisfied. The model is the initial model of the AI world 
for which the free Skolemized trees were constructed. Partial deductions 
in this approach correspond to proof trees that have free Skolemized trees 
in their representation. While doing proofs with free Skolemized trees we 
are facing proofs of the form p(g(…)) proves p(f(g(…)) and generaliza-
tions to p(f(x)) proves for all x, p(f(x)). Thus the free proofs are in some 
sense an abstract counterpart of the SLD. Practical AI Goal Satisfaction. 
The predictive diagram could be minimally represented by a set of func-
tions {f1, …, fan} that inductively define the model. The free trees we had 
defined by the notion of provability implied by the definition, could con-
sist of some extra Skolem functions {g1, …, gl} that appear at free trees. 
The f terms and g terms, tree congruences, and predictive diagrams then 
characterize partial deduction with free trees.
10.5.5  KR AND DATA WAREHOUSING WITH KEYED 
FUNCTIONS
Let us see what predictive diagrams do for knowledge discovery knowl-
edge management. Diagrams allow us to model-theoretically character-
ize incomplete KR to incomplete knowledge-base. The following figure 
depicts selector functions Fi from an abstract view grid interfaced via an 
inference engine to a knowledge base and in turn onto a database. Practical 
AI systems are designed by modeling AI with facts, rules, goals, strategies, 
and knowledge bases. Patterns, schemas, AI frames and viewpoints are 
the micro to aggregate glimpses onto the database and knowledge bases 

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
209
were masses of data and their relationships-representations, respectively, 
are stored. Schemas and frames are what might be defined with objects, 
the object classes, and the object class inheritances user-defined inheri-
tance relations, and specific restrictions on the object, class, or frame slot 
types and behaviors. From Nourani (2000) scheme might be Intelligent 
Forecasting.
IS-A Stock Forecasting Technique
Portfolios: Stock, bonds, corporate assets
Member Management Science Techniques
Schemas allow brief descriptions on object surface properties with 
which high level inference and reasoning with incomplete knowledge can 
be carried out applying facts and the defined relationships among objects.
Visual objects have mutual agent visual message correspondence.
Visual objects is a way some practical AI is a carried on with to recog-
nize important features, situations, and applicable rules. From the proofs 
standpoint patterns are analogies to features as being leaves on computing 
trees. Forward chaining is a goal satisfaction.
Visual objects technique, where inference rules are activated by data 
patterns, to sequentially get to a goal by apply the inference rules. The 
current pertinent rules are available at an agenda store. The carried out 
rules modify the database. Backward chaining is an alternative based on 
opportunistic response to changing information. It starts with the goal and 
looks for available premises that might be satisfied to have gotten there. 
Goals are objects for which there is automatic goal generation of missing 
data at the goal by recursion backward chaining on the missing objects as 
subgoals. Data unavailability implies search for new goal discovery. Goal 
Directed Planning is carried out while planning with diagrams. The part of 
the plan that involves free Skolemized trees is carried along with the proof 
tree for a plan goal. If the free proof tree is constructed then the plan has 
an initial model in which the goals are satisfied. IM’s basis for forecasting 
is put forth at preliminary stages (Nourani, 1999a).
Visual objects logic with predictive model diagrams has been applied 
as a basis for intelligent forecasting (Nourani, 1999a, 2000). There are 
graphics sequents for predicting the quarter earnings from the second and 

210	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
third combined with a market condition graph. The way a market condi-
tion graph is designed is a propriety issue. It is obtained by Morph Gent-
zen sequents from known stock market parameters. Data discovery from 
KR on diagrams might be viewed as satisfying a goal by getting at relevant 
data which instantiates a goal. The goal formula states what relevant data 
is sought.
10.5.6  THE STOCK TRADERS INTERFACE MODEL
The basis for forecasting is put forth at preliminary stages in the author’s 
publications since 1998. The idea is to apply Morph-Gentzen logic as a 
basis for intelligent multimedia forecasting. Figure 10.2 indicates a graph-
ics sequent for predicting the fourth quarter earnings from the second and 
third combined with a market condition graph. The way a market condi-
tion graph is designed is a propriety issue. It is obtained by Morph Gentzen 
sequents from known stock market parameters. The enclosed are example 
stock trading and forecasting interfaces.
FIGURE 10.2  Stock forecasting. (Courtesy of pixabay.com)
 
 

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
211
10.5.7  THE VISUAL DB ASSET MANAGEMENT MODEL
The fast track to real media content management is a media asset man-
agement environment that allows vendors and customers media appli-
cations to interoperate seamlessly within the IBM DB2 Digital Library 
infrastructure. Asset management is an important area to the efficient 
intelligent multimedia computing. Cost-effective management of digital 
content is expected to be another frequent topic. IBM’s Grand Central 
Media “Grand Central Media” provides media asset management that 
enables a company to manage, secure, share, locate and reuse digital 
media files. The IBM solution also allows media and entertainment exec-
utives to import and index digital content and combine search requests 
into one results list that can be graphically browsed and shared with 
others world-wide. IBM Grand Central Media is part of the company’s 
suite of Digital Library applications that are being used by leading film 
studios, advertising firms, and broadcast and stock footage houses. The 
Web-based solution supports the synchronization of databases at different 
physical locations or on wide-area networks.
10.5.8  MULTIMEDIA MIDDLEWARE DATABASES AND 
WRAPPERS TO USER INTERFACES
Large-scale multimedia information systems today rely on big data stored 
in systems with differing capabilities. Many of the “mission-critical” tasks 
these customers do depend on integrating data from several sources. Often 
the data sources to be integrated include a broad range of sources, such 
as CAD/CAM systems, text search engines, molecular structure data-
bases, or customer-specific repositories. Garlic (Nourani et al., 2000) 
offers the ability to interrelate data from multiple sources with a broad 
range of querying capabilities, in a single, cross-source query. Garlic is an 
IBM prototype, which allows new sources to be easily added to an exist-
ing installation. Garlic offers the ability to interrelate data from multiple 
sources with a broad range of querying capabilities, in a single, cross-
source query. A significant focus of the project is the provision of support 
for data sources that provide type-specific indexing and query capabili-

212	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
ties. Garlic’s “wrapper architecture,” (Wiederhold, 1992) and the applica-
tions at Nourani (1996) encapsulate data sources, allowing new sources to 
be added quickly, and accommodating a wide variety of sources, with a 
broad range of traditional and nontraditional query processing capabilities. 
Wrappers model legacy data as objects, participate in query planning, and 
provide standard interfaces for method invocation and query execution. 
The knowledge base is keyed with relevant selector functions. There are 
worldwide web retrieval designs, which have to apply direct links. The 
hierarchical abstract structures are being applied to the knowledge base 
and data structures to accomplish the tasks called for.
10.5.9  CONTENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM WITH TAIM
To design interfaces with systems we have to provide content management 
interfaces. The intelligent interface component and the Intelligent Data-
base applying the three-tier model as depicted as the basis (Figure 10.3).
FIGURE 10.3  A content management system.

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
213
Tiers and RMI Basics: The remote method invocation based the tiers is 
depicted in Figure 10.4.
The stub implements an interface with the same business methods as 
the object itself, but the stubs method does not contain business logic. The 
data tier consists of one or more databases and may contain data-related 
logic in the form of stored procedures.
FIGURE 10.4  RMI.
10.6  CONTENT MODELS AND VIEWS—A SPECIFIC DESIGN 
PROTOTYPE
The model contains the core of the application’s functionality. The model 
encapsulates the state of the application. Sometimes the only functional-
ity it contains is state. It knows nothing about the view or controller. The 
view provides the presentation of the model. It is the look of the appli-
cation. We apply predefined user know functions on the view to present 
the application’s look. The view is notified when changes to the model 
occur. The business logic updates the state of the model and helps control 
the flow of the application. Action classes as a thin wrapper to the actual 
business logic accomplish the tasks. The model represents the state of the 
application. The business objects update the application state. ActionForm 

214	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
bean represents the model state at a session or request level, and not at a 
persistent level. The JSP file reads information from the ActionForm bean 
using JSP tags.
Our goal was to develop a minimal prototype that can demonstrate the 
functionality we are striving towards. Since the XML parser is brought up 
on the system. Let us start to write tag descriptors for certain generic tags. 
You can use what tag library or functions there are basic prototype assump-
tion: the layer transparency rule. To each view, there corresponds generic 
functions that are deployed from the business logic layer to key onto the 
data layer. Example Tags want to allow the JSP to name the generic func-
tions that the business logic layer deploys, stating certain characteristics 
and conditions on the functions. Simple example Tag the JSP states I want 
F1 and F2 and that F1 and F2 are returning values meeting my criteria. 
We applied Struts MVC model further on. The model contains the core 
of the application’s functionality. The model encapsulates the state of the 
application. Sometimes the only functionality it contains is state. It knows 
nothing about the view or controller.
Model: The model contains the core of the application’s functional-
ity. The model encapsulates the state of the application. Sometimes the 
only functionality it contains is state. It knows nothing about the view or 
controller.
View: The view provides the presentation of the model. It is the look 
of the application. The view can access the model getters, but it has no 
knowledge of the setters. In addition, it knows nothing about the control-
ler. The view should be notified when changes to the model occur. Certain 
functions are provided on the view. Our Morph Programming techniques 
transmute the functionality to allow the controller to create a model. The 
model is created with functions that enable the functionality desired from 
the view, i.e., the presentations layer functions.
Controller: The controller reacts to the user input. It creates and sets 
the model.
The JSP are not entirely static, since there are tags allowed.
Study tags and customized tags: The design technique flirts with a new 
programming paradigm that can allow us to deploy tag descriptors to in 
part code business logic with functions that are transmuted through Struts 

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
215
view onto the content model. Let’s call it Morphic programming for the 
time being. Therefore, the ACID criterion is important, particularly, since 
Tags communicate with shared objects. MVC helps resolve some of the 
issues with the single module approach by dividing the problem into three 
categories:
Struts overview: Client browser
An HTTP request from the client browser creates an event. The Web 
container will respond with an HTTP response.
Controller: The Controller receives the request from the browser, and 
makes the decision where to send the request. With Struts, the Controller 
is a command design pattern implemented as a servlet. The struts-config.
xml file configures the Controller.
Business logic: The business logic updates the state of the model and 
helps control the flow of the application. With Struts this is done with an 
Action class as a thin wrapper to the actual business logic.
Model state: The model represents the state of the application. The 
business objects update the application state. ActionForm bean represents 
the Model state at a session or request level, and not at a persistent level. 
The JSP file reads information from the ActionForm bean using JSP tags.
View: The view is simply a JSP file. There is no flow logic, no busi-
ness logic, and no model information—just tags. Tags are one of the 
things that make Struts unique compared to other frameworks like Veloc-
ity (Figure 10.5).
By placing the business logic in a separate package or EJB, we allow 
flexibility and reuse. Another way of thinking about Action class is as 
the Adapter design pattern. The purpose of the Action is to “Convert the 
interface of a class into another interface the clients expect. Adapter lets 
classes work together that couldn’t otherwise because of incompatibility 
interface” (from Design Patterns—Elements of Reusable OO Software by 
Gof). The client in this instance is the ActionServlet that knows nothing 
about our specific business class interface. Therefore, Struts provides a 
business interface it does understand, Action. By extending the Action, 
we make our business interface compatible with Struts business interface 
(An interesting observation is that Action is a class and not an interface. 
Action started as an interface and changed into a class over time. Noth-
ing’s perfect.).

216	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Our design generates a content model for specific applications with 
Agent Object Model. The view provides the presentation of the model. It 
is the look, or the presentation of the model, and the look of the applica-
tion. We apply predefined user known functions on the view to present the 
applications look. The view should be notified when changes to the model. 
The business logic updates the state of the model and helps control the 
flow of the application. With Struts this is done with an Action class as a 
thin wrapper to the actual business logic. The model represents the actual 
business state of the application. The business objects update the applica-
tion state. The business objects update the ActionForm bean represents the 
Model state at a session or request level; bean represents the Model state 
at a session or request level, and not at a persistent level. The JSP file reads 
information from the ActionForm bean using JSP tags. Our design applies 
the same functions that are presented on the view for specific application 
to generate a content model for specific applications.
We can apply Content Model languages such as SGML to carry on the 
Model languages such as SGML to specifics at the parsing level. The view 
feels like a flyer with direct throttles onto the content engine. An example 
FIGURE 10.5  Struts overview.

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
217
prototype was designed with a Humboldt University, Berlin student proj-
ect some years before.
10.7  BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE AND MOBILE CONTENT
Business Objects XI is the first and only business intelligence (BI) plat-
form that delivers a complete set of BI capabilities: superior reporting, 
delivers a complete set of BI capabilities: superior reporting, query and 
analysis, query and analysis, performance management, and data integra-
tion, performance management, and data integration. Business Objects XI 
helps you track performance, understand business drivers, and manage 
your business performance.
BI content overview is as follows:
Reporting
Reporting allows organizations to access, format, and deliver data as 
meaningful information to large populations of information consumers 
both inside and outside the organization.
•  Crystal Reports
•  Crystal Reports Explorer
•  Live Office
Query and Analysis
Query and analysis tools allow end users to interact with business 
information and answer ad hoc questions themselves, without advanced 
knowledge of the underlying data sources and structures.
•  Web Intelligence
•  Desktop Intelligence
•  OLAP Intelligence
10.7.1  MULTIDIMENSIONAL CONTENT AND WEB CONTENT
There are important content management intelligent multimedia data-
bases, practical and multimedia databases, practical design areas explored 
on research projects published on the author’s projects from projects from 

218	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
intelligent multimedia content, to databases, and intelligent multimedia 
content. Interactive visual models allow anyone to quickly turn ordinary 
Excel spreadsheets into engaging business presentations filled with spread-
sheets into engaging business presentations filled with dynamic charts and 
vibrant graphs. An example is Crystal.
10.7.2  BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE PLATFORMS
The BI platform provides a set of common services to simplify deployment 
and management of BI tools, reports, and analytics. BI is comprised from 
data mining, data querying, reporting, and analytics. Business intelligence 
it is what was commissioned to analytical teams that had the necessary 
computing resources to manage big data. However, since new platforms 
have become available now even small businesses are implementing some 
business intelligence to enhance their successful operations, for example, 
to improve the decision-making process.
The reports generated from BI are used to make the business opera-
tions more effective, or to identify new revenue streams, to identify market 
trends, or problem areas. Performance management products and services 
help users align with strategy by tracking and analyzing key business 
metrics and goals via management dashboards, scorecards, analytics, and 
alerting. A new Intel-based system through close cooperation with Cyber-
Link is illustrating the creative potentials Technology platform, as well as 
our ready solutions for HD DVD. Retrieval information may also be used 
to select retrieval and filtering of broadcast “push” material or for person-
alized advertising. Further descriptions will allow fast and cost effective 
use of the underlying data, by enabling semiautomatic multimedia presen-
tation and on and editing.
In essence, MPEG I7 is the metadata standard, based on XML Schema, 
for 7d, based describing features of multimedia content and providing 
the most features of d providing the comprehensive set of audio-visual 
description tools available. These visual description tools are based on 
catalog (title, creator, rights); description tools are based on semantic 
(the who, what, when and where information about objects and events); 
and structural (the measurement of the amount of color associated with 
an image or the timbre of a recorded instrument) features of the audio-

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
219
visual where they build on the audio ENT. They build on the visual data 
representation defined by fined by MPEG-1, 2, and 4. A proprietary web 
technology developed and proprietary web technology developed and pro-
vided by Macromedia, Inc. Flash allows creation of animated web con-
tent, and can creation of animated web content, and can incorporate text, 
graphics, animations, video and accessibility, or been unable to address it 
directly by following the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines following 
the Web Content.
10.8  CONCLUSIONS
Prespecified views are designed and obtained with intelligent multimedia 
active databases keyed with functions onto KR with generalized diagrams. 
As a science IM and Morph Gentzen are developing concepts and vocabu-
lary to help us understand intelligent multimedia. The overview to a mul-
timedia language, a logic—the Morph Gentzen logic and a brief view to 
its models are presented. The techniques are the basis for encoding intel-
ligent multimedia systems and active databases with morph channels. The 
knowledge base consists of behavior descriptions, vocabulary definitions, 
visual objects and relations, decision rules and uncertain facts. General-
ized diagrams are shown to be an encoding for a minimal efficient KR 
technique applied to define relevant world models and KR for data search 
and discovery. Model checking is simplified to the same degree. A new 
area where the chapter applies to is heterogeneous computing (Nourani, 
1998) and mediation (Wiederhold, 1992). Proof abstraction is yet another 
area where KR can be keyed to KB and applied to knowledge discovery. 
Knowledge base data discovery and KB completions can be applied with 
our techniques developed in Nourani (1999a,g). Multimedia dataware 
housing and discovery computation techniques with predictive diagrams 
are briefed. There are management science areas applied on projects with 
colleagues at the University of Auckland Management Science being 
reported at conferences (Nourani, 2000). User modeling, mobile interface 
platforms with content processing are areas that can be cultivated from the 
basis here.

220	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
KEYWORDS
••
Active Databases
••
Big Data Analytics
••
Cloud Interfaces
••
Content Processing
••
Intelligent Multimedia Database
••
Mobile Platforms
••
Multiagent AI Computing
••
Multitier Designs
••
Windows Analytics
REFERENCES
Arion, M., Numan, J. H., Pitariu, H., Jorna, R. 1994. “Placing Trust in Human-Computer 
Interaction.” Proc. of the 7th European Cognitive Ergonomics Conference.
Bailey, J., Georgeff, M., Kemp, D. B., Kinny, D., Ramamohuarao, K. “Active Databases 
and Agent Systems, A Comparison,” Technical Report 95/10. Department of Com-
puter Science, University of Melbourne, Parkville 3052, 1995.
Brajnik, G., Guida, G., Tasso, C. User Modeling in Expert Man-Machine Interfaces: A 
Case Study in Intelligent Information Retrieval. IEEE Transaction on Systems, Man, 
and Cybernetics, 1990, 20(1), pp. 166–185.
Cody, W. F., Haas, L. M., Niblack, W., Arya, M., Carey, M. J., Fagin, R., Lee, D., Petkovic, 
D., Schwarz, P. M., Thomas, J., Roth, M., Williams, J. H., Wimmers, E. L. 1995, 
“Querying Multimedia Data from Multiple Repositories by Content: The Garlic Proj-
ect.” Proceedings IFIP 2.6 Third Working Conference on Visual Database Systems 
(VDB-3), Lausanne, Switzerland, Chapman & Hall.
Cyurs F. Nourani, Grace S. L. Intelligent Business Objects and Agent Computing. Uni-
versity of Auckland, April 1998. Parallel and Distributed Computing, Las Vegas, 
Nevada, June 1999.
Dekker, K., Lesser, V. 1993, “Analyzing the Need for Metalevel Communications,” In 
Proc. of the Twelfth International Workshop on Distributed AI, DAI 93, Hidden Val-
ley, Pennsylvania.
Del Galdo, E. M., Nielsen, J. (Eds.) International User Interfaces. Wiley: New York, NY, 
1996.
Genesereth, M., N. J. Nilsson Logical Foundations of Artificial Intelligence, Morgan-
Kaufmann, 1987.
Gentzen, G. 1943. Beweisbarkeit und Unbewiesbarket von Anfangsfallen der trasnfininten 
Induktion in der reinen Zahlentheorie, Math Ann 119, 140–161.

Virtual Mobile Interfaces, Business Intelligence, & Analytics Content Processing	
221
Morph Gentzen, K. R., World Model Diagrams, KR, and World Model Diagrams. April 2, 
1998. April 2, 1998. Automated Deductions and Geometry, Zurich, September 2000. 
Automated Deductions and Geometry, Zurich, September 2000.
Nourani, C. F. “Morph Gentzen Plan Computation with Visual Diagrams Plan Computa-
tion with Visual Diagrams ISTA” 2001 the Conference Proceedings published in the 
GI-Edition. ‘Lecture Notes in Informatics,’ Austria.
Nourani, C. F. “Versatile Abstract Syntax Meta-Contextual Logic and VR Computing, 36th 
Lingustische Kolloquium, Austria, Proceedings of the 35th Colloquium of Linguis-
tics.
Nourani, C. F. 1991, “Planning and Plausible Reasoning in AI,” Proc. Scandinavian Con-
ference in AI, May 1991, Roskilde, Denmark, 150–157, IOS Press.
Nourani, C. F. 1995a, “Free Pores of Trees and Model-Theoretic Planning, AISB, Shef-
field, April 1995.
Nourani, C. F. 1996, “AII and Heterogenous Software Design,” May 10, 1995, Eighth 
European Workshop on Modeling Autonomous Agents in a Multi-Agent World, May 
1997, University of Karlskrona/Ronneby, Department of Computer Science and 
Business Administration, Sweden.
Nourani, C. F. 1997, MIM Logik, December 1997, Summer Logic Colloquium, Prague, 
July 1998, December 1997, Summer Logic Colloquium, Prague, July 1998. www.
math.cas.cz/~lc98/abstracts/Nourani.html.
Nourani, C. F. 1999a, “Agent Computing, KB For Intelligent Forecasting, and Model Dis-
covery for Knowledge Management,” June 1998. AAAI Workshop on Agent Based 
Systems in the Business Context Orlando, Florida, July 18–22, 1999.
Nourani, C. F. 1999b, “AII, Heterogeneous Design, and Retrieval Agents,” February 1997. 
Brief Version at IJCAI-99, IIIS Track, Stokholm, July 1999.
Nourani, C. F. 1999c, “Intelligent Multimedia: New Computing Techniques and Its Appli-
cations,” February 28, 1997. CSIT’99, Proceedings of 1st International Workshop 
on Computer Science and Information Technologies, January 18–22, 1999, Mos-
cow, Russia. Ch. Freytag and V. Wolfengagen (Eds.): MEPhI Publishing 1999, ISBN 
5-7262-0263-5.
Nourani, C. F. 1999d, Competitive Models and Game Tree Planning, November 1999. 
Applications to Economic games. A version published at SSGRR, L’Auquila Rome, 
Italy, September 2001. Invited paper.
Nourani, C. F. 1999e, Intelligent Multimedia: Computing Techniques and Design Para-
digms, Preliminary Textbook completed August 1999 published at Treeless Press, 
Berkeley, California. New edition from Lulu Press, http://www.lulu.com/CrisFN.
Nourani, C. F. 1999f, Virtual Tree Computing-Abstract Posted at the ECCAD, Carolinas, 
May 1999.
Nourani, C. F. 1999g, “KR and Model Discovery with Predictive Logic,” brief abstract 
publish at the Australian AI Conference, AKA Workshop, Sydney, December.
Nourani, C. F. 2000, “Intelligent Heterogeneous Multimedia and Intelligent Active Visual 
DB and KB,” ICCIT 2000, April 2000, Las Vegas, Nevada.
Nourani, C. F. 2002, Game Trees, Competitive Models, and ERP. New Business Models 
and Enabling Technologies, Management School, St Petersburg, Russia. http://www.
math.spbu.ru/user/krivulin/Work2002/Workshop.htm

222	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Nourani, C. F. 2003, “Versatile Abstract Syntax, MetaContextual l Logic and VR Com-
puting,” the third international conference on Information in Tokyo, November 29–
December 2, 2004. http://www.information-iii.org/conf/info2004.html iii.org/conf/
info2004.html
Nourani, C. F. 2004, “Versatile Abstract Syntax, “MetaContextual Logic and VR Comput-
ing,” The third international conference on Information in Tokyo, November 29–
December 2, 2004. http://www.information-iii.org/conf/info2004.html iii.org/conf/
info2004.html
Nourani, C. F. 2005, Intelligent Multimedia Computing Science-Business Interfaces, Data-
bases, Data Mines, and Wi-Fi American Scientific Publishers, 2005. http://www.
aspbs.com/multimedia.html
Nourani, C. F. 2006, “Intelligent Interface Design Project,” Humboldt Universitat, Berlin.
Nourani, C. F. 2013, W-Interfaces, Business Intelligence, and Content Processing, Invented 
Industry Track Keynote, IAT–Intelligent Agent Technology, Atlanta, November 
2013.
Nourani, C. F., “A Multiagent Intelligent Multimedia Visualization Language and Comput-
ing Paradigm. February 2000. Visualization 2000, Workshop on WWW Interfaces, 
Seattle, September 2000.
Nourani, C. F., “Predictive Model Discovery, and Schema Completion, “International 
Cybernetics and Systems Conference, Florida 2003.
Nourani, C. F., “The TAIM Intelligent Visual Database, “12th International Workshop on 
Database and Expert Systems Applications, Workshop Records, (DEXA 2001) 3–7 
September 2001 in Munich, Germany. IEEE Computer Society Press.
Nourani, C. F., 1999, “Business Modeling and Forecasting AIEC-AAAI99, Orlanda, July 
1999, AAAI Press.
Nourani, C. F., Grace S. L. Loo, K. R., Model discovery from active DB with Predictive 
logic, the University of Auckland, Data Mining 2000 Applications to Business and 
Finance. Cambridge, UK, August 2000.
Prawitz, D. 1965, “Natural Deduction: A Proof Theoretic Study. Stokhom, Almqvist and 
Wiksell.
Sebastian Thrun, Faloutsos, C., Mitchell, T., Wasserman, L. Automated Learning and Dis-
covery: State-of-the-Art and Research Topics in a rapidly Growing Field September 
1998 CMU-CALD-98–100. Center for Automated Learning and Discovery Carnegie 
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213.
Trenner, L., Bawa, J. (Eds.) The Politics of Usability: A Practical Guide to Designing 
Usable Systems in Industry. Springer-Verlag: London, UK, 1998.
Widerhold, G. “Mediation in the Architecture of Future Information Systems,” IEEE Com-
puter Magazine, 1992, 25(5), 33–49.

A HAPTIC COMPUTING BASIS 
FOR FACIAL OR VISUAL EMOTION 
EXPRESSION RECOGNITION
CYRUS F. NOURANI
Research Professor, Simon Fraser University, British Columbia, 
Canada
CONTENTS
Abstract.................................................................................................. 223
11.1  Introduction................................................................................. 224
11.2  Haptic Immersion........................................................................ 226
11.3  Learning and Expression Computations..................................... 236
11.4  Concluding Comments................................................................ 243
Acknowledgments.................................................................................. 244
Keywords............................................................................................... 244
References.............................................................................................. 244
ABSTRACT
The chapter presents novel modeling techniques for facial and visual 
expression computation and recognition. A haptic control virtual com-
puting logic is applied with Nourani’s (1997) Morph Gentzen system to 
characterize facial and visual expressions. Agent trees computing logic 
carries visual structures via functions. Designated functions define com-
puting haptic motion and ontology epistemics. Based on the functions on 
CHAPTER 11

224	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
the haptic computing logic we can state expression-spanning schemas, 
hereon called Eigen Schemas that on tuple characterize morph compose 
to characterize facial expressions. The Eigen schemas allow us to express 
or detect human emotions expressed on facials. The haptic logic encom-
passes a predictive Bayesian confidence on the characterizations. Genetic 
algorithms and neurocognitive bases for the above are presented in brief. 
The techniques are not competing cognitive psychology trends, rather new 
processing capabilities that facilitate for the preceding experimental cog-
nitive psychologist or neurocognitive scientists to examine their methods 
with precise direct processor for facial expression recognition.
11.1  INTRODUCTION
The author presents novel techniques with a neuro-cognitive inspired 
modeling basis to facial and pictorial visual emotion recognition based 
on haptic Morph Gentzen natural like deductive system the author has 
developed over a decade. An overview to a virtual tree computing haptic 
logic with applications to the new Expression Schema cognitive comput-
ing techniques are presented. The reasoning system that is capable to lift 
from context is combined with the haptic Morph Gentzen logic, to a picto-
rial deductive algebra, comparable to natural deduction systems that the 
author had presented in 1997, to address facial computation and recogni-
tion areas. Agent trees on the languages can carry visual structures via 
functions. Designated functions define agents, as specific function sym-
bols, to represent languages with only abstract definition known at syntax. 
Computing haptic motion and ontology epistemic are modeled. Starting 
with basic AI agent computing multimedia AI systems is presented neces-
sitating esthetics with world models. Multimedia context computing and 
context abstraction are introduced leading into visual object perception 
dynamics. Linguistics, cognition, and vision was motivated by the urge 
to bridge the gap from logic, metaphysics, philosophy and linguistics to 
computational theories of AI and practical AI systems. Practical artificial 
intelligence, AI, is concerned with concepts and practice of building intel-
ligent systems. Intelligent multimedia techniques and paradigms are being 
defined whereby AI is applied to all facets of the enterprise starting from 

A Haptic Computing Basis for Facial/Visual Emotion Expression Recognition	
225
the basic multimedia programming stated in Nourani (2000). The tech-
niques are developed here for facial expression computing models and 
facial recognition. To put the thought on a chronological track, apart form 
the artistic 17th century, onto to the 19th century, facial expression analy-
sis has a direct relationship to the modern day science of automatic facial 
expression recognition by Charles Darwin. Darwin grouped various kinds 
of expressions into similar categories, for example: low spirits, anxiety, 
grief, despair joy, high spirits, love, tender feelings, devotion, surprise, 
astonishment, fear, hatred, anger, self-attention, shame, shyness, modesty. 
This chapter addresses more contemporary areas on facial expressions 
based on the Eckman (1971) and Russell’s (1994) critique that questions 
the claims of universal recognition of emotions.
The section outlines are as follows: Section 11.1 is all about introduc-
tion and outline of this chapter. Section 11.2 is a brief on haptic agent 
computing and affective models, merging to a “new” Kant illusion logic 
(author since 1995’s) with applications to the neurocognitive psychology 
are on dreams, AI, and intelligent multimedia to set the stage for haptic 
motion logic. Section 11.2 further presents a haptic immersion based on 
Morph Gentzen computing logic. The mathematical basis is presented in 
brief with a haptic control logic with examples. The neurocognitive nature 
is examined based on a decade ago briefs since that area has since become 
a very important research direction. Section 11.3 begins to state haptic 
motion and expression Eigen schemas. That is where IM_BID agent model 
(Nourani 2005), DESIRE Haptic epistemic, is applied towards android 
logic learning. The visual field is represented by visual objects connected 
with agents that carry information among objects about the field. That 
information is mapped onto the intelligent trees for computation. Intel-
ligent trees compute the spatial field information with the diagram func-
tions. The trees defined have function names corresponding to computing 
agents. The computing agent functions have a specified module defining 
their functionality. Facial expression morph tupling on expression Eigen 
schema are presented. Section 11.3 concludes onto a versatile syntax and 
Meta-contextual Logic for VR-virtual reality computing supporting the 
expression computations on processors. The basis for facial recognition 
is different from the contemporary research on the references in that we 
do not have an experimental simulative approach, rather an essentially 

226	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
mathematical basis with a haptic algebraic logic to characterize or recog-
nize facial expressions and emotions. This not the same as what is known 
Schmidt’s Schema theory or any polyschematics architecture. The author 
has newer application published with coauthors where it is delineated 
how usual cognitive architectures are designed, e.g. spanning an attention 
space. This author’s presentation here is not about cognitive architectures, 
rather specific cognitive systematics for facial recognition and motion 
epistemics, on a bio-anthropomorphic basis. Rather, basic mathematical 
artificial intelligence Schemas augmented with a haptic morph Gentzen 
natural deduction system. For example, in Haptic visual ontology, the 
author published at Nourani (2006).
11.2  HAPTIC IMMERSION
In the author’s Haptic logic beginnings publications, this author examines 
how intelligent decisions might be based on emotions, alluding to Picard’s 
questions. Other related issues that influence creativity, planning, per-
ception, mood-congruent memory retrieval, with precise computing and 
cognitive models. Essentially a neuro-cognitive grid system with agents 
and objects is presented to examine the issues. The author presented an 
asymmetric view of the application of this computing paradigm and the 
basic techniques were proposed for various AI systems (Nourani, 1991; 
Nourani, 1995). Picard’ s assertions indicate that not all modules of an AI 
system might pay attention to emotions, or have to have emotional com-
ponents. Some modules are useful rigid tools, and it is fine to keep them 
that way. However, there are situations where the human-machine interac-
tion could be improved by having machines naturally adapt to their users. 
Affective computing expands human-computer interaction by including 
emotional communication together with appropriate means of handling 
affective information. Since neurological studies indicate that the role 
of emotion in human cognition is essential; emotions are not a luxury. 
Instead, emotions play a critical role in rational decision making, in per-
ception, in human interaction, and in human intelligence. Therefore, agent 
attention span (Nourani et al., 2013) has to take into considerations the 
above factors. These facts, combined with abilities computers are acquir-
ing in expressing and recognizing affect, are also important in crystallizing 

A Haptic Computing Basis for Facial/Visual Emotion Expression Recognition	
227
attention spans. Attention relations to changes in facial expression, e.g., 
(Eimer-Holmes, 2003), has been studied in neuropsychology focusing 
on change detection of emotion expression by electroencephalography. 
The peripheral faces remains or randomly changed to joy, anger or dis-
gust. Affective computing can deliberately have an influence on people’ 
emotions. New models are suggested for computer recognition of human 
emotion, and both theoretical and practical applications are described for 
learning, human-computer interaction, perceptual information retrieval, 
creative arts and entertainment, human health, and machine intelligence. 
Picard suggests that affective intelligence, the communication and man-
agement of affective information in human/computer interaction, is a key 
link that is missing in tele-presence environments and other technologies 
that mediate human-human communication.
The IM Morphed Computing Logic for computing for multimedia is 
the new projects with important applications since Nourani (1997, 2009b). 
Liquid morphic specific realization can be designed for arbitrary immer-
sion with haptic agents applying Morph Gentzen IM. Arbitrary immersion 
is when virtual tree images are immersed in arbitrary visual and spatial are-
nas. Morph Gentzen allows for example a morph sequent recording as if 
virtual images were rippling onto a liquid mirror (Fleischman and Strauss, 
1996). The morphing has fluidity with mathematical precision determined 
with computing agents on specific visual pictures. The basic principles 
are a mathematical logic where a Gentzen or natural deduction a system 
is defined by taking arbitrary structures coded by diagram functions. The 
techniques can be applied to arbitrary topological structures. Thus, we 
define a syntactic morphing to be a technique by which infinitary definable 
structures are anthropomorphically mapped via their defining functions 
to new structures. The deduction rules are a Gentzen system augmented 
by two rules Morphing, and Trans-morphing. The Morph Rule—A struc-
ture defined by the functional n-tuple <f1, …, fn> can be morphed to a 
structures definable by the functional n-tuple <h(f1), …, h(fn)>, provided 
h is a homomorphism of abstract signature structures (Nourani, 1996). 
The TransMorph Rules—A set of rules whereby combining structures A1, 
…, An defines an Event {A1, A2, …, An} with a consequent structure 
B. Thus, the combination is an impetus event. The deductive theory is a 
Gentzen system in which structures named by parameterized functions; 

228	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
augmented by the morph and transmorph rules. The structures we apply 
the Morph logic to are definable by positive diagrams. The idea is to do it 
at abstract models syntax trees without specifics for the shapes and topolo-
gies applied (Nourani, 2009b).
According to Kant human knowledge is limited to appearances, 
whereas things in themselves are “noumena” are thinkable but not actu-
ally knowable. Kant termed the doctrine Transcendental Idealism. Given 
the idealism is the possibility of synthesizing a priori knowledge to pos-
sible description and experience is easily explainable, since each object 
must necessarily conform to the conditions under which they can become 
objects for us. It assumes the human mind possesses such condition and 
demonstrating it is Transcendental Aesthetics. The computing import 
is since explored by the author’s projects. To carry on with intelligent 
multimedia we have to be conscious as to what are the basic knowledge 
representation techniques necessary to describe knowledge and its sig-
nificance for perception. Generic model diagrams (Nourani, 1991, 1998) 
and applications define computable models and relevant world reasoning. 
Generic diagram are defined from a minimal set of function symbols that 
can inductively define a model. Basic application areas to start with as 
examples are designing predefined visual scenes with diagram composi-
tion and combination for scene dynamics.
11.2.1  AGENT COGNITION PROCESSES
Let us start with the popular agent-computing model the Beliefs, Desire, 
and Intentions, henceforth abbreviated as the BID model (Brazier-Truer 
et al., 1995). BID is a generic agent-computing model specified within 
the declarative compositional modeling framework for multiagent sys-
tems, DESIRE. The model, a refinement of a generic agent model, explic-
itly specifies motivational attitudes and the static and dynamic relations 
between motivational attitudes. Desires, goals, intentions, commitments, 
plans, and their relations are modeled. Different notions of strong and 
weak agency are presented at (Wooldridge and Jennings, 1995). To apply 
agent computing with intelligent multimedia some specific roles and mod-
els have to be presented for agents. The BID model has emerged for a 

A Haptic Computing Basis for Facial/Visual Emotion Expression Recognition	
229
“rational agent”: a rational agent described using cognitive notions such as 
beliefs, desires and intentions. Beliefs, intentions, and commitments play 
a crucial role in determining how rational agents will act. Beliefs, capa-
bilities, choices, and commitments are the parameters making component 
agents specific. A generic BID agent model in the multiagent framework 
DESIRE is presented towards a specific agent model. The main emphasis 
is on static and dynamic relations between mental attitudes, which are of 
importance for cooperative agents. DESIRE is the framework for design, 
and the specification of interacting reasoning components is a framework 
for modeling, specifying and implementing multiagent systems (Brazier, 
Dunin-Keplicz, Jennings, and Treur, 1995, 1996; Dunin-Keplicz and 
Treur, 1995). Within the framework, complex processes are designed as 
compositional architectures consisting of interacting task- based hierar-
chically structured components. The interaction between components, and 
between components and the external world is explicitly specified. Com-
ponents can be primitive reasoning components using a knowledge base, 
but may also be subsystems that are capable of performing tasks using 
methods as diverse as decision theory, neural networks, and genetic algo-
rithms. As the framework inherently supports interaction between compo-
nents, multiagent systems are naturally specified in DESIRE by modeling 
agents as components. The specification is sufficient to generate an imple-
mentation. Specific techniques for such claims might be further supported 
at (Nourani 1993a, 1999a). A generic classification of mental attitudes is 
presented and a more precise characterization of a few selected motiva-
tional attitudes is given. The specification framework DESIRE for mul-
tiagent systems is characterized. A general agent model is described. The 
framework of modeling motivational attitudes in DESIRE is discussed.
Agents are assumed to have the four properties required for the weak 
notion of agency described in Wooldridge and Jennings (1995). Thus, 
agents must maintain interaction with their environment, for example 
observing and performing actions in the world: reactivity; be able to 
take the initiative: proactiveness; be able to perform social actions like 
communication, social ability; operate without the direct intervention of 
other (possibly human) agents: autonomy. Four main categories of men-
tal attitudes are studied in the AI literature: informational, motivational, 
social and emotional attitudes. Examining the distinction between human 

230	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Cognition and machine-generated or also lower-level (human) cognition 
at Nourani et al. (2013), considering cognition, as being the “higher level 
capacity of discursive thought” in the sense of Kant “I think so I am,” 
these processes include thinking, knowing, remembering, deciding, and 
problem-solving. Cognition or cognitive processes, therefore, in general, 
can be natural or artificial, conscious or unconscious. Human Cogni-
tion is affected by mental, attitudes, as well as social and environmental 
conditions involving the person. Cognition design is essential to solving 
design problems in cognitive agent systems.
It is obvious that human Cognition is significantly different from any 
virtual or cyber-physical agent system that has to act in a prescribed envi-
ronment as they are having inherent “machine” cognition capabilities. 
Cognitive intelligence uses a human mental introspective experience for 
the modeling of intelligent system thinking. Cognitive intelligence may 
use brain models to extract brain’s intelligence properties (or functions). 
On the other side modeling or designing the computational cognitive intel-
ligence is still a very hard task to be solved, even if the progress in this area 
has been amazing. Cognitive intelligence in cyber-physical worlds takes a 
totally new dimension in terms of complexity and dynamicity of the emer-
gent and interaction complex multiagent systems that include humans as 
well as objects, devices and complex applications or environments.
11.2.2  EXPRESSIONS, AND CONSCIOUSNESS STAGES
In order to present our techniques for visual expression recognition and 
facials it might be important to consider the process in reverse cognition 
the causes the expressions. That is further explored on the neurocognitive 
models in the author’s publications past decade and the newer schools, e.g. 
Swiss neuro- haptic research.
A Multiagent Cognitive theory had been put forth by Nourani (1997) 
defines a Cognitive syntax and might provide a paradigm for Language 
Visualization. Intelligent syntax carries most cognitive computing aspects. 
The Double Vision Computing artificial intelligence paradigm (Nourani 
1995) is a problem-solving paradigm with pairs and agents defined on 
the pair. The agents from the object and coobjects cooperate for problem 

A Haptic Computing Basis for Facial/Visual Emotion Expression Recognition	
231
solving on boards. The paradigm has further visual linguistics compo-
nents. The world is viewed by dual pairs of possible worlds, with agents 
cooperating on boards. Intelligent tree computing and linguistic theories 
from our recent research are applied to put forth a basis for formalizing 
the computing paradigm.
The multiagent cognition project had started in 1993 with the Dou-
ble Vision Computing, IAS 1995, Karlsruhe its initial publication. Since 
there has been the 1994–95 Abstract Linguistic and Meta-Contextual Rea-
soning, Intelligent Multimedia, MIM logic, and its consequent paper on 
Consciousness Science, abstract enclosed. The context abstraction and 
met-contextual reasoning abstract is also enclosed. In the papers dia-
grams for Cognitive modeling is applied and scientific techniques applied 
towards a Conscience Science.
11.2.3  NEUROCOGNITIVE MODELS
The spotlight of attention shines on the stage where Conscience Experi-
ence is on stage and there are Fringes. There is a memory system, ways to 
interpret conscience context, autonomolism, and it all rides on a motiva-
tional system. There are theater diagrams for, for example, context behind 
a scene. The fundamental mind and Kant’s Dialectics can be examined 
towards an agent computational perception, e.g., (Nourani, 2003, 2009). 
The spandrels of sleep: How can we be sure that we are not always dream-
ing. For Kant conscience operates in the dichotomy between thinking 
objects and the thought object. There are two components of knowledge: 
spontaneity and receptivity. In cognition Kant’s spontaneity is not in the 
void. If acts of thought have objective bearing it is because they are filled 
with intuition of something that is given to the person, towards which the 
person is receptive. Whenever we know something through intuition some-
thing is given us. Kant calls it “sensibility.” Intuition is never anything but 
sensuous (Kant, 1990, 1993). Cognitive modeling issues can be applied. 
The Consciousness science formalized by the author’s project since 1993 
have applied positivist thoughts. However, we have a logical route to 
Kant’s sensibility with mathematical precision upto infinitary models and 
logics, diagrammatic techniques, a multiagent cognitive theory, dynamic 

232	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
epistemics, and the IM MIM logic towards such science (Nourani, 1987, 
1998) papers.
A computing conscience science can only be defined by combining 
AI, IM, Diagrammatic and analogical reasoning, and computational epis-
temics. The knowledge base consists of behavior descriptions, vocabu-
lary definitions, objects and relations, decision rules and uncertain facts. 
A basic route to neurocognitive computing modeling biological systems 
consists of modeling certain aspects of a biological system, modeling gen-
eral principles of intelligence, and using these principles in the design of 
functioning robots or androids. A multi agent cognitive theory was pre-
sented by the author at Nourani (1996). The premise is that cognition is 
at particle neurons resembling micro-computer processors. Though that 
specific detail is not applied here, the genetic computing role is a motiva-
tion for biologically inspired modeling. Thus a neuron is itself capable 
of a form of computation. Specialized neurons might compute certain 
functions in the most efficient manner. Our minds carry a very complex 
multiagent computing cognitive system not easily explained on a high-
level “cognitive architecture.” Therefore, we attempt no such character-
izations for cognition in general. Genetic secretion algorithms are based 
on hypotheses that indicate the present theories might be genetic secre-
tions computations. Recent biological scientific discoveries are presented 
to further support the cognitive intelligence theory proposed. More recent 
publications are on neurocognitive models (Borscht and Snader, 2003) or 
psychology are (Sun, 2002) on cognition and multiagent systems. These 
authors, for example, indicate that processes contribute to successful rec-
ognition memory, some of which can be associated with spatiotemporally 
distinct event-relate. Neurophysiological-based models of recognition 
memory retrieval allow examination of the time course of the processes 
that contribute to illusory memories. Neurocognitive models are further 
explored at Max Planck Institute, Liepzig (Mecklinger) and at Tubingen 
University (Germany). The former study is a neurocognitive model of 
recognition memory based on event related memory retrieval. The event-
based computations are areas where the techniques in the present chapter 
are applicable. The latter is exploring techniques that might have applica-
tions with the present modeling cognitive designs on a vector machine, 
e.g., ambient cognitive tracks (Nourani et al., 2013).

A Haptic Computing Basis for Facial/Visual Emotion Expression Recognition	
233
11.2.4  MACRODOT MORPHING
Macrodot morphing is a specific technique to detail agent Morph Gent-
zen computation on interest point-focal bases (Nourani, 2004). Intelligent 
Multimedia is applied with multimedia interfaces to areas ranging from 
virtual reality tangible media and multimedia learning with interactive 
media, to television programming, telecommunications media, business 
and financial computing to multimedia commerce. Multimedia AI sys-
tems are designed according to the new computing techniques defined. 
The concept of a Hybrid Picture is the start to define intelligent multime-
dia objects. Visual dynamics based on general principles can be projected 
and the effects of scenes projected on viewers can be predicated. On the 
virtual reality logic (Nourani, 1993) agents at each world compliment 
one another to portray a computing visual stage by cooperating. The IM 
agent computing techniques can be applied to define interactions among 
personality and view descriptions. The basis to a Haptic computing logic 
that was developed preceding this exposition and briefed on the follow-
ing section are applied with microdot morphing for applications to facial 
expression modeling. Facial expressions are defined by morph tupling on 
basic facial expression schemas. Macrodots (c.f. Figure 11.1), on pictures 
correspond to agents that can vary and characterize the facial structures 
based on the morph Gentzen h: whereby a functional n-tuple <f1, …, fn> 
can be morphed to a structure definable by the functional n-tuple <h(f1), 
…, h(fn)>. The techniques were applied to plan computation for applica-
tions to spatial computing in (Nourani, CFRM, 2001).
11.2.5  A HAPTIC CONTROL LOGIC
Affective computing expands human-computer interaction by including 
emotional communications together with appropriate means for handling 
affective information. New models can be presented for computing rec-
ognition of human emotions- both practical and theoretical applications 
can be and are described for learning, human computer interactions, and 
perceptual information retrieval, creative arts and entertainment, and 
machine intelligence. Scientists have discovered many surprising roles 

234	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
played by human emotion- especially in cognitive processes, such as per-
ception, decision making, memory and more. Human intelligence includes 
emotional intelligence, especially the ability to accurately recognize and 
express affective emotions. The techniques briefed here are the bases to a 
haptic logic with multiagent cognition, where central affective computing 
questions might be addressed. Emotions might signal cognitive changes. 
These are the premises for briefing on a haptic logic in this and the follow-
ing section towards applications to facial recognition systems.
Agent computing is introduced to interactive intelligent multimedia. 
An overview to a practical agent-computing model based on beliefs, 
intentions, and desire is presented and possible augmentation to intelli-
gent multimedia is explored. (Nilsson-Genesereth, 1987) introduces agent 
architectures. A specific agent might have internal state set I, which the 
agent can distinguish its membership. The agent can transit from each 
internal state to another in a single step. With our multiboard model agent 
actions are based on I and board observations. There is an external state 
set S, modulated to a set T of distinguishable subsets from the observation 
viewpoint. A sensory function: S → T maps each state to the partition it 
belongs. Let A be a set of actions that can be performed by agents. A func-
tion action can be defined to characterize an agent activity action: T→A. 
There is also a memory update function mem: I x T → I.
Worlds, epistemics, and cognition for androids are introduced with pre-
cise statements in the author’s preceding publications on computational 
FIGURE 11.1  Morph Gentzen Glimpse (Nourani, 1977).

A Haptic Computing Basis for Facial/Visual Emotion Expression Recognition	
235
epistemology onto a haptic logic. The foundations are applied to present a 
brief on Computational Illusion, affective computing, and Virtual Reality. 
KR for AI Worlds, and Computable Worlds are presented with diagrams. 
Are intelligent decisions based on emotions? If there is a Gestalt model 
decided on, the answer might be affirmative. Furthermore, emotions might 
be independent of consciousness modes (Nourani, 1998, 1999). Deduction 
models and perceptual computing is presented with a new perspective. 
Intelligent multimedia interfaces are an important component to the prac-
tical computational aspects. Visual context and objects are presented with 
multiagent intelligent multimedia. Context abstraction allows us to reason 
above context, denoted met-contextual reasoning, and published as a new 
direction in logic and computational linguistics fields. Multiagent visual 
multiboard planning is introduced as a basis to cognitive planning intel-
ligent multimedia with applications to spatial computing.
Desire, and Intentions, henceforth abbreviated as the BID model (Bra-
zier-Truer et al., 1997). BID is a generic agent-computing model specified 
within the declarative compositional modeling framework for multiagent 
systems, DESIRE. The model, a refinement of a generic agent model, 
explicitly specifies motivational attitudes and the static and dynamic rela-
tions between motivational attitudes. Desires, goals, intentions, commit-
ments, plans, and their relations are modeled. The BID model has emerged 
for a “rational agent”: a rational agent described using cognitive notions 
such as beliefs, desires and intentions. Beliefs, intentions, and commit-
ments play a crucial role in determining how rational agents will act. 
Beliefs, capabilities, choices, and commitments are the parameters mak-
ing component agents specific. A generic BID agent model in the mul-
tiagent framework DESIRE is presented towards a specific agent model. 
The main emphasis is on static and dynamic relations between mental 
attitudes, which are of importance for cooperative agents. DESIRE is the 
framework for design, and the specification of interacting reasoning com-
ponents is a framework for modeling, specifying and implementing multi-
agent systems (Brazier et al., 1995, 1996; Dunin-Keplicz and Treur, 1995). 
Within the framework, complex processes are designed as compositional 
architectures consisting of interacting task-based hierarchically structured 
components.

236	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
A specifying BID agents, specifics a mathematical basis to such 
models with agent signatures might be obtained from Nourani (1996a), 
whereas the author had introduced that since 1994. The generic model 
and specifications of agent computing described above, can be refined to a 
generic model of a rational BID agent capable of explicit reasoning about 
its beliefs, desires, goals and commitments. closure can be inferred, by a 
minimal set of terms defining the model. Thus providing a minimal char-
acterization of Android Haptic Epistemics. Since planning with IM_BID 
is at times with the pictorial window agent computing groups, communi-
cating, as two androids might, with facial gestures, for example (Picard, 
1998). In virtual or the “real-world” AI epistemic, we have to note what 
the positivists had told us some years ago: the apparent necessary facts 
might be only tautologies and might not amount to anything to the point at 
the specifics. Philosophers have been faced with challenges on the nature 
of absolute and the Kantian epistemic (Kant, 1990; Nourani, 1999a) for 
years. It might all come to terms with empirical facts and possible worlds 
when it comes to real applications. Most reasoning about beliefs, desires, 
and intentions can be modeled as an essential part of the reasoning an 
agent needs to perform to control its own processes. The preliminaries to 
VR computing logic are presented since Summer Logic Colloquium 1997, 
Prague. These techniques are applicable with description logics (Badder 
et al., 2003), Nourani (2003, 2009) cognitive modeling in view of the pre-
ceding paragraphs, to have basic modeling preprocessor inputs to a Morph 
Gentzen deductive system for facial recognition. Following the preceding 
publications on a computational epistemology on perception and cogni-
tion (Nourani, 1994), the author begins to apply description logic to cog-
nition paradigms encoding FACS. AU’s described with agent description 
logics to present inputs to the Morph Gentzen processor depicted as in 
Figure 11.2.
11.3  LEARNING AND EXPRESSION COMPUTATIONS
11.3.1  EMOTIONS AND EXPRESSIONS
Emotions are visually expressed through changes in facial expressions. 
Whether or not facial expressions are the same in all cultures we can define 

A Haptic Computing Basis for Facial/Visual Emotion Expression Recognition	
237
this author’s stance is that we can define invariants that can be applied 
as morph tuples on Eigen expression schemas. Based on his theory of 
evolution, Darwin suggested that the expressions are universal. However, 
there was no general consensus. In 1971, Ekman and Friesen conducted 
studies on subjects from western and eastern cultures and reported that 
the facial expressions of emotions are “constant” across cultures (Ekman, 
1971). However, in 1994, Russell wrote a critique questioning the claims 
of universal recognition of emotion from facial expressions. This author 
does not see a need to adhere to such general universality, but maintains 
that there are universal invariants defined based on Eigen tupling morph 
schemas. That Russell was refuted by Ekman and Izard, or however, is not 
all on common accepted strong “scientific” bases, and might not be con-
sequential. One reason for not engaging in such disagreements on our part 
is that there is not a universal cognitive basis that can be interpreted across 
all cultures. All we need is invariants on what the six emotional states are.
Newer expression recognition systems, e.g., Tian et al.’s (2000) AFA 
systems have developed methods that attempt to recognize the basic 
expressions and some attempts at recognizing nonbasic expressions. 
There have been very few attempts at recognizing the temporal dynamics 
of the face. The agent computing Morph Gentzen models here sequent 
with, for example, Sandewall Features are capable to further address that 
area’s specifics. Pantic and Patras have reported successful recognition of 
FIGURE 11.2  The Facial Deductive System.

238	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
facials and their temporal segments. Psychologists have proved that posed 
expressions are different from spontaneous expressions, in terms of their 
appearance, timing and temporal characteristics. Facial features can be 
classified as being basic or transient. Permanent features are the features 
like eyes, lips, brows and cheeks that remain permanently. Transient fea-
tures include facial lines, brow wrinkles and deepened furrows that appear 
with changes in expression and disappear on a neutral face. Understand-
ing the emulating human emotion might help in out efforts to understand 
intelligence.
11.3.2  EXPRESSION AND HAPTIC COMPUTING
Considering the six emotional states that are primary according to the pre-
ceding sections, namely happiness, sadness, anger, surprise, disgust and 
fear, based on the agent haptic computing logic we can state expression 
spanning schemas: let us call that expression Eigen schemas.
Let us state the above with schemas as above to span with six Eigen 
schemas. The Eigen schemas allow us to detect human emotions expressed 
on facials. There are new computing techniques, languages, and a new 
deductive system with models. A new computing area is defined by arti-
ficial intelligence principles for multimedia. It is not a reinvention of AI, 
however, an exponential degree of computational complexity on a deduc-
tive system is reduced on a new pictorial system that is carried onto a 
haptic computing logic. Such computability is possible with the MIM and 
Morph Gentzen logic the first author had introduced around 1997.
Example Morph Schema:
Schema {Face Has 2 Eyes Has 1 Nose Has 1 Mouth Has 2 cheeks}
Motion agent
Morph Rule {
That is turn agent signals a morph 90 degrees to the feature agents.}
Comparing to Eckman et al.’s FACS system experiments the premise is 
that Ekman and Friesen d to code facial expressions. FACS coders decom-
pose facial expressions in terms of the apparent intensity of 46 component 

A Haptic Computing Basis for Facial/Visual Emotion Expression Recognition	
239
movements, which are to correspond to individual facial muscles. What 
such authors consider elementary movements are called action units (AU) 
to be regarded as the “phonemes” of facial expressions. Examples are:
Inner brow raiser , Outer brow raiser, Upper eye-lid raiser Nose wrin-
kle, Upper lip raiser Lip corner puller, Dimpler Lip corner depressor, Chin 
raiser , Lip stretcher , Blink. However, there is no mathematical system 
that characterizes such AU’s and expressions. In the present exposition, 
e.g., Section 10.4.1 on this author presents a mathematical basis for facial 
and visual expression epistemics that can characterize systems similar to 
FACS with more flexibility yet mathematical precision. This is because 
morph Gentzen epistemics is a direct mathematical codding for visual 
haptic encoding logics with cognitive agents.
11.3.3  FACS MORPH TUPLING
Basic Facial Morph Schema is composed with Eigen schema tuplings to 
present an expression. Since we have Macrodot agent models, the facial 
variations can be haptic logic computed and be assigned temporal sequenc-
ing (Figure 11.3).
Schema {Face Has 2 Eyes Has 1 Nose Has 1 Mouth Has 2 Cheeks)
Motion agent
Morph Rule {That is turn agent signals a morph 90 degree to the fea-
ture agents.}
Features {shape, eye agent: a}
Features {shape, size, nose agent: n}
Features {size, mouth agent: m}
Features {shape, cheek agent: ck}
Features {turns function agent, degree) Turn Agent (a, n, m, ck, degree)
Now we define the Facial Eigen Schemas composing the base facial 
schema, abbreviated BFS with transform function tuples, to a tuple mor-
phing Eigen schemas on the six Facial expression states.
Happy State: mouth agent: open: Cheek (turns function agent: 10–20 
degrees)

240	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Eye agent (turns dimmer 10 degrees)
Eigen Happiness function is: <mouth feature, eye feature> composed 
with Happy State Features
Sad State mouth agent closed: cheek (turns function agent −5 degrees)
Eye agent (turns −2 to −5 degrees).
Eigen Sad <mouth agent closed, eye agent dimmed low>
Eigen Anger: <mount agent pressed tight, eye agent clamped close>
Eigen Surprise <mouth agent opening, eye agent dilating>
Let us leave the latter two not so specific now and open to imagination.
Eigen Disgust
Eigen Fear
FIGURE 11.3  Free to display basic Facial Morph, Germany.

A Haptic Computing Basis for Facial/Visual Emotion Expression Recognition	
241
The techniques here with agent computing allow a free to culture char-
acterization cognition, c.f. (Franova, 2005), or facial expressions that are 
robust enough to tune to the variations, from Darwin to now. We do not 
have the time and space in this publication to detail all the “action units” 
since we can vary that to whatever action units on facials, including a 
mime face expressions, MIM-Logic 1997.
11.3.4  LEARNING AND ONTOLOGY TRANSFER
Our transfer-learning model applies the BID model to specify learning 
arenas M1 and M2. Each arenas BID is presented with intelligent signa-
tures Σ1 and Σ2. Predictive game models are presented with agent sig-
nature game trees where the above formalism can is applied to realize 
competitive learning models. The predictive modeling techniques are 
applicable with Bayesian confidence measures (Nourani, 2003; Schulte, 
2011). The following process is applied to transfer game tree and comple-
tive model learning across domains since modeling and realizability are 
based on morphism preserved formulas. The term ATL here refers to the 
process of abstract transfer learning from an abstract characterization of 
a world, or learning domain to a second arena or world (e.g., Nourani et 
al., 2013). Thus, ATL express the relationship between two forms of rep-
resentations. The notion of abstract transfer learning is either algebraic or 
model-theoretic (algebraic logic definitions) (Nourani, 2005; Nourani et 
al., 2013). Predictive learning is explored in the author’s publications past 
several years. Minimal prediction is an artificial intelligence technique 
defined since the author’s model-theoretic planning project (1991). It is 
a cumulative approximation attained with completing model diagrams on 
what might be true in a model or knowledge base, based on a Bayesian 
confidence measure for example. A predictive diagram for a theory T is 
a diagram D (M), where M is a model for T, and for any formula q in M, 
either the function f: q → {0,1} is defined, or there exists a formula p in 
D(M), such that T U {p} proves q; or that T proves q by minimal predic-
tion. The predictive model diagram could be minimally represented by a 
set of functions {f1, …, fn}. The predictive diagrams are applied to model 
discovery. Prediction is applied to plan goal satisfiability and can be com-
bined with plausibility (Nourani, 1991), probabilities, or fuzzy logic to 
obtain, for example Bayesian confidence intervals.

242	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
11.3.5  VIRTUAL REALITY LOGIC AND FACIAL EXPRESSIONS
A logical paradigm that can be applied to facial sequencing details might 
be further explored from the author’s newer publications on VR (Nourani, 
2002), and meta-contextual logic (Nourani, 1998, 2012). The preliminar-
ies to VR computing logic are presented since Summer Logic Colloquium 
1997, Prague. The basic mathematics emerging was that Morph Gentzen 
is a sound and complete logic to characterize visual reasoning with objects 
and agents, e.g., on a Macrodot morph computation, hence is a sound basis 
for logic on virtual reality computations, abbreviated VR.
Linguistics knowledge representation and its relation to context abstrac-
tion are defined in Nourani (1999a), where the author has put forth new 
visual computing techniques for intelligent multimedia context abstraction 
with linguistics components. Model-based computing (Nourani, 1998) can 
be applied to automated data and knowledge engineering with keyed dia-
grams. Specific computations can be carried out with predictive diagrams 
(Nourani, 1995a). For cognition, planning, and learning the robot’s mind, 
a diagram grid can define state. The designs in the author’s papers are 
ways for a robot to update its mind state based on what it encountered on 
its path. That which the robot believes can be defined on a diagram grid. 
The array grid entries are pointing to things to remember and the degree 
the cognitive agent believes them.
The grid model is a way to encode the world with the model diagram 
functions. Designated functions define agents, as in artificial intelligence 
agents, or represent languages with only abstract definition known at syn-
tax. For example, a function Fi can be agent corresponding to a language 
Li. Li can in turn involve agent functions among its vocabulary. Thus con-
text might be defined at Li. An agent Fi might be as abstract as function-
als defining functions and context with respect to a set and a linguistics 
model. Generic diagrams for models are defined as yet a second order lift 
from context. The techniques to be presented have allowed us to define 
a computational linguistics and model theory for intelligent languages. 
Models for the languages are defined by the author’s techniques. Meta-
contextual logic is combined with Morph Gentzen, a new computing logic 
the author presented in 1997, towards a Virtual Reality design languages 
and their computing logic.

A Haptic Computing Basis for Facial/Visual Emotion Expression Recognition	
243
Features and Fluents, e.g. (Sandewall 1995) complements this author’s 
newer visual logic with more basic techniques for reasoning about actions 
a change in the physical world being one of the classical research top-
ics in artificial intelligence. It is motivated by the needs of autonomous 
robots that must be able to anticipate their immediate future, to plan their 
future actions. Newer cognitive applications are presented in Nourani et 
al. (2013) on current cognitive agent systems and points to the design of 
intelligent system interfaces using higher-level cognitive capabilities.
11.4  CONCLUDING COMMENTS
The chapter presented a novel deductive system for graphical and visual 
computing with multiagent cognition for facial and visual recognition 
schemes based on novel mathematical techniques. What might come clos-
est to how the mathematical formalisms are applied to visual data is in the 
proceedings on Diagrammatic reasoning (Glasgow et al., 1995). However, 
the techniques here have to specific relations to what had transpired there. 
Furthermore, that specific area was not agent computing or intelligent 
multimedia at all. Rather a static characterization on visual data. Meta-
contextual logic is combined with Morph Gentzen, a new computing logic 
the author presented in 1997, towards a Virtual Reality design languages 
and their computing logic and Haptic computing (Picard, 1999; Nourani, 
2005, 2006).
Facial or visual expression models recognition techniques can be a 
promising area to explore with the Morph Gentzen deductive system as 
a scientific basis and a sound and complete deductive system. The Hap-
tic logics developed are natural systems for characterizing and studying 
facial expressions with the new agent cognitive paradigms. The challenge 
remains to determine precisely how the any regulatory signaling cognitive 
functions and affective systems work their influences in characterizing 
expression to facilitate a recognition processing system encoding.
Practical areas to be treated are to detail all morph compositions on all 
FACS AU’s as examples. Next stage is to essentially motion track facial 
movements and mimic emotional cognitions projected on a real Android 
epistemics. We can apply predictive diagram knowledge representation 

244	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
to compute to discover facial similarities from observed data and visual 
object images keyed with diagram functions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wishes to thank his newer colleagues on cognitive comput-
ing groups, Anna, Codrina, and Rasmus for comments. The author further 
thanks his colleague Oliver Schulte, SFU Computation logic lab for com-
ments on Bayesian inference.
KEYWORDS
••
agent cognitive computing models
••
facial Eigen schemas
••
Haptic computing logic
••
model-based reasoning
••
neurocognition
••
virtual trees
••
VR computing
REFERENCES
Anderson, K., McOwan, P. W. “A Real-Time Automated System for Recognition of 
Human Facial Expressions,” IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B, 
2006, 36(1), 96–105.
Barbara Khittl, Herbert Bauer, Peter Walla, “Change Detection Related To Peripheral 
Facial Expression: An Electroencephalography Study.” Springer-Verlag 2008. J Neu-
ral Trans, 2009, 116, 67–70; doi: 10.1007/s00702-008-0125-5.
Bettadapura, Vinay. Face Expression Recognition and Analysis: The State of the Art 25 
291, Cambridge, UK, Aug. 23–26, 2004.
Biederman, I., “Recognition-By-Components: A Theory of Human Image Understanding,” 
Psychological Review, 1987, 94(2), 115–147.
Brazier, F. M. T., Dunin-Keplicz, B. M., Jennings, N. R., Treur, J. DESIRE: Modeling 
Multi-Agent Systems in a Compositional Formal Framework. International Journal 
of Cooperative Information Systems, 1997, 6(1), 67–94.

A Haptic Computing Basis for Facial/Visual Emotion Expression Recognition	
245
Brazier, F. M. T., Jonker, C. M., Treur, J., Formalization of a cooperation model based on 
joint intentions. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 1997, 1193, 141–155
Brazier, F. M. T., Treur, J., Wijngaards, N. J. E., Willems, M. Temporal semantics of com-
plex reasoning tasks. In: B. R. Gaines, M. A. Musen (Eds.), Proc. of the 10th Banff 
Knowledge Acquisition for Knowledge-Based Systems Workshop, KAW’95, 1995.
Brosch, T., Sander, D. The appraising brain: Towards a neuro-cognitive model of appraisal 
processes in emotion. Emotion Review 2013, 5, 163–168.
Chalmers, D. J. The Conscience Mind. In: Search of a Fundamental Theory, Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Codrina Lauth, Cyrus F. Nourani, Rasmus Uslev Pedersen, Anna Blume, Cognitive Agent 
Systems and the Design of Intelligent Interfaces using Human Cognition, Special 
Issue on Multidisciplinary Perspectives of Agent-based Systems, Sept. 2013.
Cooper et al. A Systematic Methodology for Cognitive Modeling, In: AI’85, 1996, pp. 
3–44.
Donato, G., Bartlett, M. S., Hagner, J. C., Ekman, P., Sejnowski, T. J. “Classifying facial 
actions,” IEEE. Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 
974–989, Oct. 1999.
Dunin-Kęplicz, B., Nguyen, L. A., Szałas, A. Tractable Approximate Knowledge Fusion 
Using the Horn Fragment of Serial Propositional Dynamic Logic. Int. Journal of 
Approximate Reasoning, 2010, 51(3), pp. 346–362.
Dunin-Kęplicz, B., Szałas, A., Agents in Approximate Environments. In: Games, Actions 
and Social Software, College Publications, 2010.
Dunin-Keplicz, B., Treur, J. Compositional formal specification of multi agent systems. 
In: M. Wooldridge and N. R. Jennings, Intelligent Agents, Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1995, Vol. 890, pp. 102–117.
Dunin-Kęplicz, B., Verbrugge, R., M. Slizak. TeamLog in Action: a Case Study in Team-
work. In: Computer Science and Information Systems 8, 2010.
Eimer, M., Holmes, A. The role of spatial attention in the processing of facial expression: 
an ERP study of rapid brain responses to six basic emotions. Cogn Affect Behav 
Neurosci 2003, 3(2), 97–110.
Ekman, P. “Strong evidence for universals in facial expressions: A reply to Russell’s mis-
taken critique,” Psychological Bulletin, Mar. 1994, 115(2), 268–287.
Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V. “Constants across cultures in the face and emotions,” J. Personal-
ity Social Psychology, 1971, 17(2), 124–129.
Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V. “Manual for the Facial Action Coding System,” Consulting Psy-
chologists Press, 1977.
Ekman, P., Rosenberg, E. L. “What the Face Reveals: Basic and Applied Studies of Sponta-
neous Expression using the Facial Action Coding System (FACS),” Illustrated  Edi-
tion, Oxford University Press, 1997.
Farah, M. J., Wilson, K. D., Drain, M., Tanaka, J. N. “What is ‘special’ about facial percep-
tion?” Psychological Review, 1998, 105(3), 482–498.
Fleischmann, M., Strauss, W. “Digitale Körperbilder oder Inter-Faces als Schlüssel zur 
Imagination,” in Kunstforum, 1996, Vol. 132, Die Zukunft des Körpers.
Ford, K. M., Glymour, C., Hayes, P. J. Android Epistemmology, AAA/MIT Press, 1995.
Genesereth, M., Nilsson, N. J. Logical Foundations of Artificial Intelligence, Morgan-
Kaufmann, 1987. 

246	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Gentzen, G, Beweisbarkeit und Unbewiesbarket von Anfangsfallen der trasnfininten 
Induktion in der reinen Zahlentheorie, Math Ann, 1943, 119, 140–161.
Glasgow, J. L., Narayanan, N. H., Chandrasekaran, B. (Eds.), Diagrammatic Reasoning: 
Cognitive and Computational Perspectives, Boston, MA: MIT Press and Menlo Park, 
CA: AAAI Press, 1995
Graf, S. Adaptively in Learning Management Systems Focusing on Learning Styles, Ph.D. 
Thesis, Vienna University of Technology, 2007.
Hameroff, S. R., Kasznaic, A. W., Scott, A. C. (eds.) Towards a Science of Consciousness. 
The First Tucson Discussion and Debates, MIT Press 1996.
Holyoak, K. J., Thagard, P. Mental Leaps, Analogy in Creative Thought. Cambridge, MIT 
Press.
Hoshiyama, M., Kakigi, R., Watanabe, S., Miki, K., Takeshima, Y. Brain responses for the 
subconscious recognition of faces. Neurosci Res 2003, 46, 435–442.
Hummel, J. E., Holyoak, K. J. “LISA: A Computational Model of Analogical Inference and 
Schema Induction,” Proc. 18th Ann. Conf. Cognitive Science, La Jolla, July 1996.
Izard, C. E. “Innate and universal facial expressions: Evidence from developmental and 
cross-cultural research,” Psychological Bulletin, Mar 1994, 115(2), 288–299.
Jennings, Intelligent Agents, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 890, Springer, 
Berlin, pp. 102–117.
Jerome R. Busemeyer, Adele Diederich, Cognitive Modeling April 2, 2009, ISBN-10: 
0761924507; ISBN-13: 978-0761924500; 1st Edition.
Kanade, T., Cohn, J., Tian, Y. “Comprehensive Database for Facial Expression Analysis,” 
Proc. IEEE Int’l Conf. Face and Gesture Recognition (AFGR’00), pp. 46–53, 2000.
Kant, I., 1990, Critique of Pure Reason, Translated by J. M. D. Meiklejohn and D. Kinny.
Kant, I., 1993, Opus Postumum, Cambridge University Press.
Kotsia, I. Pitas, “Facial Expression Recognition in Image Sequences Using Geometric 
Deformation Features and Support Vector Machines,” IEEE Trans. Image Process-
ing, 2007, 16(1), 172–187.
Lucas, B. D., Kanade, T. “An Iterative Image Registration Technique with an Application 
to Stereo Vision,” Proc. 7th Int. Joint Conf. on Artificial  Intelligence (IJCAI), 1981, 
pp. 674–679.
Marta Franová, 2005, “Symbiosis descarto-ackermanno-filkornised: Why and How?” Lab-
oratoire de Recherche en Informatique Bât. 490, Université Paris-Sud, 91405 Orsay.
Mecklinger , A. 2000, “Interfacing mind and brain: A neurocognitive model of recognition 
memory” Max Planck Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Leipzig, Germany.
Michel, P., Kaliouby, R. “Real Time Facial Expression Recognition in Video Using Sup-
port Vector Machines,” Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Multimodal Interfaces,  Vancouver, BC, 
Canada, 2003, pp. 258–264.
MIT Encyclopedia of Cognitive Sciences—MIT Cognetcognet.mit.edu/MITECS/‎Edited 
by Robert A. Wilson and Frank C. Keil. 2010 The MIT Press.
Nina Gaissert, Steffen Waterkamp, Roland, W., Fleming, Isabelle Buelthoff, 2012, Hap-
tic categorical perception of shape. Published: April 12, 2012. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pcbi.1002453 Tubingen Neuroscience, BCCN publications.
Nourani, C. F. “A Descriptive Computing,”  Information Sciences Forume,  Leipzig, 
March 2009a.

A Haptic Computing Basis for Facial/Visual Emotion Expression Recognition	
247
Nourani, C. F. “A Multiagent Cognitive Theory,” Revised January 1995, International 
Conference Cognitive Science, La Jolla, July 1996.
Nourani, C. F. “A Multiagent Intelligent Multimedia Visualization Language and Comput-
ing Paradigm, February, VL2000-WWW Interface Track, Seattle, September 2000.
Nourani, C. F. “Aesthetics, CL, and Models. Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena Institut für 
Germanistische Sprachwissenschaft, Institut für Anglistik/Amerikanistik Fürstengra-
ben 30, Ernst-Abbe-Platz 8 the 37th Linguistic Colloquium Germany, September 
25th to 27th 2002. Motto “Language and the modern media.” “http://www.uni-jena.
de/fsu/anglistik/Lingcoll/”
Nourani, C. F. “Agent Languages, Visual Virtual Trees, and Models,” IJPAM 2012–19–
175. International Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics, 2012.
Nourani, C. F. “Agent Planning, Models, Virtual Haptic Computing, and Visual Ontology 
“International Federation for Information Processing (“IFIP”) for presentation at its 
conference on August 2006 (name of conference) held on August 2006 at Santiago, 
Chile. Springer-Verlag, 2006.
Nourani, C. F. “Intelligent Languages—A Preliminary Syntactic Theory,” 1995, Math-
ematical Foundations of Computer Science 1998, 23rd International Symposium, 
MFCS’98, Brno, Czech Republic, August 1998, Jozef Gruska, and Jiri Zlatuska 
(Eds.): Lecture Notes in Computer Science; 1450, Springer, 1998, ISBN 3-540-
64827-5, 846 pp.
Nourani, C. F. “Intelligent Trees, Genetic Algorithms, and Thought Processes   6th World 
Multiconference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (SCI 2002) to be 
Orlando, USA, in July 14, 2002.
Nourani, C. F. “Intelligent Trees, Thought Models, and Intelligent Discovery,” Model-
Based Reasoning in Scientific Discovery (MBR’98) Pavia, Italy, December 17–19, 
1998b.
Nourani, C. F. “KR, Data Modeling, DB and KB Predictive Scheme Completion,” A ver-
sion published at International Systems and Cybernetics, Florida, July 2003. 
Nourani, C. F. “MIMLogik,” Summer Logic Colloquium, August 1997.
Nourani, C. F. “Planning and Plausible Reasoning in AI,” Proc. Scandinavian Conference 
in AI, May 1991, Roskilde, Denmark, 1991, 150–157, IOS Press.
Nourani, C. F. “Towards Computational Epistemology—A Forward,” Proc. Summer Logic 
Colloquium, Clermont-Ferrand, France, July 1994. 
Nourani, C. F. “Virtual Tree Computing, Meta-Contextual Logic, and VR,”  February 12, 
2001 ASL Spring 2002, Seattle WA, March, BSL Vol. 8. No. 3, ISSN 1079–8986.
Nourani, C. F. 2005, “A Haptic Computing Logic,” in The Future of Learning, Volume 1, 
2006. Affective and Emotional Aspects of Human-Computer Interaction. In: Game-
Based and Innovative Learning Approaches, Edited by Maja Pivec, ISBN 978-1-
58603-572-3.
Nourani, C. F. A Descriptive Computing, Information Forum, Liepzig, Germany, March 
2009. SIWN2009 Program, 2009. The Foresight Academy of Technology Press 
International Transactions on Systems Science and Applications, Vol. 5, No. 1, June 
2009, pp. 60–69.
Nourani, C. F. A Haptic Computing Logic—Agent Planning, Models, and Virtual Trees. In: 
Pivec, M. (Ed.) Affective and Emotional Aspects of HCI: Game-Based and Innova-
tive Learning Approaches, IOS Press, 2006, p.317.

248	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Nourani, C. F. A Multi Agent Cognitive Theory. Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual 
Conference of the Cognitive Science, UCSD, La Jolla,  Garrison W. Cottrell—edi-
tor, 1996.
Nourani, C. F. Abstract Linguistics—A Brief Overview, ICML, Mathematical Linguis-
tics,  Tarragona, Catalunia, Spain. May 1995.
Nourani, C. F. Intelligent Multimedia Computing Science- Business Interfaces, Databases, 
Data Mines, and WiFi American Scientific Publishers, 2005. http://www.aspcs.com/
multimedia.htm. Intelligent Multimedia: New Computing Techniques and Its Appli-
cations, February 28, 1997.
Nourani, C. F. Intelligent Trees and Consciousness Science, Consciousness in Science and 
Philosophy ‘98, Illinois, November 1998.
Nourani, C. F. Morph Gentzen, K. R., World Model Diagrams April 2, 1998. Automated 
Deductions and Geometry, The Third International Workshop on Automated Deduc-
tion in Geometry Zurich, Switzerland, September 25–27, 2000.
Nourani, C. F. Proceedings of 1st International Workshop on Computer Science and Infor-
mation Technologies, January 18–22, 1999, Moscow, Russia. Ch. Freytag and V. 
Wolfengagen (Eds.): MEPhI Publishing 1999, ISBN 5-7262-0263-5, Vorotnikovskiy 
per., 7, bld.4 Moscow 103006, Russia JurInfoR-MSU Institute for Contemporary 
Education (JMSUICE).
Nourani, C. F. Slalom Tree Computing: A Computing Theory For Artificial Intelligence, 
June 1994 (Revised December 1994), A. I. Communication December 1996a, 9(4).
Nourani, C. F. Versatile Abstract Syntax Meta-Contextual Logic and VR Computing 36th 
Lingustische Kolloquium, Austria Proceedings 36th Lingustische Kolloquium, Aus-
tria Proceedings of the 35th Colloquium of Linguistics, Innsbrucke. Europa Der 
Sprachen: Sprachkopetenz-Mehrsprachigeit-Translation, TIEL II: Sprache und Kog-
nition, Sonderdruc 2003, Lew N. Zybatow (HRSG). 1998.
Nourani, C. F. Virtual World Models, Illusion Logic, and Morphs, In Information Sciences 
Forum, Leipzig, March 2009.
Nourani, C. F. Virtuelle Macrodot Morph Kino Und Das FERNSEHN, IMK- Netzspan-
nung.org, Sank Augustine, Germany, 2004.
Nourani, C. F., “Morph Gentzen Plan Computation with Visual Diagrams, “ISTA” 2001 
the Conference Proceedings published in the GI- Edition ‘Lecture Notes in Infor-
matics,’ Austria. Kharkiv, Ukraine Proceedings of the 2001 international conference 
on Information systems technology and its applications—vol. P-2 Kharkiv, Ukraine, 
2002, 215–228. ISSN: 1617-5468, 3-88579-331-8.
Nourani, C. F., “Visual Computational Linguistics,” July 29, 1997. Brief at the 34th Lin-
guistics Colloquium, September 1999, Mainz, Germany.
Nourani, C. F., Codrina Lauth, and Rasmus Pedersen, WI-IAT 2013 IOT special session. 
Cognitive Agent Planning  with Attention Spanning–A Preliminary. IAT Special Ses-
sion on IOT, Atlanta, November 2013.
Nourani, C. F., Intelligent Trees, Genetic Algorithms,  and Thought Complex-
ity Abstract June 18, 1997 Accepted to the BioComplexity Conference, Stanford.
Nourani, C. F., Worlds, Models, and KM Workshop on Philosophy and Knowledge Man-
agement, 2–4. April 2003, at the WM 2003, Luzern, Switzerland. http://www.dfki.
uni- kl.de/~klein/wm2003-preproceedings/htmls/index.htm

A Haptic Computing Basis for Facial/Visual Emotion Expression Recognition	
249
Oliver Schulte, “A tractable pseudo likelihood function for Bayes Nets applied to rela-
tional data.” Proceedings of the SIAM SDM Conference on Data Mining, 2011, pp. 
462–473.
Pantic, A., Patras, I. “Dynamics of Facial Expression: Recognition of Facial Actions and 
Their Temporal Segments Form Face Profile Image Sequences, “IEEE Trans. Sys-
tems, Man, and Cybernetics Part B, 2006, 36(2), 433–449.
Pantic, M., Patras, I. “Detecting facial actions and their temporal segments in nearly fron-
tal-view face image sequences,” Proc. IEEE conf. Systems, Man and  Cybernetics, 
Oct. 2005, 4, 3358–3363.
Pantic, M., Rothkrantz, J. M. “Facial Action Recognition for Facial Expression Analysis 
from Static Face Images,” IEEE Trans. Systems, Man arid  Cybernetics Part B, 2004, 
34(3), 1449–1461.
Pantic, M., Rothkrantz, L. J. M. “Automatic analysis of facial expressions: the state-of-
the-art,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2000, 22(12), 
1424–1445.
Parrott, W. G., “Emotions in Social Psychology,” Psychology Press, Philadelphia, October 
2000.
Pedersen, R. U. Micro Information Systems and Ubiquitous Knowledge Discovery In: 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, No. 6202, 2010, 216–234.
Picard, R. T. Affective Computing, TR#321, MIT Media Lab. 1998.
Picard, R. W. “Affective Computing for HCI,” In: Proceedings of HCI, Munich, Germany, 
August 1999.
Picard, R. W., Papert, S., Bender, W., Blumberg, B., Breazeal, C., Cavallo, D., Machover, 
Strohecker, C.: Affective Learning–A Manifesto, BT Technical Journal, 2004, 22(4), 
253–269.
Prawitz, D., “Natural Deduction: A Proof Theoretic Study, Stokhom, Almqvist and Wik-
sell, 1965.
Putzeys, T., Matthias. Bethge, Felix Wichmann, Johan Wagemans, Robbe Goris. BCCN 
and Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Abteilung Empirische Inferenz, 
Tübingen, Germany ax Planck Institute, 2012.
Rao, A. S., Georgeff, M. P. “Modeling rational agents within a BID-architecture,” In: R. 
Fikes, E. Sandewall (eds.), Proceedings of the Second Conference on Knowledge 
Representation and Reasoning, Morgan Kaufman, 473–484.
Rao, A. S., Georgeff, M. P. Modeling rational agents within a BID-architecture. In: R. 
Fikes, E. Sandewall (eds.), Proceedings of the Second Conference on Knowledge 
Representation and Reasoning, Morgan Kaufman, 1991, pp. 473–484.
Russell, J. A., “Is there universal recognition of emotion from facial expressions? A review 
of the cross-cultural studies,” Psychological Bulletin, vol. 115, no. 1, pp. 102–141, 
Jan. 1994.
Sandewall, Erik: Features and Fluents, The Representation of Knowledge about Dynami-
cal Systems, Volume 1, Clarendon Press: Oxford Logic Guides 1995, 30, pp. 346, 
978-0-19-853845-5, Hardback.
Shoham, Y., Cousins, S. B. Logics of mental attitudes in AI: a very preliminary survey. 
In: G. Lakemeyer, B. Nebel (eds.) Foundations of Knowledge Representation and 
Reasoning, Springer Verlag, 1994, 296–309.
Sternberg, R. J. (Ed.), Cognitive Psychology, Wadsworth, Australia, 2012.

250	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Sternberg, R. J. (Ed.), The Nature of Cognition. Cambridge, MIT Press, MA, 1999.
Sun, R. Cognitive science meets multiagent systems: Aprolegomenon, Philosophical Psy-
chology, Volume 14, Issue 1, 2001. (Sun 2002).
Thagard, P. (1996). Mind: An introduction to cognitive science. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Tomasi, C., Kanade, T. “Detection and Tracking of Point Features,” Carnegie Mellon Uni-
versity Technical Report CMU-CS-91-132, April 1991.
Verbrugge, R., Dunin-Kęplicz, B. Formal approaches to multiagent systems. Introduction 
in: Journal of Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 2009, 19(1), 1–3.
Zeng, Z., Pantic, M., Roisman, G. I., Huang, T. S. “A Survey of Affect Recognition Meth-
ods: Audio, Visual, and Spontaneous Expressions,” IEEE Trans.  Pattern Analysis 
and Machine Intelligence, 2009, 31(1), 39–58.

INDEX
A
Abstract Intelligent Implementation 
(AII), 204
Academia, 14, 16, 94, 105, 171
Acceleration, 92, 94–99, 110, 111
Action
form, 213–216
bean, 214–216
servlet, 215
units (AU), 23, 36, 92, 239, 243
Adapter design pattern, 215
Adobe example content, 198
Adobe FrameMaker templates, 199
Adoption phases, 39, 52
Agent 
cognition processes, 228
cognitive computing models, 244
object model, 216
Agile
certified practitioners, 130
context, 41, 62
development, 50–52
implementation, 39, 52
manufacturing, 154
methodologies, 38–41, 51, 52, 64
methods, 39, 50, 52
practices, 50, 51
scrum methodology, 50
software development, 37–41, 50–52
software methodologies, 50
Algebraic logic definitions, 241
Algebraic/model-theoretic, 241
Algorithms, 28, 196, 203, 224
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), 170
Alpha prototype, 161
Analogy engine, 28, 30
Analytics, 185, 199, 218
Android haptic epistemics, 236
Antecedents, 42, 43, 53, 59
Architecture, 26, 130, 152
Artificial Intelligence (AI), 19, 26–29, 
191–194, 201–209, 224–226, 229–235, 
236, 238
creativity ecoinnovation innovation, 
32
technique, 27, 204, 241
Atomic sentences, 193, 202
Audio process audio clips, 198
Audio-visual description tools, 218
Autonomy, 39, 44, 153, 229
B
Bacca Foundation, 99
Baltic International Academy, 84
Bayesian
confidence, 224, 241
networks, 186
Behavioral control, 58–60, 64–66
Beta prototype, 161
Big Data, 151, 154, 199, 200, 220
Binge drinking session, 58, 59
Biodesign, 92, 100–103, 157, 168–174, 
178–181
capstone, 170
courses, 170
global affiliates, 171
process, 100, 157, 170–174
program, 100, 103, 168–172
BioInnovate program, 171, 172
Biological
scientific discoveries, 232
system, 232
Biomimicry, 13, 15
Biotechnologies, 13
Blood clot material, 100
Brainstorming, 15, 81, 165, 169

252	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Building Your Own Database Driven 
Website, 199
Business
applications, 136, 191
class, 215
information, 217
intelligence (BI), 217, 218
intelligence/mobile content, 217
multidimensional content/web 
content, 217
business intelligence platforms, 
218
intelligence platforms, 218
interface, 215
layer, 152
logic, 213–216
metrics, 218
model, 12, 95, 162, 158, 174
operations, 218
partners, 135, 195
performance, 217
plan, 83–85, 99, 169
process, 135, 138, 152, 195
delivery process, 135
sense, 162
technical domains, 50
C
CAMTech, 99–101, 113
innovation platform, 92
Cardiac rhythm disease management 
(CRDM), 175
Cardiologists, 104
Category theory, 183, 186
Cloud
applications, 151
computing, 130, 151, 152
interfaces, 220
Cognition
capabilities, 230
cognitive process, 230
design, 230
Cognitive
agent systems, 230, 243
applications, 243
architecture, 232
changes, 234
computing aspects, 230
designs, 232
flexibility, 24
intelligence, 230
theory, 232
modeling, 231, 236
notions, 229, 235
psychologist/neurocognitive scien-
tists, 224
psychology trends, 224
theory, 232
Commercialization, 101, 107, 112, 164, 
173
Communication
networks, 142
express, 202
Compensation plans, 121
Complex system, 26, 27, 49, 121, 131, 
134
Component-testing programs, 54
Computable models, 192, 202, 228
Computational
epistemology, 236
linguistics, 235, 242
numerical methods, 186
perception, 231
Computing
cognitive models, 226
linguistic theories, 231
multimedia, 224
platform, 152
resources, 218
techniques, 190, 191, 233, 238, 242
technologies, 143
visual stage, 233
Conceptualization process, 158
Concertive control, 60, 63, 64
Conference Board, 117
Consortium of Affordable Medical Tech-
nologies, 99
Content
business, 126
concepts, 52
databases, 194

Index	
253
management/processing, 194–199
adobe example content, 198
analytics/big data, 199
enterprise content management, 
195
web content, 196
XML content, 197
model languages, 216
presentation languages, 195
processing, 191–197, 199–203, 
205–209, 211, 213, 215–221
Core
teams, 165, 174
Coronary/peripheral artery blockages, 
100
Coronary sinus, 100
Corporate memory (CM), 191
Corporate social responsibility approach, 
20
Cost-effective management, 211
Cultural environment, 129
Custom application development, 121
Customer
emergency response team, 137
relationship management, 25
requirements, 121, 150
specific repositories, 211
Cyber-physical worlds, 230
Cybersecurity, 151
D
Data
base design, 206
centers, 8
collection procedures, 52
discovery, 204–210
techniques, 190
integration, 217
querying, 218
return, 148
visualizations, 200
Decision
evaluation, 148
making mechanisms, 27
making process, 218
reviews/process, 165, 174
model design, 148
Deductive system, 190, 200, 224, 236, 
238, 243
Deductive theory, 201, 227
Development
process, 51, 133, 162, 164
strategy, 169
tools/techniques, 165, 175
Diagram functions, 200–206, 225, 227, 
242, 244
Diagrammatic/analogical reasoning, 232
Diagrammatic techniques, 231
Digital
content, 79, 211
era, 80
learning materials, 82
library applications, 211
infrastructure, 211
media files, 211
options, 89
Disciplinary mechanisms, 57
Disease management, 175, 176
Double Vision Computing
artificial intelligence paradigm, 230
paper, 200
Dr. Dobbs Global Developer Techno-
graphics, 51
Drug-drug interactions, 185
Drug-eluting stent systems, 105
Dynamic
adaptation, 50
agents, 93
behavior, 132
induction, 27
properties, 202
relations, 228, 229, 235
systems development method 
(DSDM), 50
E
E-business, 190
Ecodesign, 15, 24
Ecoinnovation, 12, 15, 22, 25, 32
E-commerce, 3, 4, 25, 190

254	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Economic
crisis, 12, 78
development board (EDB), 171
emigration, 78
evolution, 13
growth, 12
impact, 16, 31
reasons, 78
sector, 92
terms, 31
value, 168, 176
Ecosystem, 12, 15, 16, 20–22, 31, 92–94, 
99, 100, 105–110, 116, 126, 129, 133, 
135, 159, 164, 167, 169
Effective value articulation, 168
Eigen schemas, 224, 225, 238, 239
Eigen tupling morph schemas, 237
E-learning, 25, 78, 83–89
environment, 83
studies, 78
Electric engine, 142
Electroencephalography, 227
Electromagnetic field, 32
Electromechanical implants, 107
Electronics/telecommunications, 87
Elementary data storage, 148
Emotional
communication, 226
components, 226
expressions, 236
responses, 58
Empirical data extraction method, 81
Empowerment, 184
Energy
consuming, 27
independence, 154
Engineering 
background, 161
development platform, 98, 111
expertise, 178
problem solving, 163
prototyping facilities, 106
Enterprise content management, 195
Enterprise innovation process, 122
Entovation International, 14
Entrepreneurial capacity, 99, 101
Entrepreneurship, 14, 78, 81, 179, 180
Environmental
aspects, 15, 18
conditions, 41, 230
criteria, 15
impact, 22
principles, 15, 24
Epistemics, 223, 226, 232, 234, 239, 243
Ergonomics, 24, 190
European Research Programs, 14
Evidence-based medicine (EBM), 185
Exploitation phase, 24
Expression/haptic computing, 238
Expression schema cognitive computing 
techniques, 224
F
Facebook, 3–5, 81
Facial
eigen schemas, 244
expression, 224–227, 233, 236–241, 
243
recognition, 225
recognition systems, 234
visual expression, 223, 239
Feature-driven development (FDD), 50
Filtering process, 170
Financial
commercial actors, 13
organizational memory applications, 
190
penalties, 135
security, 83
support, 83
Flexibility, 19, 51, 149, 150, 153, 178, 
198, 215, 239
Foxhollow Technologies, 100
Frascati Manual, 13, 17, 18
G
Garlic’s wrapper architecture, 212
Gastroenterology, 172
Gastrointestinal, 175
G-diagram, 192, 193, 203–208
Generalized predictive diagrams, 206

Generic
algorithms, 229
diagram, 193, 194, 203, 228, 242
functions, 214
model, 236
secretion algorithms, 232
computations, 232
Gentzen
epistemics, 239
logic, 219, 224
system, 201, 223, 227
Geographical location, 149, 174
Gestalt model, 235
Global
Biodesign, 170
communities, 8
hubs, 110, 159
market, 147
phenomenon, 12
Glucose monitors, 176
Google
approach, 184
fit, 184
trends, 6
Government program, 109, 159
Government run incubation programs, 
92
Green transportation, 22
Grounded theory, 41
H
Haptic
agents, 227
computing logic, 224, 233, 238, 244
control logic, 233
immersion, 225, 226
logic, 224, 226, 234, 235, 239
visual ontology, 226
Hardware 
combinations, 8
infrastructure, 138
optimization, 8
HCC human computer confluence, 153
HCI
era, 153
evolution, 153
professionals, 153
Health ontology, 185, 186
Healthcare, 91, 92, 99–108, 142, 157, 
168, 181–185
industry, 168
innovations, 91
systems, 103, 106
HealthKit, 184
Heart rhythm products, 176
Heterogeneous computing, 194, 204, 219
Hierarchical
abstract structures, 212
image, 196
linear regression models, 41
organizational forms, 38
High-tech medical imaging equipment, 
107
Holistic vision, 14
Homomorphism, 201, 227
Human
activities, 15, 16, 22
capital, 122
cognition, 230
computer confluence, 153
computer interactions, 233
emotion, 227, 238
health, 16, 227
human communication, 227
imagination, 19
intelligence, 226, 234
machine interaction, 226
mindset, 129
motivation, 48
operators, 144
resources, 24, 143, 152, 191
interaction, 190, 226, 227, 233
Hybrid picture, 191, 200, 201
I
Idiosyncrasy, 47
Incoming challenges, 143, 150
architecture, 152
big data, 150
cloud computing, 151
Index	
255

256	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
faster processing requirement, 153
networking and security, 151
platform independent, 152
Indian clinical settings, 170
Indo-US Science and Technology Forum 
(IUSSTF), 170
Industrial design, 18
Industrial Internet Consortium (IIC), 
142
Information
processing opportunity, 48
systems, 51, 121, 135, 196, 211
technology, 135
Infrastructure team, 136
Ingenious solutions, 15
Injunctive norms, 40–42, 48, 49, 55–60, 
62–66
InnAccel, 91, 92, 94–99, 110–112, 157, 
180, 181
Innovation
dynamics, 11, 12, 20
ecosystem, 159
horizon, 166
management process, 116, 117, 122, 
123, 131
design capability, 131
performance, 42, 49
platform, 92–94, 97, 98, 110
power, 118
process management process (IPMP), 
131–134, 139
process, 16–19, 42, 93, 116, 117, 
124, 131
program/process, 100
Innovative
capacity, 29, 31
concept, 165
contribution, 137
enterprises, 127
environment, 129
organizations, 127
platforms, 93
products, 109, 159
Innovators, 92, 95, 100, 103, 139, 
161–165, 167–171
Installation, 154, 211
Intelligent multimedia, 190–192, 200, 
220, 231, 233
computing paradigm, 200
database, 220
techniques, 224
Intelligent system, 230, 243
Interactive visual models, 218
Interdisciplinary team, 168, 172
Internal resources, 136
International differences, 192
Internship programs, 170
Interpersonal pressure, 45, 64, 67
Interventional specialists, 104
Inventions, 122, 123, 163
J
Japan Federation of Medical Devices 
Associations (JFMDA), 172
John’s Hopkins innovation platform, 92
Journal of the National Academy of 
Inventors, 14
K
Kant illusion logic, 225
Kant’s dialectics, 231
Kerberos proximal solutions, 100
Kickstart high-tech MedTech manufac-
turing, 108
Knowledge
base, 137, 204–208, 212, 219, 229, 
232, 241
discovery, 26, 28, 206, 208, 219
economy, 16
innovation, 19
management (KM), 16, 19, 20, 25, 
33, 191, 206, 208
innovation, 19
multiple impact technology, 33
modeling, 26, 205
models supporting design, 19
representation, 193, 202
skills, 45, 130

L
Laboratory tests, 160
Latvian
institutions, 80
language, 83, 84
National Action Plan, 79
Reform Program, 78–80
Leadership approaches, 123
Learning
capabilities, 39
expression computations, 236
emotions/expressions, 236
expression/haptic computing, 238
FACS morph tupling, 239
Learning/ontology transfer, 241
virtual reality logic/facial expres-
sions, 242
process, 42, 81, 85, 87
Linear process model, 18
Linguistics, 224, 242
Linux distribution, 152
Liver biopsies, 103
Logical algorithm, 186
Logic-based medicine (LBM), 185
Louis Comfort Tiffany, 118, 119
M
Macrodot
agent models, 239
morph computation, 242
morphing, 233
Management
methods, 15
process, 190
Managerial
independence, 132, 134
method, 25
organizational controls, 41, 49
practices, 40
Manufacturing
activities, 144
areas, 154
data, 147
execution system (MES), 141, 147, 
154
improvement, 150
process, 142–144, 147–152, 154
resources, 144, 150
systems, 141, 149, 150
Market
analysis, 169, 174
dynamics, 165
impact, 24
value, 5
Marketing
method, 13
promotion, 83
Massive open online courses (MOOC), 
79
Mathematical
artificial intelligence Schemas, 226
basis, 191, 225, 226, 236, 239
logic publications, 201
precision, 227, 231, 239
system, 239
McIntosh, 19
MecMaan Healthcare, 103
Media asset management, 211
Medical
device, 100, 103, 105, 158, 163, 164, 
168, 171, 178
development, 158
equipments, 13
products, 97, 108, 175, 176
technology, 92, 94, 105, 106, 109, 
110, 159, 171
innovation, 92, 159
ventures, 105
Medicis Pharmaceutical, 105
MedTech
accelerator, 95, 96
commercialization, 96
companies, 104, 105, 108, 165
ecosystem, 96, 100
entrepreneurs, 97
entrepreneurship, 158
industry, 97, 106–110, 159
innovation, 94, 97, 99, 110, 159, 163
market, 106, 167
Index	
257

258	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
networks, 96
problems, 164
sector, 106, 109, 159
ventures, 95
Medtronic, 101, 103, 104, 166, 175, 176
Member Management Science Tech-
niques, 209
Memory system, 231
M.E.S. functional areas, 143
dispatching, 144
document control, 146
labor management, 143
maintenance management, 146
performance analysis, 144
process management, 144
product tracking, 144
quality management, 144
resource allocation, 143
scheduling, 144
Meta-contextual reasoning, 231
Meta-model, 194
Metamorphosis, 161
Metaphysics, 224
Microsoft’s HealthVault, 184
Microtechnique, 57, 58
Mobile
health, 186
medical, 184
platforms, 220
Model 
computing, 242, 244
innovation ecosystems, 20
theoretic planning project, 204, 241
theory, 191, 242
Modernization, 79, 80
Molecular structure databases, 211
Mood-congruent memory retrieval, 226
Morgenthaler ventures, 105
Morph Gentzen
logic, 210
sequents, 210
Morph programming techniques, 214
Morph rule, 201, 227, 238, 239
Morphic programming, 215
Morphism, 241
Motivation, 39, 45, 51, 53, 64, 78–81, 85, 
88, 116, 232
Motivational
attitudes, 228, 229, 235
barriers, 58
force, 46
social dimensions, 44
state, 47, 48
system, 231
Multiagent
AI Computing, 220
cognition, 231, 234, 243
project, 231
cognitive theory, 231
computing, 200, 232
intelligent multimedia, 235
systems, 28, 228–232, 235
visual multiboard planning, 235
Multiboard model, 234
Multidisciplinary
approach, 92, 168
dimensions, 13
knowledge, 12, 18, 30
Multilevel/multisource survey, 41
Multimedia
artificial intelligence business appli-
cations, 191
content, 191, 196, 218, 224
context abstraction, 242
databases, 217
intelligence database, 190
multiple modalities, 203
objects, 191, 200
paradigms, 190
principles, 191, 192
programming, 192
techniques, 191
Multitier designs, 220
N
Nanotechnologies, 13
Natural
artificial, 230
capital, 16
deduction, 200, 224–227

language processing, 28, 118, 137
techniques, 28
Navigation, 32
NEET group, 78–80, 89
Neither in education nor in employment 
or training (NEETs), 78, 83
Network services, 121, 136
Networking/security, 151
Neurocognition, 244
Neurocognitive
bases, 224
computing modeling, 232
grid system, 226
model, 230–232
nature, 225
psychology, 225
Neurological deficits, 100
Neurophysiological based models, 232
Newborn warming care, 158
Non-technical managers, 4
Nonformal education, 79, 88
Noninvasive devices, 104
Novel
competitive learning techniques, 190
ideas, 39
medical technologies, 171
modeling techniques, 223
solution, 161
O
Online innovation platform, 100
Ontology, 28, 183–186, 194, 196, 223, 
224, 241
Open-source projects, 7
Operational independence, 134
Operational/business excellence, 150
Optimization, 8, 28, 149
Ordinary diagram, 193, 202
Organization/management, 12, 29
Organizational 
business activities, 11
documentation, 41
identification, 57
innovation, 116, 117, 126
management process, 116
learning processes, 44
memory (OM), 191
operating processes, 116
standards, 47
structure, 123
units, 41, 49, 133
values, 58
Oslo Manual, 13
Outsourcing/offshoring options, 6
P
Patient management solutions, 176
PAX system, 24
Pedagogical support, 88
Performance management, 217
Personal
innovation process, 118
management, 116
responsibility, 129
Physical
ability, 118
assets, 122
infrastructure, 97
medical technology innovation plat-
form, 92
resources, 143, 144, 154
support systems, 133
Physiometrix, 104
Pingpong table/bigger monitors, 7
Planet protection, 15
Planning 
designing procedures, 18
intensive linear development, 38
techniques, 206, 208
Platform independent, 152
Policy support report, 106
Polyschematics architecture, 226
Practical
artificial intelligence, 224
design, 217
multimedia databases, 217
design, 191
Predictive
diagram, 205–208, 241, 243
model, 204, 205, 209, 241
Index	
259

260	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Problem-solving paradigm, 200, 230
Product
design, 13, 178, 191
development, 41, 51, 52, 92, 98, 112, 
162–165, 169, 174
development project excellence ele-
ments, 164
core teams, 164
decision-making reviews/process, 
165
development tools/techniques, 165
structured development process, 
167
lifecycle management (PLM), 15
service economy, 16
Production
composition, 151
process, 153
Professional qualities, 87
Programming applications, 191
Proto method system, 134
Prototype, 5, 17, 96, 103, 118, 158, 161, 
164, 169, 190, 211, 214, 217
alpha prototype, 161
beta prototype, 161
functional prototype, 161
Psychoemotional
condition, 85, 88
diagnosis, 81, 84
state, 88
Psychological test, 84
Public health impact, 101
Public-Private-Partnership, 106
Q
Qualified-self solutions, 185
Quality assessment, 88
Quality of education, 89
Query/analysis, 217
web intelligence, 217
desktop intelligence, 217
OLAP intelligence, 217
Query processing, 190, 212
Querying capabilities, 211
Questionnaires, 88
R
Recyclability, 24
Regenerative process, 121, 123
Regulatory
agencies, 161
approval, 162
Relevant data selection, 148
Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, and 
Child Health (RMNCH), 99, 101
Research and development (R&D), 12, 
13, 41, 106, 141, 153
Resource allocation/management, 28
Resource Description Framework 
(RDF), 195, 196
Revascularization, 103
Revenue renewal, 121
Revolution, 142, 148, 151–154
Robotic surgery platforms, 107
Root cause analysis, 136
S
Samsung School Future, 81
Schmidt’s Schema theory, 226
Scientific
publications, 13
techniques, 231
Scrum
methods, 51
results, 51
Security problems, 151
Self-managing teams, 38, 42, 44–51, 53, 
64–67
Self-organization, 39
Self-organizing teams, 50
Semantic
domains, 197
networks, 28
Semiautomatic multimedia presentation, 
218
Sensory
function, 234
perception, 84
Service management team, 136
Seurat pointillism painting, 134
Simplification, 199

Singapore-Stanford Biodesign (SSB), 171
Singapore-Stanford examine, 171
Skolem functions, 193, 203, 205, 208
Skolemized trees, 204–209
Smart
factory, 149, 154
phones, 3, 148, 153
sensors, 150, 154
transportation, 15
Social
categorization, 47
conduct, 42
context, 39, 49, 65, 185
contextual influences, 43
economic innovation, 13
emotional attitudes, 229
environment, 38, 40, 49, 62, 65
factors, 53, 65
group, 62
identification, 47
identity, 42–45, 49, 57
ideological modes, 41, 49
influence, 38, 53
innovation, 12, 15
institutional conflicts, 93
learning theory, 53
networks, 12, 15, 20, 25, 81, 82
norms, 38, 46, 48, 56
pressure, 47, 59
psychology course, 84
sanction, 48, 56
Soft
factors, 118, 122
sciences, 12, 16
Software
delivery organization, 136
development, 18, 39, 50, 52
Solid technologies, 162
Specification document, 169
Stakeholder theory, 42, 49
Stanford Biodesign
companies, 101
program, 101
Stanford India Biodesign Program (SIB), 
103, 170
Stanford University, 100, 103, 157, 
168–171
Stanford University learning, 170
Steady state operation, 131
Stock forecasting analytics, 190
Stock forecasting technique portfolios, 
209
Stock traders interface model, 210
Strategic development services, 94–96
Structured development process, 165, 
174
Supervision process, 153
Surgery robots, 13
Surgical systems, 107
Swiss neurohaptic research, 230
Syntax properties, 201
System of System (SoS), 131–135
T
Team
descriptive norms, 42
environment, 39, 43
injunctive norms, 58
innovation, 42, 43, 49
norms, 46, 65, 67
Technical
development, 162
feasibility, 158
innovation, 101
specifications, 18
Technological
feasibility, 24, 30
innovation, 13, 134
platforms, 15
solution, 83
state, 196
Technology strategy, 164
Telecommunications media, 233
Tiffany’s studio system, 119
Traditional forms, 85–89
Transcendental Aesthetics, 228
Transfer learning model, 241
Transformation, 22, 24, 29, 30, 166, 191, 
194
Index	
261

262	
Ecosystems and Technology: Idea Generation and Content Model Processing
Transformer Active Intelligent Database, 
206
Transmorph rules, 201, 227, 228
U
Ubiquitous computing, 32, 149
Universal
recognition, 225, 237
solution, 151
V
Validation, 95, 160
Velocity, 215
Venture
capital, 96, 107–110, 159
funds, 105, 159
contracts, 135
health, 104
Versant ventures, 105
Versatile channels, 122, 123
Virtual
computing logic, 223
connection, 30
cyber-physical agent system, 230
environment, 81
images, 227
reality design languages, 242, 243
tree images, 227
Visionary
leader, 118, 120, 121, 125
leadership, 121
led innovation, 116, 118
management processes, 122
process, 118, 120
Visual
compatibility, 192
computing paradigms, 190
content logic, 200
computable world models, 203
learning from multimedia data, 
203
models, 201
relevant KR visual business 
objects, 202
context, 235
data, 191, 219, 243
bases, 191, 204, 205
DB asset management model, 211
description tools, 218
dynamics, 192, 233
KR diagrams for relevant world 
models, 192
multimedia databases, 192
expressions, 223
features, 196, 197
field, 225
haptic encoding, 239
linguistics components, 231
object perception dynamics, 224
structures, 223, 224
Visualization, 100, 203, 230
Vocabulary definitions, 219, 232
Vocational educational establishments, 
87
Voluntary
basis, 81
norms, 47
VR computing, 236, 242, 244
W
Wavlet transformations, 197
Web
based solution, 211
component presentation, 196
content, 196, 217, 219
development, 121
environments, 196
information systems, 196
metadata, 195
resources, 195, 196
site, 196
technology, 219
Webster’s New World Dictionary, 14
WHO, 158, 185
Windows
analytics, 220
server, 152
World Bank, 16
World Wide Web, 195

Wrappers model legacy data, 212
X
XML content, 197
XML parser, 214
EXtreme programming (XP), 50
Index	
263

