
ECSTATIC RELIGION
THIRD EDITION
States of spirit possession, in which believers feel themselves to be
‘possessed’ by the deity and raised to a new plane of existence, are found
in almost all known religions. From Dionysiac cults to Haitian voodoo,
Christian and Sufi mysticism to shamanic ritual, the rapture and frenzy of
ecstatic experience forms an iconic expression of faith in all its
devastating power and unpredictability. Ecstatic Religion has, since its
first appearance in 1971, become the classic investigative study of these
puzzling phenomena. Exploring the social and political significance of
spiritual ecstasy and possession, it considers the distinct types and
functions of mystical experience—in particular, the differences between
powerful male-dominated possession cults which reinforce established
morality and power, and marginal, renegade ecstatics expressing forms
of protest on behalf of the oppressed, especially women.
I.M.Lewis’s wide-ranging comparative study looks at the psychological,
medical, aesthetic, religious and cultural aspects of possession, and
covers themes including soul-loss, ecstatic trance, divination, erotic
passion and exorcism. Probing the mysteries of spirit possession through
the critical lens of anthropological and sociological theory, this fully
revised and expanded Third Edition is of crucial importance for students
of psychology, sociology, religious mysticism and shamanism.
I.M.Lewis, a former Professor of Anthropology and head of
department at the London School of Economics, is the author of several
works on anthropology and religion including Religion in Context
(1996) and Blood and Bone (1994).


ECSTATIC RELIGION
A Study of Shamanism and
Spirit Possession
Third Edition
I.M.LEWIS
Routledge
Taylor & Francis Group
LONDON AND NEW YORK 

First published 1971
by Penguin Books
 
Second edition published 1989
by Routledge
 
Third edition published 2003
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
 
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
29 West 35th Street, New York NY 10001
 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
 
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2003.
 
© 1971, 1989 and 2003 I.M.Lewis
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means,
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording,
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publishers.
 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Lewis, I.M.
Ecstatic religion: a study of shamanism and spirit possession/
I.M.Lewis.—3rd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-415-30508-X (hb)—ISBN 0-415-30124-6 (pbk.)
1. Ecstasy. 2. Shamanism. 3. Spirit possession.
4. Religion and sociology. I. Title.
BL626 .L48 2003
306.6´9142–dc21 
2002027542
 
ISBN 0-203-24108-8 Master e-book ISBN
 
 
 
ISBN 0-203-55781-6 (Adobe eReader Format)
ISBN 0-415-30124-6 (PB)
ISBN 0-415-30508-X (HB)

For Ann

‘Pour soulever les hommes il faut avoir le diable au corps’
BAKUNIN 

vii
CONTENTS
Preface to the third edition
ix
1—TOWARDS A SOCIOLOGY OF ECSTASY
15
2—TRANCE AND POSSESSION
32
3—AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
59
4—STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK:
PROTEST AND ITS CONTAINMENT
90
5—POSSESSION AND PUBLIC MORALITY—
I ANCESTOR CULTS
114
6—POSSESSION AND PUBLIC MORALITY—
II OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
134
7—POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
160
Bibliography
185
Index
195


ix
PREFACE TO THE
THIRD EDITION
I
Since the last edition of this book in 1989, the ‘possession’ of human
beings by alien spirits, an exotic condition that seemed to have virtually
disappeared from Western culture, returned with a bang in the shape of
what psychiatrists call ‘Multiple Personality Disorder’. This striking
phenomenon of contemporary, especially American, life, involving
possession by an assorted collection of spirit entities (including
frequently aliens), with its specialist diagnosticians and therapists, has
become big business. It is legitimated and promoted by a mushrooming
popular literature and by highly successful films such as ‘The three
faces of Eve’, ‘Rosemary’s Baby’, ‘Alien’, ‘Others’ etc.
The current appeal of New Age beliefs and practices has encouraged a
similar, if more exclusive, market for ‘Neo-Shamanism’, as individuals
and groups in contemporary Western society adapt what they take to be
exotic shamanistic lore for ritual healing and other spiritual purposes (cf.
Pen-in, 1995; Jakobsen, 1999; Ogudina, 1999). This is a kind of ‘psychic
aerobics’ as Clifton (1989) dubs ‘armchair shamanism’, and if you have
the money to spare, you can enrol in practical courses and not only at
such famous sites as Big Sur in California. Successful Western
entrepreneurs even finance international conferences for academic
researchers on ‘traditional’ shamanism (the real mackay), as well as for
practitioners like themselves. This is truly the era of guru globalisation!
For its part, Multiple Personality Disorder connects with another
popular contemporary preoccupation: satanism. The standard explanation
of MPD by its diagnosticians and therapists is in terms of childhood sexual
assault, often in a satanic ritual context. Typically, therapy which is
designed to recover repressed memories, often with the aid of hypnotism,
reveals that the patient, typically a female, was sexually abused in

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
x
childhood by a senior male relative, usually the father. By the early 1990s,
therapists claimed that a quarter of the estimated MPD 200,000 victims in
the US were survivors of ritual Satanic abuse (Schnabel, 1994). This
interpretation revives Freud’s early theory that hysteria, in later life, is a
consequence of childhood sexual abuse. Freud himself, of course, later
revised this formulation, treating the theme of child sexual abuse by a
parent as, in the Oedipus context, an extremely powerful wish-fulfilling
fantasy, not an actual fact. Without this crucial reclassification of childhood
incest as a fantasy rather than reality, as the feminist analyst Juliet Mitchell
(2000) points out, there would have been no scope for the elaboration of
the key constructs of Freudian psychoanalysis.
This new (or revisionist) version of Freud’s theory casts the parent
(usually the father) in the unenviable role of incestuous child molester—a
very powerful denunciation by the ‘innocent’ MPD ‘victim’ (Ross, 1995).
This terrifying scenario, with its normally disastrous outcome for the
accused parents or other relatives, whose lives are usually literally
destroyed in the wake of the accusations, has striking parallels with the
social dynamics of possession and witchcraft in many Third World cultures
which we explore later in this book (cf. also Lewis, 1996; Littlewood,
1996). As we shall see, witchcraft accusations (by definition implying
incest) may be made by spirit-possessed victims, when the latter impute
their possession illness to the malevolent acts of a ‘witch’ (in the case of
MPD a parent). In these circumstances, the effect of the accusation is to
deny or destroy the relationship which, of course, is exactly what happens
when therapists encourage their MPD patients to ‘recover’ memories of
sexual abuse by a father or other male relative. The presenting symptoms
of this fashionable malady, in a climate strongly interested in ‘satanism’
and UFO’s, also often include possession by aliens as well as less exotic
human agents (see Schnabel, 1994). ‘Alien’ is of course a relative term and
spirit entities of various degrees and kinds of alienness are commonplace in
possession cosmologies in the Third World.
Over the thirteen years since the last edition of this book, there has been
an impressive growth of anthropological (and other) literature on both
spirit possession and shamanism, as the bibliographical surveys referred to
at the end of this preface indicate. The Sudanese/Ethiopian zar/bori cult to
whose inspiration this book owes so much, has been further studied and
analysed by a number of anthropologists and historians (see Lewis, al-Safi
and Hurreiz, eds. 1991). In terms of new fieldwork, the rich study by
Boddy (1989) in a Sudanese village in 1977 and 1984 deserves particular
mention as the fullest ethnographic account so far published. Boddy treats

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xi
the spirit cult as ‘counter hegemonic’ for women in the male dominated
local Islamic context. Sudanese women, she claims, are culturally ‘over-
determined’ to be fertility objects where their socialisation deprives them
of any sense of individuality and fails to provide them with a way of
dealing ‘conceptually and actively with infertility, or other significant
contraventions of femininity’. By preventing pregnancy and causing
premature and still births, as is believed locally, zar spirits assume
responsibility for disrupting human fertility. Possession, thus, lifts from the
women’s shoulders a measure of responsibility for reproduction. At the
same time, by paying for the woman’s treatment, her husband and kin are
forced to acknowledge some liability.
Thus far Boddy repeats previous analyses (cf. below, pp.90–114).
But she seeks to go further, invoking literary analogies to treat
possession and trance episodes as ‘texts’ (as advocated by her
colleague, M.Lambeck, 1981). More daringly, she claims that Sudanese
spirit possession is designed to promote free-thinking, encouraging
reflection on the taken-for-granted world by the possessed, and thus
promotes enhanced self-consciousness. In consequence, oppressed
women are led to enjoy ‘more felicitous outcomes in their encounters
with others’. However, no evidence is offered in this ambitious account
to suggest that in consequence of the intellectual refocusing or re-
framing postulated, possessed women do actually think and feel
differently. Boddy does not provide information on how women
comport themselves, and on what they say about themselves and others
before and after their possession experiences.
This rather precious ‘literary’ analysis thus conceals the familiar ‘If I
were a horse’ series of suppositions (cf. Lewis, 1990). Indeed, as a number
of other critics have noted, Boddy slips back into the kind of analysis she
sets out to replace. Possession for her is an ‘allegory’, the ‘words and
dances of mediums refer “allegorically” to social factors such as gender,
class and personal history’ (Nourse, 1996). She thus remains imprisoned
by her own intellectual perceptions, and the spirit realities she sets out to
explore remain ‘interpretatively opaque’ as Karp (1990, p.79) delicately
puts it. It is a pity that she did not concentrate more on the conceptions of
the Sudanese women themselves with more substantial ethnographic
reporting. Adopting the historical approach to how possession and the
spirit galaxy respond to social change which I have long advocated (below,
pp. 121ff), Makris (2000) documents the associated tumbura possession
cult. This involves marginalised men and women of slave descent in the
urban Sudan, and extends our understanding of zar-bori and its derivatives.

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xii
So many historical figures—General Gordon, Earl Cromer, the Pashas and
other characters expressive of the Anglo-Egyptian period people the zar/
bori cosmology that it is impossible not to view it, in part, as a kind of
historiography of ‘repressed memories’. (On the wider geographical and
historical reach of this multifaceted subterranean cult linked to various
kinds of social exclusion in Islam in Africa and the Middle East, see Lewis,
al-Safi and Hurreiz, eds. 1991.)
Possession in other areas of the world continues to be identified,
documented and analysed, generating a rapidly expanding, if uneven
literature. As has recently been observed in a Latin American context,
this ramifying written documentation (as well as a host of films and
recordings of possession music), shows inter alia how anthropologists
are prone to reproduce ‘their own logic, converting the possessed into a
medium through which they speak to their own (anthropological)
agenda’. (Placido, 2001, p.208). Possession studies do thus indeed tend
to mirror the current fashions of anthropological theory and, if we are
not careful, the voices of those we seek to report are in danger of being
silenced as we pursue our own ethnocentric preoccupations.
II
This undesirable tendency seems to me to be especially promoted by the
vogue for Post-Modernist ‘interpretative writing’ which certainly reveals
much about the anthropological writer, but often disappointingly little
about his or her informants (cf. Lewis, 1999). A number of the more
recent possession studies follow the literary style criticised above,
privileging the possessed persons utterances as ‘texts’ in a wider
‘discourse’, while tending to ignore, or undervalue, the dramatic
character of the séance in which they take place, and the roles played by
key performers in possession ritual (contrast, for instance, the collection
of self-consciously interpretative essays assembled by Behrend and Luig,
1999, with the more staid, but more scholarly collection of Mastromattei,
1999). What the possessing spirits actually say, as they in effect speak for
their human vehicles, is obviously an important initial clue to
understanding what is going on as we emphasise in this book. But, this is
only part of the picture in any satisfactory sociology of possession which
must ask ‘what do the women and men involved in possession
themselves think it is about? In what circumstances do people become
possessed? What are the social (and political) implications of possession?
How does it demonstrably affect peoples’ lives?’ The textual, ‘cultural

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xiii
account’ approach does not adequately elucidate these questions. A case
in point is Kapferer’s (1983) unconvincing attempt to explain the
prevalence of possessed female victims in Buddhist Sri Lanka in terms of
what he calls ‘cultural typification’ which, he claims, ‘places women in a
special and significant relation with the demonic’. This observation
should be the starting point, not the end of analysis. As Isabelle Nabokov
(1997, p.298) shrewdly remarks, Kapferer fails to explain why ‘it is not
women as a whole, but predominantly new brides who are most at risk’.
The difficulties of their novel marital situation, and their ‘emotional
entrapment’ makes them especially vulnerable to seduction by hedonistic
spirits who, not only sexually enjoy their victims, but also incite them to
resist the sexual attentions of their legitimate mortal spouses. Hence
culturological accounts—which may reproduce local social
representations and stereotypes (e.g. women are especially vulnerable to
possession)—do not in themselves explain the incidence of possession
which is the prime sociological concern. The key question in that context
is: Why new brides rather than other women? The answer, as suggested,
lies in the difficulties some brides experience in adapting to their new
marital situation, especially if the husband proves to be unsatisfactory.
This book seeks to answer such questions in relation to possession
and shamanism, viewing both as social rather than specifically cultural
phenomena, exploring which social categories of people are most
vulnerable to spirits, and what social consequences follow from this.
We also examine how the character of possessing spirits relates to the
social circumstances of the possessed.
Here, since as we shall see, shamans are regularly possessed, I reject
Luc de Heusch’s outright ‘dialectical’ distinction between possession
and shamanism (which follows Mircea Eliade’s classical dichotomy,
based on the latter’s misreading of the relevant primary sources). But, I
adopt (with reservations) de Heusch’s valuable insights into the
implications of responding to possession by exorcism, as distinct from
the contrary process of domesticating spirits, which he calls ‘adorcism’.
Interest in how these cults based on adopting rather than expelling
spirits, develop from an initial traumatic experience into what are often
effectively mystery religions, does not commit the researcher to a
medical interpretation of possession.
Nor, pace Boddy (1994, p.410) do I see how my sociological
distinction between main and marginal cults contributes to a
‘medicalization’ of possession (cf. Csordas, 1987). The differentiation
(which is relative) between ‘central’ and ‘peripheral’ cults (discussed

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xiv
more fully in chapters 5 and 6) does not rest on their therapeutic (or
medical) scope, but on whether they are inspired by spirits which directly
uphold public morality (central) or those ‘peripheral’ agencies that
threaten public order. For an alternative formulation of this distinction
see Kramer (1993). Defined by their social significance, the former
constitute shamanistic religions, the latter subversive marginal cults
(albeit internally perceived as ‘secret religions’).
It would be perverse, moreover, to ignore the explicit views of those
involved who choose to present possession as therapeutic and in modern
terms ‘medical’ (cf. de Heusch, 1997). This comes out clearly in
Brown’s (1986) study of Brazilian Umbanda where spirit mediums wear
nurses’ uniforms and, in the name of their spirits, hold clinics for
spiritual healing. In a recent short field-study in Malaysia, I found exactly
the same ‘medicalization’ well established in the healing practise of
spirit-inspired bomohs with ‘clinics’ modelled on those of local doctors.
This criticism seems all the more surprising since the ensuing pages
emphasise, how gender influences the interpretation of possession, and
the manner in which an initially negative possession indisposition is
regularly transformed retrospectively into a beatific revelation. In male
chauvinist societies, women’s secret religions are apt to be represented
to outsiders (especially males) as harmless therapies, whose practise is
in everyone’s interest. I readily confess, also, an interest in the
psychiatric significance of possession. But, following Shirokogoroff
and others, I argue that Western psychiatry (and especially
psychoanalysis) constitutes an alternative framework for understanding
perceptions and behaviour which elsewhere are couched in the
language and logic of spirit possession (cf. Littlewood and Lipsedge,
1982). As Shirokogoroff long ago put it, ‘spirits are hypotheses’.
Typically, possession makes its initial appearance as a traumatic
experience, even a crippling ‘illness’, or other personal disaster.
However, the ensuing definition and redefinition of this involuntary spirit
intrusion depends upon how the onset symptoms respond to subsequent
treatment and the changing condition of the possessed victim. Where the
forces at play are initially interpreted as dangerous and terrifying,
exorcism is the preferred response (particularly by men). If this proves
ineffective, treatment switches to attempting to reach an accommodation
with the spirit, placating and domesticating it, by paying it cult
(adorcism). As the cliché has it, what begins in agony ends in ecstasy.
According to her own testimony, this was the case with the famous
Christian mystic St. Teresa of Avila (1515–1582) whose initial

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xv
experiences were fraught with pain and difficulty. Her most sublime
transports, however, she describes as unfolding in three phases: ‘union’,
‘rapture’, and the climatic ‘wound of love’. De Heusch refers to her as a
mystic spouse, devoured by amorous passion. But she also had an
extremely ambitious and powerful personality and steely determination
as well as practical skills. These qualities, which led to her being
regularly referred to as ‘Eagle and Dove’, were amply displayed in her
campaign to establish the reformed (barefoot) Carmelite movement.
Her family background would not, however, have indicated such a
career. As has recently been highlighted by the American philosopher
Evan Fales (1996), St. Teresa was a member of a family forced to convert
from Judaism to Christianity during the religious persecutions of the
Inquisition in fifteenth century Spain. As a woman, a spinster and
convert, despite her family’s wealth, she was in several significant
respects a marginal figure, and like her counterparts in traditional
societies, a strong candidate for spiritual attention. Against the patriarchal
odds of her times, she appears to have successfully mobilised her
spiritual intimacy with Christ to legitimise her sharp political criticism of
the aristocratic power structure of the Spanish monarchy, based as it was
on the concept of ‘honour’. Fales adopts the general arguments of this
book to claim that the empowerment, conferred by possession on those
disadvantaged by gender and other social disabilities, provides an
adequate explanation of mystical experience. This, he contends, is more
logically compelling and inherently plausible than taking religious
experience at face value as conclusive evidence for the existence of God.
Although his argument goes somewhat beyond the more limited
objectives of this book, it is gratifying that our study should be cited in
this philosophical debate on the existential status of theistic beliefs!
III
As a rebellious figure, the ecstatic experiences of St. Teresa (canonised
after her death) always risked being refuted, and re-classified by the
ecclesiastical authorities as demonic episodes. Had St Teresa been less
successful in treading this tightrope, she would almost certainly have
been subject to exorcism. Exorcism, which we see as the logical opposite
to adorcism, is indeed frequently employed to control and contain unruly
and excessively enthusiastic ecstatics (especially women).
This is particularly marked in strongly patriarchal traditional cultures
where exorcism is gender-biased and is the preferred treatment applied by

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xvi
husbands to treat their possessed wives. Men clearly sense the rebellious
undertones (which we discuss in detail in later pages) and seek to respond
by re-imposing patriarchal order and obedience. Nabokov, cited above,
provides a convincing account of this situation amongst the Tamils of
southern India. An equally telling literary demonstration comes from the
famous eleventh century classic The Tale of the Gengi where the brilliant
female author, Murasaki Shikibu (‘Japan’s Shakespeare’), shows how in
the Heian period (794–1186), spirit possession (mono noke) was rampant
amongst the grand ladies of the imperial court. In this patriarchal,
polygynous society, this ‘woman’s weapon’, as Doris Bargen (1997) puts it
in her magisterial study, was invoked to counter incestuous transgression
by male nobility and courtiers and the unwelcome attentions of peeping-
toms. However distant in time, and space and culture this was evidently
thus not all that remote in its aetiology from Multiple Personality Disorder.
This women’s condition in ancient Japanese society was not, it seems,
allowed to flourish into a full-blown female cult. It was held in check by
the vigorous practise of exorcism, mainly by male priests.
Nevertheless, the picture here is complicated. For women, initiated
as spirit mediums, usually served as vehicles for the spirits possessing
the victim. The possessing spirits then spoke and acted on their behalf
during the drama of exorcism so that: ‘the possessed, the possessing
spirits, and the medium formed a powerful female triad engaged in
resolving gender-related conflict’ (Bargen, 1997, p.15).
Despite their logical opposition and the sociological value of de
Heusch’s division between exorcism and adorcism, when we examine a
wider range of evidence carefully, it becomes evident that the contrast is
less clear cut than at first appeared. This is not simply, as de Heusch
(1997) himself appears to suppose in a recent revision of his schema,
that, as we have seen from a gender perspective, both exorcism and
adorcism regularly operate as alternative procedures in the same society.
This fuller complexity becomes evident when we turn to modern Japan,
where possession is one of the commonest problems leading women to
join the exorcistic ‘New Religions’, often themselves founded by
women. Members of these religions are not exorcised once and for all
but, rather, repeatedly attend their exorcistic rituals. This, obviously,
makes the status of exorcism problematic. We find the same phenomena
in the Catholic exorcisms performed in Rome (until in 2001 the Vatican
refused to allow him to practise) by the well-known African Archbishop
Milingo (Lanternari, 1988; ter Haar and Ellis, 1988). Similar cases of the
same individuals repeatedly attending the same ‘exorcistic’ rites and

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xvii
experiencing ecstatic ‘possession’ on each occasion are reported in the
north African cult of Islamic saints (Virolles-Souibes, 1986; Ferchiou,
1991; Hell, 1997).
In such cases, although carried out in the name of the local established
male-dominated religion, repeated exorcism seems paradoxically to
stimulate and clandestinely incorporate (and effectively co-opt) what
amounts to an implicit ecstatic cult. If as I argue, exorcism is regularly
employed to control wayward female mystical tendencies (and those of
men of similar subordinate status), and adorcism does not succeed in
achieving a formal existence, it may nevertheless surface as an
undercurrent within the process of exorcism itself (cf. Bastide, 1972, p.
102). When we look more closely at the mechanics of exorcism this
paradox is not as surprising as it first appears. For, as we note later in this
book, possession is usually expected to reach a dramatic climax at the
critical moment when the struggle between the exorcist and the
possessing spirit is about to culminate in the expulsion of the latter.
Exorcism, thus, paradoxically serves to stimulate possession trance.
Since expulsion (exorcism) and induction (adorcism) may in their trance
manifestations coincide, the essential ambiguity of these two formally
opposite processes becomes apparent. This helps to explain why
professional exorcists seem usually to be regarded as ambiguous,
potentially dangerous figures of uncertain moral virtue.
This also recalls the essential ambivalence of the typical initial
possession experience, at first in the form of a terrifying trauma or
illness, but which once brought under control, and mastered, signifies the
attention of the Gods and the onset of the inspired healer’s career. This is
how the leaders of women’s spirit cults are recruited and accredited. It is
equally the standard route to the assumption of the male shaman’s career.
In the Christian tradition, we see a typical example in the case of the
divine calling of the Apostle Paul, whose shamanistic conversion on the
road to Damascus, as John Ashton (2000) argues in his exciting new
study, is clearly recorded in the famous revelatory passage in Romans
7:13–25. The term shaman, as we see later (pp.45–50), comes originally
from the Tungus reindeer herders of Siberia, who for centuries have
provided the locus classicus of shamanism. As explained by specialists
on Tungus culture and language, this originally ethnographically specific
term, meaning a spirit inspired priest and healer, comes from the root
sam signifying the violent bodily movement and agitated dancing of the
shaman as he vigorously beats his drum to summon the spirits to his
séance. According to the French Tungus specialist, Roberte Hamayon

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xviii
(1990), in the séance which is highly charged with sexual symbolism, the
shaman wears the animal skin of one of his spirits to whom he is
‘married’, and his dramatic movements in his dance mime the act of
rutting with this spirit partner. This more recent and admirably detailed
documentation confirms the classic account of the Russian medical
doctor and pioneering ethnologist, S.M.Shirokogoroff, to whom we owe
our fundamental understanding of the spirit-inspired shaman. We may
note in passing that Hamayon seeks to question the significance of the
shaman’s ‘trance’ experience. Despite its obvious sexual appropriateness
as signalling the climax of the shaman’s dance with his spirit partner, she
claims that trance is a psychological phenomenon beyond the scrutiny of
anthropology. This idiosyncratic view, criticised by de Heusch and
Rouget, seems irrelevant to the séance drama where what is at issue is
not whether or not the shaman is ‘really’ in trance but the effectiveness of
his performance (see Lewis, 2002).
IV
Some years ago, faced with the difficulty of defining Social Anthropology,
a witty commentator opted for a ‘functionalist’ definition as ‘what social
anthropologists do’. Rather similarly from the sociological perspective
advocated in this book, we can define shamanism as the work of shamans
who, as we see, are spirit-inspired priests (masters of spirits). This view
emphasises the coincident importance of spirit possession and rejects the
shaman’s ‘celestial voyage’, as the determining feature insisted on by
Eliade and his successors. As we see below, Shirokogoroff and other first-
hand sources (which Eliade was not) describe the shaman’s mystical
voyages, with the aid of his spirits, as travelling both above and below, as
well as on our terrestrial world. Unlike the tradition generally pursued by
historians of religion, in privileging the shaman’s role we detach it from
any particular cosmology. The former culturological approach, which is
natural to American anthropology, has other disadvantages to which I
return in a moment.
In firmly following Shirokogoroff I also follow a more recent Siberian
specialist who, writing after the publication of the first edition of this
book, says: ‘To be a shaman does not signify professing particular
beliefs, but rather refers to a certain mode of communication with the
supernatural’ (Lot-Falck, 1973). The supposed mutually exclusive
distinction between spirit possession religions and shamanic ones was
first mooted by Eliade, and then developed by de Heusch in his

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xix
imaginative model contrasting ecstatic religiosity with spirit possession
which we examine later. Both writers share the view that shamanism
necessarily involves celestial voyages, whereas as an incarnation,
possession is an earth-bound phenomenon. Celestial flight, they argue,
excludes spirit possession: but, in fact, as we emphasise, possessing
spirits may take their human hosts (in one form or another) on exciting
spirit trips to the heavens as well as elsewhere. De Heusch applies this
false dichotomy to develop his structuralist theory of religion, in which
shamanism and possession feature as opposed ‘metaphysics’, and the
former is seen primarily as a culturally specific Tungus product. As
indicated, I prefer to see shamanism as a general, cross-cultural
phenomenon based on the shaman’s mastery of spirits and the practise of
his art with the aid of spirits. In common with other charismatic figures,
‘mastery’ here is never a secure property, since it is regularly contested,
making the shaman’s role inherently insecure and problematic.
The old-fashioned view of shamanism, emphasising mystical flight,
still continues to haunt the writings of historians of European religion as
well as some historians of early society. These include the influential
Italian historian, Carlo Ginzburg (1989), whose neo-Frazerian fantasy,
Storia Notturna (English title: Ecstasies), conjures up a misty ‘shamanic’
complex, rooted in early Europe and with wide-flung tentacles in time
and space, to explain the ecstatic features of the ‘witch’s Sabbath’ in
sixteenth century Italian popular culture. Inevitably, as Ginzburg
acknowledges, this remarkable enterprise recalls the theories on
European witchcraft of the English folklorist Margaret Murray (1962).
Her discredited notion of a pan-European fertility cult, associated with
the Goddess Diana, with significant traces surviving into modern times,
is too well-known to require further comment here. As we see below
witchcraft is in fact very often linked with spirit possession, but this topic
is rather undeveloped in Ginzburg’s notion of shamanism. A number of
Italian anthropologists have remarked on this omission. They point out
that this neglect is all the more surprising given the well-known
prominence in southern Italian popular culture of the cult of tarantism,
involving possession by the hybrid tarantula spider—Saint Paul (Pizza,
1995, 1997; see also below, pp.81–83).
Nevertheless, the artificiality, as I hold, of separating possession and
shamanism in water-tight compartments, seems to be becoming
increasingly evident to specialists in these fields, especially those who
study religion as a social phenomenon (cf. Johansen, 1999). Here
feminist analyses have contributed by pointing out that ‘shamanism’ has

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xx
tended to be invoked where male priests are involved, in contrast to
possession dominated by women. Since men also experience possession
(and trance), it cannot, however, be the case that possession is inherently
gendered and rooted in the female’s physical experience of heterosexual
intercourse and pregnancy (see Sered, 1994, p. 190). By the same token,
as ‘masters of spirits’, shamans might be expected always to be cast as
‘husbands’ in their unions with spirits. But this is by no means inevitably
the case, the superior status of spirits vis à vis mortals is often expressed
by classifying their shaman partners (irrespective of sex) as ‘wives’. The
gender of their human hosts may also change in the course of a séance as
they are possessed in succession by male or female deities.
Beyond gender, consideration of the wider political co-ordinates of
shamanism (advocated in this book) is increasingly explored in a
number of recent publications often, but not always, in the neo-Marxist
political-economy style (see e.g. Atkinson, 1989; Balzer, 1990; Santos-
Granero, 1991; Thomas and Humphrey, 1994; Taussig, 1987). This
work does not usually exclude spirit possession but treats it as a related
and, frequently linked socio-political phenomenon.
In America, however, where the term ‘shamanism’ has been much
more widely used than in Britain, the ambient culturological bias tends
to encourage the separate treatment of the two phenomena (for a useful
survey of the field see Atkinson, 1992). Illustrating yet again the
dominance of the cultural over the social paradigm in American
anthropology, Atkinson also seeks to represent the culturally distinct
varieties of shamanism she recognises as so many ‘shamanisms’, thus
side-stepping the core definition, based on the shaman’s role, which
our sociological approach advocates.
Yet, despite this American tendency to celebrate cultural specificity,
it is probably significant that an increasing number of international
conferences and collected papers by academic specialists breach the
gap, here following the sensible lead of the open-minded International
Society for Shamanic Research and the policy of its journal, Shaman.
Finally, it is gratifying to note that Janice Boddy’s (1994) review of
the field should judge that in the analysis of possession, ‘the model and
assumptions’ set out in this book ‘have guided a generation of
scholarship’. As our subject—possession-shamanism (‘ecstatic religion’,
for short) continues to develop with new material and new analyses, I
hope that these ideas may continue to have some utility. Above all, I hope
that they may serve as a guide to what is known and, therefore, does not
need to be re-invented by young researchers seeking a novel topic. The

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xxi
existing literature on possession and shamanism is truly vast. But like the
shaman’s guiding spirits, this store of knowledge requires to be
convincingly mastered by those who aspire to add significantly to it, thus
contributing further to our understanding of possession and shamanism.
loan Lewis
London, December 2001
References
Aigle, D., Brae de la Perriere, B., and. Chaumeil, J-P., La Politique des Esprits,
Paris, Societe d’Ethnologie, 2000
Arens, W. and Karp, I. (eds) The Creativity of Power, Washington, Smithsonian
Institute, 1989
Atkinson, J.M., The Art and Politics of Wana shamanship, Berkeley, University
of California Press, 1989
——‘Shamanisms Today’, Annual Review of Anthropology, vol. 21, 1992,
pp.307–330.
Balzer, M. (ed.) Shamanism: Soviet Studies of Traditional Religion in Siberia
and Central Asia, London, M.E.Sharp Inc., 1990
Bargen, D.G. A Woman’s weapon: Spirit Possession in the Tale of the Gengi,
Honolulu, University of Hawai Press, 1997
Bastide, R. Le Reve, La Transe, et la Folie, Paris, Flamarion, 1972
Behrend, H. and Luig, U. (eds), Spirit Possession, Modernity, and Power in
Africa, Oxford, James Curry, 1999
Boddy, J. ‘Spirit Possession Revisited: Beyond instrumentality’, Annual Review
of Anthropology, vol. 23, 1994, pp. 407–34
Brown, D.G.Umbanda: Religion And Politics in Urban Brazil, Ann Arbor,
University of Michigan Press, 1986
Csordas, T. ‘Health and the body in African and Afro-American spirit
possession’, Social Science and Medicine, 24, (1), 1987, pp.1–11
Fales, E. ‘Scientific explanations of mystical experiences, Part I: the case of St.
Teresa’, Religious Studies, 32, 1996, pp.143–163
——‘Part II: the Challenge of Theism’, Religious Studies, 32, 1996, pp.299–313
Ferchiou, S. ‘The possession cults of Tunis’, in Lewis, I.M., al-Safi, A. and
Hurreiz, S. (eds), Women’s Medicine, Edinburgh University Press, 1991,
pp.209–219
Ginzburg, C. Storia Notturna, Turin, Einaudi, 1989 (English translation by R.
Rosenthal, Ecstasies: deciphering the witches’ sabbath, London, Penguin,
1992
Hacking, I., ‘Multiple Personality Disorder and its Hosts’, History of Human
Society, 5, pp.3–31, 1992

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xxii
Hamayon, R. La Chasse a l’ame, Paris, 1990
——‘Pour en finir avec la ‘transe’ at ‘l’extase’ dans l’etude du Chamanisme’, in
Beffa, M.I. and Even, M.D. Variations Chamaniques, 2, Paris, University of
Paris X, 1996
ter Haar, G. and Ellis, S. ‘Spirit possession and healing in modern Zambia’,
African Affairs, 87, 347, pp.185–206, 1988
Hell, B. Possession et Chamanisme: les Maitres de Desordre, Paris,
Flammarion, 1999
——‘travailler avec ses genies: de la possession sauvage a la possession
maitraise chez les Gnawa du Maroc’, in Aigle D. etc. (eds) La Politique des
Esprits, Paris, 2000, pp.411–434
Heusch, de L. ‘Pour en revenir a la Transe’, Paper given at the IVth ISSR
Conference on Shamanism, Chantilly, 1997
Jakobsen, M.D. Shamanism: traditional and contemporary approaches to the
mastery of Spirits and Healing, New York, Berghan Books, 1999
Johansen, U., ‘Further thoughts on the History of Shamanism’, Shaman, vol. 7,
No. 1, 1999, pp.40–58
Kapferer, B. A Celebration of Demons, Bloomington, Indiana University Press,
1983
Karp, I. in Jackson, M. and Karp, I. (eds) Women’s Medicine, Edinburgh
University Press, 1991
Kenny, M.G. The Passion of Ansel Bourne: Multiple Personality in American
Culture, Washington, Smithsonian Institution, 1986
Kramer, F. The Red Fez: Art and Spirit Possession in Africa, London, Verso,
1993
Lambek, M. Human Spirits: a Cultural Account of Trance in Mayotte,
Cambridge University Press, 1981
Lanternari, V. ‘L’Africa cattolica A Roma: il cuito terapeutico di Emmanuel
Milungo’, Metaxo, 6, pp.65–81, 1988
Lewis, I.M., ‘In the house of Spirits’, Times Literary Supplement, 1990
—— Arguments with Ethnography, London, Athlone Press, 1999
—— ‘Is there a shamanic Cosmology?’, in Mastromattei, R. and Rigopoulos,
R. (eds), Shamanic Cosmos, New Delhi, D.K. Printworld, Ltd., 1999, pp.
117–128
——‘Music, Trance, Shamanism and Sex’, in press, 2002
——Religion in Context, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1996
Lewis, I.M., al-Safi, A. and Hurreiz, S. (eds) Woman’s Medicine, Edinburgh
University Press, 1991
Littlewood, R. Reason’s necessity in the specification of the Multiple Self, RAI
Occasional Paper No. 43, London, 1996
Littlewood, R. and Lipsedge, M. Aliens and Alienists: ethnic minorities and
psychiatry, Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1982
Loftus, E. and Ketcham, K. (eds), The Myth of Repressed Memory: False

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xxiii
Memories and Allegations of Sexual Abuse, New York, St. Martin’s Press,
1994
Mageo, J.M. and Howard, A. (eds) Spirits in Culture History and Mind,
London, Routledge, 1996
Lot-Falck, E. ‘Le chamanisme en Siberie: essai de mise au point’, Asie du Sud-
Est et Monde Insulindien, 4, No.3, pp. 1–10
Mageo, J.M. ‘Spirit girls and Marines’: possession as historical discourse in
Samoa’, American Ethnologist, 23 (12), pp.61–82, 1996
Makris, G.P.Changing Masters. Spirit Possession and Identity Construction
among Slave Descendants and other Subordinates in the Sudan, Evanston,
Northwestern University Press, 2000
Masquelier, A. ‘Consumption, prostitution and reproduction: the poets of
sweetness in Bori (Niger)’, American Ethnologist, 22, pp.883–906, 1995
Mitchell, J., Mad Men and Medusas, London, Allen Lane, 2000
Murray, M., The Witch Cult in Western Europe, London, 1921
——The Witch Cult in Western Europe, Oxford University Press, 1962
Nabokov, I., ‘Expel the Lover, recover the wife: symbolic analysis of a South
Indian exorcism’, Journal Royal Anthropological Institute, vol. 3, No. 2, 1997
Nourse, R. ‘The voice of the winds versus the masters’ of cure: contested
notions of spirit possession among the Lauje of Sulawesi’, Journal Royal
Anthropological Institute, vol. 2, No. 3, 1996
Ogudina, G., ‘A look at the New Shamans’, in Mastromattei and Rigopoulos
(eds), Shamanic Cosmos, 1999, pp. 181–206
Perrin, M. Le Chamanisme (Que sais-je?), Paris, Presses Universitaires de
France, 1995
Pizza, G. ‘The Virgin and the Spider: Revisiting Spirit possession in southern
Europe’, unpublished ms., IVth Conference, International Society for
Shamanic Research, Chantilly, 1997
Placido, B. ‘It’s all to do with words: an analysis of spirit possession in the
Venezuelan cult of Maria Lionza’, Journal Royal Anthropological Institute,
7, 2, pp.207–224, 2001
Ross, C.A. Satanic Ritual Abuse: principles of treatment, Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 1995
Santos-Granero, F., The Power of Love: the moral use of knowledge amongst
the Amuesha of Central Peru, London, Athlone Press, 1991
Schnabel, J., Dark White: aliens, abductions, and the UFO obsession, London,
Hamish Hamilton, 1994
Sered, S.S., Priestess, Mother, Sacred Sister: Religions dominated by women,
New York, Oxford University Press, 1994
Shapiro, D.J., ‘Blood, oil, honey and water: symbolism in spirit-possession sects
in North East Brazil’, American Ethnologist, 22, No. 4, pp.828–847, 1995
Stoller, P. Embodying colonial memories: spirit possession, power and the
Hauka in West Africa, New York, Routledge, 1995

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xxiv
Virolle-Souibes, M. ‘Femmes, possession et chamanisme: exemples algeriens’
in Transe, Chamanisme, et possession, Nice, Editions Serre, 1986
Taussig, M. Shamanism, Colonialism, and the Wildman, Chicago University
Press, 1987
Thomas, N. and Humphrey, C. (eds.), Shamanism, History, and the State, Ann
Arbor, University of Michigan Press, 1994
Wafer, J. The Taste of Blood: Spirit Possession in Brazilian Candomble,
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1991

15
Chapter One
 
TOWARDS A SOCIOLOGY
OF ECSTASY
I
This book explores that most decisive and profound of all religious
dramas, the seizure of man by divinity. Such ecstatic encounters are by
no means uniformly encouraged in all religions. Yet it is difficult to find
a religion which has not, at some stage in its history, inspired in the
breasts of at least certain of its followers those transports of mystical
exaltation in which man’s whole being seems to fuse in a glorious
communion with the divinity. Transcendental experiences of this kind,
typically conceived of as states of ‘possession’, have given the mystic a
unique claim to direct experiential knowledge of the divine and, where
this is acknowledged by others, the authority to act as a privileged
channel of communication between man and the supernatural. The
accessory phenomena associated with such experiences, particularly the
‘speaking with tongues’, prophesying, clairvoyance, and transmission of
messages from the dead, and other mystical gifts, have naturally
attracted the attention not only of the devout but also of sceptics. For
many people, in fact, such phenomena seem to provide persuasive
evidence for the existence of a world transcending that of ordinary
everyday experience.
Despite the problems inevitably posed for established ecclesiastical
authority, it is easy to understand the strong attraction which religious
ecstacy has always exerted within and on the fringe of Christianity. We
can also readily appreciate how modern Spiritualism has won the
interest not only of Christians of all shades of opinion, but also of
agnostics and atheists. The comforting message that it ‘proves survival’
has much to do with its appeal for the recently bereaved; and this
obviously contributes to Spiritualism’s popularity in times of war and

ECSTATIC RELIGION
16
national calamity. Yet the phenomena in which it deals continue to
command the serious attention of experimental scientists. And if
scientists are prepared to give their cautious assent to some psychic
phenomena, we can scarcely be surprised that certain churchmen
should still search in the séance for conclusive proof of the divine
powers of Jesus Christ. Indeed, whether in the séances of suburbia, or
in more rarefied surroundings, those mystical experiences which resist
plausible rational interpretation are seen, even sometimes by cynics, as
pointing to the possibility that occult forces exist.
There is also a vast literature on the occult which has no doubts at
all on the matter. The metaphysical meaning of trance states has been
expounded by hundreds of writers in many languages and from many
different points of view. Something of the character of much of this
literature, or at least of that produced by enthusiastic partisans of the
occult, can be gauged from the breath-taking predictions made by the
editor of a popular book on trance (Wavell, 1967). ‘Once the use of
trance becomes as easily available as electricity,’ this writer assures us,
 
immense new opportunities potent for good or evil will be open
to all people. Conquests which spring to mind are those on which
we currently expend many of our resources—space travel,
physical and psychological warfare, espionage, pop music, and
mass organized leisure. Its greatest practical application may be
in space exploration…the light barrier …need prove no obstacle
to spirits of astronauts bent on visiting the other regions of the
universe.
 
Perhaps not. However, the golden age of trance which this inspired
writer foresees is not without its darker side. ‘Its greatest danger’, he
solemnly warns us, ‘lies in providing our planet, already divided into
hostile nations, with a new dimension for conflict-spirit hosts in mass
formations manipulated by demoniac shamans annihilating the human
race and all its hopes of reincarnation.’
This remarkable passage must seem on a different astral plane, to
put it mildly, from the secluded world of Origen, or any other of the
great Christian mystics. As recently as a decade ago it would also have
struck most people as ridiculous in the extreme. Today, however, such
seemingly far-fetched views are not so discordant with much of the
climate of opinion in which we live. Far from being relegated to
obscure publications on dusty shelves in seedy bookshops, as used to

TOWARDS A SOCIOLOGY OF ECSTASY
17
be the case, the occult is now very much part of the contemporary
scene. By the young, at any rate, the message of the Maharishi is
widely listened to—at least until it has been displaced in popularity by
some other brand of mysticism. In the same vein, the Sunday colour
supplements in Serious’ newspapers sententiously bid us contemplate
the therapeutic potentialities of healing magic and ‘white’ witchcraft;
some psychiatrists even rally to the cry: ‘Spiritualism proves survival’,
and a trendy bishop or two throws in his weight for extra measure.
Other indications point in the same direction. Scientology may be
more successfully organized as a business venture than most of the
Spiritualist churches which it succeeds and to some extent supplants.
But it has much in common with them in seeking to blend pseudo-
science and occult experience in that special package-deal which sells
so well today. These and a host of other new competing cults strive to
fill the gap left by the decline of established religion and to reassert the
primacy of mystical experience in the face of the dreary progress of
secularism. In thus appealing to the ever-present need for mystical
excitement and drama, these new sects naturally often find themselves
in conflict, not only with each other, but also with that longer
established rival, psychiatry, which has already taken over so many
functions formerly fulfilled by religion in our culture. Here the
fanatical rantings of Scientologists against psychiatry are a revealing, if
unreassuring, testimony to their rival common interests.
All this suggests that we live in an age of marginal mystical
recrudescence, a world where Humanists seem positively archaic. Our
vocabulary has been enriched, or at any rate added to, by a host of
popular mystical expressions which, if enshrined in the special argot of
the Underground, also spill over into general usage. We know what
‘freak-outs’ are, what ‘trips’ are, and any one who wants to can readily
participate in psychedelic happenings in dance halls with evocative
names like ‘Middle Earth’. Although much of this language relates to
drug-taking, in its original and more extended usage it also carries
strong mystical overtones. Certainly the Eskimo and Tungus shamans,
whom we consider later, would find a ready welcome in that most
successfully publicized sector of our contemporary society, the pop
scene. With its pronounced magical aura, and shamanic superstars like
Jimi Hendrix and the Beatles (cf. Taylor, 1985), in this clamorously
assertive sub-culture, far from being dismissed as excessive crudities of
questionable religious value, the trance and possession experiences of
exotic peoples are seriously considered, and often deliberately

ECSTATIC RELIGION
18
appropriated as exciting novel routes to ecstasy. It is thus perhaps not
surprising that readings from an earlier edition of this book were
included in the American public service religious radio series, ‘Rock
and Religion’, broadcast from Sacramento, California, in 1979.
II
In this eclectic climate little special pleading is needed to introduce an
anthropological study of trance and possession which, as the reader
would expect, draws many of its examples from exotic tribal religions.
Contrary to what might be anticipated, the fact that so much has already
been written on these topics, largely by historians of religion, provides an
added incentive for the development of a fresh approach. Most of these
writers have had other ends in view, and have consequently not been
concerned to pose the sort of question which the social anthropologist
automatically asks. Few of the more substantial works in this area of
comparative religion pause to consider how the production of religious
ecstasy might relate to the social circumstances of those who produce it;
how enthusiasm might wax and wane in different social conditions; or
what functions might flow from it in contrasting types of society. In a
word, most of these writers have been less interested in ecstasy as a
social fact than in ecstasy as an expression, if a sometimes questionable
one, of personal piety. And where they have ventured outside their own
native tradition to consider evidence from other cultures their approach
has generally been vitiated from the start by ethnocentric assumptions
about the superiority of their own religion. This is not to say that no
interesting sociological conclusions emerge from any of this work; but
rather where they do, it is more by accident than by design.
Let me illustrate and at the same time move towards the position
from which the arguments of this book stem. Here Ronald Knox’s
splendidly erudite study of Christian enthusiasm provides an excellent
starting point (Knox, 1950) Beginning with the Montanists, Knox
traces the erratic history of Christian enthusiasm, which he defines as a
definite type of spirituality. He makes no attempt to explain by
reference to other social factors the ebb and flow of ecstatic
phenomena—possession, speaking with tongues, and the rest—whose
wavering course he charts through so many centuries. These he views
as the inevitable product of an inherent human tendency, almost of a
failing—the disposition to religious emotionalism which John Wesley
summed up in the word ‘heart-work’. ‘The emotions must be stirred to

TOWARDS A SOCIOLOGY OF ECSTASY
19
their depths, at frequent intervals, by unaccountable feelings of
compunction, joy, peace, and so on, or how could you be certain that
the Divine touch was working within you?’ Knox is concerned to point
the moral that ecstasy is less a ‘wrong tendency’ than a ‘false
emphasis’. But if he stresses the dangers of an excessive and unbridled
enthusiasm, he also recognizes that organized religion must allow
ecstasy some scope if it is to retain its vitality and vigour. These are the
lessons which Knox seeks to impress upon the reader and which he
finds little difficulty in illustrating in the mass of evidence which he so
skilfully marshals.
Knox writes, as he says, primarily from a theological point of view.
Yet certain interesting sociological insights almost force themselves
upon him. Thus, with greater sociological perspicacity than Christian
charity, he sees enthusiasm as the means by which men continually
reassure themselves, and others, that God is with them. This view of
ecstasy, as a prestigious commodity which could readily be
manipulated for mundane ends, opens the door to the sort of
sociological treatment which this book advocates, and which I shall
enlarge upon shortly.
By confining his attention to the Christian tradition, and arguing in
effect that spirituality is to be judged by its fruits, Knox was not faced
with the problem of relating mystical experiences in other religions to
those in his own. This tendentious issue has been left to plague other
Christian authorities. Thus R.C.Zaehner (1957), the orientalist, has
boldly sought to establish criteria with which to assess objectively the
relative validity of a host of mystical encounters. The examples range
from the recorded experiences of celebrated Christian and oriental
mystics at one extreme, to the author’s own and Huxley’s experiments
with drugs at the other. The critical sophistication of his argument is
impressive, but the result is too predictable to be entirely convincing.
Indeed, only those who share his assurance will accept Zaehner’s
conclusion, that Christian mysticism represents a more lofty form of
transcendental experience than any other.
Not all Christian writers in this field are so adamant of course. Where
Zaehner re-erects and fortifies the barriers of Christian complacency,
Professor Elmer O’Brien’s concise and useful survey, mainly of
Christian mysticism, knocks them down again (O’Brien, 1965). Perhaps
because he is a professional theologian he can afford to be more tolerant
and practical. He is again concerned with the problem of establishing the
authenticity of different mystical experiences. But the homely recipes,

ECSTATIC RELIGION
20
which he recommends should be applied in the assessment of the mystic,
do not contain such glaring, inbuilt assumptions about the superiority of
Christian or any other experience. O’Brien suggests that the following
tests are crucial. First, the reputed mystical experience should be contrary
to the subject’s basic philosophical or theological position. Thus ‘when
the experience (as that of St Augustine) does not fit in at all with the
person’s speculative supposition, the chances are that it was a genuine
experience’. Secondly, the experience, which the would-be mystic
claims, is all the more convincing if it can be shown to be contrary to his
own wishes, and cannot then be dismissed simply as a direct wish-
fulfilment. Finally, the experience alone gives meaning and consistency
to the mystic’s doctrines.
Here, clearly, O’Brien is less concerned than Zaehner to pronounce
upon the quality of ecstatic experience in any final or ultimate sense.
His object is not to extol some brands of mysticism as superior, because
more fully endowed with divine authenticity than others, but simply to
provide criteria for distinguishing between the genuine and simulated
mystical vocation. Here involuntariness and spontaneity become the
touch-stones in assessment. It can, I think, be argued that O’Brien’s
first criterion depends too directly upon the special circumstances of
the Christian tradition to make it universally applicable in all cultural
contexts. But there is no doubt at all that in emphasizing the mystic’s
reluctance to assume the burdens of his vocation Professor O’Brien is
pointing to a characteristic which, as we shall see later, applies widely
in many different religions. Indeed it is a condition that most cultures
which encourage mysticism and trance take as axiomatic.
But if O’Brien’s tolerant catholicity can help to speed us on our path
towards the comparative study of divine possession in a wide range of
different cultures, his view of the incidence of mysticism seems to spell
disappointment to all our hopes. Where Knox assumed a constant if
partly regrettable human proclivity to indulge in enthusiasm, to some
extent varying in its expression in different social conditions, O’Brien
holds that apparent variations in the mystical ‘outputs’ of different ages
are an illusion. The explanation for the seeming lack or abundance of
mystics at any given period is ‘not that a time and place favourable to
mysticism brings mystics into existence’. On the contrary, it is merely a
question of whether more or less attention is paid to mystics in different
ages. Where mysticism is fashionable and accepted it is fully reported;
where it is not nobody bothers to keep any record of it.
This steady state theory of mystical productivity would, if it were

TOWARDS A SOCIOLOGY OF ECSTASY
21
correct, divorce transcendental experience from the social environment
in which it occurs and make totally irrelevant the sorts of sociological
questions which I have urged should be applied to the data. Indeed it
would almost close the door to sociological analysis; for all that would
be left to discuss would be the significance of changing fashions
concerning the desirability or otherwise of mystical experiences.
Powerful arguments against this stultifying conclusion come from a
direction from which social anthropologists do not always like to
accept help—psychology. T.K.Oesterreich, whose magisterial study of
possession within as well as outside the Christian tradition is the most
substantial work by a psychologist in this field, takes a very different
view (Oesterreich, 1930). Acknowledging the universal character of
possession phenomena, which he explains in terms of suggestion and
the development of multiple personalities in the self, Oesterreich
emphasizes how belief in the existence of spirits encourages psychic
experiences which are interpreted as possession by these spirits. These
transcendental encounters tend in turn to confirm the validity of the
pre-existing beliefs in the existence of spirits. As he says (p. 377):
 
By the artificial provocation of possession, primitive man has to a
certain degree had it in his power to procure voluntarily the
conscious presence of the metaphysical, and the desire to enjoy
that consciousness of the divine presence offers a strong incentive
to cultivate states of possession. In many cases it is probable that,
exactly as in modern Spiritualism, the impervious desires for
direct communication with departed ancestors and other relatives
also play a part. Possession begins to disappear among civilized
races as soon as belief in spirits loses its power. From the
moment that they cease to entertain seriously the possibility of
being possessed, the necessary auto-suggestion is lacking.
 
True enough. Yet as we now see in our own contemporary world, when,
through drugs and other stimuli, people find a ready means to achieve
trance states, these experiences quickly become invested with
metaphysical meaning (see e.g. Young, 1972). There are also striking
similarities in the patterns of imagery in which such experiences are
expressed (see Grof, 1977).
Writing over fifty years ago, Oesterreich thus pushes further along the
road towards a genuinely objective cross-cultural study of possession and
trance than any of the more recent authorities I have mentioned. He also

ECSTATIC RELIGION
22
confirms that we are right to pursue our aim of relating these phenomena
to the wider social circumstances in which they are produced. But if
Oesterreich makes the connection for us between ecstasy in the great
religions of the world and in the tribal religions studied by
anthropologists, it is naturally to the latter that we should look for
guidance in their own field. So far, however, the results of their labours
have been singularly disappointing. Only one major comparative work
has been produced—Mircea Eliade’s study, Shamanism and Archaic
Techniques of Ecstasy (Eliade, 1951). Here Eliade, who regards himself
as a historian of religions, traces easily and convincingly the many
common symbolic themes which occur in ecstatic cults in different
cultures. However, his concern with the internal structures of these
symbolic motifs and their historical relation leaves him little space for
sociological analysis. In fact, he candidly acknowledges that the
sociology of ecstasy has still to be written. The thirty years which have
elapsed since this harsh judgement was delivered have, I am afraid,
produced little that would require it to be revised.
III
At least until quite recently, anthropologists have scarcely displayed
any more interest in the sociology of possession and trance than their
colleagues who have studied these phenomena under the guise of
ecstasy or enthusiasm in other cultural traditions. With a few notable
exceptions they have thus simply not asked the important questions
which, I glibly asserted above, automatically roll off the tongues of
anthropologists. On the contrary, the majority of anthropological
writers on possession have been equally fascinated by its richly
dramatic elements, enthralled—one might almost say—by the more
bizarre and exotic shamanistic exercises, and absorbed in often quite
pointless debates as to the genuineness or otherwise of particular trance
states. Their main interest has been in the expressive or theatrical aspect
of possession; and they have frequently not even troubled to ask
themselves very closely what precisely was being ‘expressed’—except
of course a sense of identity with a supernatural power.
This fixation with all that is dramatic in possession contrasts sharply
with the social anthropologist’s approach to the study of witchcraft and
sorcery. In that dark corner of comparative religion where, at least in my
opinion, sociological research has made its most successful impact, the
anthropologist focuses squarely on the social nexus in which sorcery and

TOWARDS A SOCIOLOGY OF ECSTASY
23
witchcraft accusations are made. He passes beyond the beliefs to
examine the incidence of accusations in different social contexts. He is
thus able to show convincingly how witchcraft charges provide a means
of mystical attack in tension-fraught relationships, where other means of
pursuing conflict are inappropriate or unavailable. It is possible that this
objective and thoroughly sociological approach, which sees the accused
witch as the real victim rather than the ‘be-witched’ subject, is
encouraged by the simple fact that by and large anthropologists do not
themselves believe in the reality of witchcraft or sorcery. Where religious
ecstasy and all its many theatrical accessory manifestations are
concerned, however, many anthropologists appear to display a much
more open, and certainly a far less dispassionate attitude. This is even
true of those anthropologists who flaunt their atheism. For atheists, after
all, frequently believe in extra-sensory perception, if not in all the more
sensational manifestations of the occult.
For whatever reasons, the fact is that social anthropologists have in
general shown a quite remarkable reluctance to ask the really
significant questions when dealing with possession. This, of course, is
not to say that no sociological interpretation whatsoever has been
attempted. A number of anthropologists have considered the social role
of the possessed priest or ‘shaman’, and the manner in which religious
ecstasy may serve as the basis for a charismatic leader’s authority.
Others have emphasized the significance of the evasion of mortal
responsibility implied where decisions are made not by men, but by
gods speaking through them. And if some have stressed the
employment of ecstatic revelations to conserve and strengthen the
existing social order, others have shown how these can equally well be
applied to authorize innovation and change.
This short catalogue, however, practically exhausts the range of
most current preoccupations in the sociological study of possession.
The crucial bread-and-butter questions still remain to be asked. How
does the incidence of ecstasy relate to the social order? Is possession an
entirely arbitrary and idiosyncratic affair; or are particular social
categories of person more or less likely to be possessed? If so, and
possession can be shown to run in particular social grooves, what
follows from this? Why do people in certain social positions succumb
to possession more readily than others? What does ecstasy offer them?
It is these basic issues concerning the social context of possession that
this book examines.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
24
I referred earlier to the possible relevance of the anthropologist’s
personal equation in influencing his approach to his data. I hasten
therfore to say that the adoption of this sociological line of inquiry does
not necessarily imply that spirits are assumed to have no existential
reality. Above all, it is not suggested that such beliefs should be
dismissed as figments of the disordered imaginations of credulous
peoples. For those who believe in them, mystical powers are realities
both of thought and experience. My starting point, consequently, is
precisely that large numbers of people in many different parts of the
world do believe in gods and spirits. And I certainly do not presume to
contest the validity of their beliefs, or to imply, as some anthropologists
do, that such beliefs are so patently absurd that those who hold them do
not ‘really’ believe in them. My objective is not to explain away
religion. On the contrary, my purpose is simply to try to isolate the
particular social and other conditions which encourage the
development of an ecstatic emphasis in religion.
Nor, of course, have I any ambition to follow Zaehner or other
ethnocentric writers in seeking to distinguish between ‘higher’ and
‘lower’, or ‘more’ or ‘less’ authentic forms of ecstatic experience. The
anthropologist’s task is to discover what people believe in, and to relate
their beliefs operationally to other aspects of their culture and society.
He has neither the skills nor the authority to pronounce upon the
absolute ‘truth’ of ecstatic manifestations in different cultures. Nor is it
his business to assess whether other people’s perceptions of divine truth
are more or less compatible with those embodied in his own religious
heritage, whatever he may feel about the latter. Indeed I would go
further. Such judgements might be more fittingly left to the jurisdiction
of the powers which are held to inspire religious feeling. Certainly, at
least, it is not for the anthropologist to attempt to usurp the role of the
gods whose worship he studies.
Hence the reader who expects any cross-cultural calculus of the
relative authenticity of the ecstatic experiences discussed in this book
will be disappointed. Judgements concerning the truth or falsity of
inspiration will only be relevant to our sociological analysis where they
are made by the people in whose midst these experiences occur. Only
where the actors themselves hold that some ecstatic states are false,
whereas others are true, does this assessment form part of the evidence
which we have to consider.
Perhaps I should also add that in treating tribal and Christian beliefs,
and sometimes those of other world religions within the same frame of

TOWARDS A SOCIOLOGY OF ECSTASY
25
reference no disrespect is intended to the adherents of any of these
faiths. I can only ask that the validity of my comparisons should be
judged by their inherent plausibility, and by the extent to which they
contribute to the understanding of religious experience.
IV
I make these declarations because the study of religious enthusiasm is
peculiarly sensitive to subjective judgement. My slogan, if one is still
necessary, is: let those who believe in spirits and possesion speak for
themselves! Now let me summarize my argument which, I repeat, is
based on the assumption that, notwithstanding all its richly dramatic
aspects and, from one point of view, its highly personal character,
religious enthusiasm can be treated as a social phenomenon.
I begin in the next chapter by trying to unravel a number of largely
semantic confusions which bedevil the objective comparison of ecstatic
experiences, showing how the non-mystical conception of trance held
by medical science is shared by some tribal peoples, but not by others.
Those for whom trance connotes a mystical state tend to adopt one of
two partly conflicting theories. They consider that trance is due either
to the temporary absence of the subject’s soul (‘soul-loss’), or that it
represents possession by a supernatural power. The first interpretation
stresses a loss of personal vital force, a ‘de-possession’, the second
emphasizes an intrusion of external power. In some cultures both these
views are entertained simultaneously, so that the ‘de-possessed’ person
is ‘possessed’ by the spirit or power. For the most part, however, our
concern in this book is with those who regard trance primarily as a
form of supernatural possession. If I use the term ‘trance’ to denote
some degree of mental dissociation, it is extremely important that we
should grasp that in other cultures people are frequently considered to
be possessed who are very far from being in a trance state. Often the
onset of an illness if regarded as possession by an alien mystical power,
long before the subject is in anything approaching a condition of
trance. Possession thus has a much wider range of meanings than our
denatured term trance.
Following this, I move on to examine briefly some of the most
striking common elements in imagery and symbolism which so many
different ecstatic religions share. If I pursue here only those themes
which relate directly to my sociological preoccupations and ignore
others which are more tangential, I do this deliberately and not because

ECSTATIC RELIGION
26
I consider the latter unimportant. Those who seek a fuller treatment of
the symbolic content of possession will readily find it in Eliade’s book.
After these necessary preliminaries, I begin in the third chapter to
look closely at the social contexts in which ecstasy and possession
flourish. Far from being arbitrary and haphazard in its incidence, there
we shall see how a widespread form of possession, which is regarded
initially as an illness, is in many cases virtually restricted to women.
Such women’s possession ‘afflictions’ are regularly treated not by
permanently expelling the possessing agency, but by reaching a viable
accommodation with it. The spirit is tamed and domesticated, rather
than exorcized. This treatment is usually accomplished by the induction
of the affected women into a female cult group which regularly
promotes possession experiences among its members. Within the
secluded cult group, possession has thus lost its malign significance.
Hence what men consider a demoniacal sickness, women convert
into a clandestine ecstasy. And this of course is my justification for
treating as a religious experience something which, on the surface,
appears to be its precise opposite. If the reader still feels that this
dramatic apotheosis is unconvincing, he should remember how
frequently the great mystics of the Christian and other world religions
have received their first illumination either in circumstances of extreme
adversity, or in a form which appeared initially as a searing affliction.
He should recall also how aptly the conception of this first call as a
dreaded sickness meets the requirements for mystical authenticity so
clearly formulated by Professor O’Brien.
For all their concern with disease and its treatment, such women’s
possession cults are also, I argue, thinly disguised protest movements
directed against the dominant sex. They thus play a significant part in
the sex-war in traditional societies and cultures where women lack
more obvious and direct means for forwarding their aims. To a
considerable extent they protect women from the exactions of men, and
offer an effective vehicle for manipulating husbands and male relatives.
This interpretation coincides closely with Ronald Knox’s brilliant, if
caustic, aside that in Christianity, ‘from the Montanist movement
onwards, the history of enthusiasm is largely a history of female
emancipation, and it is not a reassuring one’. I do not subscribe to the
latter judgement. But this conclusion—which Knox does not pursue
systematically—offers striking corroboration, from a somewhat
unexpected quarter, of the validity of our findings in very different
cultural circumstances.

TOWARDS A SOCIOLOGY OF ECSTASY
27
So far we have said nothing of the character of the spirits involved in
this type of possession. It is I believe of the greatest interest and
importance that these spirits are typically considered to be amoral: they
have no direct moral significance. Full of spite and malice though they
are, they are believed to strike entirely capriciously and without any
grounds which can be referred to the moral character or conduct of
their victims. Thus the women who succumb to these afflictions cannot
help themselves and at the same time bear no responsibility for all the
annoyance and cost which their subsequent treatment involves.They are
thus totally blameless; responsibility lies not with them, but with the
spirits.
Because they play no direct part in upholding the moral code of the
societies in which they receive so much attention, I call these spirits
‘peripheral’. They are in fact very often also peripheral in a further
sense. For typically these spirits are believed to originate outside the
societies whose women they plague. Frequently they are the spirits of
hostile neighbouring peoples, so that animosities between rival local
communities become reflected in this mystical idiom. And if their
favourite victims are usually women who, as jural minors in traditional
societies, also in a sense occupy a dependent—and in a sense also
peripheral position, we have here a very direct concordance between
the attributes of the spirits, the manner in which the afflictions they
cause are evaluated, and the status of their human prey. Peripherality, as
I use the term, has this three-fold character.
Such peripheral cults, as I try to show in Chapter Four, also
frequently embrace downtrodden categories of men who are subject to
strong discrimination in rigidly stratified societies. Peripheral possesion
is consequently far from being a secure female monopoly, and cannot
thus be explained plausibly in terms of any innate tendency to hysteria
on the part of women. And where men of low social position are
involved, although ostensibly existing only to cure spirit-caused
illnesses, such cults again express protest by the politically impotent.
Our own contemporary experience of fringe protest groups and cults
should help us to appreciate what is involved here.
In addition to explaining illness, peripheral possession can thus be
seen to serve as an oblique aggressive strategy. The possessed person is
ill through no fault of his own. The illness requires treatment which his
(or her) master has to provide. In his state of possession the patient is a
highly privileged person: he is allowed many liberties with those whom
in other circumstances he is required to treat with respect. Moreover,

ECSTATIC RELIGION
28
however costly and inconvenient for those to whom his normal status
renders him subservient, his cure is often incomplete. Lapses are likely
to occur whenever difficulties develop with his superiors. Clearly, in
this context, possession works to help the interests of the weak and
downtrodden who have otherwise few effective means to press their
claims for attention and respect. This process, Gomm (1975) aptly
calls, ‘bargaining from weakness’.
This interpretation of peripheral possession as a form of mystical
attack immediately suggests parallels with the employment of
witchcraft accusations to express aggression between rivals and
enemies. To accuse someone of bewitching you is, however, to attack
them openly and directly, and represents a much more drastic strategy
than is implied in the devious manoeuvre of peripheral possession. The
possessed person exerts pressure on his superior without radically
questioning his superiority. He ventilates his pent-up animosity without
questioning the ultimate legitimacy of the status differences enshrined
within the established hierarchical order. If peripheral possession is
thus a gesture of defiance, it is also, usually, one of hopelessness. It
follows from these distinctions that we should expect these two
separate strategies to operate, in different social context, and this is
largely what we find in practice. However, a highly significant
synthesis is also achieved between them. We shall find that those who,
as masters of spirits, diagnose and treat illness in others, are themselves
in danger of being accused as witches. For if their power over the
spirits is such that they can heal the sick, why should they not also
sometimes cause what they cure? Reasoning in this fashion, the
manipulated establishment which reluctantly tolerates bouts of
uncontrolled possession illness among its dependants, rounds on the
leaders of these rebellious cults and firmly denounces them as witches.
Thus, I argue, the most ambitious and pushing members of these
insurgent cults are kept in check, hoist, as it were, with their own
petard.
It will be clear that whatever mystical or psychological benefits
peripheral possession confers, it also regularly achieves other more
tangible rewards. Following this up, we move on in Chapters Five and
Six to explore the functions of possession where this has ceased to be
solely the resort of the weak and humiliated and has become the
mystical idiom in terms of which men of substance compete for
positions of power and authority in society at large. Here enthusiasm
emerges from its seclusion on the fringes of society into the full light of

TOWARDS A SOCIOLOGY OF ECSTASY
29
day. Now we are on more familiar ground since we are concerned with
the ecstatic aspects of mainline religions. The path we shall follow has
already been indicated for us by Knox’s observation that religious
leaders turn to ecstasy when they seek to strengthen and legitimize their
authority. Whereas those cults we called peripheral involved spirits
which were sublimely indifferent to the moral conduct of mankind,
now we are concerned with mystical powers which are regarded
frankly as sternly moralistic. While they inspire men to high positions,
they also act as the censors of society. Their intervention in human
affairs is a direct product of human misdemeanours and the
commission of moral wrongs. Their task is to uphold and sustain public
morality.
In distinction to the peripheral cults with their more limited and
specialized functions, I shall refer to these thoroughly moralizing
systems of ecstatic beliefs as ‘main morality possession religions’, or,
more simply and less barbarously, as ‘central possession religions’. I
shall distinguish two types: those involving ancestor spirits (Chapter
Five); and those involving more autonomous deities which are not
simply sacralized versions of the living (Chapter Six). In both cases we
shall examine how the inspired priest, or shaman, who has privileged
access to these supernatural powers, diagnoses sins and prescribes the
appropriate atonement. The political and legal authority wielded by the
holders of these religious commissions is, as we shall see, largely a
function of the availability of other more specialized agencies of
political and social control. In highly atomized societies without secure
and clearly defined political positions, the shaman comes into his own
as an omni-competent leader, regulating the intercourse both between
man and man and between men and the spirits.
If certain exotic religions thus allow ecstasy to rule most aspects of
their adherents’ lives, all the evidence indicates that the more strongly-
based and entrenched religious authority becomes, the more hostile it is
towards haphazard inspiration. New faiths may announce their advent
with a flourish of ecstatic revelations, but once they become securely
established they have little time or tolerance for enthusiasm. For the
religious enthusiast, with his direct claim to divine knowledge, is always
a threat to the established order. What then are the factors which inhibit
the growth of this attitude towards ecstasy and keep possession on the
boil? The empirical evidence, which we review, suggests that part at least
of the answer lies in acute and constantly recurring social and
environmental pressures which militate against the formation of large,

ECSTATIC RELIGION
30
secure social groups. For, as we shall see, those societies in which central
possession cults persist seem to be usually composed of small, fluid,
social units exposed to particularly exacting physical conditions, or
conquered communities lying under the yoke of alien oppression. Thus,
as in peripheral cults, the circumstances which encourage the ecstatic
response are precisely those where men feel themselves constantly
threatened by exacting pressures which they do not know how to combat
or control, except through those heroic flights of ecstasy by which they
seek to demonstrate that they are the equals of the gods. Thus if
enthusiasm is a retort to oppression and repression, what it seeks to
proclaim is man’s triumphant mastery of an intolerable environment.
This brings us directly to the crucial question of the psychological
significance of possession. If I have relegated discussion of
psychological interpretations of ectasy to my final chapter, this is not
because I consider these unimportant. My objective is to bring us back
finally to our world, relating these largely exotic experiences from alien
cultures to our own contemporary circumstances through psychology
and psychiatry, since it is primarily within the subject matter studied by
these disciplines that we find directly comparable material today. As I
have already revealed so much of the hand that I try to play in this
book, I leave the reader to explore for himself the arguments of the
final chapter. I would only add, that such is the incidence of mental
stress and illness in our contemporary culture, that we do well to
ponder how so many beliefs and experiences, which we relegate to
abnormal psychology, seem to find in other cultures a secure and
satisfying outlet in ecstatic religion.
Finally, my aplogy, if an apology is needed, for this extended
summary of the arguments of this study is that where one seeks to open
up a largely novel line of approach and to look at old data from a fresh
angle, the writer owes it to the reader to indicate the general direction
he intends to follow. I am not particularly wedded to the analytical
terms ‘peripheral’ and ‘central’ which I find so useful. But since I hold
very definite views about the realities to which I consider they refer, it
has seemed essential to make it perfectly clear from the start how these
concepts are applied. Much of my treatment of the evidence on
possession and shamanism will be found to correspond closely to that
modish approach which is now often dignified with the title of
‘transactional analysis’. For what it is worth, my own more limited
slogan in the present context is, that to a significant extent, possession
is as possession does.

TOWARDS A SOCIOLOGY OF ECSTASY
31
In thus pointing to certain social functions fulfilled by possession I
do not maintain that these exhaust the phenomenon’s functional
capacities, nor do I consider that in any complete sense they explain its
existence. Once they have shown what for secular ends is done in the
name of religion, some anthropologists naïvely suppose that nothing
more remains to be said. Thus they leave largely unexplained the
characteristic mystical aspects which distinguish the religious from the
secular, and they totally fail to account for the rich diversity of religious
concepts and beliefs. Although my ambitions do not extend to
explaining these particularistic aspects of different ecstatic religions, I
do seek to uncover some of the foundations, psychological as well as
social, upon which the ecstatic response is based. In pursuing these
aims, I realize of course that I must sometimes seem to have allowed
myself to be carried to conclusions which impose some strain on the
existing evidence. Where this is the case I would only plead that
enthusiasm is catching. Although I don’t myself fall in this category, I
might add that some of those anthropologists who have studied
shamanism in other cultures have followed Carlos Castaneda to
become themselves practising shamans in their own culture.
 

32
Chapter Two
 
TRANCE AND POSSESSION
I
The great Danish Arctic explorer and ethnographer, Rasmussen,
records how one of the Eskimo shamans, or inspired priests, whom he
encountered had in vain sought instruction in his mystical vocation
from other shamans. Finally, like St Antony, the founder of the
Anchorites, this Eskimo neophyte sought inspiration in solitude and
wandered off to pursue a lonely vigil in the wilderness. ‘There,’ he told
Rasmussen,
 
I soon became melancholy. I would sometimes fall to weeping
and feel unhappy without knowing why. Then for no reason
all would suddenly be changed, and I felt a great, inexplicable
joy, a joy so powerful that I could not restrain it, but had to
break into song, a mighty song, with room for only one word:
joy, joy! And I had to use the full strength of my voice. And
then in the midst of such a fit of mysterious and overwhelming
delight I became a shaman, not knowing myself how it came
about. But I was a shaman. I could see and hear in a totally
different way. I had gained my enlightenment, the shaman’s
light of brain and body, and this in such a manner that it was
not only I who could see through the darkness of life, but the
same bright light also shone out from me, imperceptible to
human beings but visible to all spirits of earth and sky and
sea, and these now came to me to become my helping spirits
(Rasmussen, 1929, p. 119).
 
This vivid recollection of an Eskimo shaman’s calling echoes countless
descriptions of similar ecstatic experiences in the world’s universalistic

TRANCE AND POSSESSION
33
religions as well as in the more exotic tribal religions with which this
book mainly deals. It is directly analogous too to the growing volume
of reports of mystical experiences engendered by the so-called
‘sacramental drugs’ of the LSD type. One typical American subject, for
example, has described this common response to a session with this
drug in similar, if more pretentious language:
 
But then in a flash of illumination, I understood that this perfect
genius of which I conceived was nothing more than a minute
and miserable microcosm, containing but the barest hint of the
infinitely more complex and enormously vast macrocosmic
Mind of God. I knew that for all its wondrous precision this
man-mind even in ultimate fulfilment of all its potentials could
never be more than the feeblest reflection of the God-Mind in
the image of which the man-mind had been so miraculously
created. I was filled with awe of God as my Creator, and then
with love for God as the One Who sustained me even, as in my
images, I seemed to sustain the contents of my own mind…I
marvelled all the more at the feeling I now had that somehow
the attention of God was focused upon me and that I was
receiving enlightenment from Him. Tears came into my eyes
and I opened them upon a room in which it seemed to me that
each object had somehow been touched by God’s sublime
Presence (Masters & Houston, 1967, p. 264).
 
Attempts to diminish the status of such drug-induced mysticism by
dubbing it ‘instant religion’ need not detain us here. Nor need we be
unduly disturbed by the fact that psychiatric case-records abound in
descriptions of similar subjectively evaluated mystical experience. The
problem of distinguishing between madmen and mystics, which we
shall take up later, is one most religious communities have had to face.
For our purposes all we need to note for the moment is the
universality of mystical experience and the remarkable uniformity of
mystical language and symbolism. We also require, however, a neutral
term to denote the mental state of the subject of such experiences. Here
I shall employ the word ‘trance’, using it in its general medical sense
which the Penguin Dictionary of Psychology conveniently defines as:
‘a condition of dissociation, characterized by the lack of voluntary
movement, and frequently by automatisms in act and thought,
illustrated by hypnotic and mediumistic conditions.’ So conceived,

ECSTATIC RELIGION
34
trance may involve complete or only partial mental dissociation, and is
often accompanied by exciting visions, or ‘hallucinations’, the full
content of which is not always subsequently so clearly recalled as in
the two experiences quoted earlier.
As is well known, trance states can be readily induced in most
normal people by a wide range of stimuli, applied either separately or
in combination. Time-honoured techniques include the use of alcoholic
spirits, hypnotic suggestion, rapid over-breathing, the inhalation of
smoke and vapours, music, and dancing; and the ingestion of such
drugs as mescaline or lysergic acid and other psychotropic alkaloids.
The specific and non-specific effects of these drugs and the extent to
which drug experiences vary with the socio-cultural setting in which
they occur has received much attention (see eg. Furst, 1972; Harner,
1973; Grof, 1977; Schultes and Hofmann, 1980). Even without these
aids, much the same effect can be produced, although usually in the
nature of things more slowly, by such self-inflicted or externally
imposed mortifications and privations as fasting and ascetic
contemplation (e.g. ‘transcendental meditation’). The inspirational
effect of sensory deprivation, implied in the stereotyped mystical
‘flight’ into the wilderness, has also been well documented in
laboratory experiments. The most exciting scientific discoveries here,
surely, are those of the endorphins—natural opiates in the human
brain—whose production and release is promoted by such traditional
methods of trance induction (Ahlberg, 1982; Prince, 1982). The
presence of these natural euphoriants in the human body—which seem
to be released by such mundane activities as jogging (cf. Banyai, 1984)
makes Marx’s famous epithet about ‘religion as the opium of the
people’ literally and materially true in a most unexpected way! The
existence of this natural endorphin (and possibly other similar)
endogenous systems also explains how states of altered consciousness
and analgesia associated specifically with the ingestion of
hallucinogenic or psychotropic drugs can be produced without these
external aids to trance.
However they are produced, our immediate concern is with the
interpretation given by different cultures to trance states. Here we take
up the question of the culturally standardized, and therefore ‘normal’,
meaning of trance in different communities. In conformity with our
own Christian tradition, we tend to equate trance and possession, thus
following what—as we shall see in a moment—is one of the most
widespread cultural explanations of mental dissociation. As with other

TRANCE AND POSSESSION
35
established religions, however, orthodox Christianity has generally
sought to belittle mystical interpretations of trance where these were
claimed by those who experienced them to represent Divine revelation.
Thus though it is difficult to ignore the countless visions of Christian
mystics, where the church has approved or honoured these ascetic
figures it has often done so on other grounds. The sanction of heresy
has proved a powerful deterrent in curtailing and discrediting wayward
personal mystical experiences. Indeed, it is mainly in the context of
trance states ascribed to the work of the Devil that we meet official
ecclesiastical recognition of possession. But today, within the Catholic
church, the wide range of cases, which in the middle ages were
unhestitatingly diagnosed as demoniacal possession, has shrunk to
those few instances which Catholic psychiatrists feel unable to explain
in more prosaic terms. This small residuum is all that remains of the
vast spectrum of trance and hysterical behaviour formerly attributed to
the work of the Devil and his agents. All other cases are treated as
‘pseudo-possessions’ explicable in terms of modern science.
Outside the Catholic church, for most psychiatrists and
psychoanalysts there is no such thing as true possession in our modern
world. All cases involving the ideology of possession are considered to
be satisfactorily explained without invoking belief in the existence of
the Devil—or of God. Indeed, psychiatry today itself uses a wide range
of therapies which are specifically designed to provoke trance and
trance-like states in which the patient, liberated by drugs or hypnosis
from his customary restraints, is freed to disgorge repressed traumatic
experiences through abreaction. Here, for most psychiatrists, if not for
all psychoanalysts, there is no implication that these techniques are
inherently mystical. Rather they are held to work on the central nervous
system by scientific processes which, if not yet fully understood in
detail, are certainly not considered to be unfathomable.
This non-mystical secular interpretation of trance and dissociation
which, of course, is not fully shared by Western Spiritualists,
Pentecostalists, some Quakers, or many of the new ‘pop’ cult-groups, is
by no means a monopoly of modern science. Amongst the conservative
Samburu pastoral nomads of northern Kenya, Paul Spencer (Spencer,
1965) has vividly described trance states which in their own local
cultural setting involve no mystical aetiology. Here Samburu men in the
unmarried warrior age-group of fifteen to thirty years called morans,
readily fall into trance in particular circumstances. These ‘odd men
out’, suspended between boyhood and adulthood in an uncomfortably

ECSTATIC RELIGION
36
prolonged adolescence, regularly go into trance, shaking with extreme
bodily agitation, in frustrating situations. Typical precipitating
circumstances are those where one group of morans is out-danced by a
rival group in front of girls; or when one of their own girls is led off in
marriage; during initiation; or when they are about to be replaced by a
new age-group of younger men. Similarly outside these traditional
settings, Samburu soldiers may get the shakes on parade, or when
ambushed. All the evidence here shows conclusively that this is a
culturally conditioned response to tension and danger which is not
interpreted mystically, and is indeed viewed by the Samburu as a sign
of manliness and self-assertion. Once men have passed through the
moran grade, have married, and become elders, they stop shaking. It
would no longer be culturally appropriate for adult men to make this
response. In all these trance experiences there is no implication at all
that those who shake are possessed by spirits. Possession is not part of
Samburu ideology.
Rather similarly, amongst the Abelam tribe of New Guinea (Forge),
young deprived bachelors sometimes exhibit all the symptoms which in
many other societies would be interpreted as signs of possession.
Known in this state by a word which means literally ‘deaf’ and clearly
well describes their dissociation, these men behave with hysterically
agitated gestures and (apparently) uncontrolled violence. Such
outbursts are tolerated for those in this position, and indeed temporarily
earn them a measure of special respect. Again, there is no idea that this
state is due to spirit possession. Although the evidence is not entirely
clear, it seems that this is also the case with that wider New Guinea
phenomenon, known as ‘mushroom madness’, where trance behaviour
is associated with the eating of certain fungi.
This non-mystical interpretation of trance also applies, although not
completely, to that medieval dancing mania called tarantism, which in
the fifteenth century swept through Italy in the wake of the Black
Death. This was the Italian version of the extraordinary epidemic which
had earlier spread like a contagion through Germany, Holland, and
Belgium. In those countries, the malady had become associated with
the names of St Vitus and St John the Baptist, since it was at shrines
dedicated to these saints that the dancers sought relief from their
affliction. Whether it was known as St Vitus’s Dance or tarantism, its
symptoms, and the circumstances in which it occurred, were generally
the same. In times of privation and misery, the most abused members of
society felt themselves seized by an irresistible urge to dance wildly

TRANCE AND POSSESSION
37
until they reached a state of trance and collapsed exhausted—and
usually cured, if only temporarily. Contemporary reports record how
peasants left their ploughs, mechanics their workshops, house-wives
their domestic duties, children their parents, servants, their masters—all
swept headlong into the Bacchanalian revelry. The frenetic dancing
would last for hours at a stretch, the dancers shouting and screaming
furiously, and often foaming at the mouth. Many enjoyed strange
apocalyptic visions, as the heavens seemed to open before their eyes to
reveal the Saviour on His throne with the Blessed Virgin at his side.
Sometimes individuals were seized first by epileptic-like attacks.
Panting and labouring for breath, they fell swooning to the ground,
only to leap up again to dance with powerful convulsive movements.
Although this ‘dancing mania’, as Hecker calls it, was remarkably
uniform in its incidence and character, it was not everywhere interpreted
in the same way. In the Low Countries, the malady was usually regarded
as a form of demoniacal possession and was frequently treated by
exorcism. The same method was also sometimes employed by the priests
in Italy. But here, as its local name—tarantism—indicates, it was thought
to be caused by the poisonous bite of the tarantula spider rather than to
be due to possession by the Devil. As elsewhere, those suffering from the
disease showed extreme sensitivity to music and, at the sound of the
appropriate air, would dance themselves into a state of trance after which
they would collapse exhausted and, for the time being at least, cured.
Once the tune to which the patient responded had been discovered, a
single application of this dance and music therapy was often sufficient to
lift the affliction for a whole year.
In the fifteenth century it was generally believed in Italy that
dancing to the music of fifes, clarinets, and drums, and especially to the
brisk rhythm of the tarantella (named after the spider), caused the
poison from the tarantula’s bite to be dispersed round the body of the
victim, whence it was expelled harmlessly through the skin as
perspiration. Indeed, as late as the seventeenth century, it was still
customary for bands of musicians to traverse the country in the summer
months, when the malady was at its height, treating the taranti in
different villages and towns at large rallies. Because of the marked
predominance of female victims, these gatherings were usually known
as the ‘Little Carnivals of Women’. Although the incidence of tarantism
has greatly declined since, it still survives today in an attenuated form
in the more remote and backward villages of southern Italy (de
Martino, 1966).

ECSTATIC RELIGION
38
I shall examine this interesting phenomenon more fully in a later
chapter. My present concern is simply to emphasize that, in contrast to
St John’s and St Vitus’s Dance, tarantism was long considered by many
to be a disease caused by the toxic bite of the tarantula spider and not
involving any mystical aetiology. More recent research has established
that there are two types of tarantula spider, and that only one of these is
actually venomous with a poisonous bite capable of producing the
symptoms encountered in tarantism. Paradoxically, it is not this toxic
spider, but the other completely harmless variety of tarantula, which is
larger and looks more threatening, that figures predominantly in
tarantism. We shall return to the implications of this discovery later.
Finally, even in cultures where trance is regularly and indeed
normally interpreted mystically, some cases may be explained in non-
mystical terms. Among the Tungus reindeer herders of Siberia, who
provide the locus classicus of shamanism (since shaman is a Tungus
word), hysterical states, involving trembling and the compulsive
imitation of words and gestures, are not necessarily always attributed to
the action of spirits. In fact the term olon (from a verb meaning to be
frightened) is used to describe such persons who exhibit this behaviour
but are not considered to be possessed by spirits. Those concerned here
are sometimes young women uncontrollably repeating taboo’d obscene
expressions in the presence of old women and men. Such demure
maidens are then employing language normally reserved for their
elders and betters; and adding insult to injury by doing this in the
company of those whom they should respect and honour. There is thus
involved an element of rebellious, flaunting behaviour which is clearly
present in my favourite example of this phenomenon. This concerns the
scandalous affair of the Third (Tungus) Battalion of the TransBaikal
Cossacks. The battalion was being harangued by its irascible Russian
colonel, and suddenly began to repeat after him all his commands and
gestures, and, as these were not obeyed, the flood of obscene curses
which followed. What happened afterwards is not recorded and is in
any case irrelevant here. We should note, however, the behaviour of this
kind, which is not interpreted as mystically caused, rapidly shades
amongst the Tungus into states where a mystical aetiology is invoked.
II
The altered state of consciousness (which may vary very considerably
in degree) and which for convenience we call trance is, in the

TRANCE AND POSSESSION
39
circumstances in which it occurs, open to different cultural controls and
to various cultural interpretations. Indeed, as with adolescence, trance
is subject to both physiological and cultural definition. Some cultures
follow our own medical practice in spirit if not in detail in seeing this
condition as a state of mental aberration where no mystical factors are
involved. Other cultures see trance as mystically caused; and others
again interpret the same physiological phenomenon in different ways in
different contexts. The existence of rival and apparently mutually
opposed interpretations of trance occurs of course today in our own
society. With the advance of medical science, the incidence of trance
states interpreted by the Church as signs of possession has
progressively decreased since the Middle Ages. Yet outside this rigid
framework of established religion, fringe cults have increasingly taken
over a mystical interpretation of trance as the sign of divine inspiration.
This is certainly the manner in which trance is overwhelmingly
understood in revivalist movements like those of the ‘Bible Belt’ of the
USA, and seems also to be growing in significance in the newer protest
cult groups which employ drugs such as LSD and other psychedelic
stimulants.
The ideological leap from a non-mystical to a mystical evaluation of
trance may be illustrated by the Indian Shaker cult founded by John
Slocum in Washington state at the end of the last century (Barnett,
1957). Here, uncontrollable bodily agitation and trance states achieved
in emotionally charged church services, are referred to as ‘shaking’, in
the manner we have already seen amongst the Samburu tribe of Kenya.
But whereas for the Samburu this condition has no mystical
implications, amongst the Shakers (as with the early Quakers) each
seizure represents a manifestation of the Holy Spirit. Trance indeed is
both personalized and objectified, so that an Indian speaks of ‘his
shake’ as a distinctive vital force, or power, and people will say in
support of their convictions: ‘So-and-so is true, because my shake told
me so.’ Here trance has become divine possession.
If, however, possession by an external agency or spirit may be one
explanation of trance, it does not follow that all conditions in which
spirit possession is postulated necessarily involve trance. Much
confusion in the literature on spirit possession results directly from
assuming that these two states are necessarily and always equivalent.
As we shall increasingly see, in many cultures where possession by a
spirit is the main or sole interpretation of trance, possession may be
diagnosed long before an actual state of trance has been reached.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
40
Frequently, for example, illness is seen as a form of possession; yet
the possessed patient is far from being in trance. Indeed it is regularly
only in the actual treatment of possession, either by exorcism, or by a
procedure which aims at achieving a viable accommodation between
victim and possessing agency, that trance in the full sense is induced.
As the great German medical student of possession, T.K.Oesterreich,
noticed of medieval treatments, it was frequently only in the full
throes of clerical exorcism that ‘possession’ (i.e. trance) in the
clinical sense really occurred. This penetrating observation
corresponds very well with the evidence of Charcot’s experiences at
the Salpêtière mental hospital in Paris in the second half of the
nineteenth century. There, as now seems clear, it was the great
physician himself who often induced the more extravagant
manifestations of ‘grand hysteria’ in his patients!
Spirit possession thus embraces a wider range of phenomena than
trance, and is regularly attributed to people who are far from being
mentally disassociated, although they may become so in the treatments
which they subsequently undergo. It is a cultural evaluation of a
person’s condition, and means precisely what it says: an invasion of the
individual by a spirit. It is not thus for us to judge who is and who is
not really ‘possessed’. If someone is, in his own cultural milieu,
generally considered to be in a state of spirit possession, then he (or
she) is possessed. This is the simple definition which we shall follow in
this book. This, of course, is not to deny that there are degrees of
possession. As we shall see, this is widely recognized in those cultures
which employ this mystical aetiology.
Spirit possession, then, is one of the main, widely distributed
mystical interpretations of trance and of other associated conditions.
The other major mystical theory is that which attributes these states to
the temporary absence of the victim’s soul, and is consequently usually
known in anthropology as ‘soul-loss’. The Belgian anthropologist Luc
de Heusch has argued that these two mystical explanations are mutually
necessary (de Heusch, 1962; 1971). Possession can only occur if at the
same time there is a ‘depossession’ of the self, such as is implied in the
doctrine of soul-loss. At first sight this seems to make excellent sense.
But in practice we find empirically that while these explanations may
co-exist in some cultures, or in some contexts of trance in a particular
society, other people, if they even explicitly draw this logical inference,
do not trouble to stress it. The picture is also further complicated by the
fact that in many cultures man is considered to possess not one but

TRANCE AND POSSESSION
41
several souls. A few examples will show the complexity of the
situation.
The Yaruro Indians of Venezuela evidently follow de Heusch’s logic.
They believe that when their shamans journey to the spirit land they
leave behind them a mere husk of their personality. This residuum
serves as a link in the channel of communication which in trance they
establish with the spirit powers. In this state of depossession they are
possessed by visiting helper spirits. Here clearly, and fairly explicitly,
soul-loss is seen as a necessary pre-condition for spirit possession. The
Akawaio Caribs of British Guiana take a rather similar view which they
express in a very imaginative way. They believe that in trance, which is
induced by chewing tobacco, the shaman’s spirit (or soul) becomes
very small and light and is able to detach itself from his body and fly
with the aid of ‘ladder spirits’ into the skies. The swallow-tailed kite,
known colloquially as ‘clairvoyant woman’, helps the shaman’s spirit
to soar aloft to commune with other spirits. At the same time, his body,
which is left behind as an empty receptacle, is filled by various forest
spirits. It is these which now possess his body and speak through it.
However, to complicate matters, the Akawaio also believe that the
shaman’s body can be concurrently occupied by several ghosts or
spirits as well as by his own spirit or soul. Indeed a successful
shaman’s helping familiars stay with him all the time. Thus he may be
in a constant state of latent possession, but only occasionally, at
séances, in full trance (Butt, 1967).
In Haitian voodoo, likewise, at least according to the doctrines of the
shamanistic priests themselves, when a loa spirit moves into the head
of an individual it does so by first displacing his gros bon ange, one of
the two souls which each person carries in himself. This temporary
eviction of the ‘good angel’ soul, causes trembling and convulsions
which are characteristic of the opening stages of possession and trance.
Similarly among the Saora tribesmen of Orissa, in India, when a
shaman goes into trance and the spirit comes upon him, his own soul is
temporarily expelled and the spirit takes its place in his heart or Adam’s
apple. Finally, in this vein, the Arctic Tungus believe that each man has
two or three souls. The first soul may leave the body causing
unconsciousness, but nothing more serious. Prolonged absence of the
second soul, however, leads to death; and after death this soul goes to
the world of the dead. The third soul remains with the body until it has
decomposed and then leaves the body to live on with the dead man’s
relatives. Tungus shamanism which, as we shall see, involves

ECSTATIC RELIGION
42
possession may be accompanied by a displacement of one of these
three souls.
Amongst numerous other peoples with whom we shall be concerned
in this study, however, the implication that possession by an external
agent can only occur if the subject’s own soul is temporarily displaced
is not emphasized, and sometimes receives no explicit recognition.
This, for example, is the position amongst the Muslim Somali nomads
of north-east Africa, where possession is conceived of as an ‘entering’
by a spirit without any doctrine that this entails the absence of the
person’s own soul. The latter, in any case, is believed to leave the
human body only on death. And even where, as in some of the cases
which we shall exmaine later, one person is believed to possess
another—so that the possessing agency is in some sense an emanation
of a living person—this is not necessarily viewed as involving the
displacement of either participant’s soul. This lack of explicit concern
with the inner mechanism of possession is, in fact, a general feature of
a great many cultures where the doctrine of possession is stressed.
Conversely, in many other societies, where little emphasis is given to
possession in the interpretation of trance and illness, soul-loss is the
primary idiom in which these phenomena are described. In Africa, this
pattern of explanation involving soul-loss without possession seems
generally rare. One good example, however, which will serve to
illustrate the distinction, concerns the hunting and gathering Bushmen
of the Kalahari desert in South Africa. In this culture trance states are a
monopoly of men. They are used therapeutically to release the power
of the spirit in the human body to fight the evil powers which cause
illness, and to cure sickness in the afflicted. In healing dance
ceremonies to the accompaniment of singing and hand-clapping, adult
men work themselves into a state of trance. In this stimulating
atmosphere the spirit (or soul) boils up in a man’s body and goes to his
head. Perception is altered. Things appear to be smaller than usual and
to fly about. Eventually the spirit temporarily leaves the body, and sets
out to fight those powers which the Bushmen fear as the cause of
sickness and death. In this spiritually active condition, men lay their
hands on the sick patient and rub sweat into his body until he is
believed to be cured. Soul-loss trance sometimes also occurs spon-
taneously in response to a sudden fright or terrifying experience. The
presence of a marauding lion, for instance, may trigger off trance
states. As amongst the Samburu, whose non-mystical conception of
trance we considered earlier, the Bushmen associate soul-loss trance

TRANCE AND POSSESSION
43
with the expression of fear and aggression (Marshall, 1969, pp. 347–
81; see also Katz, 1982).
This culturally determined emphasis on soul-loss, rather than on
spirit possession, is a strongly developed religious motif in many North
American Indian societies. Outside that area, possession is either the
dominant element or co-exists, in varying degrees of emphasis, with
soul-loss as the explanation of trance and associated phenomena. It is
with this possession ideology, that we are mainly concerned in this
book.
III
We have already made free use of the originally Tungus term ‘shaman’,
and its convenient anthropological derivative ‘shamanism’. ‘Shaman’ is
widely employed by American anthropologists, but rarely by their
British colleagues, to denote a variety of social roles, the lowest
common denominator of which is that of inspired priest (see Lewis,
1986, pp. 94–107). We are now in a position to examine more closely
the connections between the shaman so conceived and possession.
According to Mircea Eliade, the diagnostic features of shamanism in
the classical Arctic sense are quite specific. The shaman is an inspired
priest who, in ecstatic trance, ascends to the heavens on ‘trips’. In the
course of these journeys he persuades or even fights with the gods in
order to secure benefits for his fellow men. Here, in the opinion of
Eliade, spirit possession is not an essential characteristic and is not
always present. As he himself puts it:
 
The specific element of shamanism is not the incorporation of
spirits by the shaman, but the ecstasy provoked by the ascension
to the sky or by the descent to Hell: the incorporation of spirits
and possession by them are universally distributed phenomena,
but they do not belong necessarily to shamanism in the strict
sense (Eliade, 1951, p. 434).
 
Moreover, in Eliade’s view, different elements in the shamanistic
complex can be assigned to different stages of historical development:
 
It is beyond doubt that the celestial ascension of the shaman is a
survival, profoundly modified and sometimes degraded, of the
archaic religious ideology which was centred on faith in a

ECSTATIC RELIGION
44
Supreme Celestial Being and the belief in concrete
communications between the sky and earth… The descent to
Hell, the fight against the evil spirits, and also the increasingly
familiar relations with spirits which aim at their incorporation or
at the possession of the shaman by them, are all innovations, for
the most part recent enough, and to be imputed to the general
transformation of the religious complex (Eliade, 1951, p. 438).
 
As with other religious phenomena, shamanism is obviously subject to
historical development and change. That is not in dispute. But anyone
who cares to examine the data will be impressed by the slender and
ambiguous character of the evidence on the basis of which this
particular interpretation is so confidently asserted. It is not necessary
for our purposes, however, to enter into any detailed discussion of the
probability of this particular evolutionary theory of the development of
Asiatic shamanism. Our concern is to see whether Eliade is correct in
seeking to drive a wedge between spirit possession and shamanism.
Other writers on the subject clearly accept his judgement. Thus, in his
stimulating comparative study, Luc de Heusch has sought to develop
these ideas into an ambitious, formalistic theory of religious
phenomena. Here shamanism (in Eliade’s sense) and spirit possession
are treated as antithetical processes. The first is an ascent of man to the
gods: the second the descent of the gods on man. Shamanism, in de
Heusch’s view, is thus an ‘ascensual metaphysic’—a movement of
‘pride’ in which man sees himself as the equal of the gods. Possession,
on the other hand, is an incarnation. This, and other alleged
distinctions, are developed by de Heusch into an elaborate complex of
structural antitheses which he somewhat grandiloquently describes as
the ‘geometry of the soul’. However logically satisfying these Hegelian
contrasts may seem, the crucial question here is whether the empirical
evidence supports, or refutes, the distinction which Eliade and de
Heusch seek to make between shamanism and spirit possession.
To settle this issue we must go back to the main primary accounts
of Arctic shamanism utilized by Eliade and also by de Heusch. When
we examine these sources carefully we find that this distinction is in
fact untenable. Shamanism and spirit possession regularly occur
together and this is true particularly in the Arctic locus classicus of
shamanism. Thus, amongst both the Eskimos and the East Siberian
Chukchee, shamans are possessed by spirits. More significantly still,
this is also true of the Arctic Tungus from whose language the word

TRANCE AND POSSESSION
45
shaman derives, and whom, therefore, we may take to epitomize the
phenomena under discussion. Let us start at the beginning. The
Tungus word shaman (pronounced saman among the adjacent
Manchus) means literally ‘one who is excited, moved, or raised’ (and
this, incidentally, is very similar to the connotations of other words in
other languages employed to describe possession). More specifically,
a shaman is a person of either sex who has mastered spirits and who
can at will introduce them into his own body. Often, in fact, he
permanently incarnates these spirits and can control their
manifestations, going into controlled states of trance in appropriate
circumstances. As Shirokogoroff, the great Russion authority on the
Tungus, puts it, the shaman’s body is a ‘placing’, or receptacle, for
the spirits. It is in fact by his power over the spirits which he
incarnates that the shaman is able to treat and control afflictions
caused by pathogenic spirits in others.
Shamanism is tied to the Tungus clan structure of which, indeed, it
is an essential component. Tungus clans are small, scattered patrilineal
units, rarely boasting more than a thousand members. As well as family
and lineage heads, or elders, and politically significant ‘big-men’ who
are primarily concerned with directing the secular life of the group,
each clan normally has at least one generally recognized shaman. This
‘master of spirits’ is essential to the well-being of the clan, for he
controls the clan’s own ancestral spirits and other foreign spirits which
have been adopted into its spirit hierarchy. In the free state, these spirits
are extremely dangerous to man. Most are hostile and pathogenic and
are regarded as the sources of the many diseases which affect the
Tungus.
Most diseases, thus, are seen as having a mystical basis in the action
of these noxious spirits. As long as the clan shaman is doing his job
properly, however, in incarnating these spirits and thus controlling them
by containing them, all is well. Indeed with the inducement of regular
offerings, these tamed spirits are considered to protect the clan from
attack by other alien spirits and also to ensure the fertility and
prosperity of its members. These ‘mastered’ spirits can thus be applied
to fight off, or overcome, other hostile spirits which have not yet been
rendered harmless by human incarnation. With the aid of the tamed
spirits, the clan shaman can divine and treat such sickness and affliction
as does strike his kinsmen. The shaman is thus in a sense a hostage to
the spirits, and Shirokogoroff lays particular stress on the strenuous and
demanding character of his calling.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
46
Although the shaman acts in other contexts also, the main centre of
his activity is the séance. Séances may be held to make contact with the
spirits of the upper or lower worlds. For instance, the shaman may be
consulted by his clansmen to reveal the causes of an outbreak of
disease, or to discover the reason for a run of bad luck in hunting. This
requires him to call up the spirits into himself and, having established
the cause of the misfortune, to take appropriate action. He may, for
example, consider it necessary to take a sacrificial reindeer to the spirits
of the lower world and seek to persuade them to remove the difficulties
his kin are experiencing.
Other séances are concerned with the spirits of the upper world, or
with spirits living in this world. Shamanistic rites addressed to spirits in
the latter category may involve the liberation of a person or clan from
the spirits of a hostile shaman, or clan, or other foreign source; sacrifice
to benevolent or malevolent spirits; and divination of a wide range of
afflictions with the aid of the shaman’s spirits. Sometimes the shaman
may practise his art much more informally, concentrating his power
with the aid of the brass mirror which is one of the commonest
incarnations of a Tungus shaman’s familiars. In this case ecstasy is
likely to be limited to shaking. Nevertheless, the séance remains the
main ritual drama of shamanism and includes possession.
Shirokogoroff gives a vivid description of the atmosphere in which it is
conducted, which coincides closely with accounts of séances in many
of the other possession cults which we discuss in this book.
 
The rhythmic music and singing, and later the dancing of the
shaman, gradually involve every participant more and more in a
collective action. When the audience begins to repeat the refrains
together with the assistants, only those who are defective fail to
join the chorus. The tempo of the action increases, the shaman
with a spirit is no more an ordinary man or relative, but is a
‘placing’ (i.e. incarnation) of the spirit; the spirit acts together
with the audience, and this is felt by everyone. The state of many
participants is now near to that of the shaman himself, and only a
strong belief that when the shaman is there the spirit may only
enter him, restrains the participants from being possessed in mass
by the spirit. This is a very important condition of shamanizing
which does not however reduce mass susceptibility to the
suggestion, hallucinations, and unconscious acts produced in a
state of mass ecstasy. When the shaman feels that the audience is

TRANCE AND POSSESSION
47
with him and follows him he becomes still more active and this
effect is transmitted to his audience. After shamanizing, the
audience recollects various moments of the performance, their
great psychophysiological emotion and the hallucinations of sight
and hearing which they have experienced. They then have a deep
satisfaction—much greater than that from emotions produced by
theatrical and musical performances, literature and general
artistic phenomena of the European complex, because in
shamanizing the audience at the same time acts and participates
(Shirokogoroff, 1935).
 
This psychologically highly charged atmosphere of the séance makes
it, when it is applied to curing the sick, no doubt highly effective in the
treatment of certain neurotic or psychosomatic disturbances. And as
Shirokogoroff also points out, even in the case of organic illnesses, it
probably also has considerable significance in strengthening the
patient’s will to recover. Thus, both from this point of view and from its
purely ritual aspects, shamanism plays a highly significant role in
Tungus clan life. No clan is secure without its shaman. Consequently
when the shaman’s powers of control over the spirits are waning an
urgent search begins for a successor. Should the old shaman lose his
powers completely, or die before he can be replaced, the spirits will be
freed to wreak havoc in the clan. This must be avoided at all costs. The
position may in fact be inherited, or it may be acquired by an unrelated
young shaman who has given ample proof of his command of the
ecstatic technique and control over spirits., The extent to which this
institution is linked with clanship is seen in the fact that when a clan
grows large and splits into two new exogamic groups, each nascent new
clan must have its own shaman. Shamanship and spirits are part of the
clan patrimony.
Among the Tungus, then, possession by pathogenic spirits is a
common explanation of illness (though not the only one), and at the
same time the normal road to the assumption of the shaman’s calling.
The stock indication of a person’s initial seizure by a spirit is culturally
stereotyped ‘hysterical’ behaviour (although such behaviour, as we
have seen, may also be interpreted non-mystically). The signs of this
‘Arctic hysteria’, as it is usually known in the literature, are: hiding
from the light, hysterically exaggerated crying and singing, sitting
passively in a withdrawn state on a bed or on the ground, racing off
hysterically (inviting pursuit), hiding in rocks, climbing up trees, etc.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
48
Unless there are contra-indications, people who exhibit these symptoms
of hysterical flight are likely to be regarded as possessed by a spirit,
and may, or may not, be encouraged to become shamans. If they do
receive support and encouragement, they quickly learn to cultivate the
power of experiencing demonstrable ecstasy. And when in response to
such appropriate stimuli as drumming and singing they can produce
this state at will, they are well on the road to public recognition as ‘
masters of spirits’. The controlled production of trance is taken as
evidence of controlled possession by spirits. Here we should note,
although as we shall see the distinction is not unambiguous, that the
Tungus distinguish between a person possessed (involuntarily) by a
spirit, and a spirit possessed (voluntarily) by a person. The first is
uncontrolled trance interpreted as illness; the second is controlled
trance, the essential requirement for the exercise of the shamanistic
vocation. The accuracy of Shirokogoroff’s interpretation here is amply
confirmed in exhaustive modern re-appraisals of the Tungus and Arctic
shamanism by such leading specialists as Delaby, 1976, Siikala, 1978,
and Basilov, 1984.
We can see now that, contrary to the views of Eliade and de Heusch,
in its Tungus form shamanism involves controlled spirit possession;
and that, according to the social context, the shaman incarnates spirits
in both a latent and an active form, but always in a controlled fashion.
His body is a vehicle for the spirits. We can also see that the shaman’s
vocation is normally announced by an initially uncontrolled state of
possession: a traumatic experience associated with hysteroid, ecstatic
behaviour. This, I think, is a universal feature in the assumption of
shamanistic roles and is even present, though in muted form, when
these pass by inheritance from one kinsman to another. Thus, in the
case of those who persist in the shamanistic calling, the uncontrolled,
unsolicited, initial possession seizure leads to a state where possession
can be controlled and can be turned on and off at will in shamanistic
séances. This is the controlled phase of possession, where as the
Tungus say, the shaman ‘possesses’ his spirits (although they also
possess him).
Luc de Heusch has sought to distinguish between these two phases
in terms of a much more thorough-going and wide-reaching distinction
between what he calls ‘inauthentic’ and ‘authentic’ possession. The
first of these he sees as an undesired illness, a baneful spirit intrusion,
which can only be treated by the expulsion, or exorcism, of the
intrusive agency. The second, in contrast, is the very stuff of religious

TRANCE AND POSSESSION
49
experience: a ‘joyous Dionysian epiphany’. This desired state of
exaltation is realized by what is in effect a ‘sacred theatre’. Thus for de
Heusch, these are not merely separate phases, as I have distinguished
them, within the assumption of the mystical calling; but, on the
contrary, totally opposed experiences belonging to two separate types
of cult. In his view the first cult is based on exorcism, the second on the
deliberate cultivation of ecstatic states. Erica Bourguignon, who in
contrast realizes correctly that these are not necessarily totally opposed
experiences characteristic of different kinds of religious cult, calls them
‘negative’ and ‘positive’ possession (Bourguignon, 1967). I prefer the
more neutral analytical terms ‘uncontrolled’ and ‘controlled’
possession, or ‘unsolicited’ and ‘solicited’ possession which, as I hope
will become increasingly clear, have greater explanatory utility. Finally,
we may note here how as Anna-Leena Siikala (1978) has emphasized,
beliefs in pathogenic demonic possession on the one hand and
spiritinspired shamanizing on the other, far from belonging to separate
cultic or religious traditions, regularly reinforce each other within the
same religion.
It will be evident, then that the Tungus evidence makes nonsense of
the assumption that shamanism and spirit possession are totally
separate phenomena, belonging necessarily to different cosmological
systems and to separate historical stages of development. Without
wishing to wander too far from the present argument, we might note
parenthetically that this misleading misunderstanding has been applied
quite widely in other contexts. Thus in his discussion of Greek religion,
E.R.Dodds takes soul-loss as the definitive characteristic of shamanism.
On this basis he treats the rise of shamans, amongst whom he numbers
Pythagoras, as an ideologically distinct later development of Greek
religion replacing the earlier spirit-inspired world of the Apollonian
oracles and the cult of Dionysus (Dodds, 1951). Classical scholars will
know whether the cosmological changes Dodds infers are justified. But
since at least the conceptual distinction in terms of which they are
described is not, it seems possible that the imposition of a misleading
model may have skewed his interpretation.
We can see now that we are perfectly justified in applying the term
shaman to mean, as Raymond Firth (Firth, 1959, pp. 129–48; 1967)
rightly stresses, a ‘master of spirits’, with the implication that this
inspired priest incarnates spirits, becoming possessed voluntarily in
controlled circumstances. The evocative Polynesian expression ‘god-box’
expresses the relationship between the shaman and the power he

ECSTATIC RELIGION
50
incarnates very exactly. All shamans are thus mediums and, as the Black
Caribs of British Honduras so expressively put it, tend to function as a
‘telephone exchange’ between man and god. It does not follow, of
course, that all mediums are necessarily shamans, although as will be
shown in the next chapter the two are usually linked. People who
regularly experience possession by a particular spirit may be said to act
as mediums for that divinity. Some, but not all such mediums are likely
to graduate in time to become controllers of spirits, and once they
‘master’ these powers in a controlling fashion they are properly shamans.
Thus, what so often begins as a hostile spirit intrusion, may be later
evaluated as the first sign of grace in the assumption of the shamanistic
calling. Not all such traumatic experiences necessarily have this outcome.
But all shamans seem to have experienced something of this initial
trauma. These are thus, very frequently, phases in a forward-going
process, rather than sign-posts to totally distinct types of cult. Perhaps the
reader will accept this for the moment and, if unconvinced, suspend final
judgement until the problem is explored more fully in later chapters.
IV
We must now examine the sorts of relationship which people of
different cultures conceive to exist between shamans and mediums and
their possessing familiars. Amongst the Tungus, some emphasis is
given to the idea that a contractual relationship binds the shaman and
the spirits which he incarnates. This conception of an agreement of
compact, sometimes involving the surrender of the shaman’s own soul
(as in the Faust legend), is stressed amongst the Eskimos. There, the
shaman-to-be who has received a spiritual call gives up his soul to
those spirits which are henceforth bound to him as familiars. Thus
Rasmussen reports that the first thing which the neophyte’s instructor
has to do is to withdraw the soul from the pupil’s eyes, brain and
entrails, and to hand it over to the helping spirits which then become
his familiars. The apprentice shaman must also learn how to attain
enlightenment or ‘light’, that mysterious luminous fire which the
shaman suddenly feels in his body and which enables him to see all
that is otherwise hidden from mortal eyes.
This gift of illumination, in return for a surrendering of the self or
part of the self, described in the classical language of mysticism as
gnosis—a fusing of man and divinity—is part of controlled spirit
possession everywhere. In some cases the immediate relationship may

TRANCE AND POSSESSION
51
initially be with minor powers or tutelary spirits—the ‘controls’ or
‘guides’ of western Spiritualism, through whose help the shaman is
able to incarnate and communicate with higher divinities or powers. In
other cases, there may be a more direct relationship, without such
intermediaries, with a more central divinity, or ‘refraction’ of that
divinity, and very frequently, as the shaman’s power grows, his
repertoire of incarnable spirits increases in the same measure. Whatever
the conceptual details involved, shamanism includes a special
relationship with a divinity or divinities, a relationship which, of
course, is most dramatically realized in full incarnation when the
personality of the possesed is totally effaced. Ecstatic communion is
thus essentially a mystical union; and, as the Song of Solomon and
other mystical poetry so abundantly illustrate, experiences of this kind
are frequently described in terms borrowed from erotic love. Indeed, as
Ernest Jones (1949) has justly observed, the notion that ‘sexual
intercourse can occur between mortals and supernatural beings is one
of the most widespread of human beliefs’.
This imagery is by no means absent in that widespread symbolism
for possession according to which the spirit, when incarnated in its
earthly host, is said to ride its ‘horse’. Thus, for instance, in the richly
dramatic bori spirit possession cult of the Hausa-speaking peoples of
west Africa (which we shall investigate more fully later) possessed
women are described as the ‘Mares of the Gods’. The spirits ‘mount’
them; but they also ‘mount’ the spirits. Amongst the Sidamo tribes of
southern Ethiopia, this idiom is even extended to differentiate between
the possession of men and of women. Men are ‘horses’ for the spirits,
and women are ‘mules’. Such fine distinctions are not made
everywhere.
This expressive language of the stables, which is widely employed
in possession cults and often contains sexual innuendoes, may have
several components. Thus in many cultures we find the notion that in a
state of latent or incipient possession prior to actual trance the spirit is
perched on the shoulders or neck of its host. It mounts into his head, or
some other centre of the body, assuming full possession of its
receptacle only when complete trance occurs. Thus the Greek oracle at
Delphi was mounted by the God Apollo who rode on the nape of her
neck; and the same imagery appears in Haitian voodoo and elsewhere.
Full possession itself is widely perceived as a form of temporary death,
sometimes called ‘half-death’, or ‘little death’. At the same time,
though by no means universally, ecstatic possession seizures are

ECSTATIC RELIGION
52
sometimes explicitly interpreted as acts of mystical sexual intercourse
between the subject and his or her possessing spirit. Among the Dayaks
of southern Borneo, in public rituals in which the priests and
priestesses of the community become possessed by the two supreme
deities of the cosmos—the Hornbill of the upper world, and the
Watersnake of the lower world—this is represented as a divine coition.
This theme is directly evoked in the accompanying chants, and
reproduced in acts of intercourse amongst the congregation. As the
hymns sung express it: ‘The journey of Jata (the Watersnake) in her
golden boat is ended; Mahatala (the Hornbill) has arrived in his boat of
jewels. They let down the pole into the vagina of the Watersnake; they
lower the staff of the Hornbill into the open gong.’ (Scharer, 1963, p.
135). The relationship between the devotee and the spirit, which he or
she regularly incarnates, is often represented directly in terms either of
marriage or of kinship. To some extent, which of these idioms is chosen
seems to depend upon the sexual identity and character both of the
subject and of the spirit involved. Thus, male shamans who incarnate
their own ancestor spirits are hardly likely to conceive of their mutual
relationship other than in terms of descent. Conversely, the idiom of
marriage seems to be favoured where stress is laid on the contractual
rather than the biologically determined nature of the relationship, and
where the possessed subject and possessing spirit are of opposite sex.
‘Marriage’ between men and masculine divinities is not, however,
absolutely excluded. Nor should we ignore the potential importance of
the theme of incest here. For the two separate ideologies of marriage
and descent may be combined as in the case of effeminate male
Burmese shamans, possessed by female nat spirits, who are represented
as their ‘mothers’ or ‘sisters’ (Spiro, 1967). More explicitly and
dramatically, among the Tukano Amazonian Indians of Colombo with
the aid of a local hallucinogenic preparation, shamans experience
ecstatic visions of an incestuous return to the cosmic womb (Reichel-
Dolmatoff, 1971).
The metaphor of spiritual marriage is familiar to us from our own
Christian tradition. This is the relationship traditionally postulated
between the Church and Christ; and, as we know, nuns are specifically
bound in spiritual union to the Sacred Bridegroom. Many Christian
mystics have used the same idiom, for example St Bernard, who wrote
of Christ as his soul’s Bridegroom; and this imagery has often been
employed by Islamic mystics both in relation to the Prophet
Muhammad, and even to Allah. This usage, however, is by no means a

TRANCE AND POSSESSION
53
monopoly of these religions. All over the world, we find this
conception of a spiritual union, parallelling human marriage, used to
image the relationship between a spirit and its regular devotee. Such
unions, as with their human counterparts, are moreover often blessed
with issue. Few anthropologists have been privileged to discover this
quite as directly as Professor Raymond Firth did on the Polynesian
island of Tikopia. There, following an illness which was taken by the
Tikopians to signify that he had been ‘overcome’ by the powerful
female spirit Pufine-i-Vaisiku, Firth was surprised to discover that he
had inadvertently begotten several spirit sons. This occurred during his
first work in the island in 1929. When he returned twenty-three years
later, he found that the incident was still remembered. He was asked
about his spirit sons (who presumably had grown up in the interval)
and eventually arranged to make contact with them through a friendly
medium (Firth, 1967, p. 319). In Muslim Malaysia in 1986, on the
other hand, a woman who claimed to have had a child by a spirit to
which she was ‘married’ was fined by an Islamic court for committing
adultery.
This uxorial imagery is also employed in Haitian voodoo; amongst
the Akawaio Carib-speaking Indians of British Guiana where the
shaman, the ‘one who perceives’, has the swallow-tailed kite as his
spiritual partner; in Buddhist Burma; in Bali with its highly theatrical
possession cults; in the elaborate possession cults of Dahomey and
Songhay in west Africa; in Ethiopia; and in many other African
possession cults elsewhere. With this widespread distribution, a detailed
enumeration of examples here would make dull reading and serve little
purpose. Several cases, however, raise points of wider significance and
are therefore worth discussion briefly.
Amongst the Saora tribesmen of Orissa, living on the fringes of
Hindu caste society, a shaman is often chosen by the direct intervention
of a female spirit, marriage with which effects the new priest’s
dedication. Thus, as one shaman plaintively put it. ‘I too had much
trouble before I married, for several tutelary (i.e. spirit) girls were after
me…’ And another man happily wedded to his spirit partner told
Verrier Elwin how, on the advice of an established shaman, he had
married a spirit girl (Elwin, 1955). The marriage proved fruitful and the
shaman had thus acquired three fine spirit boys, the celestial
counterparts of his earthly family of three sons and a daughter.
Significantly, such spiritual wives are considered to be Hindus, in
distinction to their earthly partners, and exact a strict code of behaviour

ECSTATIC RELIGION
54
from their spouses. Before any important sacrifice, for example, the
shaman must fast and abstain from earthly sexual intercourse. When he
dies, he is ‘taken away’ by his tutelary partner and joins her in the
underworld. In the process he himself becomes a spirit and a Hindu,
and is thus separated from his mortal spouse who, when she in turn
dies, may not join him.
Thus the shaman’s spiritual union not only defines his dedication to
a particular spirit, but also sets him apart from other members of his
society and imposes a barrier in his relations with mortal women. This
is most marked in the case of women who become shamans. The spirit
partners of such women regularly come to lie with them and tend to
monopolize their affections. Since, moreover, the spirit husband is a
Hindu, this represents a step up for his mortal wife. As can readily be
imagined, while giving the woman increased status and freedom, this
also renders her a formidable marriage partner to ordinary men. We
shall examine these implications of this common situation more fully in
the following chapter.
Amongst the Arctic Chukchee there are further complications within
the same theme. Here the sexually normal male shaman often has a
spirit wife who is considered to take part in the everyday life of the
family in which she is thus incorporated. Women shamans, however,
are disadvantageously placed, since their spirit familiars recoil from
any contact with the birth of children. Thus women with shamanistic
vocations find that their powers wane when they have children, and
they do not recover them fully until they have stopped bearing. This
opposition between mundane and celestial maternity occurs frequently
in spirit possession cults and has significant implications, as we shall
see later. Its effect among the Chukchee is of course to strengthen
men’s control of the shamanistic profession which, however, is equally
open to homosexual and to heterosexual males. The former, known as
‘soft-men’, fall into various categories according to the degree of
feminine behaviour which they exhibit. Some extreme homosexual
shamans, who are greatly feared for their mystical power, have spirit
‘husbands’ as well as the human husbands with whom they live. These
latter, however, are not in a very enviable position, since they are kept
in order by the spirit spouse who is regarded as the true head of the
family (Bogoras, 1907). Thus spiritual liaisons are evidently adapted to
all tastes, and exhibit as much variety as those of the mortal
partnerships which they mirror. As Milton reminds us in Paradise Lost:
‘Spirits when they please, can either sex assume, or both!’

TRANCE AND POSSESSION
55
A voodoo marriage certificate recording the mystical union of a woman
with her spirit (DAMBALLAH) LIBERTÉ, ÉGALITÉ, FRATERNITÉ
Republic of Haiti, 5.847—The year 1949 and sixth day of the month of
January at 3 o’clock in the afternoon. We, Jean Jumeau, Registrar of Port-
au-Prince, certifies (sic) that citizens Damballah Toquan Miroissé and
Madame Andrémise Cétoute appeared before us to be united by the
indissoluble bond of the marriage sacrament. Inasmuch as Madame Cétoute
must consecrate Tuesday and Thursday to her husband Damballah without
ever a blemish on herself, it being understood Monsieur Damballah’s duty
is to load his wife with good luck so that Madame Cétoute will never know
a day’s poverty: the husband Monsieur Damballah is accountable to his
wife and owes her all necessary protection as set down in the contract. It is
with work that spiritual and material property is amassed. In execution of
article 15.1 of the Haitian Code. They hereto agreed in the affirmative before
qualified witnesses whose names are given. [Signatures.]
(From Métraux, 1959, p. 215)
 
Finally, let us look briefly at the very explicit use made in Ethiopian zar
possession and in Haitian voodoo of celestial marriage as the regular
means of induction into the ranks of the chronically possessed. In
Ethiopia, the new acolyte, far from yet being a shaman, is referred to as
a ‘bride’ and is assigned two human protectors or ‘best-men’, just as in
mortal unions the bride is attended by two supporters to whom she may
afterwards turn for help if she has difficulties with her husband. She
thus takes as spiritual partner a spirit of opposite sex.
This marital theme is even more elaborately developed in the
voodoo cults of Haiti. There a person who wishes to secure the
permanent protection of one of the loa or ‘mysteries’ may make a
formal proposal of marriage, and so may the god. Ezili, the patron
goddess of lovers, is particularly uxorious and regularly offers her hand
to any man who serves her zealously, especially if he is about to take a
mortal wife! She then insists on marrying her devotee first, in case he
should forget her. Such marriages are celebrated with elaborate
ceremonies which Métraux has recorded in detail (Métraux, 1959).
Mortal unions are exactly paralleled even to the extent of the issuing of
a wedding certificate (see above). In spiritual unions the marriage vows
apply particularly strongly. When the god, and his or her mortal
partner, have pronounced the ritual phrases and exchanged rings (by
proxy) as a sign of plighted troth, they share a common destiny. The

ECSTATIC RELIGION
56
loa’s duty is to watch over his spouse, but he must be given presents in
return. The night of the day consecrated to his worship must also be
reserved for him and not shared with mortal partners. Some human
spouses make up a separate bed for their spirit and sleep on it on the
allotted night.
As in other cases, both men and women contract such unions which
are much more binding and strongly sanctioned than those in mortal
society. The extent of their solidary character is particularly evident in
those special cases which have a more sinister quality involving as they
do a compact with a spirit made specifically to gain success and riches.
Here the Faustian theme is strongly emphasized, and the person who
seeks to advance his fortunes through such a Commitment’ may be
allowed only a specified span of years before he is ‘taken’ by the evil
spirit, or ‘hot point’ (point chaud), to whom he is engaged.
Paradoxically, after his death, such a spirit force may enter the
deceased’s family estate and pass to his heirs as a transformed
benevolent loa (Larose, 1977).
As I said earlier, although this marital imagery is very widely used
to represent the relationship between man and spirits, the bond of
mystical union may also be expressed in terms of a direct blood-
relationship. Here the shaman or devotee is described as a child (a son
or daughter, according to sex), or occasionally, as a younger sibling of
the spirit. This filial idiom is employed in parts of South America. It is
prominent in the possession societies known as candomblés in Brazil
and in the linked syncretic religion of Umbanda (compounding
Amerindian, African, and European elements) which is sweeping from
the great Brazilian urban centres into the interior of the country in the
wake of socio-economic change and modern communications (Pressel,
1977). Sometimes this genetic symbolism occurs together with the
marriage imagery which we have just discussed, cult devotees being
collectively called ‘the children’ of the spirits, but each individual
having his or her own spirit partner. Both these images, of course, are
present in Christianity where the shaman Jesus is the ‘Son’ of God,
direct issue of the mystical union of the ‘Virgin Mary’ with God; and
the traditional Church itself, incarnating the Holy Spirit, is further
united to its spiritual Bridegroom, Christ. We need not pursue these
intricate familial relationships further here. Sufficient has been said to
illustrate the character of the two principal metaphors in which the link
between man and spirit is figured.

TRANCE AND POSSESSION
57
V
We began this chapter by noting the universality of states of altered
consciousness and dissociation, and saw that these may be explained in
different cultures either mystically or non-mystically (and sometimes in
both ways in different contexts). Spirit possession and soul-loss
(sometimes more accurately described by Linton’s term
‘soulprojection’) are the two principal mystical explanations. Although
they may exist side by side, usually emphasis is placed on one rather
than the other, arid it is of course the possession aetiology that chiefly
concerns us. Possession is believed to be both involuntary (or
uncontrolled), and voluntary (or controlled). Those who practise
controlled possession,’ mastering’ spirits, are in the Arctic context
known as ‘shamans’. I retain this term for men or women who play a
wide repertoire of social roles on this basis.
The attainment of the shaman’s calling is normally the climax of a
series of traumatic experiences and ‘cures’ in the course of which the
extent of his control of trance progressively increases. Ultimately he
achieves a stable relationship with a spirit which is formulated, either in
terms of marriage, or of direct kinship.
Finally, however bizarre or eccentric possession may seem to us, it
cannot be too strongly emphasized that in the religions which we
explore in this book, possession is a culturally normative experience.
For our purposes whether or not people are actually in trance, they are
only ‘possessed’ when they consider they are, and when other members
of their society endorse this claim or indeed initiate it. Thus as Stewart
has put it:
 
It matters little whether manifestations of possession are in reality due
to physical or pyschical abnormalities or whether they are artificially
induced by auto-suggestion. The essential factor in possession is the
belief that a person has been invaded by a supernatural being and is
thus temporarily beyond self-control, his ego being subordinated to
that of the intruder (Stewart, 1946, p. 325).
 
The subjective experience of possession in this sense, although it occurs
in a western Spiritualist1 context which is only marginally normative in
our secular culture, has been very well described by the Genevese
1For an intriguing anthropological account of contemporary spiritualism in Wales,
see Skultans, 1974.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
58
medium Hélène Smith to her investigator Flournoy. The latter gives the
following account in his interesting book, Des Indes a la planête Mars
(Paris, 1900):
 
Hélène has more than once described to me that she had the
impression of becoming and momentarily being Leopold
(Leopold Cagliostro, the eighteenth-century magician). This
happens to her during the night or particularly on waking in the
morning; she first has a fugitive vision of her cavalier, and then
he seems to pass gradually into her: she feels him as it were
invade and penetrate her whole organic substance as if he became
herself or she him. It is in short a spontaneous incarnation…
 
In the cults with which we deal next, personal interpretation of this
kind are culturally standardized and form part of orthodox, everyday
belief.
 

59
Chapter Three
 
AFFLICTION AND ITS
APOTHEOSIS
I
Possession by an intrusive spirit is by no means invariably as warmly
welcomed as it evidently was in the case of Hélène Smith. The initial
experience of possession, particularly, is often a disturbing, even
traumatic experience, and not uncommonly a response to personal
affliction and adversity. Up to a point, this is even the case in those
societies where the position of shaman-priest has become firmly
instituted and passes more or less automatically to the appropriate heir
by title rather than by personal attainment. In the first place, in such
circumstances not every heir is as keen to succeed to his predecessor’s
position as the spirits are anxious to effect this transition. Where the
successor shows reluctance in assuming his onerous duties, the spirits
remind him forcefully of his obligations by badgering him with trials
and tribulations until he acknowledges defeat and accepts their insistent
prodding. We find examples of this spiritual blackmail in all those
societies where, as among the Tungus, the position of shaman is
regarded as an inherited office. An instance from the Macha Galla of
Ethiopia will serve to illustrate the general situation. The old shaman of
one of the Macha clans sent his son to Addis Ababa to be educated.
There the Emperor helped him and he acquired a good schooling.
While he was still at Addis Ababa under the Emperor’s protection, his
father died and he immediately fell ill. He had no strength, and did not
want to return to his home there to succeed to his father’s position as
clan shaman. After a long period of illness, however, the Emperor
advised him: ‘You will not get well here and your education affords
you no joy. Return to your father’s land and live as your custom bids
you.’ Then the son returned home and became a shaman and soon
recovered (Knutsson, 1967, p. 74).

ECSTATIC RELIGION
60
Moreover, in such societies where in theory the position of inspired
priest is an inherited endowment, in practice it can also be achieved,
even if only in exceptional cases, by individual initiative. And the less
well-qualified by birthright the aspiring shaman is, the more violent
and dramatic will be the possessions by which he seeks to demonstrate
the efficacy of his calling. As is recognized in Haitian voodoo, in such
cases the new devotee is like an unbroken horse, throwing himself and
his spirit rider about with violent, wild plungings.
Thus while some shamans slip without fuss into the mantles of their
predecessors, or are summoned by dreams and visions to their calling,
this is by no means the universal pattern of recruitment. Very
commonly, as with St Paul, the road to the assumption of the shaman’s
vocation lies through affliction valiantly endured and, in the end,
transformed into spiritual grace. In Bali many of the temple mediums
are recruited following an illness which is later reinterpreted as a
benign inspiration. In Haiti, similarly, possession and initiation into the
cults of the loa mysteries often follow a serious illness or other
affliction. And here it is very noticeable that those whose lives flow
smoothly without much difficulty or distress are rarely summoned by
the spirits. For the less fortunate, it is only by induction into the loa cult
group that protection and security are ensured. Hence-forward those
who have been severely tried find comfort and solace in the ever-
present care of their guardian spirit. If they are hungry, the loa appears
to them saying ‘Take courage; you will have money.’ And the promised
help comes (Métraux, 1959, p. 95).
Here, clearly, initiation into the ranks of the chronically possessed is
in the nature of a cure. Moreover, as elsewhere, the devotee is prone to
experience possession in difficult, stressful situations, from which there
is otherwise no satisfactory escape. Thus Métraux reports that the
Haitian patient undergoing a painful operation may achieve, through
becoming possessed, a fuller anaesthesis than that provided by the
medical authorities. Shock following traffic accidents similarly
sometimes manifests itself as possession by a loa. And even
shipwrecked sailors, helplessly floundering in the sea, have sometimes
been visited by the spirits and thus carried in safety to the shore. In
exactly the same way, possession by spirits of the Shango cult
conveniently supervenes in Trinidad in situations of difficulty and
conflict and is not unknown in the hearing of a case in court (Mischel,
1958, pp. 249–60).
Likewise, in the Arctic, there are many similar reports of the same

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
61
ambiguous association between affliction, or illness, and divine
inspiration. The Chukchee, for example, compare the preparatory
period in the assumption of the shaman’s calling to a long and severe
illness, and in fact the call of the spirits is often a direct consequence of
an actual illness, misfortune, or danger. One Chukchee out harpooning
seal on an ice-flow slipped into the water and would, as he later said,
certainly have drowned but for the miraculous appearance of a friendly
walrus which comforted him and helped him to regain a foothold on
the ice, so that he was able to scramble to safety. Afterwards, full of
gratitude for his safe deliverance, he made offerings to the walrus and
became a shaman with that creature as his helping spirit.
The biography of the Chukchee shaman called ‘Scratching-Woman’
reported by Bogoras illustrates the same theme (Bogoras, 1907, p.
424). This shaman’s father was a small sickly fellow with a few
reindeer which he finally lost in a thick fog. He died of starvation in the
search for the missing herd, but his wife and son survived, being cared
for by relatives. Then followed many years of privation and misery for
the son. As a boy, he hauled fuel on a sledge for richer folk and was
paid with a little meat and blood. What he could thus earn was,
however, far from adequate and he remained weak and sickly. Then one
day he began to beat the drum (used by the Chukchee for summoning
spirits), and to call for spirits. One by one all the supernatural beings
appeared before him, and he became a shaman. The spirit of the
Motionless Star visited him in a dream and said: ‘Cease being such a
weakling. Be a shaman and be strong, and you will have plenty of
food!’ With this inspirational guidance and exhortation, Scratching-
Woman soon found luck had changed in his favour. He quickly
amassed a large reindeer herd and married into a well-to-do family.
When his father-in-law died, he became head of the family, his wife
being the eldest child. Thus from his lowly orphan beginnings, the
spirits made him a successful shaman and herder.
Amongst the Eskimo there are many similar accounts of the rise to
fame and fortune of shamans whose origins were full of misery and
privation. Indeed, among the Iglulik Eskimo, Rasmussen was told how
the primeval shaman had first appeared at a time of desperate affliction
and adversity. And in many of the biographies he collected, the helping
spirits made their first appearance by molesting the person they were
later to befriend and make a shaman. Thus the most dreaded of all
helping spirits, the sea-ermine, would attack men while they were out
in their kayaks, slipping up the sleeves of their clothes and running

ECSTATIC RELIGION
62
over their bodies filling them with ‘shuddering horror’. Such dangerous
and terrifying encounters frequently figured as the prelude to the
assumption of the shamanistic vocation (Rasmussen, 1929, p. 122).
Similar motifs, of course, abound in our own culture. The New
Testament traditions emphasize the lowly origins of the Carpenter of
Nazareth and His early spiritual travails, particularly His temptation by
the Devil on the mountain; and such themes recur in the inspirational
biographies of a host of later and lesser Christian figures. If it was only
after her death at the stake that final authenticity was granted to the
ambiguous Voices’ of Joan of Arc, some other more recent Christian
mystics of similar background have sometimes been more fortunate.
One of the less well known, but not least interesting, of these was
the Swedish tailor’s daughter, Catharina Fagerberg, who was born in
1700. After a period of employment as a domestic, she learnt to weave
linen and, while following this trade, rejected the advances of a leather-
worker who wished to marry her. Then followed seven years of severe
mental and physical torment in the course of which she was frequently
visited by a ‘good spirit’, who explained that the cause of her anguish
lay in her possession by devils which had been sent to trouble her by a
black magician at the behest of her slighted suitor. Gradually however,
inspired—as she believed—by God, Catharina acquired the power to
contain her affliction and to diagnose and cure disease in others. Her
reputation as a faith-healer soon spread and she inevitably came into
conflict with the ecclesiastical authorities. But, in a century in which
witch-trials were outmoded, she was acquitted, leaving her spiritual
manifestations to be dismissed by her sceptical opponents as morbid
fantasies. However, in a world where many still believed in evil spirits
and witchcraft, as well as in divine inspiration, Catharina enjoyed wide
success as a local shamanistic healer. She was supposed to incarnate
‘good’ and ‘evil’ spirits, and, by sending out her own ‘life-spirit’, to
divine distant events (Edsman, 1967).
These examples remind us how, frequently, those whom the gods
call they first humble with affliction and despair. Moreover, as we saw
amongst the Tungus, the powers involved are often, either directly or
indirectly, both the causes of misfortune and the means of its cure.
Those who become shamans thus commonly act, in effect, on the basis
of the crude slogan: if you can’t beat them, join them. It is, further-
more, precisely by demonstrating his own successful mastery of the
grounds of affliction that the shaman establishes the validity of his
power to heal. This conception of the shaman as the ‘wounded

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
63
surgeon’, to borrow T.S.Eliot’s memorable phrase, will be examined
more fully later. For the moment, all we need to note is that, while there
is a real sense in which all religions are essentially cults of affliction, in
the inspirational calling this association has a particular and poignant
significance. In the language of theology, the shaman’s initial crisis
represents the healer’s passion, or, as the Akawaio Indians themselves
put it, ‘a man must die before he becomes a shaman’.
II
The link between affliction and its cure as the royal road to the
assumption of the shamanistic vocation is thus plain enough in those
societies where shamans play the main or major role in religion and
where possession is highly valued as a religious experience. Here what
begins as an illness, or otherwise deeply disturbing experience, ends in
ecstasy; and the pain and suffering of the initial crisis are obliterated in
its subsequent re-evaluation as a uniquely efficacious sign of divine
favour. In other societies, however, where shamans play only a minor
role and are concerned with disease-bearing spirits which are not
central to the religious life of the community this apotheosis, although
it still occurs, is thrust into the background. Indeed, in these
circumstances, the connection between suffering and possession is so
overwhelming that at first sight it seems to constitute an end in itself,
rather than an end and a beginning.
Here, ostensibly at least, possession connotes misfortunes and
sickness, and cult activity is primarily concerned to alleviate distress
rather than to attain ecstasy. The emphasis is on disease and its cure,
and not, overtly at least, on affliction as a means to the achievement of
mystical exaltation. It is this feature, as we saw in the last chapter,
which has led some writers to characterize such healing cults as being
concerned only with ‘inauthentic’, or ‘negative’ possession, and to
contrast these with religions where ‘authentic’ possession is realized as
a divine ecstasy. To elucidate this misleading, and ultimately false,
antithesis we must look more closely at such apparently ‘negative’
cults.
This negative aspect is strongly reflected in the character of the
spirits involved. For by those who believe in them, but actually
worship other gods, these malign pathogenic spirits are regarded as
being extremely captious and capricious. They strike without rhyme
or reason; or at least without any substantial cause which can be

ECSTATIC RELIGION
64
referred to social conduct. They are not concerned with man’s
behaviour to man. They have no interest in defending the moral code
of society, and those who succumb to their unwelcome attentions are
morally blameless. At the same time they are always on the look-out
for a convenient excuse to harass their victims, and they are
inordinately sensitive to human encroachment. To step on one
inadvertently, or otherwise unwittingly annoy it, is sufficient to so
inflame the spirit’s wrath that it attacks at once, possessing its
trespasser, and making him ill or causing him misfortune. These
unattractive characteristics are displayed by all these hostile spirits,
whether they are conceived of as anthropomorphic powers, or as
puckish nature sprites.
Since they are so pointedly indifferent to human conduct, it would
be reasonable to suppose that these unpleasant spirits would be quite
indiscriminate in their selection of human prey. This, however, is far
from being the case. Contrary to what might be expected, they show a
special predilection for the weak and oppressed. We should be wrong,
however, to leap immediately to a pessimistic assessment of the
workings of providence in these cases. For as we shall see, it is often
precisely through succumbing to these seemingly wanton visitations
that people in such adverse circumstances secure a measure of help and
succour. Thus, in complete contrast to the sublime indifference to the
human condition which they are supposed to display, such spirits are in
fact acutely sensitive to the plight of the under-privileged and
oppressed. These assertions, fortunately, can easily be confirmed. All
we have to do is to look closely at a number of societies where illness
is interpreted as malignant possession, paying particular attention to the
categories of person most at risk and to the circumstances in which
they most frequently succumb to possession. Since we are here
primarily concerned with the incidence of disease, we shall in fact be
following what in medical parlance would be called an epidemiological
approach.
Let me begin with data on the Somali pastoralists of north-east
Africa which I collected in the course of field-work in what is now
the Somali Republic (Lewis, 1969). In this strongly patrilineal
Muslim society, witchcraft and sorcery as these phenomena are
known elsewhere do not figure prominently in the interpretation of
illness and misfortune. Their main religious life is concerned with the
cult of Allah whom Somalis approach through the mediation of the
Prophet Muhammad and a host of more immediate lineage ancestors

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
65
and other figures of real or imputed piety who, as in Roman
Catholicism, play a vital role as mediating saints. As in other Muslim
countries, this public cult is almost exclusively dominated by men,
who hold all the major positions of religious authority and prestige.
Women are in fact excluded from the mosques in which men worship
and their role in religion tends to be little more than that of passive
spectators. More generally, in the Somali scheme of things, women
are regarded as weak, submissive creatures. This is the case despite
the exacting nature of their nomadic life, and the arduous character of
their herding tasks in managing the flocks of sheep and goats, and the
draught camels, which carry their tents and effects from camping-
ground to camping-ground.
In this male-dominated and highly puritanical culture, spirit
possession, which is regarded as one cause among others of a wide
range of complaints (ranging from slight malaise to acute organic
diseases such as tuberculosis), occurs in a few well-defined contexts.
The first of these which I shall discuss here concerns cases of frustrated
love and passion, and involves emotions which, especially on the part
of men, are not traditionally recognized or overtly acknowledged. The
stiff-lipped traditional view is that the open display of affection and
love between men and women is unmanly and sentimental and must be
suppressed. The expression of love towards God, in contrast, is a highly
approved emotion which is widely encouraged and rapturously phrased
in Somali mystical poetry. But the direct acknowledgement of similar
feelings between men and women is totally out of place. Thus, if a girl
who has been jilted by a boy she loved and who privately undertook to
marry her exhibits symptoms of extreme lassitude, withdrawal, or even
more distinct signs of physical illness, her condition is likely to be
attributed to possession by the object of her affections. Here, as in all
other cases of Somali possession, the victim is described as having
been ‘entered’. (Although in this case it is strictly the personality of her
former lover which is supposed to have ‘seized’ her, rather than a free
spirit entity, I make no apology for mentioning this type of possession
here since it serves as a useful prologue to what follows.)
This interpretation of the disappointed girl’s state is consistent
with the traditional sex morality where the conception of romantic
attachment was, as I have indicated, excluded. Only within the last
twenty years or so has this rigid attitude begun to change—especially
in the towns which, as elsewhere in Africa, are the foci of social
change and modernity. There today, among the younger generation,

ECSTATIC RELIGION
66
the explicit recognition and acceptance of romantic love is a popular
theme given wide currency in contemporary Somali verse and radio
‘pop’ songs which scandalize men of the older generation. With these
enlightened views, young western-educated Somalis today describe
such cases of young women’s possession, in the Shakesperian idiom
of ‘love-sickness’. The traditional attitude, on the other hand, is much
more in keeping with that exhibited by seventeenth-century French
Catholic ecclesiastics in their handling of the celebrated case of the
hysterical Sister Jeanne des Anges, prioress of the convent school at
Loudon, and her frustrated infatuation for the notoriously amorous
Canon Urbain Grandier. As readers of Aldous Huxley’s lively
evocation in The Devils of Loudon will recall, this poor nun’s
condition was attributed to possession by malevolent spirits and
Grandier was held responsible. He was convicted of witchcraft and
burned at the stake in 1634.
In the Somali Republic these matters are dealt with less drastically,
and no legal action can be taken against the man involved. The
interpretation which these facts suggest is virtually that given by young
educated Somalis themselves. For a jilted girl no other institutionalized
means are traditionally available to express her outraged feelings. For it
is only where a formal engagement has been contracted, with the
consent of the two parties of kin, that a suit can be filed for breach of
promise. The disappointed girl’s private emotions and feelings are of
little moment in the jural world of men. Hence illness, and the care and
solicitude which it brings, at least offer some solace for her wounded
pride. Of the treatment administered to the possessed girl, all that need
be said here is that, as with Sister Jeanne des Anges, the invading
familiar may be exorcized by a cleric—in this case a Muslim man of
religion.
The other context of Somali possession is similarly regarded as an
illness and involves parallel symptoms ranging from mild hysteria or
light depression to actual organic disorders. In this case, however,
these disturbances are unequivocally attributed to the ingress of a
hostile spirit or demon. As elsewhere in Islam, Somalis believe that
anthropo-morphic jinns lurk in every dark and empty corner, poised
ready to strike capriciously and without warning at the unsuspecting
passer-by. These malevolent sprites are thought to be consumed by
envy and greed, and to hunger especially after dainty foods, luxurious
clothing, jewellery, perfume, and other finery. In the context which I
am about to describe, they are known generally as sar, a word which

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
67
describes both the spirits themselves and the illness attributed to
them. The smitten victim is said to have been ‘entered’, ‘seized’ or
‘possessed’ by the sar.
The prime targets for the unwelcome attentions of these malign
spirits are women, and particularly married women. The stock
epidemiological situation is that of the hard-pressed wife, struggling to
survive and feed her children in this harsh environment, and liable to
some degree of neglect, real or imagined, on the part of her husband.
Subject to frequent, sudden and often prolonged absences by her
husband as he follows his manly pastoral pursuits, to the jealousies and
tensions of polygyny which are not ventilated in accusations of sorcery
and witchcraft, and always menaced by the precariousness of marriage
in a society where divorce is frequent and easily obtained by men, the
Somali woman’s lot offers little stability or security. These, I hasten to
add, are not ethnocentric judgements read into the data by a tender-
minded western anthropologist, but, as I know from my own direct
experience, evaluations which spring readily to the lips of Somali
women and which I have frequently heard discussed. Somali tribes
women are far from being as naïve as those anthropologists (see e.g.
Wilson, 1967, pp. 67–78) who suppose that tribal life conditions its
womenfolk to an unflinching acceptance of hardship and to an
unquestioning endorsement of the position accorded them by men. My
interpretation here is further corroborated from a modern woman’s
perspective by Raqiya Abdalla’s (1982) study of female circumcision
and infibulation and, more impressionistically perhaps, in Nuruddin
Farah’s early novel, From a Crooked Rib (1970).
In these circumstances, it is hardly surprising that many women’s
ailments, whether accompanied by definable physical symptoms or not,
should so readily be interpreted by them as possession by sar spirits
which demand luxurious clothes, perfume, and exotic dainties from
their menfolk. These requests are voiced in no uncertain fashion by the
spirits speaking through the lips of the afflicted women, and uttered
with an authority which their passive receptacles can rarely achieve
themselves. The spirits, of course, have their own language but this is
readily interpreted (for a suitable fee) by female shamans who know
how to handle them. It is only when such costly demands have been
met, as well as all the expense involved in the mounting of a cathartic
dance (‘beating the sar’) attended by other women and directed by the
shaman, that the patient can be expected to recover. Even after such
outlays, relief from the sar affliction may be only temporary.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
68
Significantly, in some cases the onset of this spirit illness coincides
with a husband’s opening moves to marry an additional spouse; and in
every example which I encountered some grudge against her partner
was borne by the woman involved. It scarcely requires any elaborate
forensic technique to reach some understanding of what is involved
here; certainly, Somali men draw their own conclusions. What the
women call sar possession, their husbands call malingering, and they
interpret this affliction as yet another device in the repertoire of
deceitful tricks which they consider women regularly employ against
men. This ungallant charge men support by alleging that the incidence
of the disease is markedly higher amongst the wives of the wealthy
than amongst those of the poor. Women in their turn counter this
insinuation with the ingenious sophistry that there are some sar spirits
which only attack the wealthy while others molest the poor. Not
surprisingly, sar spirits are said to hate men.
Despite their essentially sociological view of the situation, men’s
attitudes are in fact ambivalent. They believe in the existence of these
sar spirits (for which the Quran provides scriptural warrant, since they
are assimilated to jinn), but with typical Somali pragmatism they are
sceptical when their own womenfolk and pockets are directly affected.
Depending upon the marital circumstances and the value placed upon
the wife concerned, the normal reaction is for the husband to accept
reluctantly a few bouts of this kind, especially if they are not too
frequent. But if the affliction becomes chronic, as it is apt to, and the
wife becomes a more or less regular member of a circle of sar
devotees, then, save in exceptional circumstances, the husband’s
patience is liable to wear thin. If a good beating will not do the trick
(and it often seems very effective), there is always the threat of divorce
and, unless the wife actually wants this (as she may), or is genuinely
physically ill (as she may very well be) or severely psychologically
disturbed, this threat usually works. Leaving aside for the moment the
wider implications of membership of a regular association of sar
devotees, it is evident that this characteristically female affliction
operates amongst the Somali as a limited deterrent against the abuses of
neglect and injury in a conjugal relationship which is heavily biased in
favour of men. Where they are given little domestic security and are
otherwise ill-protected from the pressures and exactions of men,
women may thus resort to spirit possession as a means both of airing
their grievances obliquely, and of gaining some satisfaction.
Somali women have a strong and explicit sense of sexual solidarity

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
69
and feelings of grievance and antagonism towards men who, in their
turn, regard the opposite sex as possessing a unique endowment of
guile and treachery. Of course, both these sexual stereotypes are
mutually reinforcing. It might even be argued, without stretching the
facts too far, that here, as in other societies where sexual differentiation
is equally strongly engrained, there are in effect two cultures—the
officially dominant world of men, and the subordinate sphere of
women. It is certainly in terms of such a wide-ranging dichotomy that
Somali men see women’s possession as a specialized strategy designed
to forward feminine interests at their expense. This ‘sex-war’ view of
the situation is very evident in the following folk-tale which, whether it
records a true episode or not, has a very clear moral.
The wife of a well-to-do official was feeling out of sorts one
morning and sitting morosely in her house, where there happened to be
fifty pounds of ready cash belonging to her husband. An old woman (a
sar specialist) came to visit the dejected wife and soon convinced her
that she was possessed by a sar spirit and would need to pay a lot of
money for the mounting of a cathartic dance ceremony, if she were to
recover. The necessary sar expert was quickly engaged, food bought,
and neighbouring women summoned to join in the party. When the
husband returned from his work at midday for his lunch, he was
surprised to find the door of his house tightly barred and to hear a great
hubbub inside. The shaman ordered his wife not to let him in, on pain
of serious illness, and after knocking angrily for some time the husband
lost patience and went away to eat his lunch in a tea-shop. When, in the
evening, the husband finally got back from work the party was over.
The wife, who had recovered remarkably quickly, met him and
explained that she had been suddenly taken ill. Sar possession had been
diagnosed, and in consequence she had unfortunately to spend all her
husband’s ready cash to pay for the curing ceremony. The husband
accepted this disturbing news with surprising restraint.
On the following day, which was a holiday, while his wife was out
shopping in the market, the husband took all her gold and silver
jewellery and her cherished sewing-machine to a money-lender from
whom he received a susbtantial advance. With this money he
assembled a party of holy men and sheikhs and feasted them royally
in his house. When his wife returned later in the day, she found the
door firmly closed and heard sounds of exuberant hymn-singing
within. After trying unsuccessfully to get in, she in her turn went off
puzzled to inquire from neighbours what was going on. When she

ECSTATIC RELIGION
70
finally returned home later, she found her husband sitting quietly by
himself and asked what had happened. ‘Oh’, said the husband, ‘I was
suddenly taken ill, and to recover I had to summon a group of holy
men to say prayers and sing hymns on my behalf. Now, mercifully, I
am better; but, unfortunately, since there was no ready cash in the
house I had to pawn all your jewels and even your sewing-machine in
order to entertain my guests.’ At these words, as can be imagined, the
woman raised a loud lament. But after a short period of reflection her
anger subsided, as she perceived the reasons for her husband’s action.
She promised fervently never again to ‘beat the sar’. Her husband in
his turn undertook never again to entertain holy men at his wife’s
expense and later redeemed her riches. And so, we presume, the
couple lived on afterwards in amity.
The use by women of sar spirit possession, which this simple tale so
well illustrates, is not confined only to the Muslim Somali. This pattern
of possession exists also in Ethiopia (under the name zar), where it
appears to have originated, and in the Muslim Sudan, Egypt, parts of
North Africa, and the Arabian Gulf where it has even penetrated the
sacred city of Mecca. In Christian Ethiopia, its psychological and
dramatic aspects have been explored by the French surrealist poet and
ethnographer, Michel Leiris (Leiris, 1958; see also Tubiana, 1983).
Further light on its social significance there has been shed by
subsequent anthropological research by Messing (1958), Young (1975),
and Morton (1977). Messing records how wives use the cult in Somali
fashion to extort economic sacrifices from their husbands by
threatening a relapse when their demands are ignored—a process
which the husbands seek to check by advocating Christian exorcism as
the most appropriate treatment. Although more expensive initially, this
latter procedure is theoretically efficacious as a single treatment. This
avoids the unattractive prospect, following the initial initiatory illness,
of the wife drifting into a zar coterie which would damage the
husband’s reputation as a respectable Ethiopian Christian. It is thus,
perhaps, not inappropriate that the zar spirit and initiatory illness
should also be known as ‘creditor’ (kureyna)—creating onerous debts
which extend through the spirit-possessed victim to burden her male
kin. Much the same appears to be the case with economically depressed
women in Cairo, although zar possession seems to have an appeal for
some rich women too, and zar ceremonies have become folkloric
events and even made the basis for a distinctive ‘Oriental’ ballet dance
style (Arabes-que, 1978; 1983). To the extent that zar possession offers

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
71
one explanation of illness, improved medical facilities and other
aspects of modernization seem to have a somewhat ambiguous impact
on the phenomenon. In the Egyptian countryside where village women
are less secluded than their bourgeois sisters—cherished by their
husbands as symbols of Islamic respectability—they are reported to be
less intensively involved in the cult than the latter (Saunders, 1977). In
some villages such possession is known as the ‘excuse’ and the
possessed victim referred to literally as ‘excused’—as indeed she is
from her routine tasks (Morsy, 1977; 1978). These themes are very
explicitly displayed in the suburbs of Khartoum, capital of the Sudan
republic. There researchers report that zar spirits possessing wives may
not only demand gifts, including in one case several gold teeth, but also
roundly upbraid the husbands in terms which would not be tolerated
were they expressed directly by the women themselves
(Constantinides, 1977, 1985; al-Shahi, 1984).
III
As an explanation of a wide range of symptoms, zar possession
provides women patients (acting consciously or unconsciously) with an
opportunity to pursue their interests and demands in a context of male
dominance. Sometimes they are clearly competing with other women
(e.g. co-wives) for a fuller share of their husband’s attentions and
regard. This may be related to difficulties or inabilities in fulfilling and
sustaining men’s ideal female roles as, for instance, with fertility
problems. In other cases, they may be directly striving for more
consideration and respect and sometimes actually competing with the
head of the family for a larger slice of the domestic budget. These ‘sex-
war’ aspects are by no means restricted to the zar complex. Without
attempting any comprehensive survey of all similar cults elsewhere, let
us look briefly at a few selected examples which are illuminating in
various respects.
In African ethnography, one of the earliest and most vivid
descriptions is given by Lindblom in his study of the Kamba of East
Africa (Lindblom, 1920). In this society a sharp distinction is made
between the local ancestral spirits which uphold morality and represent
the ongoing interests of their descendants, and other, capricious spirits.
These latter demons are typically spirit representations of
neighbouring peoples—Masai, Galla and other tribes—including
Europeans. These external or ‘peripheral’ spirits of foreign origin are

ECSTATIC RELIGION
72
not worshipped directly as the ancestors are, but regularly plague
Kamba women. As elsewhere, the afflicted women ‘speak with
tongues’ in a foreign dialect in accordance with the provenance of the
invasive spirit. The spirits’ demands, however, are quite clear. What
they seek are gifts and attention from the menfolk, usually from the
husbands, each spirit requesting things which reflect its tribal identity.
Swahili spirits thus demand richly embroidered Arab-style hats, and
European spirits articles which the Kamba take to symbolize European
identity. Women’s clothes are a popular request, so that the spirits help
to enlarge the wardrobes of those they possess. That conscious
deception is sometimes involved here is clearly indicated in a poignant
little case history recorded by Lindblom. A woman with a craving for
meat could only gain her husband’s consent to the slaughter of an
animal by resort to possession in which her hunger was voiced by the
spirit. Unfortunately, however, once her desires were satisfied she
made the serious mistake of boasting her successful deception so
openly that it came to the ears of the husband who, outraged, sent her
packing to her father.
Parallel cases are reported from Tanzania, where, some thirty years
ago, Koritschoner described the high incidence in women of an
affliction popularly called ‘devil’s disease’ in Swahili. Again the
possessing spirit, which manifests its presence by hysterical and other
symptoms, demands gifts which reflect its origin. Treatment here is
often a lengthy business; and involves not only the usual costly
cathartic dances but also the presence for some time of the therapist
within the family of the afflicted woman. In this enlightened therapy,
the sick wife is made to feel the centre of attention and her husband
may even be constrained to modify his behaviour towards his spouse
(Koritschoner, 1936, pp. 209–217). Among the Swahili of southern
Kenya, similar possession illnesses in wives, expressing conjugal strife,
are treated by expensive exorcisms controlled by men. In the exorcism
a sort of bargaining from a position of weakness ensues in which:
‘demands made by women in marriage (for money, clothes and
consumer goods) and refused, are made in the voice of a male spirit
and granted. Husbands are publicly bound to provide the goods which
will be used by the wife in the name of the spirit after “cure” has been
effected.’ (Gomm, 1975, p. 534: on patterns of Swahili possession
more generally see Giles, 1987.)
Again, among the Luo of Kenya another account describes a similar
cult of amoral, malevolent spirits of external origin, existing alongside

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
73
the ancestor cult which sustains local morality. The Luo ancestors
cause sickness and misfortune amongst their descendants when people,
neglecting customary rules, commit sins. But the foreign non-ancestral
spirits, which particularly single out women for their attentions, are not
concerned with administering the social code. They cause a wide range
of afflictions ranging from organic illnesses to such minor troubles as
constipation. Treatment, which as usual is expensive and involves
dancing and feasting, is undertaken by a female shaman who summons
the spirit possessing the patient and finds out what it wants. Often a
victim has to be temporarily ‘hospitalized’ in the shaman’s home, thus
enjoying a pleasant respite from the work-a-day world of the hard-
pressed Luo housewife. In the course of the therapy, the spirit agency
involved is not so much permanently expelled as brought under control.
And once pronounced fit, and restored to the bosom of her family, the
wife must henceforth be treated with respect and consideration lest the
dreaded affliction recur (Whisson, 1964).
Finally from East Africa, among the Taita, Grace Harris has
described a similar woman’s possession affliction caused by spirits
other than those which sanction morality, and functioning in much the
same way to exert pressure on men. Here an element which is present
in many of these cathartic rituals and which is in this case particularly
stressed is the assumption by possessed women of male postures and
dress. Here too there is direct evidence, which is not always so well
elucidated, that women actually envy men and resent the male
domination which, according to some anthropologists, they should be
conditioned to endure with equanimity and passive acceptance (Harris,
1957, pp. 1046–66).
The number of cults of this type in Africa is legion and we shall
have space here for only one further example, from West Africa, which
is particularly elaborate and well developed. Like its eastern analogue
zar, the Hausa bori spirit cult of Nigeria and Niger has spread to North
Africa and has a wide distribution (see e.g. Tremearne, 1914;
Dermenghem, 1954; Monfouga-Nicolas, 1972; Echard, 1978; Besmer,
1983). The cult is based upon an imposing pantheon of some two
hundred individually named divinities which are related amongst
themselves in a manner reminiscent of the gods of ancient Greece.
These spirits range in descending order of grandeur from the mighty
‘King of the jinns’ to a tiny cluster of sprites known familiarly as ‘the
little spots’ which, despite their innocent-sounding name, are held
responsible not only for a number of minor ailments but also for

ECSTATIC RELIGION
74
smallpox. As with many of its less expansive counterparts, this bori
galaxy is thus not merely a census of spiritual forces, but equally a
medical dictionary. Each spirit is associated with a particular group of
symptoms, although there is inevitably some overlap.
Both amongst the Muslim Hausa in West Africa proper, and in its
northern extension in North Africa this cult is again predominantly one
of women. Women are the regular devotees in shamanistic exercises
designed to cure and control the grounds of their ailments. Here, as
elsewhere, in the polygynous family, women succumb to afflictions
caused by these pathogenic spirits in situations of domestic conflict and
strife. It is thus most significant that amongst the residual, pagan
Hausa, when a man turns to embrace Islam, his wife is apt to join the
bori cult (Last, 1979). When possessed, such wives are treated with a
deference and respect which they are not otherwise accorded. Thus, as
a Nigerian anthropologist has put it, wives
 
manipulate bori episodes in such a way as to reduce their
husbands to social and economic straits. Hence bori is not only a
symbolic but also a real way of defying the male dominance
which pervades Hausa society. In bori women find an escape
from a world dominated by men; and through bori the world of
women temporarily subdues and humiliates the world of men
(Onwuejeogwu, 1969).
 
It is not my intention to prolong this recital of women’s complaints
indefinitely. A few brief examples outside Africa must, however, be
given if only to indicate that what we are discussing is far from being a
uniquely African syndrome. In the Polar regions, women are especially
prone to contract ‘Arctic hysteria’ which may be diagnosed as
possession by a spirit. The incidence of this affliction is highest in the
harsh winter months when the struggle to survive is most acute.
Gussow, who has interpreted this condition in Freudian terms, refers to
the hysterical flights, to which those affected are prone, as un-
conscious seductive manoeuvres and invitations to male pursuit. It is,
he argues, the refuge of those women who in circumstances of
adversity and frustration seek loving reassurance. Stripped of its
Freudian cadences, this interpretation closely parallels the line of
analysis which we have been following (Gussow, 1960).
Similarly, in parts of South America, where traditional deities still
uphold customary morality and are monopolized by men, we find

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
75
women prone to attack by peripheral spirits of the sort we have come
to anticipate. This is the case, for instance, amongst the Mapuche of
Chile, where such afflicted women may in the course of time
graduate to become female shamans. The Black Carib women of
British Honduras are likewise plagued by a variety of evil spirits
which have no connection with the ancestors who, within a Christian
framework, uphold morality. One such is a demon bush-sprite which
lurks in shady places, and is particularly attracted to pregnant or
menstruating women. It woos women in their dreams and inflicts
sickness upon them. But the most feared of all such spirits in this
culture is that described as the ‘devourer’, which is claimed to be
known in English by the outlandish title of ‘belzing-bug’. This
terrifying creature can assume such various forms as a crab, snake,
hen, armadillo, or iguana, and possesses girls, making them dance.
The treatment of these afflictions is, as we have now learnt to expect,
as rewarding to the women molested as it is economically damaging
to their husbands and menfolk (Taylor, 1951).
This sex-linked possession syndrome we are tracing seems to be
equally prevalent in India and in South East Asia generally. In Uttar
Pradesh disafflliated malevolent spirits, or ghosts, haunt the weak and
vulnerable and those whose social circumstances are precarious. Thus
the young bride ‘beset by homesickness, fearful that she may not be
able to present sons to her husband and his family may label her woes a
form of ghost possession’. And, ‘if she has been ignored and
subordinated, the spirit possession may take an even more dramatic and
strident form as a compensation for the obscurity under which she has
laboured’ (Opler, 1958, Dube, 1970). Amongst the Havik Brahmins of
Mysore, where as many as twenty per cent of all women are likely to
experience peripheral possession at some point in their lives, the
pattern is similar. Here it is again mainly insecure young brides (or
older, infertile women) who are most exposed to this form of
possession. More generally, women as a class are considered weak and
vulnerable and thus easily overcome by spirits which, flatteringly, are
believed to be attracted by their beauty. In possession, the spirit
conveys ‘its’ demands, causing the husband and his family to mount an
expensive ceremony designed to placate it and to persuade it to leave
the sick host. Until wives have gained more secure positions in their
families of marriage and have given birth to heirs, the illness is liable to
recur, thus granting the sick woman all the attention and influence
which she is otherwise denied (Harper, 1963, pp. 165–177). Reports

ECSTATIC RELIGION
76
from Muslim Malaysia have, likewise, tended to focus attention on the
dramatic diagnostic and healing séances of the inspired shaman
(bomoh). More recently, however, as well as presenting a subtle
analysis of the symbolism of the séance, Clive Kessler (1977) has
carefully analysed the epidemiology of possession afflictions which
principally affect women. There are three main categories of female
victim: reluctant young brides in arranged marriages; older wives
caught in the stresses of polygynous marriage with the threat of
divorce; and widows and divorcees. The insidence of possession in all
three cases, as Kessler (1977, p. 316) shows, ‘derives from and also
quite openly expresses the problematic relation between the sexes in
Kelantanese peasant society’. The evidence thus confirms ‘the
connexion’, we are tracing between ‘stress, illness and possession’, and
‘the sexual politics involved here are, moreover, largely understood by
bomoh and expressed…in the ritual therapy they employ’.
In rural Sri Lanka, the same possession pattern recurs; subordinate
women are frequently beset by demons which cause sickness and voice
the demands of the afflicted host very clearly. Here, as we have seen in
some previous examples, there is also explicit evidence that women
resent the position granted them by men: the partial alleviation which
they achieve by possession does not exhaust their antagonism. Thus
women frequently pray to be reborn as men and give other indications
of their dissatisfaction with their lot as a sex (Obeyesekere, 1970, 1981;
see also Kapferer, 1983). Again in Burma, as Spiro has shown, the cult
of amoral nat spirits which is led by possessed women complements
the official Buddhist religion dominated by men, and permits the
former sex to protect and advance their interests (Spiro, 1967).
Similarly, in one of the very rare sociological analyses of these
phenomena in Indonesia, Freeman has reported the same patterns of
married women’s spirit ailments, among the Iban of western Borneo,
which are attributed in this case to possession by lustful male incubi
(Freeman, 1965).
In traditional Chinese culture also, women are, as ever, especially
liable to possession by disafflliated spirits and, as is well known, play
an important part as mediums and shamans. Thus, in a psychiatric
study in Hong Kong (to which I shall be referring again later), women
in situations of domestic stress and conflict are shown to employ the
same feminist strategy with similar results (Yap, 1960, pp. 114–37).
Finally, in the profusely syncretic Japanese religious tradition where
a perennial shamanic current has flowed from the earliest times to the

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
77
present, possessed women have figured prominently. According to Hori
(1968), the leading authority on Japanese folk religion, the generic
term for shaman, or possessed medium—miko—implies that the role is
primarily a feminine one. Historians of the ancient ‘theocratic’ period
describe possessed female shamans acting as court oracles and, in some
traditions, such inspired female shamans figure as dynastic founders. In
the Heian period (784–1185), contemporary sources recount cases of
aristocratic women possessed by gods and spirits in contexts of
domestic strife of the kind with which we are now familiar. The
eleventh-century Tale of Genji contains a number of striking episodes
of jealous women possessed by aggressive spirits in contexts of
polygynous and concubinal conflict, with the usual sex-war overtones
(Bargen, 1986). This tradition of female spirit possession has persisted
to the present (Blacker, 1975) and in contemporary Japan spirit
possession is one of the commonest problems bringing women to seek
refuge in the exorcistic Japanese ‘New Religions’—whose founders are
frequently possessed women (Davis, 1980). The linkage between
women’s spirit afflictions, and domestic conflict is, perhaps, today even
more directly and pervasively evident in South Korea (see e.g. Harvey,
1979; and Kendall, 1985).
IV
It will now be clear, I think, that we are dealing with a widespread
spiritual interpretation of female problems common to many cultures,
whose diagnosis and treatment gives women the opportunity to gain
ends (material and non-material) which they cannot readily secure
more directly. Women are, in effect, making a special virtue of
adversity and affliction, and, often quite literally, capitalizing on their
distress. This cult of feminine frailty which, in its aetiolated form, is
familiar enough to us from the swooning attacks experienced by
Victorian women in similar circumstances, is admirably well adapted to
the life situation of those who employ it. By being overcome
involuntarily by an arbitrary affliction for which they cannot be held
accountable, these possessed women gain attention and consideration
and, within variously defined limits, successfully manoeuvre their
husbands and menfolk.
Since the illnesses which they suffer are interpreted as malign
possessions in which their personality and volition are effaced by those
of the spirits, it is obviously not the women themselves who make these

ECSTATIC RELIGION
78
wearisome and costly demands on men. Although the spirits speaking
in various tongues, all monotonously voice the same (to male ears)
irksome requests, their enunciation in this oblique fashion makes it
possible for men to give into them without ostensibly deferring to their
wives or jeopardizing their position of dominance. And if, in the
possession rituals, as they often do, women (no doubt often in
mockery) assume men’s clothing and accoutrements and behave at
least as aggressively as their partners, is not imitation the sincerest form
of flattery?
Hence, within bounds which are not infinitely elastic, both men and
women are more or less satisfied: neither sex loses face and the official
ideology of male supremacy is preserved. From this perspective, the
tolerance by men of periodic, but always temporary, assaults on their
authority by women appears as the price they have to pay to maintain
their enviable position. The concessions women extract can be
regarded, in turn, as ‘rewards for colluding in their own oppression’
(Gomm, 1975, p. 541).
In this connection the actual conceptual identity of the spirits
generally involved seems highly significant. In most cases these spirits
are either unwelcome aliens originating among hostile neighbouring
peoples, or mischievous nature sprites existing outside society and
culture. In other cases where this salient characteristic of externality is
more narrowly defined, they are either restive, disaffiliated ghosts, or
ancestors belonging to groups other than those where they cause so
much havoc. In a word, they are other peoples’ spirits. They are thus
officially dissociated, as we have seen, from the overt social norms of
the communities in which they figure so frequently as sources of
affliction. This ostensibly amoral, rather than immoral quality makes
them particularly appropriate as the carriers of disease for which those
who succumb to them cannot possibly be blamed. Again, both women
and men can have a clear conscience on this score.1
At the same time, the special predilection which these peripheral
spirits display for women seems also peculiarly fitting. For whether or
not they be regarded as pawns in the marriage games which Lévi-
Strauss and other alliance theory enthusiasts insist men are always
1To appreciate the full significance of this evasive action we have to go back to Job
in the Old Testament. Like him, most tribal communities assume that a high proportion
of misfortunes and illnesses are to be interpreted as punishments for sins. Possession by a
peripheral spirit thus provides an explanation of sickness which does not carry this
implication of guilt.

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
79
playing, there is no doubt that in many, if not most societies women are
in fact treated as peripheral creatures. The peripherality of women in
this sense is, irrespective of the system of descent followed, a general
feature of all those societies in which men hold a secure monopoly of
the major power positions and deny their partners effective jural
equality. Here, of course, there is in one sense an obvious and vital
contradiction since, whatever their legal position, women are equally
essential to the perpetuation of life and of men. It is they who produce
and rear children, and play a major part in their early training and
education. Thus the treatment of women as marginal persons denies, or
at least ignores, their fundamental bio-social importance and in social
terms clashes with their deep commitment to a particular culture and
society.
Returning now to our previous argument, if, to a significant degree,
it is in terms of the marginalization of women from full participation in
social and political affairs and their final subjection to men that we
should seek to understand their marked prominence in peripheral
possession we must also remember that these cults which express
sexual and domestic tensions are yet permitted to exist by men. It
seems possible that this tolerance by men of these cults, as well as the
ritual licence and blessing also accorded to women more generally,
may reflect a shadowy recognition of the injustice of this contradiction
between the official status of women and their actual importance to
society. If, in short, women are sometimes, even in traditional societies,
explicitly envious of men, the dominant sex in turn also acts in ways
which suggest that it recognizes that women may have some ground for
complaint. This is not the only factor affecting men’s interests and
behaviour however. As Roger Gomm (1975) shrewdly observes, the
redefinition of a problem of discipline (of the husband over the wife) as
a problem of possession enables men to maintain ‘a stance of
competence in the face of conflicting evidence—although at a financial
cost’. Moreover, the translation of a marital problem ‘into one of
possession’ enables all parties to co-operate in effecting a ‘cure’.
These aspects are perhaps more evident when we consider the wider
elaborations of women’s peripheral possession. Although I have
repeatedly used the term ‘cult’, so far I have concentrated on the use
made by women in their domestic situation of possession afflictions as
an oblique protest strategy against husbands and menfolk. Their
possession is diagnosed and treated as an illness. The primary emphasis
is sometimes initially on the casting out, or exorcism of the intrusive

ECSTATIC RELIGION
80
pathogenic spirit. But since such complaints tend to be habit-forming,
what is eventually achieved is often more in the nature of an
accommodation between the chronically possessed patient and her
familiar. The patient learns, in effect, to live with her spirit. The spirit is
thus finally ‘tamed’ and brought under control, but usually only at the
cost of recurrent ceremonies in its honour. This process is normally
realized by the woman concerned joining a club, or group of other
similarly placed women under the direction of a female shaman. Such
societies meet periodically to hold dances and feasts for the spirits in
which their members incarnate their familiars and perform rituals in
their honour.
As long as we maintain the external view—which men endorse—
that all these activities are designed to combat sickness and disease, we
can consider them as directly therapeutic in intention. They are
essentially cures, and in psychiatric terms, the cult meetings assume
much of the character of group therapy sessions. (This is an aspect of
their character which we shall discuss more fully later.) However, from
reports of the elaborate, if furtive, ritual procedures involved—and
from which men are rigorously excluded—it is abundantly clear that
such occasions are for the women themselves more in the nature of
religious services. Thus the healing cult is, for its participants, a
clandestine religion, and women are for once exercising a double
standard. What men reluctantly accept at face value as illness and cure,
the weaker sex enjoys as a religious drama. What is for both initially an
illness, thus becomes for women a traumatic induction into a cult
group. Consequently, we have here a feminist sub-culture, with an
ecstatic religion restricted to women and protected from male attack
through its representation as a therapy for illness. Just as with those
other possession cults involving men, which occupy a central position
in society and where the royal road to divine election lies through
affliction, so also here what begins in suffering ends in religious
ecstasy.
These apparently contradictory, but in reality highly compatible,
elements are all present in tarantism as it survives today in southern
Italy and Sardinia. This, as we saw in the previous chapter, is officially
an illness caused by the bite of the dreaded tarantula spider. But since,
of the two tarantula spiders, the one whose bite is actually harmless is
that selected as the ostensible cause of this disease, there is clearly
more to tarantism than at first appears. Other considerations fully
confirm this suspicion. Those who have been ‘bitten’ once, re-

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
81
experience the effects of the ‘bite’ at regular, often annual, intervals.
The bite can also even run in families. Its first occurrence coincides
with the experience of stress and conflict by the victim. And women,
though they are actually less likely to be in contact with the real
tarantula which could cause their symptoms, are much more prone to
contract this disease than men. That we are concerned here with
something much more exalted and arcane than the effects of a real
spider bite, is further indicated by the rich mythology and ritual which,
contrary to the apparently non-mystical aetiology of the affliction, lies
at the heart of tarantism.
In the first place, the spider involved is no ordinary insect but a
macabre cultural construct ambiguously connected with St Paul.
Following the celebrated incident with the serpents in Malta, it is this
saint who alone is credited with the gift of curing the bite; and what he
cures, he also causes. So the Apostle Paul is ambivalently assimilated to
the mystical spider, and in Apulia the rites of exorcism now take place
mainly at shrines dedicated to him. In the province of Salente, where
tarantism has been studied on the spot by the Italian scholar, de
Martino, the main ceremonies take place in St Paul’s chapel in the
church at Galatina. Here the participants assemble annually on the
saint’s feast-day in June and dance and sing to the accompaniment of
rhythmic clapping. Those who seek a cure and those who come to
celebrate their recovery, summon the saint with the invocation: ‘My St
Paul of the Tarantists who pricks the girls in their vaginas: My St Paul
of the Serpents who pricks the boys in their testicles.’
This strangely incongruous identification of the libertine spider with
the ascetic Apostle is not as wayward as it appears. For in earlier
centuries, the revelries of the tarantists certainly had a highly erotic
character, echoing the frenzied dancing of the maenads of Dionysus
from which there is some reason to suppose they may actually have
developed. And since tarantism today involves possession by the hybrid
spider-saint (for that is what the ‘bite’ really signifies), the expression
of this in the language of physical love is, as we have now so often
seen, far from unusual. The recognition of the saint’s special power to
cure the affliction has thus enabled what was probably, in origin, a pre-
Christian and possibly once Dionysian popular cult to be
accommodated within the local practice of Christianity.
What is clearly involved here today is a loosely Christianized
peripheral cult practised mainly by peasant women. As in the other
examples we have considered, entry to the cult is achieved by

ECSTATIC RELIGION
82
succumbing to an illness for which the mythical tarantula is held
responsible. Treatment consists of the usual cathartic dance rituals
conducted traditionally in the patient’s own home to the tune of the
tarantella, but held increasingly today in the saint’s chapel. As
elsewhere, all this is a costly business for, while the church profits (as
well as the patient), heavy expenses fall upon the victim’s husband and
male kin. Once bitten, the subject is normally bound to the spider-saint
for life. The symptoms reappear at regular intervals, being interpreted
as further bites by the original spider, and abate only after the dance in
its honour has been celebrated. The association of the spider with St
Paul, and of the principal curing ceremonies with his feast day,
incorporates the cult within the church calendar.
A typical example of the onset and subsequent treatment of the bite
will show how everything that has been said previously of these cults
applies equally here (de Martino, 1966, pp. 75 ff). A girl, whose father
had died when she was thirteen, was brought up in poor circumstances
by an aunt and uncle. At the age of eighteen Maria fell in love with a
boy who, since his family disapproved of the match because of the
girl’s poverty, subsequently abandoned her. Maria suffered much from
this. One Sunday while gazing listlessly out of her window, she was
‘bitten’ by the spider and felt constrained to dance. About the same
time, a woman of the district began to think of Maria as a possible
spouse for her son. When a suitable occasion presented itself, the
mother asked Maria to accept her boy in marriage. To gain time, Maria,
who was not attracted by the proposal, pleaded that she had not
sufficient money to make a trousseau, because of her outlays to
musicians for her tarantist dance treatment.
At this point, St Paul providentially appeared, ordering Maria not to
marry, and summoning her in mystical union with himself. Shortly
afterwards, however, the son and his mother succeeded in luring Maria
out to a deserted farm and forced her to live there in shame. After a
little time, a quarrel occurred when her mortal spouse brusquely
ordered her to iron his clothes. And as she went out to return the iron
she had borrowed from a neighbour, she met St Peter and St Paul who
said to her: ‘Leave the iron and come with us.’ When Maria replied,
‘And my husband, what of him?’ she was told not to worry on that
account. This incident occurred on a Sunday, exactly at the time of day
when she had been bitten before. After hearing the saint’s words, Maria
was absent for three days, wandering through the fields. When she
returned, she danced, as a result of the second bite, for nine days. With

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
83
this curious love-bite the saint sought to remind Maria of her holy tryst.
Finally, Maria achieved a compromise between the rival interests of her
human and spiritual spouses. She agreed to a formal marriage with her
human seducer while continuing to celebrate her spiritual union by an
annual recrudescence of her affliction in time to participate in the
ceremonies on the saint’s feast-day.
Thus, constrained by circumstances to marry a man she did not
want, Maria continued to pay periodical tribute to the tarantula and to
the saint, reviving on each occasion, in the symbolism of the rite, the
original adventure of the bite of love and being cured at the same time
through the grace of her celestial husband. What had begun as an
affliction attributed to the demonic spider, had found its apotheosis in a
peculiarly intimate communion with St Paul. And while Maria was thus
able to control her illness through her annual participation in the
Pauline rites at Galatina, this whole pattern of action was highly
expressive of her plight. Through these recurrent outbreaks, followed
by treatment at the shrine, Maria was able to sustain her condemnation
of her forced marriage, making conjugal life difficult, imposing severe
economic stress on the family which she did not love, and flagrantly
calling public attention to her problems. If she could not radically
remedy her situation, at least she could continue to protest at it in a
religious idiom which men could condone as a divinely sanctioned
therapy.
V
To understand fully the dynamics of this and other peripheral healing
cults, we have to distinguish clearly between a ‘primary’ and
‘secondary’ phase in the onset and treatment of possession. In the
primary phase, women become ill in contexts of domestic strife and
their complaints are diagnosed as possession. The secondary phase is
inaugurated when possession bouts become chronic, and the afflicted
wife is inducted into what may become permanent membership of the
possession cult group. In the course of time, she may then graduate to
the position of female shaman, diagnosing the same condition in other
women, and thus perpetuating what men tend to regard, uncharitably,
as a vicious circle of female extortion. Thus what is considered to begin
with as an uncontrolled, unsolicited, involuntary possession illness
readily develops into an increasingly controlled, and voluntary
religious exercise. The climax in this cycle occurs when the role of

ECSTATIC RELIGION
84
shaman is assumed by those women who, in full control of their own
spirits, are considered to be capable of controlling and healing spirit
afflictions in others. Like the Tungus shaman, they ‘master’ their own
spirits and use them for the public good, or at least for the good of that
public which consists of women.
This characteristic sequence of events has been particularly well
described amongst the Venda tribe of Southern Africa. Stayt, who
studied the situation there in the late 1920s, records that alongside the
central morality ancestor cult, an influx of intrusive foreign spirits from
the neighbouring Shona peoples of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) had
developed about 1914. These invasive powers possessed women and
spoke through them in the Shona dialect. Full of mischief and causing
illness, these sprites were believed to lurk in the crevices of trees where
they made weird unnatural noises. Their presence in sick married
women whom they regularly tormented was diagnosed and treated by
female shamans. In the course of treatment directed by the shaman and
consisting of drumming and dancing, the spirit possessing the patient
would reveal its presence by a deep, bull-like grunt and then announce
its demands. In response to the shaman’s interrogation, the spirit would
typically declare: ‘I am so-and-so, and I entered you when you were
walking in a certain place. You did not treat me well; I want a present,
some clothes or ornaments.’ The spirit might also demand such
symbols of male authority as a spear, an ancestral axe, a tail-whisk, or a
kerrie-stick. Such gifts were formally offered to the spirit who would
then allow the patient to recover.
As usual, however, relief was only temporary. Following her first
possession, a married woman regularly succumbed at times of
difficulty and distress to further attacks, and when seized by the spirits
donned the spirit’s clothes and danced to its beat. Such a woman had
now in fact become a novitiate member of a circle of recurrently
possessed women, holding regular dances, and might in time graduate
to the position of shaman herself.
In one recorded case, the impetus to assume this position came from
a forced marriage from which, unlike the tarantist Maria, the woman
concerned succeeded in escaping. The Venda girl in question left her
new husband and returned to her own family where her father, angered
at this rejection of his authority, beat her. The reluctant bride then ran
away into the bush and disappeared completely for six days. After this
alarming absence, she returned home looking very ill and complaining
bitterly. Her father sent for a shaman diviner who diagnosed that the

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
85
unhappy bride was now possessed by a spirit. That night, to her father’s
astonishment, the girl rose up and commanded him to follow her. The
father protested, but since his daughter spoke in a strange voice he was
afraid and obeyed. This initial episode was in fact the beginning of this
woman’s assumption of the career of mistress of spirits. After
becoming a full-time member of a women’s possession club, she
eventually became one of the best-known shamans in Vendaland (Stayt,
1937).
The transition from what I have called the primary phase of
peripheral possession to the secondary phase may thus be provoked by
an unacceptable marriage, or by an unhappy love-affair—as the ancient
physician Galen of Pergamon saw in relation to the onset of hysteria in
women. Clearly there are various degrees of protest here. What, in
company with many other women, Maria found supportable as long as
she also belonged to a cult group, others have rejected completely to
assume positions of greater authority and commitment within what
might almost be called the protest sub-culture or counter-culture. To
some extent, obviously, idiosyncratic personal psychological factors, as
well as situational ones, play their part here: some women feel a greater
desire than others to play the dominant role of the shaman. Others
again, have difficulties in their relations with men and find permanent
and devoted attachment to the cult group easier and more rewarding
than matrimony.
Such cults, and especially those like the Hausa bori cult, which are
associated with prostitution, also afford a convenient refuge for
divorced wives who are ‘between husbands’. Often, though not always,
the sort of women who make flighty wives and whose marriages are
unsuccessful are precisely those drawn into these movements. In other
cases, divorced wives who have failed through no fault of their own
may also temporarily attach themselves to these groups. More
generally, undoubtedly the commonest spur to the final degree of
involvement and professionalization is infertility in women. A high
proportion of those who become shamans are in fact either women past
the menopause, or their barren younger sisters. Thus those women to
whom marriage can offer little, and those who have already enjoyed its
fruits as wives and mothers find in the shaman’s role an exciting new
career. That this position of mastery over spirits and of leadership of
rebellious wives should be assumed by those whom society regards as
half-men (since they are not fully women) is of course highly
appropriate. Thus what we might call the infertility syndrome underlies

ECSTATIC RELIGION
86
the androgynous character which is frequently attributed to the leaders
of these peripheral cults (cf. Echard, 1978; Constantinides, 1985).
All this of course corresponds very well to the ancient Greek
conception of hysteria as a possession affliction relating directly to the
womb (hystera is the Greek word for womb). One of the earliest
recorded writers to have correctly diagnosed this theme was in fact
Plato, who expressed his views as follows;
 
The womb is an animal which longs to generate children. When
it remains barren too long after puberty it is distressed and sorely
disturbed: and straying about in the body and cutting off the
passages of breath, it impedes respiration and brings the sufferer
into the extremest anguish and provokes all manner of diseases
besides (quoted in Veith, 1965, p. 7).
 
It would be pleasant to leave the last word for the moment to Plato.
But, before we conclude this chapter there is a wider aspect of the
dynamics of these cults to which we must call attention—their
historical setting. Although, for the most part, I have written as though
these cults were somehow suspended in a timeless eternity, this is of
course very far from being the case. As with other religious
phenomena, they rise, change, and decline in response to variations in
the external circumstances which play upon them. And by considering
the cults in this wider context we learn more about them. Often, for
example, these comtemporary marginal movements turn out to be the
mainline religions of earlier ages which have been eclipsed by new
faiths. They are then anachronisms in which historians may be tempted
to see a rather specialized illustration of Collingwood’s well-known
remark about the persistence of the past, ‘encapsulated’—as he put it—
in the present.
Thus, for instance, in the contemporary Burmese nat-spirit posses-
sion cult, which is so popular with women, we see much of what
survives today of the old pre-Buddhist religion. Or so historians assure
us. In the same fashion, most authorities agree in regarding the West
African bori cult of today as containing elements of the old religion of
the Hausa displaced by Islam and thrust into a shadowy, peripheral
existence in a Muslim society dominated by men. In its pre-Islamic
setting, bori spirits were tied to the traditional Hausa clan structure and
did not involve possession. And in those halcyon days women enjoyed
higher status than they now do as Muslims. Thus with the rise of Islam,

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
87
the old clan deities ‘fell into the public domain’ as Jacqueline Nicolas
has put it; though ‘public’ here has to be understood in the limited
sense of referring to women rather than men. Women became
possessed by the old gods which their men had discarded. Sort, thus,
represents a syncretic transformation as much as a ‘survival’ from pre-
Islamic culture (cf. G.Nicolas, 1975; Besmer, 1983; Echard, 1978).
Possession is probably a new, post-Islamic element.
A parallel sequence of events is postulated, rather more
hypothetically in the case of the zar cult in Ethiopia, which, on this
view, was an indigenous religion displaced this time by Christianity
and thus relegated to the margins of society to be seized upon by
peripherally placed people (mainly women). In much the same way and
much more recently, amongst the newly Islamized and traditionally
matrilineal Zaramo people of the Tanzanian coast, women have been
forced into a more subordinate position than they formerly held. In
these circumstances they seem to have sought to recover something of
their former position by developing a spirit possession cult centring
round the old deities, and having all the features we have seen
elsewhere.
In many of the other examples we have discussed, however, there is
evidence that women are not so much striving to regain a lost paradise
as aspiring to achieve entirely new positions of independence and
power. Frequently it seems that social changes which have swept their
men forward have left them struggling behind, desperately seeking to
catch up. Up to a point something of this sort appears to have occurred
in the tarantist cult in southern Italy which, formerly, had a wider social
catchment, and included a higher proportion of socially disadvantaged
men than it does today. In other more exotic cases, unfortunately our
historical perspective is drastically shortened by the sheer lack of
secure knowledge of the past in any depth. Yet despite this barrier to
understanding, there is certainly much to suggest that where these
peripheral cults are not (as with bori) the residues, however
transformed, of old displaced religions, they have often arisen
comparatively recently. In Africa, at any rate, it frequently seems that
cults of this kind are in part a side-product of the wider contacts and
interaction of tribes which the colonial situation encouraged. They may
also reflect a response to European conceptions of the status of women.
Certainly, at least, such cults are acutely sensitive to changing
economic and social conditions, as indeed, we should anticipate from
their effects and symbolism.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
88
This is very clearly seen in an impressive study by Elizabeth Colson
(Colson, 1969, pp. 69–103) which contrasts the conservative,
traditionalist Tonga of the Zambesi valley with their more sophisticated
go-ahead countrymen living in the adjoining plateau-land. Amongst
these Plateau Tonga, increasingly involved in the modern market
economy of Zambia since the 1930s, and with local opportunities for
earning cash wages which did not require their menfolk to work
extensively as migrant labourers far from home, men and women have
been subject to a virtually parallel acculturation. Moreover, the
traditional pattern of relations between the sexes was one of unusual
equality for an African society. Thus, whether unmarried or not, Plateau
Tonga women participated freely in men’s social activities and were
not strictly hedged about with a barrage of mystical restraints. In this
situation, possession by peripheral, non-ancestral spirits called masabe
is today rare, and, in so far as it occurs at all, affects men and women
equally.
Amongst the Valley Tonga the position is quite different. Here men
have long participated through labour migration in the wider European-
orientated world. Women in contrast have remained at home fascinated
by the town delights and mysteries from which they have been
excluded. It is these secluded and constrained wives who are regularly
subject to possession by spirits that today characteristically demand
gifts which these women directly associate with their alluring urban
counterparts. As well as for gay clothes and luxury foods, one of the
commonest requests is for soap. This change in spirit appetites reflects
a growing male sophistication and repugnance for the oil and ochre
cosmetics with which Valley women traditionally bedecked their
bodies, and a distinct preference by men for freshly bathed and
fragrantly scented partners. It is in this glamorous idiom of the
beautician’s salon that, through their possessing spirits, these rural
women today call attention to their exclusion and neglect and seek to
alleviate or overcome it. In the past, as so often elsewhere, these same
spirits hankered after men’s garments and possessions. Matthew
Schoffeleers (1985) records a similar outburst of women’s spirit-
possession in southern Malawi in a context where the collapse of local
cotton production and consequent upsurge in male labour migration
made women more dependent on and subservient to their husbands.
Whatever may have been the case in the past, these ambitions and
longings are today no longer static. Women’s aspirations are constantly
changing with variations in their circumstances and experience. The

AFFLICTION AND ITS APOTHEOSIS
89
demands which the cults express alter accordingly as women, like
Oliver Twist, continually ask for more. To be a fully-fledged bori
woman in Niger, for instance, is synonymous with being a ‘with-it’
emancipated woman (zawara), fully versed in the sophistications of
town life and deeply involved in urban politics and other men’s
activities. Much the same applies, I suspect, to similarly, permanently
possessed, women in other urban surroundings, especially where this
involves increased domestic confinement and frustration. We shall
return to this theme of protest carried to the point of emancipation in
the next chapter. For the moment, let us also note how the changing
character and imagery of the possessing spirits mirrors the wider
varying land-scape of social experience. To the former tribal and
animal spirits which everywhere figure so prominently in these
traditional spirit pantheons are added, while they are still novel and
mysterious, such other alien powers as those manifest in telephones,
cars, trains, and aeroplanes. Much the same occurs generally with
spiritual forces of Christian and Islamic origin. These powers are as
readily assimilated in peripheral cults in the third world as was St Paul
in southern Italy. With the arrival of these new spirit accretions,
reflecting new contacts and new experiences, some of the old spirits
become otiose and drop out.
This experiential and explanatory function, as old religious forms
stretch out their arms to embrace and come to terms with new
experience, is strikingly indicated in the Sudan Republic. There, when
the first national football team was formed and public enthusiasm for
the sport was high among men, women began to be preyed upon by
foot-baller zar spirits. Similarly, during the military regime of General
Aboud, a rash of military spirits appeared; and significantly in political
circumstances which were widely felt to be oppressive, a new category
of anarchist spirits also entered the lists. These novel spirit
presentations were a great trial to women amongst whom they
faithfully reproduced the main play of events in the greater world of
men. Thus, where they may not succeed in doing so more directly, on
the spiritual plane at least, women strive to keep in step with men.
Again we see clearly that what I have called the subordinate female
sub-culture, if only in fantasy, marches forward in pace with the
dominant culture of men.
 

90
Chapter Four
 
STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL
ATTACK: PROTEST AND ITS
CONTAINMENT
I
It would no doubt be satisfying to male vanity to interpret the marked
prominence of women in the possession of cults which we have just
discussed as the reflection of an inherent, and biologically grounded
female disposition to hysteria. Unfortunately, however, this conclusion
is untenable because in practice these movements are not entirely
restricted to women. Notwithstanding my emphasis in the previous
chapter, several of the cults .which we have already examined do in fact
also include men, and not only those with obvious personality
disorders. Italian tarantism, this ‘religion of remorse’, as de Martino
punningly labels it, which still today attracts a few downtrodden male
peasants, had in earlier periods a wider catchment among men.
Seventeenth—and eighteenth-century accounts reveal a considerably
higher proportion of men tormented by the spider’s bite than is the case
today. These statistics correspond well with other historical data which
show how, in previous centuries, tarantism had a particular appeal for
men whose social circumstances were unusually oppressive or
constricting.
With its formerly more richly endowed symbolism in which the
dancers acted as swaggering captains, grandiose governors, muscle-
flexing boxers, and hectoring public orators, the cult gave such men the
opportunity of playing a range of roles far removed from those they
held in real life. The most wretched beggar could temporarily assume
the airs and graces of high society, and command respectful and
sympathetic attention for his posturing. The cult also attracted priests
who found difficulty in enduring the rigours of their celibate calling as
well as nuns who chafed against the discipline and constriction of the

STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK
91
religious vocation. Such maladjusted individuals from monastery or
convent found some measure of relief through participating
periodically in the lusty rites of the Women’s Carnival. Today all this is
changed. The spider’s bite is almost entirely restricted in its incidence
to poor peasant women in the remote and more backward parts of
southern Italy.
Although we are much less well-provided with detailed information
on the social background of its devotees, the cult of Dionysus seems to
have exercised a similar appeal not only for women but also for men of
low social status. As Jeanmaire has phrased it, Dionysus was the ‘least
political’ of the Greek gods (Jeanmaire, 1951, p. 8). He was essentially
a god of the people, offering freedom and joy to all, including slaves as
well as freemen excluded from the old lineage cults. Apollo, in
contrast, as E.R.Dodds has it, ‘moved only in the best society’. Thus it
seems that here we have another of these peripheral cults involving
spirits of foreign (here supposedly Thracian) origin which inflicted
‘illness’ on downtrodden men and women, and at the same time offered
a means of escape and cure in the associated cathartic rituals.
All this applies equally well to both the zar and bori cults in Africa
which, previously, we have discussed only in relation to women. In
Christian Ethiopia, zar possession is not in fact a monopoly of the fair
sex. The disease also affects and the cult equally embraces men of
subordinate social status, particularly people of such marginal social
categories as half-Sudanese Muslims and ex-slaves. Indeed in the interval
between 1932, when it was observed by Michel Leiris, and more recent
descriptions, it is clear that the composition of the cult groups has to
some extent changed. Some of the earlier higher class Amhara women
adherents seem to have dropped out to be replaced by a wider spectrum
of marginalized men—particularly, but not exclusively, non-Christians.
Membership of the local zar club and participation in its dramatic rituals
offer these otherwise underprivileged persons some degree of
emancipation from frustrating traditional confinements. Within these
clubs, which may also function as savings societies and credit
associations, members of low class minority groups have the opportunity
of striking up useful associations with people who, though Amhara, are
handicapped in other ways. And, in keeping with what is happening on
the wider Ethiopian scene, a new aspiration towards upward social
mobility is evident in the increasingly exalted status of the spirits which
now possess people of humble origins.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
92
Whereas in Ethiopia low class men (often Muslims) may in the zar
clubs thus rub shoulders with Christian Amhara women of higher
status, in southern Somalia each sex has its own cult. Here freeborn
women are involved in a possession society called mingis (from the
Amharic for ‘government’, ‘power’, etc.) which is a local variant of zar
incorporating some Oromo influence (for a musicological account see
Giannattasio, 1983). This cult rigorously excludes ex-slaves, who, in
this fertile part of the Somali Republic, were formerly employed as
agricultural serfs. They have their own possession club known as
numbi, and meet regularly each week to hold a dance ritual in which
they become possessed by the spirit.
Significantly, when these ex-slaves dance in the possession rites they
carry as insignia whips which, though they are of course no longer used
today, enable them to present themselves not as slaves, but as masters
of slaves. This striking role reversal is a crucial element in the ritual.
Again, although in rural districts of northern Nigeria the Hausa bori
cult is essentially a women’s protest movement, in towns—where it is
associated with prostitution and also with trade and markets in
general—men are also involved, and not merely as customers. Thus in
the Republic of Niger, as Madame Nicolas (Nicolas, 1967; Monfouga-
Nicolas, 1972) has reported, townsmen become possessed and join the
cult. But, significantly, they are foreigners, not local men, who as
outsiders may be presumed to be in a position of insecurity and
subordination. In the Ader and Kurfey regions of the northern Nigerian
Sahel, Nicole Echard (1978) has sketched out historically how the bori
cult registers external pressures as they are experienced locally.
Reacting to the privations of drought and Islamic domination,
rebellious men are increasingly attracted to the cult which, in these
circumstances, is correspondingly ‘masculinized’.
Of greater significance, perhaps, in its inclusion of men is the great
extension of bori (and to a lesser extent also of zar) in north-west
Africa. Here in a region dominated by Islamic mysticism, where the
profession of the faith is virtually synonymous with being attached to
one or other of the Sufi brotherhoods, the bori cult has found a new and
unexpected home. Bori brotherhoods, whose membership consists
primarily of ex-slaves and other servile classes of men and women,
exist alongside the more orthodox orders of freeborn and higher
society. These former slaves are in fact of West African origin, and
belong ethnically to such groups as the Hausa, Songhay, and Bambara,
etc., and thus in effect continue their old pre-Islamic cults within a

STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK
93
Muslim framework. But the significant point for us here is that in this
new Islamic setting, these traditional cults assume a peripheral position.
And since their rites incorporate many Islamic elements and mingle
them freely with the worship of bori and other non-Muslim spirits in an
unholy alliance, to the disapproving eyes of the pious North African
Arabs and Berbers, these rituals have almost the character of ‘Black
Masses’—if the pun will be forgiven.
Initiation into these ‘Black Brotherhoods’, as they are known in the
French literature, normally follows a possession illness, and the cults
are essentially healing in character. (Women of noble Arab birth also
seek cures for their complaints through the same ritual, which, of
course, usually proves an expensive business for their husbands.) More
to the point, although the position is not entirely clear in the existing
literature, I think we may infer that, in the case of slaves, the bulk of
the expenses involved in such bori therapy fell upon their masters, and
thus gave the former a lever with which to manipulate the latter. In a
more general sense too, these bori brotherhoods protected the interests
of their members, providing food and lodging for the temporarily
indigent, and while slavery still existed would sometimes buy a slave
his freedom. With the abolition of slavery, these organizations, more
than any others, came to provide the primary focus of allegiance and
social identification for the ex-slave community. They championed
their members’ rights and protected them against harassment or abuse
from their Arab and Berber superiors. Here the Black Brotherhoods
acted as pressure groups enjoying a special ritual cachet through their
association with the widely feared bori spirits. On this basis too, some
of the cult devotees also still enjoy a lucrative practice as diviners and
healers, and play a particularly important role in treating sterility
amongst the population at large. Thus an Arab woman who has lost all
her children, or one who has not borne any, may summon the bori
adepts to her aid. They make a secret mark on her leg and bless her;
and if she subsequently bears a child this ‘belongs’ to the cult group
and contributes handsomely to its periodic offerings and rituals
(Tremearne, 1914; Dermenghem, 1954; Paques, 1964).
Almost everything that has been said about bori in north-west Africa
applies with equal force to the analogous Christianized slave cults of
the Caribbean and South America. In all these areas today we find
flourishing possession cults built round a cosmological substratum of
the old gods of Africa, which the slaves brought with them, and to
which they have clung tenaciously throughout their long period of

ECSTATIC RELIGION
94
subjection and oppression. Africa, here, has great force as a symbolic
focus of authenticity and beneficent power (cf. Larose, 1977). Now, of
course, these cults have in fact become the unofficial religions of the
local peasantry, and exist in an uneasy tension with the more orthodox
Christianity of élitist society. From our point of view, these cults again
centre on spiritual forces which are peripheral to the Christian
establishments of the countries concerned and appeal most strongly to
the subordinate segments of society. To these they offer a consummate
religious experience, lifting up downtrodden men and women to
heights of exaltation which, whatever else they do, certainly serve to
underscore the lowly secular position of the possessed devotees.
Thus, for example, as has been clearly shown in Trinidad (Mischel
and Mischel, 1958), as well as appealing strongly to women, the
Shango cult generally also attracts such male adherents as domestic
servants and unemployed labourers. Such lowly figures are regularly
mounted by powerful, aggressive spirits, and when they incarnate
these gods they command the attention of large audiences in what is
evidently a highly satisfying fashion. Women similarly are often
possessed by domineering male divinities and these allow their
‘horses’ to express aspects of their personalities which in other
circumstances are strongly suppressed. Indeed, it is clear that the
Shango cult enables a discordant mass of humanity to achieve a highly
dramatic psychic ‘work-out’, the possessed giving vent in the rituals to
emotions and feelings which in other contexts are held in check. And
as elsewhere, whatever the possessed person does is done with
impunity since he is considered to act as the unconscious and
involuntry vehicle of the gods.
All these elements are equally well represented in Haitian voodoo,
which embraces over 90 per cent of the island’s population and is
regarded with contempt and disdain by the small westernized ruling
élite. This minority establishment, which is mainly of mulatto stock,
clings desperately to western values and to the orthodox Catholic
church. From its point of view, as Métraux has so well put it, voodoo is
an insidious rural paganism (Métraux, 1959). For the peasants,
however, it is a populist religion from which the freedom-fighting ex-
slave heroes of the past drew inspiration in the nationalist struggle prior
to independence in 1804.
Much of the voodoo ritual and liturgy is of Christian origin; and the
loa ‘mysteries’, which are also called ‘saints’ or even ‘angels’, although
largely of West African derivation, are viewed as part of the Christian

STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK
95
cosmology. When a loa ‘comes out’ in a new devotee it usually has to be
baptized, and many spirits, incarnated in their mounts, take holy
communion. From the other direction, many Christian saints and even
the Virgin Mary are incorporated among the dramatis personae of the
loa. With this degree of syncretism between traditional African powers
and those of Catholicism, it is scarcely surprising that the two religious
calendars should be closely synchronized (as is also the case with zar in
Ethiopia and the Sudan). Throughout Lent, the voodoo sanctuaries are
closed and no service is celebrated. In Holy Week the cult accessories are
covered with sheets, as are the images in the Catholic churches; and on
Christmas night voodoo ritual ‘takes wing in its full plumage’ as Métraux
eloquently puts it. Equally, possession by the loa is explicitly compared
with ‘the entering of the Holy Ghost into the cure when he sings mass’.
With this degree of congruence, it is only to be expected that the Haitian
peasantry who evidently experience no embarrassment or confusion in
combining the two faiths should claim that ‘to serve the loa you have to
be a Catholic’.
For their part, the loa enter very fully into the lives of their servants.
In essence, they play a protective role, and only withdraw their
benevolent patronage when they are neglected. Some ‘mysteries’ even
seek employment for the protégés. In the middle of a voodoo service at
one of the shrines, a trader or official may be suddenly accosted by a
loa which demands work for his mount. And who can reject such a
divine appeal, particularly when the loa making the request vouches for
the honesty and industry of it’s candidate? So deeply in fact do the
spirits immerse themselves in the lives of those who dance in their
honour, that there are even banker and creditor gods which offer credit
facilities for those attending the ceremonies. Their business acumen
and taste for speculation indeed drive some ‘mysteries’ to invest money
with merchants from whom good dividends can be expected. Such
investments carry with them the blessing of the gods and bring good
luck. But since the loa, like their human agents, are pitiless in financial
matters those who borrow from them do so at their own risk.
The cult groups which arise round an influential loa priest or
hungan bearing such nostalgic African names as ‘Gold Coast’, ‘God
First’, ‘The Flower of Guinea Society’ etc., fulfil a similar range of
functions in towns to those served by the bori societies in north-west
Africa. They act also as welfare and betterment associations and play a
highly significant role in defining the social identity of their members.
Above all, while in the regular danced rituals the possessed devotees

ECSTATIC RELIGION
96
are enabled to give free rein to their suppressed desires and
ambitions—which the gods gleefully and freely express on their
behalf—the cult also gives great psychic satisfaction to ‘poor souls
ground down by life’. Usually, as we would expect, downtrodden men
and women are possessed by gods which, in fantasy, express their
hopes and fears and bespeak upward social mobility.
In addition to the obvious enjoyment which, like its analogues
elsewhere, this ‘danced religion’ affords its devotees, opportunities for
status enhancement of a more direct and tangible kind are also present.
We have already seen how the gods may solicit jobs for their followers
from those who are in a position to grant such favours. At the same
time, the career of voodoo priest or priestess, which may be gradually
assumed as a cult member’s control over and knowledge
(connaissance) of the ‘mysteries’ (loa spirits) increases, can be both
lucrative and rewarding. A successful hungan is at once priest, healer,
soothsayer, exorcizer, and organizer of public entertainments—this last
representing the theatrical and recreational aspect of the cult which is
not to be dismissed lightly. In addition, such a figure is regarded as an
influential political guide, and frequently acts as an electoral agent for
whose services senators and deputies pay handsomely. Thus to assume
this role of leader of a cult group is to climb the social ladder and to
acquire a prominent place in the public gaze. Competition, however, is
fierce, and rival priests vying with one another for larger congregations
of adherents will do their utmost to discredit their adversaries. Here the
standard allegation, which coincides with that generally levelled by the
Catholic élite at voodoo as a whole, is that one’s opponents are
sorcerers or witches, working, as the Haitians say, ‘with both hands’.
Such judgements here, as elsewhere, turn on whether mystical power is
employed for the general, public good, or for narrow, private advantage
(cf. Larose, 1977; Lewis, 1986, pp. 51ff). Under the regimes of the
notorious Dr Duvalier (‘Papa Doc’) and his son, voodoo was elevated
virtually to the status of a state religion, with cult groups, serving to
underpin the dictators’ power at the local level (Courlander and
Bastien, 1966; Larose, 1977). Implicitly, if not explicitly, voodoo had
moved to the centre of the stage.
II
Since, as well as women more generally, these cults evidently also
attract men of servile origin and of other oppressed categories, we

STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK
97
should expect to find further examples in highly stratified, inegalitarian
polities elsewhere. The Swahili-speaking inhabitants of Mafia island,
off the coast of Tanzania, provide a well-documented example of such
a case.
The island’s Muslim population consists of various tribal elements
arranged in a definite order of precedence with the Pokomo, the most
African and least Arabian in ethnic affiliation, occuping (in the 1960s)
the lowest rung on the status ladder. The Pokomo are traditionally
excluded from full participation in the official political and ritual life of
this Islamic society, and find their fulfilment in a highly developed
spirit possession cult, through membership of which they exert
influence and power in the wider community. These despised islanders
are subject to possession by ‘land spirits’ of the bush classified as
‘devils’ (shaitani) which cause illness either through their own
malevolence or because they have been sent by a person with power
over them (i.e. by a witch). As usual, these spirits are not concerned
with morality, and the illnesses which they inflict on the unwary are not
viewed as punishments for infringements of the social code.
Such afflictions are diagnosed and treated by Pokomo shamans who
control the spirits concerned and initiate their victims into the
possession clubs which meet regularly to hold dance rituals. The cult is
open to both men and women of the Pokomo group, and ambitious
recruits can in time graduate to the position of shaman and diviner.
Since shamans are paid for their services as medical advisers, which
are not restricted to patients of their own tribe, they can become
wealthy and influential in this mixed society. Thus through these land-
spirit cults which, with their flamboyant rites (including blood-
drinking), are condemned by pious Muslims of higher social standing,
Pokomo men can achieve de facto positions in the island which would
otherwise be beyond their grasp.
Parallel to this Pokomo cult, a separate possession cult of sea-spirits
exists amongst the higher status groups, but is restricted to women.
Such higher class women are prone to possession afflictions by these
spirits which come from over the sea, in fact from Arabia, and which
cause those they possess to speak in Arabic. These ennobling ‘Arab’
spirits are flatteringly attracted by the beauty of their female hosts. The
incidence of the afflictions they cause is exactly similar to what we
have found in so many other cases. In stress situations in the domestic
family, women succumb to them, and they are especially concerned
with such feminine conditions as frigidity, infertility, and pregnancy.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
98
Treatment requires costly outlays by the husband and his kin, and
eventually usually leads to initiation into the possession cult group.
This meets regularly on Fridays and its ritual is in effect a parody of the
Islamic religious services which men dominate and from which women
are excluded. Since in Mafia, men’s worship is largely organized
through the mystical brotherhoods or tariqas, this women’s possession
society, like its bori analogue in North Africa, follows the same model.
At their possession meetings women sing the same hymns as men do in
the services of the Muslim brotherhoods.
Clearly while gaining protection from the exactions of their menfolk
whom they influence through possession illnesses, women also thus
participate vicariously in the male-dominated culture of the island.
Although there are here two parallel possession cults—one for the low
status Pokomo, and another for women of high status—the spirits of
the former are considered generally to be more powerful, and the
leading Pokomo shaman in fact controls both cults (Caplan, 1975). In
two other African examples which are worth mentioning briefly, men in
low social positions and women generally are not separately served by
distinct possession cults as in Mafia or southern Somalia, but collected
together in the same cult. This is the situation which has been
admirably described amongst the Muslim Songhay of the Niger bend
by Jean Rouch (Rouch, 1960; Olivier de Sardan, 1984). In this
officially Muslim society, non-ancestral spirits called holey have an
analogous role to the bori among the neighbouring Hausa. In this
stratified society, holey spirits, which include both nature sprites and
foreign powers expressive of Songhay’s wider geo-social environment,
plague women and men of low caste. Here illness, diagnosed as
possession by these spirits, appears to function amongst these
peripheral social categories as a strategy of oblique redress in the
manner we have explored in other cases. Ultimately, recurrent
possession is interpreted as an unchallengeable call by the spirits and
requires formal initiation into the cult.
Such initiated ‘children of the spirits’ as they are called, are directed
in their ritual activities by men of low occupational castes, and
particularly by the Sorko fishing people of the Niger valley. Elderly
men of this group, which may represent an autochthonous element in
the population, are considered to be ‘married to female spirits and
incapable of being interested in other women’. Such Sorko priests often
abandon their traditional riverine pursuits and devote themselves
entirely to the holey cult. In the wider society their main ritual tasks

STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK
99
concern rain-making, the organization of hunting dances to secure river
game, and the direction of rituals designed to alleviate the effects of
disasters caused by thunderstorms during the rainy season. Here their
primary role is that of intermediaries with Dongo, the thunder god.
Thus amongst the Songhay, the two most marginal elements in
society—women of all groups and men of low caste—are brought
together in a common cult of affliction which is integrated in the total
religious and officially Muslim life of this complex West African
people.
A similar synthesis under different circumstances has taken place
amongst the Gurage, a Semitic-speaking people of central Ethiopia
(Shack, 1966). Here, with those Gurage who have not yet converted to
Islam or Christianity, there are two main religious cults. The first,
which is restricted to freeborn men, concerns the sky god Waka which
is worshipped as the guardian of general morality. This deity receives
annual sacrifices at his shrine, which is the centre of Gurage political
and religious life and where he is represented by a female priestess.
This position is vested in a particular clan, but the office is only
potential. It becomes active by the marriage of a woman of the
appropriate descent group to a male ritual consort who must again be
drawn from another designated clan. However, it is this woman, human
‘wife’ to the deity, who, assisted by women of the despised class of
Fuga carpenters, leads this cult of men. Spirit possession is not
involved here.
In contrast, possession is the dominant motif in the parallel women’s
cult addressed to the female deity Damwamwit. Through possession by
this spirit, Gurage women in general and downtrodden Fuga men (who
are attached as clients to freeborn Gurage families) are allowed special
licence and a degree of status enhancement otherwise denied to them.
Thus, as can be imagined, women when in trouble with their husbands,
or Fuga dependants in difficulties with their Gurage masters, readily
become possessed. Moreover, as though to drive the point home
further, their protecting spirit is liable to attack anyone who wantonly
molests them (see Woldetsadik, 1967; Knutsson, 1975; Todd, 1980).
I see this combined women’s and Fuga movement as an essentially
peripheral cult which has become institutionalized to the point where it
is integrated in the total Gurage religious system alongside the male
cult of the masculine spirit, Waka. Here possession has not been
permitted to intrude within the male-dominated main morality cult, but
has been allowed to exist and persist amongst women under male

ECSTATIC RELIGION
100
leadership—apparently at the price of granting female direction in the
former cult. Unfortunately we know nothing of the historical
circumstances underlying this synthesis; and whether or not this
balancing of roles between the sexes represents a fair compromise
between men and women in a society where there is reported to be
much explicit sexual antagonism is equally debatable. With respect to
the downtrodden Fuga, however, it appears that the licence allowed to
them in possession can be viewed as, in effect, an acknowledgement in
ritual terms of their oppressed condition.
In thus touching on the theme of ritualized rebellion which, here as
elsewhere, is undoubtedly present in these cults of the underprivileged,
we must be careful not to assume that such canalized expressions of
insubordination necessarily represent a completely satisfying catharsis
which totally exhausts pent-up resentment and frustration. Here my last
African example, that of the kubandwa possession cult in the kingdom
of Rwanda, provides a salutary warning against the over-ready
acceptance of this ‘establishment’ view of the general situation.
Traditional Rwanda provided an extreme example of a mixed conquest
state, organized into rigid caste-like divisions. The system was
dominated by the proud Tutsi who, as intrusive pastoral aristocrats,
ruled a society in which they formed only some 10 per cent of the total
population. The bulk of the kingdom’s inhabitants consisted in fact of
Hutu cultivators who could not marry Tutsi and were attached to the
latter as clients, producing grain for them and helping to look after their
cattle. This symbiotic arrangement freed the noble Tutsi from many of
the humdrum tasks of daily life and permitted them to devote their
energies to governing and conquering. At the same time, it also allowed
the despised Hutu to participate vicariously in the dominant pastoral
culture of their masters. Finally at the bottom of the social pyramid lay
the pygmy hunters called Twa who, like the aristocratic Tutsi, formed a
very small proportion of the population.
The ‘premise of inequality’, as Maquet (1961) calls it, under which
the Hutu and Twa laboured was to some extent alleviated by their
participation in the kubandwa spirit possession cult. This cult, which
was quite separate from that of the ancestors sustaining customary
morality, centred round the god Ryangombe and his assistant spirits.
Ryangombe like Dionysus, was essentially a god of the people, uniting
in his worship subordinate Twa and Hutu as well as the lordly Tutsi.
The anti-establishment tone of the cult was plainly evident in the
unflattering and obscene names for many subsidiary spirits and the

STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK
101
ironic slogan: ‘I love the Tutsi’ (Berger, 1976). Initiation into the cult
followed a spirit illness and involved, as so often elsewhere, a mystical
union with the deity and his attendant spirits. Once this was achieved,
the initiate was protected from the power of the ancestor cults which,
as we should expect, strove hard to uphold caste morality.
Significantly, Ryangombe is depicted in myth as the victorious rival of
King Ruganzu, the most celebrated Tutsi conqueror of the court
traditions.
Although the existing accounts of this cult do not make clear
whether or not Twa and Hutu used possession, as we should anticipate,
to press their interests in their relations with their Tutsi patrons, our
sources on this movement strongly emphasize its role as a safety valve
for the ventilation of suppressed aggression on the part of the
subordinate groups in the kingdom (de Heusch 1966; Berger, 1981).
That this was only a partially successful palliative, however, is clearly
evident from the more recent sequence of events in this troubled area to
the east of the Congo. In the last days of Belgian rule the Tutsi, in the
same spirit as the white settlers in Rhodesia, pressed for early
independence in order to stamp out any further erosion of their
traditional authority. And shortly before independence, the suppressed
Hutu turned from such relief as they may have found in the kubandwa
cult to precipitate a bloody revolution in which they seized power from
the Tutsi and massacred thousands of their former masters.
III
As we saw in the case of women’s cults where, however ambivalent
male attitudes to such troublesome spirits may be, men at least believe
in them in general, so here too it is obviously essential that both
superior and subordinate should share a common faith in the existence
and efficacy of these mutinous powers. This basic necessity for a
mutual trust in the symbolism of such peripheral possession is required,
since otherwise clearly the voice of protest loses its authority. This
aspect of the situation is readily emphasized if we compare for a
moment European 1960s manifestations of ‘Flower-Power’ with that
interesting nineteenth-century Fijian precursor, usually known as the
Water Baby Cult. Whatever messages of peace they may have borne in
earlier centuries and despite the efforts of Interflora, in our secular
society flowers are no longer deeply evocative symbols charged with
esoteric meaning. Not so in nineteenth-century Fiji. There, in the

ECSTATIC RELIGION
102
context of the first impact of modern social change, young people and
minor chiefs excluded from high positions in the traditional authority
structure rallied together to form the Water Baby Cult, being possessed
by forest and water spirits, and taking new personal names—usually
those of flowers. Unlike our own Flower-People, these Fijian
counterparts achieved through possession and their participation in the
cult a measure of attention and respect which they had previously been
denied (Worsley, 1957). The symbolism selected was appropriate to the
task to which it was applied.
All the elements we have so far discussed are particularly well
displayed in the context of the Hindu caste system. Several recent
writers on Indian communities comment upon the predilection which
peripheral spirits (often those of the unquiet and untimely dead) show
for men of low caste. In some cases this may lead to dramatic and
lasting revolutionary changes in status. Thus, in a lower Himalayan
village, Gerald Berreman (1972) recounts in detail the life history of a
remarkable young blacksmith who, following a series of calamities,
was possessed by a deity and performed many miracles to become
venerated himself as a living god. More commonly, through
possession, such lowly orders are allowed a limited franchise to protest
against their menial circumstances. One of the best analyses of this
pattern of ritualized mutiny is that provided for the Nayars of Malabar
by Kathleen Gough (Gough, 1958).
This high caste of warriors and land-owners is traditionally divided
into a number of matrilineages, the functionally most significant units
of which are matri-segments known as taravads, each with its own
estate, and led by the senior male in the group. As we should expect,
within the local practice of Hinduism the ancestors of these groups are
largely concerned with the morals and obedience to caste rules of their
descendants. These essentially family spirits are carefully tended by the
head of each taravad. Sickness and affliction are interpreted as
manifestations of their wrath at some act of unfitting behaviour within
the group.
There are, however, other options. Some instances of disease and
injury are referred not to the ancestors but to alien ghosts. These latter
are typically the spirits of low caste menials and dependants of Nayars
who have died following a quarrel with their masters, or who were
actually killed by them. Such spirits, as can be imagined, haunt and
harass their former superiors, causing much malicious misfortune and
sickness. To cope with this, shrines are erected to these demanding

STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK
103
spirits and they are regularly propitiated—not by the head of the Nayar
group himself, but by an attached low caste servant. Through this
priest, offerings of toddy and chickens are made annually by the Nayar
family concerned to keep the spirit contented. Propitiatory sacrifices
are also made on other occasions in response to afflictions for which
these peripheral spirits (in our terminology) are held responsible. Here
diagnosis is provided by a low caste diviner.
In the propitiation rites, the low caste officiant usually becomes
possessed by the spirit. While in this condition, he may make further
demands on his Nayar masters as well as taking the opportunity of
voicing any grievances held at the time by the low caste dependants of
the Nayar group concerned. These representations are made of course
by the spirit and are therefore not to be dismissed lightly. Similarly, in
the actual appeasement rituals, these low caste ritual experts (described
as professional exorcists) in defiance of normal convention act very
aggressively towards their Nayar masters. In this ritual context,
however, they must be treated with great respect by the Nayars and
given gifts and such other presents as they request.
In the light of the foregoing, it is no surprise to find that the
incidence of actual afflictions laid at the door of these spirits tends to
coincide with with episodes of tension and unjust treatment in the
relations between master and servant. Thus, as so often elsewhere, from
an objective view-point, these spirits can be seen to function as a sort of
‘conscience of the rich’. Their malevolent power reflects the feelings of
envy and resentment which, people of high caste assume the less
fortunate lower castes must harbour in relation to their superiors.
Moreover, these aggressive ghosts are in this case no longer used only
by the weak and downtrodden through the oblique strategy of self-
possession. They also take the offensive and directly attack Nayars,
causing possession afflictions which can only be cured by low caste
exorcists. The Nayars have thus good grounds for taking these
capricious spirits seriously. Again, these powers can also be directly
employed in witchcraft and sorcery. Those who control them are
credited with the power of sending them against an enemy. And here it
is precisely their low caste dependants, who specialize in dealing with
these unclean spirits, that the Nayars regard as potential witches and
sorcerers.
This brings us to the theme of the next section of this chapter—the
relationship between peripheral possession and witchcraft. But before
we embark on that, let us note that in the case we have just examined

ECSTATIC RELIGION
104
these low caste spirits which the Nayars treat as aliens are of course
ancestral to the subordinate groups concerned. For what are external to
the Nayars, are kith and kin to their servants. Thus it is not here a
question of a single ethnic-group being plagued by forces from hostile
neighbouring peoples. On the contrary, the situation is that spirits
which are central to one sub-group in a plural society are marginal to
other units within the same system. The enemy in short is not at the
gates, but within the heart of the composite society. Externality or
peripherality is thus highly relative and in the Nayar case defined, as
one would expect, by caste barriers. The case is similar in other
culturally and ethnically heterogeneous systems where the gods of
subordinate segments of the wider society are feared as capricious
malcontent powers by their superiors. This is in fact the position with
the bori slave cults of north-west Africa.
Again externality may be even more narrowly defined. It may be
considered that, where women are married exogamously by men of
other lineages, each wife brings her own ancestor spirits with her and
these are alien to her husband’s family and kin. Or, alternatively, a wife
may be thought to have privileged access to her husband’s ancestral
spirits which are foreign to her. In either case, women are concerned
with spirits which have a degree of externality or marginality in the
situation in which they are operative. In many societies, and
particularly among the South African Bantu peoples, such affinal
ancestor spirits regularly cause possession afflictions in the women
concerned, but once these are mastered their victims become socially
approved anti-witchcraft diviners (see e.g. O’Connell, 1982). Here,
exactly as with more thoroughly foreign peripheral spirits, women
employ these ‘extra-descent’ spirits to advance their aims and interests
in the manner we have now come to expect.
Thus, however narrowly or broadly conceived the peripherality of
the spirits involved may be, the effect is always the same. What we find
over and over again in a wide range of different cultures and places is
the special endowment of mystical power given to the weak. If they do
not quite inherit the earth, at least they are provided with means which
enable them to offset their otherwise crushing jural disabilities. With
the authority which the voice of the gods alone gives, they find a way
to manipulate their superiors with impunity—at least within certain
limits. And, as we saw in the last chapter, to an extent that is hard to
gauge precisely, this is broadly satisfactory to all concerned,
subordinate as well as superior. Yet, as I have repeatedly emphasized,

STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK
105
this is not to say that such limited expressions of protest exhaust the
store of revolutionary fervour. However seemingly satisfying the play
of such cults, the potentiality for deeper and more radical outbursts of
pent-up resentment is always there.
Sartre, in his preface to Frantz Fanon’s The Wretched of the Earth,
clearly views the matter differently. Speaking of the last days of
colonialism in Algeria he says:
 
In certain districts they make use of that last resort—possession
by spirits. Formerly this was a religious experience in all its
simplicity, a certain communion of the faithful with sacred
things; now they make of it a weapon against humiliation and
despair; Mumbo-jumbo and all the idols of the tribe come down
among them, rule over their violence and waste it in trances until
it is exhausted (Sartre, 1967, pp. 16–17).
 
Few will want to challenge Sartre’s view that bullets are more effective
weapons than spirits in the struggle against foreign colonizers. But his
nostalgic picture of the pristinely innocent character of possession in its
traditional, pre-colonial setting shows remarkable ignorance of the true
sociological significance of the Black Brotherhoods. And certainly this
innocuous assessment is not shared—outside the colonial situation—by
those against whom such cults are aimed. As we shall see, the protest
cults we have described are only tolerated within defined limits, and are
regularly contained by defence mechanisms which seem designed to
check excessive insubordination.
IV
In the foregoing pages, as in the previous chapter, we have traced the
widespread ascription of misfortune and illness to amoral peripheral
spirits which plague the weak and downtrodden. Those men and
women who experience these afflictions do so regularly in situations of
stress and conflict with their superiors, and, in the attention and respect
which they temporarily attract, influence their masters. Thus adversity
is turned to advantage, and spirit possession of this type can be seen to
provide an oblique strategy of attack. This aspect of such possession
immediately ranks it with witchcraft and sorcery accusations which, as
is well known, are similarly employed to explain distress and disease in
situations of strife and tension. If we now proceed to compare these

ECSTATIC RELIGION
106
two ways of reacting to misfortune, it will be obvious that they
represent very different styles of attack. Let us first be clear, however,
that although in witchcraft (or sorcery) it is always the bewitched
subject who thrusts himself forward to catch our attention and
sympathy as the innocent ‘victim’ of evil machinations, the real victim
in any objective sense is the accused ‘witch’. It is of course in this
sense that we speak of ‘witch-hunts’, such as those employed in
America to hunt down communists, and where there is no doubt as to
the identity of the real victims. Thus where people believe in the reality
of witchcraft, the victim of affliction who pins responsibility for his
difficulties on an enemy by accusing him of witchcraft is pursuing
(however unconsciously) a direct strategy of mystical assault.
On the other hand, the victim who interprets his problems in terms
of possession by malevolent spirits utilizes, as we have amply seen, a
devious manoeuvre in which immediate responsibility is pointed not at
his fellow men, but upon mysterious and malign forces outside society.
Here it is only indirectly that pressure is brought to bear by the ‘victim’
on the real target which he seeks to reach. It is in the reaction of other
members of his community to an affliction for which no one can be
blamed that a measure of redress is achieved. From the stand-point of
the subject of misfortune the effect, at least in certain respects, may be
broadly similar in the two cases. This is true to the extent at least that
both strategies immediately rally support and succour to the side of the
subject. Yet the fact that the means of achieving this result differ so
radically suggests that each strategy might be appropriate to a different
set of circumstances from the other. Thus we should expect to find
distinct social correlates distinguishing the fields in which these two
tactics are applied. We now have ample material to establish whether or
not this is actually the case.
Before we do this however, we should dispose of the prior question:
if (as I am arguing) peripheral possession and witchcraft both reflect
social tensions, although in different ways, are they mutually
exclusive? That they are totally dissimilar phenomena was clearly the
view taken by a group of eminent French anthropologists at a grand
international colloquium on spirit possession. In a curiously old-
fashioned manner, these scholars in effect argued that what pertains to
God (possession) and what belongs to the dark world of the devil
(witchcraft) can scarcely be brought together within the same universe
of discourse.
This judgement, which no doubt reflects the time-honoured

STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK
107
distinction so laboriously urged by Frazer and others between religion
and magic, is also that reached from a different point of view by some
Anglo-Saxon anthropologists. Thus in a well-known paper on
shamanism among the Nuba tribes of the Sudan, S.F.Nadel says: ‘The
Nyima (a Nuba tribe) have no witchcraft. Shamanism absorbs all that is
unpredictable and morally indeterminate and saves the conception of
an ordered universe from self-contradiction’ (Nadel, 1946, p. 34). Here
Nadel has in mind the fact that spirit possession offers a means of
explaining away unmerited misfortune in a manner which does not
question the essential goodness and justice of other celestial powers.
Similarly, and more succinctly, in her comparative study of witchcraft,
Lucy Mair declares that where people ‘believe that their sufferings
come from malevolent spirits…they are not driven to turn to witchcraft
as an explanation…’ (Mair, 1969, p. 30).
As is so often the way with bold anthropological generalizations,
however, these assertions are not borne out by the facts. In many
cultures, witchcraft or sorcery (I am not distinguishing between these
here) and malevolent spirit possession do occur together. This is true
indeed, with very few exceptions, of almost all the cases we have
examined in this and the preceding chapter. In addition, the very
common association of witchcraft with spirit familiars, often of
opposite sex to the possessed witch, is a rather obvious indication of
the impossibility of regarding these mystical forces as necessarily
mutually exclusive. Nor, of course, does one need to look very far
afield to find striking examples of the co-existence of the two
phenomena: our own sixteenth—and seventeenth-century Christian
culture, to look no further back, offers an abundant record of witches
whose malign power depended upon invasive incubi and succubi.
Hence, evidently, in many cultures these two forces co-exist and
often blend into a compound power. This provides us with an excellent
opportunity for testing my initial deduction that, since they represent
different strategies, they should have distinct contexts of operation.
As in fact we have already seen, peripheral possession is regularly
used by the members of subordinate social categories to press home
claims on their superiors. Witchcraft (or sorcery) accusations (and I
emphasize that I am talking about the incidence of accusations) on the
other hand, run in different social grooves. Typically, they are launched
between equals, or by a superior against a subordinate. The rare
exceptions to this generalization prove the rule. For where witchcraft
charges are brought against a superior by an inferior, the explicit

ECSTATIC RELIGION
108
intention is to question the legitimacy of this status difference and
ultimately to assert equality. So it is, for example, amongst the Lugbara
tribe of Uganda, where when disaffection amongst his followers
reaches a climax, the old village elder finds himself repeatedly accused
of witchcraft by his rebellious juniors. Here the aim, clearly evident in
its effects, is to discredit the leader’s waning claims to legitimacy and
finally to thrust him from his pedestal.
An excellent illustration of the separate fields in which possession
and witchcraft accusation operate is provided in the polygynous family
situation. Where people believe in both these mystical forces,
witchcraft accusations are levelled against each other by the co-wives,
and by the mutual husband against any of his wives. Spirit-possession,
as we have so frequently seen, is, in contrast, the preferred mode of
assault employed by each co-wife in her dealings with her husband. A
wife usually only accuses her husband of witchcraft when she seeks to
sever their marital relationship and to assert her full independence.
Thus we see that peripheral possession expresses insubordination,
but usually not to the point where it is desired to immediately rupture
the relationship concerned or to subvert it completely. Rather it
ventilates aggression and frustration largely within an uneasy
acceptance of the established order of things. Witchcraft and sorcery
accusations in contrast, representing as they do more drastic and direct
lines of attack, often seek to sunder unbearably tense relationships.
This is an aspect of the operation of such accusations which has been
elegantly demonstrated by Marwick (1952) and others. Thus if
possessed subordinates kick against the pricks at regular intervals,
those who press witchcraft charges kick over the traces completely. For
witchcraft accusations represent a distancing strategy which seeks to
discredit, sever, and deny links; and ultimately to assert separate
identity.
So far then, I have been arguing that when peripheral possession and
witchcraft both occur together in the same culture, they tend to flourish
in different social contexts and to exert contrasting effects. However, in
many cultures, the situation is in reality more complicated than this
since these two powers frequently coalesce in a highly revealing way.
Here the situation of the Nayar, and their low caste dependants
represents one widely found pattern. Those low castes whom the
Nayars allow to protest against their authority periodically through the
medium of possession, and whom they employ as exorcists, are also
suspected by them of being witches or sorcerers. Thus there is a general

STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK
109
association between low caste status, spirit possession, exorcism, and
witchcraft—such, in short, that spirit possession and witchcraft
represent two inseparable facets of the position held by low caste
Indians. Despite their very varied cultural circumstances, we find the
same theme running through most of the other instances which we have
discussed in this and the previous chapter. Whether it is subordinate
men or women in Africa or Asia who voice their protests through
possession, it is precisely they who are held to be potential witches.
This blanket categorization exists in most cases. But, if we look more
closely at the data, we shall see that accusations of witchcraft are
particularly frequently directed at those of these social categories who
employ possession in what I have called the ‘secondary phase’ in the
development of these cults. It is especially those subordinate men or
women who, having graduated to become leading shamans, are singled
out for attack and denunciation as witches.
Thus it seems that the irritation aroused by the effects of possession
amongst the ranks of the manipulated establishment fastens most
securely on those who in assuming a positive, active, and above all,
militant role are indeed in danger of exceeding the bounds of tolerance.
These leaders of mutinous women or depressed men who, in
diagnosing and treating possession afflictions amongst their colleagues,
perpetuate the whole system are the most dangerous agents of dissent
and potential subversion. Hence it is they who are held in check by
accusations of witchcraft which seem designed to discredit them and to
diminish their status. Thus, if possession is the means by which the
underdog bids for attention, witchcraft accusations provide the
countervailing strategy by which such demands are kept within bounds.
There is a poetic justice in this. For, in effect, both subordinate and
superior are indulging in self-fulfilling prophecies the result of which is
to entrench the notion that the weak enjoy a special endowment of
mystical power. It is also all admirably logical. If the spirits involved
can cause affliction through uncontrolled, involuntary possession, then
when they become subject to controlled, voluntary possession in the
persons of shamans drawn from the lowest strata of society they can
scarcely be expected to have shed completely their capacity to harm.
Far from it indeed, for these upstart controllers of spirits are, by their
very power over the spirits, suspected of causing what they cure. Thus
where witchcraft implies the use of such spirits, he who can cast out
malign spirits is ipso facto a witch.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
110
V
In the pattern connecting witchcraft with spirit possession which we
have just established, three separate contexts of possession can be
distinguished. First, we have the case of afflictions which those who
suffer them interpret as involuntary possession by an evil spirit.
Secondly, there is the state of voluntary, controlled possession which,
from being an affliction, has virtually become an addiction, and is
celebrated clandestinely as a religious devotion. It is this type, or
context, of possession which is most forcefully realized by the shaman.
The latter, as a master (or mistress) of spirits, is considered capable of
taming these malevolent powers, and thus of treating those afflicted by
them. But, by the same token, he can also send them out to attack his
enemies, thus inflicting involuntary possession illnesses upon his
adversaries. This gives us our third context of possession.
Here, unlike the position in the first context, a possession illness is
diagnosed as being due to possession by a spirit which is not deemed to
be acting on its own account, but to have been sent by an ill-disposed
shaman. This is regarded as witchcraft and the treatment consists in
exorcising, rather than taming, or domesticating, the spirit involved. By
casting it forth, rather than by reaching an understanding with it, the
victim is enabled to recover. Thus, this interpretation of primary phase
possession as witchcraft does not lead the affected victim to join a
possession cult group through membership of which he can then
proceed to the secondary phase. On the contrary, the spirit is cast out,
and the victim is not inducted into a cult group.
This distinction between these alternative diagnoses and treatments
of the same external symptoms (for these remain constant), is
consistent with the social status of the victims involved. Subordinates
see primary phase possession as due entirely to the intrinsic malice of
the spirits. But their superiors, when they in turn fall victim to the same
spiritcaused afflictions, see in them the malicious envy of their
inferiors. Thus the mystical explanation selected by the entrenched
establishment enables its members to denounce their subordinates as
spiritridden witches. By this manoeuvre they reassert their superiority
and strengthen the gap which separates them from their lowly
subordinates, whose despised, though feared, esoteric possession cult
there is no question of their entering. Figure 4.1 attempts to clarify this
tangled pattern.
In this configuration, then, possession illnesses among subordinates
are not regarded as witchcraft. This equation only arises when the same
 

STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK
111
afflictions, with identical symptoms, are experienced by members of
the superior strata of society against whom the whole apparatus of
peripheral possession is directed. In all these contexts of possession,
although the extent to which they are held to be subject to human
control varies, the spirits involved are identical. They are without
exception amoral, peripheral spirits with a special relationship with the
lower classes. These dark powers, as I have repeatedly emphasized,
have no direct part to play in maintaining or enforcing social morality.
Their victims, who sustain possession involuntarily, are presumed to be
morally guiltless. The possessed, and therefore bewitched, rich man is
as innocent as his possessed (but not bewitched) inferior.
This, however, is not the only fashion in which possession and
witchcraft are associated. Another configuration occurs in other cases,
and in fact applies in some of the examples—such as the South African
Bantu—which we have already discussed. In this second
possessionwitchcraft complex, the spirits which cause and cure sickness
do not fall in the same category. On the contrary, they are divided into
two opposed groups, one causing illness, and the other healing it, and
these are embraced within a dualistic cosmology which distinguishes
Figure 4.1

ECSTATIC RELIGION
112
sharply between the powers of darkness and those of light. Let me
illustrate. Amongst such patrilineal tribes as the Zulu and Pondo of
southern Africa, married women regularly succumb to possession
afflictions caused by their own paternal ancestors. Such illnesses,
ascribed to the action of these ancestor spirits, may, as we have already
noted, be employed to precisely the same effect as other more extraneous
powers elsewhere. Similarly, in the long term, repeated possession by
these spirits leads the wives concerned to assume the roles of diviners,
diagnosing and treating witchcraft afflictions in others.
As we would now anticipate, such women who play this thrusting
social role are a ready target for witchcraft accusations. But, in
distinction to our first pattern, here these women are no longer
considered to be inspired by the same spirits as those they utilize when
they act as diviners. Whereas in that benevolent role, their familiars are
their own (or their husbands’) ancestors, when they are credited with
acting as witches they are thought to have as their agents hideously
obscene sprites, such as the tokoloshe. These are hirsute,
anthropomorphic dwarfs, armed with such grotesquely long penises that
they have to be carried over the shoulder. Other familiars with whom
witches also have liaisons are spirits of Indian or European origin, an
attribution which, at least in fantasy, defies the harsh laws of South
African apartheid (cf. Ngubane, 1977). Witches are believed to send out
these demons to execute their fell designs against their enemies.
Here, in distinction to the first pattern which we traced, there are
two opposed types of spirit which possess people. Only one of these,
that comprising the evil, non-ancestral spirits, is definitely associated
with witchcraft. Again there are three contexts of possession. First,
married women suffer illnesses which are interpreted as involuntary
possession by their own (or their husbands’) ancestors. Secondly,
repeated possession by these spirits leads women to join cult groups
whose leaders practise the controlled, voluntary, incarnation of the
same spirits as a religious exercise. Such female shamans, however,
operating vicariously with the ancestors whose main cult is directed by
men, run the risk of being accused of witchcraft. No longer acting with
the same spirits, but now inspired by evil demons, such women are
considered capable of plaguing men with possession afflictions which
can only be treated by exorcism. This gives us our third context of
possession where, in contrast to the other two contexts, the spirits
involved are the malign counterparts of those benign ancestors who
inspire divination and combat witchcraft.

STRATEGIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK
113
I interpret the different alignments involved here as follows. Having
got one foot in the door, as it were, of the world of power and of men,
women and other subordinates obviously cannot be discredited and thus
held in check by reference to spirits which are essentially moral in
character. Hence they can only be exposed as witches by presumed
association with an alternative, and unambiguously evil, category of
mystical forces. There are further aspects to be considered here. Wyllie
(1973) has perceptively shown how another type of witchcraft—
‘introspective witchcraft’, where the self-confessed witch is held to act
involuntarily, against her will—corresponds closely to our concept of
peripheral possession. The self-declared witch, typically a mother filled
with destructive impulses towards her children, is treated as a sick patient
who needs help and attention for an affliction for which she cannot be
blamed. The treatment—removing the affected mother from her
domestic role until she has recovered—is similar in nature and effect to
that accorded peripheral possession illnesses. Thus, in its epidemiology
and consequences, this form of self-confessed witchcraft is closer to
peripheral possession than to the more familiar ‘extrovert’ witchcraft and
sorcery discussed above (cf. Lewis, 1986, chapter 3). We may conclude, I
think, that the gamut of connections between possession and witchcraft is
wider than might be supposed and merits further research and analysis.
Figure 4.2

114
Chapter Five
 
POSSESSION AND PUBLIC
MORALITY—
I ANCESTOR CULTS
I
In the circumstances which we have just discussed, possession plays a
significant part in the enhancement of status. One result of possession
by those spirits which we have classed as ‘peripheral’ is to enable
people who lack other means of protection and self-promotion to
advance their interests and improve their lot by escaping, even if only
temporarily, from the confining bonds of their allotted stations in
society. Onerous duties and obligations are cast aside as those
concerned find refuge in clandestine cults which, since they are
represented as cures, can be reluctantly tolerated by the established
authorities.
These protest cults, which to a certain extent are indeed ritual
rebellions, do not, however, detach their followers completely from the
societies and cultures in which they originate. Although they may have
this potential, in the cases we have examined it is not realized fully; for
these movements are ultimately contained within the wider, and in
reality often pluralistic, worlds of which they are part. Here clearly,
escape is only partial and incomplete. And a crucial aspect of their
containment lies in the general acceptance that the spirits concerned are
malign pathogenic powers which lack any direct and explicit moral
significance in the total society. Yet, as we have seen, these powers are
in fact ambivalent, providing in most cases both the grounds of illness
and the means to its cure. Consequently, their evaluation as amoral evil
forces is inevitably highly relativistic. As I have suggested, while their
malevolence is emphasized by the official establishment, for those who
surreptitiously pay cult to them they appear in a very different guise.
Those powers which the conservative establishment holds at arm’s

ANCESTOR CULTS
115
length, so to speak, and regards as evil demons causing sickness and
misfortune, can be tamed, and are then venerated as gods of another
hue by their actual victims. Thus the moral status of the spirits is by no
means absolute, but on the contrary depends upon the position from
which they are viewed.
In fact, peripheral cults of the sort we have examined are only a
few steps removed from those thoroughly moralistic and thrusting
messianic religions which so often arise in circumstances of acute
social disruption and which frequently employ possession as a
supreme religious experience. With these we move from a partial to a
fuller escape into new pastures. Here the adherents of such innovating
religious movements, well represented by the so-called separatist
churches of Africa and the Caribbean and most of those cults which
Lanternari lumps together as ‘religions of the oppressed, (Lanternari,
1965), endeavour to detach themselves much more radically from
their traditional social setting. Now protest has become much more
strident in tone, and has progressed from a merely repetitive kicking
against the pricks to the formulation of separatist aspirations which
completely reject the established order. Initially, such movements
may appear in the guise of cures. But in their eventual development
they transcend the status of covert cults to become fully fledged
religions. Possession by the divinity is then an explicit and openly
encouraged aim, an ecstatic communion which represents the summit
of religious experience, and is also, of course, the idiom in which
those who aspire to positions of religious leadership compete for
power and authority. The conception of, religion as a mere therapy
for illness is then transformed into the worship of powers whose
competence extends into all aspects of life.
The boundaries between such movements and those we have
examined previously are not absolute. They remain ill-defined and
shifting, and it is often extremely difficult to assess with confidence the
precise placement of a particular instance in its temporal and social
setting. An obvious case in point is Haitian voodoo. If, in many
respects, voodoo seems to fall squarely within the peripheral cult class,
in other respects it might more appropriately be characterized as a
separatist ecstatic religion. Here, and in other parallel cases, the
difficulty of making the most appropriate classification is further
compounded by the attempts of the rejected establishment to discredit
such would-be separatist religions as mere peripheral cults, tolerable as
long as they are presented as cures, but intolerable when they claim to

ECSTATIC RELIGION
116
be religions in their own right. Our own Christian history, of course,
affords innumerable examples of separatist sects of this kind struggling
to achieve an independent existence but held in check through their
persecution as heresies.
II
A revealing anthropological report on the Giriama tribe of Kenya
provides a splendid example of this transitional situation, where what,
in its local context, appears initially as a peripheral possession cult is in
fact, for its adherents, the gate of entry to a highly moralistic religion
and a means of legitimately escaping from irksome traditional
responsibilities. The circumstances are as follows. From the 1920s
onwards, the Giriama, who were traditionally subsistence cultivators
trading with the Muslim Swahili and Arabs of the coast, began to grow
cash crops and with this increasing economic specialization there arose
an entrepreneurial class of traders and progressive farmers. The
emergence of this new local élite was accompanied by a marked
increase in sorcery accusations directed by a successful minority at
their jealous kin and neighbours, who formed the majority of the
population, and continued to live as subsistence farmers. In keeping
with the overall status hierarchy of the colony, the most powerful and
successful entrepreneurs tended to become Christians while the bulk of
this new class adopted Islam. Their mode of Islamization was
circuitous but very revealing. Members of this stratum of society were
plagued by Muslim spirits which caused them to succumb to sicknesses
for which the only secure remedy was to adopt this faith. In the
immediate local context and in relation to traditional Giriama beliefs,
these spirits appeared in the guise of malign peripheral demons with no
moral relevance to the old social order. Those who were attacked
capriciously by them were ill without having committed any moral
misdemeanour.
Conversion to Islam is thus in the local context evaluated as cure,
and such converts are in fact described by the Giriama most
appropriately as ‘therapeutic Muslims’. Conversion, however, obliges
the new Muslim adherent to observe the Islamic requirements in diet
and to abstain from traditional intoxicants, thus isolating him from his
neighbours and enabling him to escape from customary commensual
obligations. At the same time, the risk of being offered ensorcelled food
at parties by jealous neighbours or kin is also reduced.

ANCESTOR CULTS
117
Clearly, for the ambitious progressive Giriama who seeks to curtail
his traditional responsibilities, conversion to Islam (which in the pre-
independence setting, also represented the assumption of a higher
status in the wider society) is a most rewarding path to follow. At one
blow, he legitimizes his anti-social ambitions of personal
aggrandizement and protects himself from the malicious envy of the
less successful. And all this is done in the form of a cure for a
possession illness for which he cannot be held accountable. Stricken by
an amoral spirit, the path to recovery leads him into the sheltering arms
of a prestigious world religion and a new and more individualistic
morality.
Here we see in miniature one of the most revealing patterns of
conversion from traditionalist tribal religions to the universalistic
religions of Islam and Christianity. In the present context, however, the
point I want to emphasize is that in this instance we find possession
beginning as an illness and ending, not merely as a cure in a
clandestine cult, but moving forward into an overt and increasingly
accepted morally endowed religion. Islam cannot be contained by the
traditional society which, in fact, is itself becoming increasingly
Islamized. Here the tail is wagging the dog; and what was once merely
a peripheral cult may yet become the central morality of the Giriama.
In this case, of course, it is not the lowest stratum of society which
turns to possession as a form of escape, but a class of socially mobile
people whose ambitions are at odds with their traditional obligations,
and well-placed as they are, in circumstances where Islam represents
high status, they are in effect succeeding in carrying others of their
community with them. Yet, as David Parkin (1979, 1972)—the
anthropologist from whom I quoted this material—warns us, the final
outcome is still in doubt. For the prestige both of Arabs and of Islam
has markedly declined in Kenya since independence.
It is, therefore, perhaps too early to claim this illustration, with its
evocative echoes of protestant capitalism, as a success story in the history
of what was originally a peripheral cult. Nevertheless, this example helps
us to see how in the social circumstances of their formation, Christianity
and Islam likewise must have appeared initially as cults of peripheral
spirits which the entrenched religious establishments of their times were
ultimately unable to destroy or control. Other new cults, in which the
gods similarly announce their messianic message through possession
illnesses, have not always been so successful. Many of the world’s
millennarian movements and ‘religions of the oppressed’ have either

ECSTATIC RELIGION
118
been so successfully discredited and contained that they have fizzled out,
or have succeeded only in achieving a shadowy unofficial existence, as
reluctantly tolerated popular ‘superstitions’. Other cults, or the same ones
at different points in their history, have turned their backs on the
dominant cultures under whose sway they originated, to find a lonely
haven as separatist movements on the margins of societies which they
could not radically change, and where they could not impose their new
faith as the main source of public morality. In such cases, possession by
the deities which are worshipped by the faithful, remains a striking
feature of religious life. Indeed, the less successful such movements are
in securing a dominant position in the cultures in which they originate,
the more possession is likely to occupy the centre of the stage as the
central drama of religious activity. Where, on the contrary, such
peripheral cults succeed in supplanting the old established order and
eventually become themselves new establishment religions, possession
tends to become relegated to the background and to be treated as a sign
of dangerous potential subversion.
So if it is in the nature of new religions to herald their advent with a
flourish of ecstatic effervescence it is equally the fate of those which
become successfully ensconced at the centre of public morality to lose
their inspirational savour. Inspiration then becomes an institutionalized
property of the religious establishment which, as the divinely appointed
church, incarnates god: the inspired truth is then mediated to the
masses through rituals performed by its duly accredited officers. In
these circumstances individual possession experiences are discouraged
and where necessary discredited. Possession in fact becomes an
aberration, even a satanic heresy. This certainly is the pattern which is
clearly and deeply inscribed in the long history of Christianity.
Possession, interpreted as divine inspiration, has thus a tendency to
become less dramatic and significant as a new cult gains increasing
popularity and firmly establishes itself in its cultural milieu. The
changing character of Quaker religious services, which have become
less possession-orientated as the movement has become more and more
successful, illustrates the point very well. Where, however, such cults
do not attain a comparable degree of acceptance, or are passively
opposed or even actively persecuted, as long as they retain the support
of oppressed sections of the community, possessional inspiration is
likely to continue with unabated vigour. This is the situation with most
Pentecostal movements, and in the independent or separatist churches
in Africa and America and elsewhere (Sundkler, 1961).

ANCESTOR CULTS
119
If generalized possession, enthusiasm in the original sense of the
word, signals the rise of new religious cults, and sober ritualistic
dogmatism is the mark of religions which have become so thoroughly
embedded in society that almost all trace of inspirational spontaneity
has departed, the question naturally arises as to what middle ground
lies between these two poles of religious expression. In this and the
following chapter we shall attempt to answer this question. We shall
examine religions which still depend upon possession as the primary
source of their authority, and which are neither mere peripheral healing
cults, nor ossified ritualistic orthodoxies drained of inspirational
vitality.
In these religions the spirits which men incarnate stand at the centre
of the stage in the religious life of society and play a crucial, and direct,
role in sanctioning customary morality. In these circumstances, as we
have seen, possession may initially appear as a form of illness or
trauma. Yet ultimately it is regarded as the mark of divine inspiration,
the certain proof of a person’s fitness for pursuing the religious
vocation, and the basis for the assumption of leading ritual roles and
positions. Here we are no longer dealing with possession in clandestine
cults masquerading as cures, but with the most compelling and
conclusive attestation of the presence of the gods in mainline religions
whose competence and scope encompass the whole of social life.
Far from simply expressing obliquely the tolerated protests of the
underprivileged against the dominion of their earthly masters,
possession is now the idiom in which those who contend for leadership
in the central religious life of the community press their claims for
recognition as the chosen agents of the gods. Shamanism is now no
longer a special form of particularistic protest, but, on the contrary, a
central religious institution fulfilling, as we shall see, a host of
functions which vary with the social structure in which it is embedded.
Under these new conditions we should expect to find that whereas
previously possession has been monopolized by those seeking an
escape from the shackles of traditional confinements, it now acquires a
wider and more exalted catchment. Where before our shamans were
women, or men drawn from subordinate social strata, here we should
expect that such disabilities were no longer necessary for the
assumption of the shamanistic vocation. As I shall try to show, this
deduction seems empirically well founded.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
120
III
Those moralistic tribal religions which we must now consider assume
many different forms. But one of the commonest and most obvious
examples of this type is that addressed to the worship of ancestor
spirits. So we shall begin our detailed examination of the role of
possession in central morality cults with illustrations drawn from
societies with ancestor cults. By no means all ancestor cults involve
possession, of course, and we shall later have to discuss why some do
include shamanism, whereas others do not. For the moment, however,
let us concentrate on positive instances. The hunting and gathering
Veddas of Ceylon, studied by the Seligmans (Seligman, 1911) in the
first decade of this century, provide as good a starting point as any. In
this fragmented, matrilineally organized society, based on small bands
of related families without any formal apparatus of political authority,
shamans who incarnate their ancestors (the yaku) play an important
role. The ancestor cult here is merged with and includes the worship of
a legendary hunter-hero whose assistance is invoked to secure success
in the chase. These powers watch over their descendants and, only
when they are neglected, show their annoyance by withdrawing their
protection, or by becoming actively hostile.
Each small family-based band has at least one shaman with the
power to summon the spirits. One of the most important tasks of the
shaman is to officiate at funerals. On such occasions the shaman calls
to the spirit of the dead kinsman who speaks through his mouth in
hoarse guttural accents, declaring that he approves the funerary
offering, that he will assist his kinsmen in hunting, and often giving
specific advice on the direction which the group should follow in
subsequent hunting expeditions. Here, as so widely elsewhere, the
shaman’s controlled possession trance is achieved by means of dancing
and singing which becomes increasingly frenetic as he works himself
up to the point of ecstasy. Possession dances directed by the local
shaman (whose position is usually inherited matrilineally, but may pass
to a son) are also mounted at other times to secure success in hunting
and in collecting honey which forms an important part of the Vedda
diet. On these occasions the spirit summoned (which possesses the
shaman) shows consideration also for the health of those it watches
over, inquiring solicitously ‘if anyone is sick’.
This central possession cult of the ancestors who are the guardians
of customary morality is evidently directly concerned with the basic

ANCESTOR CULTS
121
subsistence activities of this hunting and gathering people, and
possession is employed as a means of communication between man
and the gods through the medium of the shaman. The office of shaman
is perhaps the most clearly defined and specialized position in the
society and is held by men. If, however, trance experienced by men is
interpreted as inspirational possession by the ancestors, illnesses may
also be diagnosed as possession by evil foreign spirits connected with
women. Thus amongst the Veddas, as the Seligmans found them, there
were apparently two possession cults: one addressed to the ancestors
and concerned with public morality and dominated by men; and a
subsidiary, peripheral cult centering on foreign spirits which afflict
women with illness.
From the information collected by the Seligmans, which is not very
detailed on this point, this latter cult appears to have been highly
responsive to new external contacts in the manner we have found with
other peripheral movements elsewhere. Contrasting their ecstatic
religion with that of the neighbouring, more strongly ‘Sanskritized’
agriculturalists, Brian Morris (1981) reports a somewhat similar pattern
of possession among the hunting and gathering Hill Pandaram of the
Ghat forests of South India. As we shall often see in the examples
which follow, where central and marginal possession religions exist
side by side in the same society, the first is primarily reserved for men,
while the second is restricted essentially to women, men of low status,
or both.
IV
Many of our illustrations of peripheral cults in earlier chapters have
been drawn from Africa, and some authorities have even claimed that
these marginal cults, rather than the central religions which are our
present concern, are an African speciality. Partly to correct this
misleading impression, I now turn to examine several well-documented
African central possession religions. I begin with the Shona-speaking
tribes of Zimbabwe who have a very vigorous shamanistic religion.
This religion offers a fruitful field for comparative study, for, since their
colonization, various Shona groups have been subject to very different
influences. These variations in the wider geopolitical environment of a
people who are largely homogeneous in culture are reflected in the
beliefs and practices of the different Shona tribes in a fashion which is
highly relevant for our analysis. Within the framework of a broadly

ECSTATIC RELIGION
122
common culture, we shall thus be able to trace significant changes in
the nature and status of their possession cults as these have altered in
response to external pressures. In the following pages we shall
concentrate on two contrasting groups whose ecstatic cults have been
fairly fully studied: the isolated and relatively conservative Korekore
Shona of the Zambesi Valley (Garbett, 1969, pp. 104–27; Lan, 1985);
and the highly acculturated Zezuru Shona, living round the European
capital of Salisbury (Fry, 1969).
The Korekore have an elaborated central shamanistic religion
addressed to the ancestors and concerned primarily with the control of
natural phenomena which are of direct importance in day-to-day living.
This group of Shona cultivators, heirs to the once powerful
Monomotapa dynasty, entered their present territory as invaders, and
are today organized in widely scattered tiny chiefdoms, grouped round
scions of the royal lineage. The density of population is low,
communications are poor, and relations between the different
chiefdoms are maintained through the cult of the ancestors. At the time
of the 1896 rebellion against the white authorities, it was through this
channel of communication that Korekore solidarity was mobilized,
with shamans playing a crucial role in promoting divinely inspired
unity against the foreign intruders. Much the same pattern recurred in
the 1970s when traditional shamans legitimated nationalist guerillas
fighting for independence against the white unilateral regime in
Southern Rhodesia (see Lan, 1985).
Shamans, who are mainly men, incarnate ancestor spirits of the long
dead, and these spirits are believed to control the rainfall and fertility in
particular tracts of country. The entire Korekore tribal area is in fact
divided into provinces, presided over by particular ancestor spirits, each
of which is linked with the founding settlers of a given region. Every
such provincial guardian spirit has at least one shamanistic medium who
regularly acts as its human host, but who is not necessarily a lineal
descendant of the spirit. The functions of these essentially religious
figures are clearly distinguished by the Korekore from those of their
secular chiefs. Shamans are considered to deal with the moral order and
with the relations of man to the earth. Natural disasters such as drought
or famine are believed to be caused by the anger of the spirit ‘owners of
the earth’, who must be approached and appeased through their shamans.
These misfortunes are interpreted as the consequences of breaches of the
moral order, so that the spirits communicating through their chosen
mediums act as the censors of society.

ANCESTOR CULTS
123
At ritual séances held to honour the spirits, the possessed shaman
exhorts the people of his neighbourhood to shun such evils as incest,
adultery, sorcery and homicide, and emphasizes the value of harmony
in social relations. In this way, through his attendant spirit, the shaman
embodies and gives expression to the sentiments and opinions of the
people in his area. Disputes are taken to him for settlement, as well as
to the official secular courts, and he is also asked to decide issues
concerning succession to chieftaincy and quarrels between
neighbouring chiefs. In these matters it is the judgement of the
guardian spirit, very properly sensitive to public opinion, that is
delivered by the shaman.
Those who live together in the same province thus fall directly
under the authority of their local guardian spirit, whose human
representative exercises a substantial degree of political and legal, as
well as ritual power. At the same time, every Korekore is directly
bound by descent to his own ancestor spirits which will also figure as
guardian spirits in some provinces but not in others. Only where the
residents of a province actually trace descent from the local guardian
spirit—which is then their ancestor—will these two attachments
coincide. Where this is not the case and men of the same lineage live
in different parts of the country, they will honour the local guardian
spirits and, at the same time, respect their common lineal ancestors
elsewhere. Those kinsmen who thus fall under this dual spiritual
dispensation will consult their lineal ancestors, through the
appropriate shamans, in issues which relate directly to kinship. Lineal
ancestors, rather than guardian spirits, are thus consulted over
succession to kinship-linked offices, in the inheritance of property
(including wives), and in sickness and misfortunes which have been
diagnosed as expressions of ancestral wrath.
These two largely separate fields of spirit authority—the first
concerned with regional interests, and the second with kinship
obligations—finally merge at the national level in the Korekore cult of
the founder of the Monomotapa dynasty. Within this tribal cult, the
shamans of component provinces are ranked in a rigid hierarchy
corresponding to the seniority and size of the regions whose spirits they
incarnate. This spiritual organization represents virtually all that
survives today of the centralized tradition of the Monomotapa
kingdom, which achieved its political zenith in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries.
In this highly institutionalized possession cult, recruitment to the

ECSTATIC RELIGION
124
post of authorized shaman for a particular guardian spirit is strictly
controlled by the shamanistic hierarchy. The aspiring shaman who
becomes possessed may at first be regarded as troubled by an evil spirit
(a shave) of foreign origin. If, however, the curative rituals which are
then applied to ‘bring out’ this noxious demon fail, further divination
may suggest that the invading agency is a guardian spirit. The patient is
then sent to an accredited shaman for observation. If he evinces the true
symptoms (experiencing strange dreams, and wandering in the forest
where the guardian spirits are believed to roam in the guise of lions),
these suggest that his call is genuine. He is then referred to a senior
shaman of the hierarchy for further scrutiny. The aspirant has now
achieved the status of an apprentice shaman, and is required to furnish
final proof of the authenticity of his inspiration. This is established
when his possessing spirit reveals the correct historical details of its
origin, the location of its shrine, and its precise genealogical links with
other spirits of the official spirit hierarchy. As a final proof, the new
recruit has to pick the ritual staff used by the spirit’s previous human
incarnation from among a bundle presented to him by the senior
examining shaman.
Admission to the profession is thus strictly controlled by the
hierarchy of established mediums, and the position is generally one
which is reached by achievement rather than ascribed by birth. Many of
those who wish to become shamans, but are not considered suitable, are
rejected on the grounds that they are possessed not by guardian spirits,
but by shave demons. It is in fact essential for the aspirant to be
sponsored by an already well-known and powerful shaman if he is to
succeed. A further important qualification, although one that is not
always honoured in practice, is that the candidate should be a stranger
to the people and locality whose guardian spirit he claims to incarnate.
This doctrine is clearly in keeping with the shaman’s role as an
impartial arbitrator, inspired by the spirit of a distant and long-departed
ancestor, in the affairs of any particular local community.
Amongst the Korekore Shona, then, there is a clearly defined
morality cult in which the spirits that watch over the conduct of men
and control their interests make known their wishes through a group of
chosen agents who are organized in a clearly structured shamanistic
hierarchy. Inspirational possession here is virtually a male monopoly.
Other forms of possession, which are interpreted as illnesses caused by
malevolent, intrusive, foreign spirits, regularly afflict women and may
be used by them to advance their interests in the way we have seen

ANCESTOR CULTS
125
elsewhere. This pattern thus corresponds closely to that among the
Veddas of Ceylon.
Now let us pursue this comparative analysis of Shona religion by
turning to the less politically centralized Zezuru. In this Shona tribe,
positions of religious leadership and power are similarly obtained
through possession by spirits of the dead. Here, however, there are two
main classes of spirits: the patrilineal ancestors (the vadzimu), and the
more powerful makombwe spirits which are considered to be closer to
God and have no precise genealogical relationship with living Zezuru.
Both types of spirit solicitously guard the traditional morality. They
allow misfortune and sickness to strike those who flout public opinion
by withdrawing their protection, thus leaving their wayward
dependants at the mercy of witches, malevolent spirits of foreign
origin, and other sources of mystical danger.
To a greater extent than among the Korekore, and without its
connecting links, Zezuru society as a whole is fragmented into a
number of petty chiefdoms each associated with a small, local ruling
dynasty and subdivided into wards, under sub-chiefs, and villages led
by headmen. The latter offices are traditionally ‘owned’ by particular
patrilineages; and chiefs and sub-chiefs are appointed and paid by the
national administration. The encapsulation of this traditional structure
within the colonial system, as so often elsewhere, has imposed a
rigidity and fixity which were formerly absent.
The vital structure of Zezuru society is based upon patrilineal kin
groups. Each local group of co-resident kin has amongst its members
one or more shamanistic mediums who act as the vehicles of its
ancestors and express their wishes. When, as a result of growth in
population, pressure on land, and internal dissension, such a
community splits, each new faction is led by a rival shaman. In the
internal life of the society, therefore, one avenue to political
advancement is through possession by a powerful ancestor spirit. The
authority of a village headman may thus depend upon his being the
senior spirit medium in his village. Such shamans are the foci for
relations between the living and dead members of their localized kin
groups, and also act as arbiters of minor disputes. Ambitious men, who
seek a wider sphere of authority, may succeed in gaining public
acceptance as the recognized vehicles for more powerful and remote
ancestors, or for makombwe spirits which are not limited in their appeal
to particular lineages. The acknowledgement of claims of this exalted
kind depends, of course, upon the popularity of a shaman’s divinations

ECSTATIC RELIGION
126
and prophetic pronouncements, his success as a healer, and his
reputation as a rain-maker.
In contrast to the position among the Korekore, here there is no
fixed hierarchy of particular spirits, nor of those who claim to incarnate
them. Instead, intense competition exists between contending mediums
who seek to establish their reputations as the recognized mouthpieces
of the most powerful spirits, and rivals are discredited by belittling the
status of their attendant spirits. At the village level, there is apparently
some concordance between the colonially-based administrative system
and that of popularly inspired shamans. For, as we have seen, shamans
may be village headmen. But at higher levels of political grouping,
where larger units of population are involved, these two spheres seem
to be largely distinct; and there is no single, all-embracing, national
dynastic cult knitting the Zezuru together in the same manner as the
Korekore.
While the Korekore pattern I have described seems to flow in a
virtually continuous line from the past, the situation among the Zezuru
is very different. In fact, the Zezuru shamanistic cults I have outlined
represent a recent resurgence of their traditional religion. To appreciate
the implications of this we have to set the Zezuru in context and review
their recent history. Situated as they are close to the main centres of
European settlement, the Zezuru are much more fully involved in the
modern exchange economy of Rhodesia than the remote and sheltered
Korekore, and much more deeply affected by contemporary social and
political trends. A large proportion of Zezuru men indeed spend most
of their lives working in nearby Salisbury (Harare) or in other urban
centres.
With this degree of involvement in the European-dominated world,
it was only natural that the Zezuru should have been acutely sensitive
to changing political conditions. After the failure of the rebellion of
1896, in which they participated, the Zezuru were subjected to intense
missionary endeavour and soon began to abandon their traditional
religion in favour of Christianity. European education, and the culture
which went with it, were warmly received and accepted with
enthusiasm. Spirit mediums dwindled in their numbers and following
and lost their power and prestige to the rising new élite of Shona
evangelists and teachers. A new morality, validated by the Christian
faith, thus gradually replaced the old authority of the ancestor spirits
which appear to have been relegated to the status of mere peripheral
spirits and left to plague women.

ANCESTOR CULTS
127
In the early 1960s, however, this picture changed radically. With the
growing suppression by the white Rhodesian government of the
African Nationalist parties which the sophisticated Zezuru supported,
there developed a self-conscious and deliberate rejection of Christianity
and of European culture. Endowed with a new and increasingly
politicized content, traditional religion burst forth again, filling the
vacuum left by the prohibition of nationalist politics. Spirits which in
the dominant world of men had become little more than a memory
suddenly began to claim new mediums with growing insistence. The
idiom of ancestral possession was quickly reinstated as a highly
respected and popular vehicle for expressing local interests and
ambitions. Many evangelists who had sought advancement through
European culture dropped out of the church and became shamans.
Teachers, and others who had secured positions within the European-
dominated world, were dramatically recalled to the faith of their
fathers. And the newly restored traditional religion was now highly
expressive of Zezuru (and, in a wider context, of Shona) cultural
nationalism.
It would be strange of course if this volte face occurred
simultaneously throughout Zezuru society. Thus the fact that a
considerable number of modern Zezuru shamans, possessed by
ancestor spirits, are women suggests that these represent a residue from
the earlier situation when the Christianization of Zezuru culture
converted the ancestors into peripheral spirits which plagued the
weaker sex. What, at an earlier stage, the men had rejected, women
clung to. If this hypothesis is correct, the position has now so changed
that the powers such women incarnate are again eminently respectable,
and they are clearly on to a good thing! For events have changed in
such a way that what was abandoned to them as cast-off clothing from
the central world of men is once again very much à la mode.
If we now leave the Shona and return for a moment to the Tonga of
Zambia whose cult of peripheral masable spirits we considered in an
earlier chapter, we can, I believe, find further support for this
interpretation. In discussing peripheral possession among the Tonga it
will be recalled that we found very different patterns in the two groups
we distinguished—the isolated, conservative Valley Tonga, and the
acculturated, progressive Tonga of the Plateau. Similar differences
occur today in the incidence of possession by another category of
Tonga spirit which we have so far not mentioned.
The spirits involved here are those known as basungu which

ECSTATIC RELIGION
128
formerly, in both Tonga groups, played an important part in sanctioning
morality (Colson, 1969). These central spirits are often derived from
the souls of leading ‘big men’ who, in their own lifetime, have played a
significant role as points of political influence in this traditionally
uncentralized community. They possess men (again, as with the Shona,
not necessarily their own lineal descendants) and enable them to act as
prophetic diviners, mediators, rain-makers, and community leaders in
their turn. Their shrines become focal points for neighbourhood rituals
relating to the rains, the harvests, and the prevention and control of
natural disasters. The shamans, incarnating these spirits, act as
intermediaries between the world of the spirits and the world of men.
They direct a cult which is essentially concerned with public morality,
fertility, and prosperity, and which, in a sense, celebrates success since
it is the spirits of the successful who in turn inspire those who succeed
in subsequent generations.
Whereas the cult of peripheral masabe spirits seems, as we saw
earlier, to be of recent origin and directly concerned with expressing
the reaction of the Tonga to novel cultural experiences, the basungu
cult is apparently of much longer standing and is today generally
declining. There are, however, important differences here between the
two Tonga groups. In the case of the conservative Valley Tonga where
masabe possession flourishes among wives separated from their
migrant worker husbands, basungu possession is still quite popular.
But, significantly, it now involves women rather than men. This
suggests that this old central morality religion is now assuming a
marginal position in relation to the dominant, acculturated sphere of
men. Amongst the go-ahead Plateau Tonga, who have now virtually
abandoned the masabe cult, this degradation appears to have gone even
further. What remains of the attenuated central basungu cult in a
culture increasingly inspired by western values has been relegated to a
very peripheral position.
V
This excursion into Central African ethnography again demonstrates
how the peripherality, or centrality, of possession cults can only be
adequately assessed when we take into account the total social and
political circumstances in which they occur. The extent to which
ecstasy is imbued with moral force is a function of the total situation of
a given society. And, in keeping with our findings in previous chapters,

ANCESTOR CULTS
129
we see here in detail the process by which cults, which were once
central, lose their moral significance and degenerate into amoral
peripheral movements. Such changes, however, in the status and
importance of possession cults are by no means necessarily final. As
the Zezuru case so well shows, new circumstances may give new life to
an old cult which has been thrust into a marginal position, bringing it
back again into the centre of the stage. This suggests that main and
peripheral possession cults should be seen as opposite extremes on a
single continuum, rather than as completely different types of religion.
This is a point to which we shall return later. At the same time, we may
note how changes in the status of a particular possession cult are
accompanied by changes in its personnel. In conformity with our
findings in earlier chapters, marginal cults appeal to subordinates, and
especially women; while those cults which stand at the centre of
society and celebrate public morality generally draw their inspired
leaders from more exalted strata.
The sentiments of protest which peripheral cults enshrine have in
these central possession religions a different significance which I shall
discuss more fully in the following chapter. For the moment, I wish to
conclude this examination of the role of possession in central morality
religions, based on ancestor cults, by considering one of the most
elaborate and interesting that has so far been reported from Africa. This
concerns the politically centralized Kaffa people of south-western
Ethiopia (Orent, 1969). This society, ruled in the nineteenth century by
a divine king, is divided into a large number of patrilineal clans and
lineages which, to a considerable extent, form local groups. Lineage
segments are usually led by a male shaman (alamo) who acts as a
medium for the spirits of his patrilineal ancestors. In this capacity he
functions as a diviner, diagnosing the causes of sickness and misfortune
within his group in terms of ancestral wrath incurred by its members
when they sin. The ancestors, which are thus approached and appeased
through the lineage elder and shaman, are concerned primarily with the
maintenance of lineage morality and with the solidarity and cohesion of
their groups. A man inherits his father’s spirit (his eqo), being selected
from a group of brothers by the spirit. Once chosen, he must build a
shrine for the spirit and he becomes subject to a series of stringent
taboos which emphasize his position as a shaman and set him apart
from other men.
As in the other cases we have considered, divine calling is highly
responsive to the needs of society. When an agnatic group led by one

ECSTATIC RELIGION
130
shaman grows large and presses so heavily upon its land resources that
a split becomes inevitable, the party which hives off is grouped round a
new elder who soon becomes possessed by a spirit in the appropriate
manner. Here, clearly, inspiration legitimizes secular authority.
Although the Kaffa are mostly nominal Christians, participating in
the rites of the Ethiopian Church, they still also hold steadfast to their
traditional beliefs in the efficacy of their ancestral spirits. Each Friday,
the members of a small local lineage congregate at the shrine to consult
the spirit through its human mount. Petitions are answered with
inspired judgements and advice on the following morning, while on
Sunday, little abashed, they attend mass at the nearest orthodox
Ethiopian Church. The spirits are consulted for advice on matters of
domestic policy, and for the diagnosis and treatment of the causes of
sickness and misfortune. Supplicants are questioned by the shaman to
discover whether their complaints can be attributed to moral
misdemeanours or negligence. If so, the guilty party will be asked to
offer sacrifices to the offended ancestor spirit. Frequently these
offerings are made in promissory form, and neglect of such promises,
once the desired end is achieved, is believed to bring down the wrath of
the ancestors on their ungrateful dependants.
This eqo cult clearly caters for the interests both of corporate groups
and of individuals who seek positions of leadership based upon their
ecstatic relationship with the ancestors. As we might anticipate, it is
built into the structure of Kaffa society in a highly formalized fashion.
Prior to their conquest by the armies of Emperor Menelik, the creator
of modern Ethiopia, Kaffa was ruled by a divine king (the tato) who,
with the aid of his council, presided over numerous subsidiary chiefs
and clan-heads. Included within the king’s council was the leading
shaman of a particular clan which had a privileged relationship with the
chief spirit of the ego cult (the spirits are arranged in a hierarchy). This
shaman was in fact the head of the cult for the kingdom as a whole, and
incarnated and controlled the leading spirit, known as Dochay.
Menelik’s conquest firmly incorporated Kaffa into the administrative
structure of the Ethiopian state. The kingship was abolished and a
system of direct rule instituted similar to that in many British colonial
territories. Administrative officials, mainly of the ruling Amhara ethnic
group, were appointed by the central government and sent to
administer Kaffa. Some traditional Kaffa leaders, however, received
minor administrative posts.
Despite these radical changes which destroyed the old political

ANCESTOR CULTS
131
superstructure of the Kaffa state, the position of the Dochay cult
shaman, who was regarded as an essentially religious figure, was left
intact. Today under Amhara rule, as in the past, the incumbent of this
office consecrates all officially recognized subsidiary clan and lineage
shamans. Indeed, as might be expected, the effect of these upheavals,
which removed the old temporal authority structure of Kaffa, has been
to consolidate and increase the power of this religious office. With the
aid of his attendant Dochay spirit, it is this paramount shaman who
decides between rival claimants for the position of appointed
shamanistic leaders of local lineages. And in the context of Amhara
domination, this national shaman has become the focus of Kaffa tribal
identity. Gifts and tribute are regularly brought to him as the
pronouncements of the spirit which he incarnates are anxiously
awaited. Virgins are given him as offerings to his spirit. These the god’s
human vessel deflowers and generously bestows amongst those Kaffa
who are too poor to afford wives of their own. Despite these taxing
demands on his virility, this tribal shaman is reported to be as corpulent
as a bishop. Without question he is the richest individual in Kaffa.
Here, evidently, in an officially Christian environment, we have a
central morality possession religion which is led by male shamans
who are elected by the spirits and exercise ritual and politico-legal
authority at every level of social grouping. Unlike the situation when
the Zezuru warmly embraced Christianity and European values, the
introduction and partial acceptance of Amhara Christianity has not
reduced the status of the traditional Kaffa religion to that of a
marginal cult. Rather a subtle, practical symbiosis has occurred which
enables the old religious system to continue alongside, and to a
certain extent within the new. And with the destruction of the
traditional Kaffa political organization by the alien authorities, the old
religion and its hierarchically ordered officiants have acquired new
political significance. Today, certainly much more than prior to the
Amhara conquest, the eqo cult serves as a vehicle for Kaffa cultural
nationalism, although not, I think, in the same measure nor in the
same deliberate and self-conscious manner as amongst the Zezuru in
Rhodesia in the 1960s. Nevertheless, it seems highly probable that
Amhara colonization and rule play an important part in keeping Kaffa
possession on the boil.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
132
VI
These examples will, I hope, show sufficiently how, where it occurs in
the context of moralistic ancestor cults and is initially interpreted as an
affliction, possession is ultimately construed as ancestral inspiration,
and then becomes the basis for the exercise of the shamanistic vocation.
Here exactly as in the case of peripheral cults, once possession has
been shown to involve the appropriate spirits, and not some other
agency, the objective is not to cast out the invader but to reach a viable
accommodation with it. The particular diagnosis made here depends
less on the symptoms than upon the standing and reputation of the
patient. Thus elected, the shaman acts as the appointed mouthpiece of
the spirits which sit in judgement upon the conduct of their descendants
and dependants.
In this context inspirational possession has an obvious conservative
bias, expressing in fact the consensus of public feeling on moral issues.
But public opinion can change, and publics differ. Thus, as we have
seen, in social units which have grown too large and faction-ridden for
comfort, the aspiring leaders of embryonic new groups find in
possession an impressive validation for the legitimacy of their aims.
And, as with peripheral possession cults, where significant changes
occur in the wider geopolitical environment these are mirrored in
alterations in the content and meaning of central possession cults as
well as in the status of their inspired priests. Whatever its psychological
and theological meaning, therefore, this morally inspired enthusiasm is
as much a social as an individual phenomenon and is just as easily
applied to manipulate others as is peripheral possession.
Of course, in characterizing these as central morality cults, I do not
wish to imply that all aspects of public morality are catered for solely
by these spirits. In all the examples we have considered in this chapter
other sanctions and other agencies of social control also exist. We
might expect that the extent to which such spirits exercise a more or
less monopolistic control of morality will depend on the presence, or
absence, of alternative legal and political mechanisms, and upon the
size of the units involved. This is a topic which we shall examine more
closely in the next chapter.
Yet, however partial or complete their moral significance, it is
nevertheless virtually an article of faith that the spirits concerned here
are essentially moralistic, and consequently predictable in their
administration of affliction. Unlike peripheral spirits, they do not strike

ANCESTOR CULTS
133
capriciously or haphazardly. Acting either directly as causes of
suffering, or indirectly by withdrawing their normal benevolent
protection, they ensure that evil deeds do not go unpunished. Their
intervention as agents of justice in human affairs is thus pointed, but
anticipated, and entirely justified. The moral character which those who
believe in them ascribe to these spirits is, consequently, just as
consistent with their actual social role as is the case with amoral spirits
in peripheral cults. Since I am well aware that these remarks do not
apply uniformly to all ancestor spirits, I would emphasize that I am
speaking here only of moralistic ancestor cults, and, within this type of
religion, only of those which also involve possession.
 

134
Chapter Six
 
POSSESSION AND PUBLIC
MORALITY—II OTHER
COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
I
Our generalizations of the previous chapter refer only to one type of
central possession religion—that addressed to the worship of ancestor
spirits. Clearly if our findings are to hold true of morally endowed
possession religions generally, irrespective of the nature of the mystical
powers concerned, it has to be shown that they apply equally well to
other types of shamanistic religion. This chapter will accordingly
attempt to extend the range of these conclusions and try to reach a
more definitive assessment of the significance of ecstasy by examining
its place in central morality cults which are directed to powers other
than ancestor spirits.
We shall start with religions where, as in the ancestor cults we have
already considered, the spirits which inspire men and also sanctify and
protect social morality do so in a straightforward and direct fashion. We
shall then discuss other cases where the mystical forces involved are not,
at first sight, primarily concerned to uphold morality, or to sanction the
relations between man and man, and yet ultimately this result is achieved
in a circuitous manner. Such religions where the powers of the cosmos
thus obliquely reflect breaches and disharmonies in human relations have
important analogies with those cults which we have classified as
peripheral. Consequently an examination of their character will bring us
back to the problem, which we have already noticed in other contexts, of
the relation between these two, seemingly radically opposed, types of
religion. This will force us to consider more carefully the significance of
these two categories in the analysis of ecstatic religion.
In what follows, I shall deliberately select illustrative material from

OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
135
societies and cultures which are widely separated geographically,
which differ substantially in their ways of life and economy, and which
exhibit similar contrasts in their political organization and in their
religious systems and cosmologies. I shall begin with cases where
shamans are by no means the sole holders of political and legal power,
and end with examples where they are almost alone in the field. In the
process, we shall move from the less familiar territory of African
shamanism to the classical shamanistic regions of the Arctic and South
America. If, over such a wide area, and in relation to societies which
differ in so many other respects, central possession cults can be shown
to exhibit fundamentally the same significance, then we can hope to
reach conclusions which will be independent of cultural particularities.
At the same time, from such comparative evidence, we should be able
to uncover some at least of the basic conditions which favour the
development and maintenance of an ecstatic emphasis in religion.
With these aims before us, let us begin with another example from
Ethiopia. In this case, such is the unusual wealth of historical evidence
available that it is possible not only to analyse this religion as it exists
today, but also to see how, over several centuries, it has come to assume
its present shape. In this instance we are confronted with a main
morality religion which, in its earlier phases, did not include ecstasy
but now has this character. I am referring to the religion of the Macha
Oromo, who live today as cultivators in an area north of the Kaffa and
west of Addis Ababa. This people is one of the many sub-divisions of
the great Oromo nation which, with a population estimated at some
twelve millions, constitutes the largest single ethnic group in Ethiopia.
As with the Kaffa and all the other subordinate Ethiopian peoples, the
Macha now form part of the Ethiopian empire and are ruled by the
Christian Amhara élite.
In contemporary Macha society (Knutsson, 1967, 1975; H.S. Lewis,
1984), men regularly incarnate God (Waka) and his various
‘refractions’, or subsidiary manifestations, which are known as ayanas.
To the Macha, God is the final guardian of morality and punishes
wrongs and misdemeanours, which are considered sins, by
withdrawing his protection and thus rendering evil-doers liable to
suffer misfortune and sickness. Sacrifices, and prayers for forgiveness
and blessing, are regularly made to God and to his subsidiary
manifestations through shamans (called kallus) who hold priestly
offices at all levels of social grouping from that of the extended
patrilineal family to the clan. The spirits summoned on these occasions

ECSTATIC RELIGION
136
are considered to be refractions of the central deity Waka, which is
apprehended as a unity at the level of the Macha people as a whole.
Shamans who in the recurring rites in honour of their spirits, are often
possessed, hold positions which are generally vested in the senior
segments of lineages.
These offices are in principle hereditary. Yet an element of
achievement is also present, since shamans vie with one another for
the leadership of local congregations built round co-resident clusters
of kin. And some shamans attain positions of religious leadership
which extend far beyond their own immediate circle of patrilineal
relatives. In this fashion, competition for power within Macha society
is couched in the idiom of possession. If, for example, a family head
becomes regularly subject to strikingly histrionic trances, which are
interpreted as signs of divine possession, and builds up a reputation
for great divinatory powers and success in mediation and dispute
settlement, then he is likely to acquire renown at a wider local and
lineage level. This gives him a standing which will enable him to bid
for recognition as the acknowledged shaman of a much larger group.
Typically, those men who are thus striving for wider power and
authority experience much more impressive and violent possession
trances than those who already hold such positions by right of birth.
But success here is often ephemeral. A shaman’s position depends
upon public recognition, and reputations can be destroyed as easily as
they can be built up. Here, as with the Zezuru Shona, but unlike the
Korekore and Kaffa, there is no firmly established hierarchy of
shamans, and no shamanistic bishopric to adjudicate between the
claims of rival competitors.
Each shaman has at least one shrine for the spirit or spirits which he
incarnates and it is to these that people of a neighbourhood come in
search of help. Inspired by these powers, the shamans hear confessions
of guilt at wrongs committed, and receive sacrifices and votive
offerings for the spirits. As I have already indicated, alongside the
official legal and administrative system of the Ethiopian government
they also exercise a certain amount of informal political and legal
power. And the judgements which they give in disputes brought to them
are backed by the sanction of their spirits. People who defiantly reject a
shaman’s decision fear his curse.
Side by side with this religion centring on the morally just God,
Waka, there exist other peripheral cults of spirits (known locally as
muata, atete (or Mariam) which often possess women. But since

OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
137
these involve features with which we are now thoroughly familiar no
more need be said about them for the moment. Instead I want to
explore the historical events which lie behind the present character of
the cult of Waka.
Whereas present evidence suggests that the central Kaffa possession
religion represents simply an intensification of traditional practices, this
is not the case with the Macha. On the contrary, in this case we are
fortunate in having secure evidence which shows that, in its present
shamanistic form, this main morality cult is a cultural innovation of
only a few generations’ standing. Before this development, the Macha
(who, it will be recalled, form one division of the great Oromo nation)
participated in the pan-Oromo cult of Waka who was represented on
earth, not by an array of inspired shamans, but by a handful of divinely
instituted priestly dynasties. Although these lines of priestly mediators
were believed to have been endowed by God, and thus to be divinely
appointed, the actual incumbents (who were also called kallus) did not
employ trance and were not considered to be possessed by the power
whose authority they exercised.
This ‘traditional’ pattern of a non-shamanistic priesthood persists
today amongst the southern branches of the Oromo nation which
remain those most attached to pastoral nomadism and least involved in
cultivation. Outside Macha, amongst these more conservative Oromo,
this office of tribal priest, which is hereditary, is closely associated with
the traditional political structure. This is based primarily upon the
generation-set organization which, in the south, is still the main
integrating and governmental principle (see Knutsson, 1975). Without
going into unnecessary details, this institution provides a mechanism
whereby the male population of any autonomous Oromo tribe is
divided into sets, each one drawn from men of a different generation,
which progress through a number of grades at eight-yearly intervals.
Each grade occupied by a set, as its members move through the system,
has different roles and obligations assigned to it.
As with age-grade organizations elsewhere, the effect, in this
traditionally uncentralized political system, is that every man is given
the opportunity of being a warrior and, later, an elder and judge. At any
point in time one set, composed of men of the same generation,
occupies that grade which supplies the peace-keeping, decision-making
and ritual direction for the tribe as a whole. Ideally and in practice, the
system is highly democratic and egalitarian. Those who exercise
political and legal authority do so only for the eight years that they are

ECSTATIC RELIGION
138
in office; power then passes out of their hands into those of the next
senior set. And the leaders of each set, who will in their turn briefly
rule the tribe as a whole, are elected by all its members. This
institution, linked closely to the dynastic kallu priesthood which
hallows it and endows it with mystical efficacy, is well suited to provide
the loose degree of integration and tribal solidarity required by sparsely
distributed pastoral nomads.
So much for the traditional Oromo social organization which, as I
have said, survives most strongly today amongst those Oromo of
southern Ethiopia and northern Kenya who still live as marginal
pastoral nomads. Now the Macha, with whom we are concerned here,
represent one of the several Oromo groups who moved up into central
Ethiopia in the course of the great northern expansion of the Oromo in
the sixteenth century. In their new environment they did not succeed in
establishing a local kallu dynasty of their own. Instead they had to
depend upon the great priests of the southern Oromo to whose shrines,
before the final imposition of Amhara rule in the late nineteenth
century, they used regularly to go on pilgramage.
In their new highland home, however, they gradually adopted
cultivation and became subject to pressures of social change
sweeping through all northern Oromo society in the late eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries. In the case of the Macha, these led to
the breakdown of the traditional and highly democratic political
system based on the generation-set organization which was
sanctioned and hallowed by the kallu priests. Pressure on the land
increased, and although lineages were initially land-holding units, the
growth of markets and of trade in this period encouraged the rise of a
new class of merchant adventurers and military leaders who came to
control the land. In some northern areas, the emergence of these ‘big
men’ led to a general development of social stratification with power
based primarily on achievement, and ultimately to the formation of
monarchies whose rulers tended to adopt Islam as a convenient
justification for the new social positions which they had created. But
amongst those Macha Oromo discussed here, this process of
increasing political centralization had not proceeded to this point
before the Amhara conquest supervened and ‘froze’ the existing
situation (cf. H.S Lewis, 1984).
This train of developments, with the rise of ‘big men’ competing
for secular power, was accompanied by parallel changes in religious
organization and cosmological beliefs leading ultimately to the

OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
139
pattern described earlier. As in other conditions of change and
dislocation in which possession phenomena flourish, so here, as we
have seen, achieved shamanistic positions, legitimized by possession,
replaced the former attachment of the Macha to the God-given high-
priesthoods of the south. Where formerly inspiration had been fully
bounded and institutionalized in the shape of divinely installed
dynasties of priests, with power incarnate in the office rather than in
the person, God was now in effect breaking out all over. The
possession-inspired kallu shaman thus succeeded the kallu priest.
And, as the generation-set organization declined in significance,
clanship became one of the main foci of social identity. Thus, at
various levels of clan grouping there developed shamanistic positions
paralleling the refraction into constituent parts of a god who had
previously been conceived of as single and indivisible. Ultimately,
therefore, the resulting new kallu institution has come to include
ascribed as well as achieved aspects, thus bringing the wheel of
religious change full circle—or nearly so. Certainly, at least, it is
possible to discern the beginnings of what may eventually become a
new kallu religious establishment, although trance and possession still
remain at the moment important factors in the exercise of the
religious vocation.
To complete this picture, we must note that, as in Kaffa, a
considerable proportion of the Macha are practising Christians.
Christianity, however, has not displaced their indigenous faith, nor
reduced it to a subsidiary position. On the contrary, both religions co-
exist in a loose syncretic relationship. To many Macha, indeed, they
must appear as parts of a single continuum, rather than as discrete and
contradictory faiths. In this tolerant ecumenical spirit, the Virgin
Mary and a number of leading saints from the Christian tradition, as
well as certain figures from Islam, including even the Prophet
Muhammad, have in fact been assimilated to refractions of Waka.
Similarly, the Christian calendar has exerted a considerable influence
upon the rotation of the main public rites addressed to the Macha
god. Hence, if this ecstatic religion voices the local cultural
nationalism of the Macha, it does so to a degree and in a manner
which at the same time admits of a gradual movement towards the
assimilative culture and religion of the dominant Amhara. Though
akin to the situation in Kaffa, these circumstances are rather different
from those amongst the Zezuru.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
140
II
The central possession religion of the Macha cultivators represents, as
we have seen, a considerably modified version of their traditional
religion. Its shamanistic character is the product of economic and
political changes over a period of some three centuries. Despite very
considerable differences in cosmology, and although we know little
about its earlier history, the classical shamanism of the Tungus reindeer
herders of Siberia and the Arctic reveals striking parallels with this
Macha cult. In order to clarify the central character of Tungus
shamanism and to show how, as in Macha, it is closely associated with
the clan system, I now refer to a detailed account of the Evenk Tungus
herders by the Soviet ethnographer, Anisimov (Anisimov, 1963, cf.
Basilov, 1984; Hamayon, 1984). In this case, the clans involved are
smaller, more tightly integrated, and exhibit a higher degree of mutual
hostility than in Macha.
In the traditional Evenk setting, sickness and misfortune were
believed to be due, either to neglect of the clan spirits, or to the malice
of other clans whose protective spirits had been unleashed on their
enemies. In the latter event, the shaman treated his afflicted clansmen
by exorcizing the demon responsible, and driving it into the lower
world. In retaliation for this hostile spirit intrusion, he would then let
loose a host of his own clan’s guardian spirits, in the form of
zoomorphic monsters, sending these out to do battle with the clan
which had initiated this spiritual combat. To defend itself against such
harassment, each clan shaman was required to fence in the clan lands,
protecting them against incursion by a mystical iron curtain consisting
of the shaman’s spirit watchmen. Alien enemy spirits had first to
penetrate this bulwark before they could reach those it sheltered and
plague them with illness and death. Aided by his spirit helpers, it was
the primary duty of the clan shaman to struggle with trespassing spirits
and, having repelled them, to repair the damage done to the clan
defences.
This defence work was three-dimensional. In the air, shamanistic
bird spirits were ever on the watch; on land, the shaman’s animal spirits
staunchly stood guard; and in the water, fish spirits were posted as
sentries. Each clan was thus thought to possess a sphere of interest
which, like that of modern nations, straddled the three worlds: the
upper world of the air and heavens, the earth which man inhabited, and
the world below into which the rivers flowed. Through the centre of

OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
141
this jealously guarded clan territory flowed the clan’s ‘watery river
road’, a spiritual stream whose sources lay in the upper world
populated by the supreme nature deities, whose middle course lay in
the world of men, and the mouth in the lower world. In this poetic
imagery, clan life was viewed as running along this river in a circular
process of reincarnation. Neighbouring clans had adjoining rivers of
life, and the relations between their mortal representatives were
reflected in those on the spiritual plane which the shaman’s spirits
regulated.
Although each Evenk clan had also a formally installed political
leader (called kulak), the shaman’s position as the interpreter of clan
morality and, indeed, as the embodiment of clan well-being, was
extremely important. While in principle hereditary, this office could
also be obtained, as we have seen, by achievement. The clan spirits
were the final arbiters in the selection of the successful candidate who
was consecrated in a collective clan ritual which incorporated the
themes of rebirth, prosperity in animal husbandry, and success in
hunting. Shamans were treated with deference, allocated the most
productive areas of clan territory, and helped with their reindeer
herding by other clansmen. Paid for their services in gifts, such as a
few head of reindeer, they often became as prosperous as they were
mystically powerful.
During the period of Russian rule before the revolution, and partly
as a result of Christian influence, shamanism declined. But under the
new Soviet authorities it acquired a new lease of life. In much the same
manner as among the Zezuru of Rhodesia, possession became the
vehicle for Tungus cultural nationalism and protest against the policies
of their new masters. In this setting, shamans joined forces with the
kulak clan leaders as agents of local resistance and disaffection.
Amongst the Tungus generally (Shirokogoroff, 1935), the well-
being of clansmen depended upon the zealous direction of the cult of
their guardian spirits by the clan shaman. If these spirits were
neglected, they could themselves wreak havoc; or, as among the Macha
Oromo and in other examples we have considered, achieve the same
effect by withdrawing their protection, and thus leaving their clan open
to attack by hostile enemy powers. These alien spirits were particularly
dangerous to women, and women’s illnesses were regularly explained
in terms of possession by such foreign spirits. Although the literature is
not entirely clear on this point, it seems that alongside the central cult
of clan guardian spirits, which was directed by men, there also existed

ECSTATIC RELIGION
142
a peripheral cult which was mainly concerned with female ailments. It
was also, apparently, through alleged association with such amoral evil
spirits, that an unpopular shaman might be discredited as a ‘witch’.
These are features which we have already encountered in a number of
our previous examples, and to the significance of which I shall return
presently.
Finally, it is of interest to note here that, during the old Russian
regime when Christianity exerted a powerful impact, in some areas clan
shamanism seems to have degenerated to the status of a marginal cult
involving female as well as male shamans. The diffusion of Buddhism,
through Manchuria, may earlier have exerted a similar effect.
III
So far, we have concentrated upon cases where male-dominated cults
sustain public morality in a direct fashion, the shaman voicing the
decisions of moralistic gods which, if they do not simply echo it, are at
least highly responsive to the judgement of public opinion. But in our
previous examples, the shaman’s inspired judgements are only one of
several, alternative sources of law, since other authorities and other
mechanisms of social control also exist. I want now to examine the role
of shamanism in societies which completely lack formal political
offices, or courts of law, and where the shaman has virtually no rivals
in his inspired ministrations. In such conditions, as we shall see, the
shaman’s portfolio of functions becomes extremely wide in scope.
I take as my example here the Akawaio Indians of British Guiana, a
people living in small autonomous settlements, strung out along the
banks of rivers, and practising a mixed economy which includes
cultivation, hunting, fishing, and collecting wild fruits. Here, as Audrey
Butt breezily says, the shaman ‘has many roles, ranging from doctor,
military tactician, and priest to lawyer and judge: at one and the same
time he is the primitive embodiment of the National Space Agency and
the Citizen’s Advice Bureau’ (Butt, 1967). To appreciate this
proliferation of tasks, the background of Akawaio beliefs must be
outlined briefly. As with so many other tribal peoples, and to some
extent in line with modern psychiatry, the Akawaio believe that
animosities between individuals, families, and local communities are a
source of sickness, misfortune, and even death. Physical and social
disorder and malfunctioning are linked together by the assumption that
nature spirits which cause suffering have, as their primary focus of

OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
143
concern, conditions of social disharmony. Hostilities and disputes in
personal and social relations are considered to attract the attention of
these spirits which then signify their disapproval by afflicting those
involved with disease or death.
Such an undesirable state of affairs requires the help of the shaman
who, as diagnostician and arbiter of spirit activity, is summoned to
investigate the trouble. His task is both medical and politico-legal. He
seeks to cure the physical symptoms as well as the more deep-seated
social ill which lies behind them. His job is to remove the ostensible
cause of suffering and also, with the authority of the spirits, to restore
harmonious relations by manipulating the tension-ridden situation
which has given rise to the sickness.
Among the Akawaio, nature spirits thus uphold morality by
afflicting transgressors with illnesses which may be interpreted either
as malign possessions by pathogenic organisms, or as caused by the
removal of a vital part of the culprit’s body by a spirit. Even theft may
be punished in this fashion by the spirits. In fact infringements of ritual
prescriptions and taboos are similarly sanctioned, so that the complete
gamut of punitive spirit action includes transgressions, omissions, and
malpractices in customary behaviour in both the secular and religious
spheres. According to Akawaio belief, an illness disappears and the
patient recovers when the wrong involved has been righted, when
harmony in society and in nature has been restored.
The shaman conducts his inquiry into the causes of affliction
through a public séance in the course of which all the relevant evidence
is uncovered and analysed. The spirits who speak through the mouth of
the possessed shaman act as barristers or prosecuting councillors,
extracting information and putting the case against the guilty patient.
Their utterances are delivered with a great deal of sagacious wit which
is savoured appreciatively by the audience. Those present at the séance
act both as witnesses to and judges of the spectacle, the shaman
interpreting public opinion with the authority which only the words of
the gods can give him. The séance thus both enshrines and expresses
the moral conscience of the community and, for the patient, is also the
confessional in which the admission of guilt and the agreement to
perform such further penances as may be prescribed bring relief and
recovery.
When such a séance is held to deal with a sick patient, the shaman’s
first task is to summon his regular helpers—the spirit of his late
teacher, the tobacco spirit, the ladder spirit, tree-bark spirits, mountain

ECSTATIC RELIGION
144
bird spirits, and the ghost spirits of dead relatives who are always
anxious to lend a hand. Having already taken the powerful tobacco
juice which helps him to achieve trance, the shaman begins by
conversing with the spirits mentioned as well as with the audience and
patient. After a number of other spirits have descended and more
tobacco juice has been taken, the shaman goes into full, cataleptic
trance. Aided by the ladder spirit, his own spirit has begun to soar aloft
on its journey to the sky, to travel among the mountains, in the forests,
and under the earth seeking the help of other spirits. Already knowing
much of the background to the patient’s troubles, with the aid of these
spirits the shaman probes further in the séance. Speaking through their
human vessel, these spirits interrogate the patient and his relatives as
well as other interested parties.
The most searching and pertinent questions are thus publicly put to
the patient who is under strong compulsion to reveal all his misdeeds,
leaving the shaman’s spirits to judge their relevance. If he attempts to
cover up his moral failings, he is in danger of being exposed by the
audience and is liable to incur a punitive intensification of his illness.
As Dr Butt records, ‘Intoxicated by tobacco, the rhythm of the
swishing leaves (used to induce trance), and his own physical and
mental exertions, the shaman must perceive during his state of
dissociation a picture of the circumstances which may have created the
condition of the patient. A number of possible causes emerge as
relevant during his inquiries so that his problem is to recognize the true
cause, the generator of sickness. Here the inspiration of the trance must
assist his knowledge. Later, if the patient starts to recover it is obvious
that the shaman and his spirit aids have indeed diagnosed correctly and
found the means of overcoming the enemy: if the patient continues to
be ill then another séance must be held and an even deeper
investigation into ultimate causation must be conducted.’
Thus in this uncentralized society of small local groups which have
no other courts, the séance is a most important mechanism for
ventilating and bringing to a conclusion smouldering quarrels and
enmities. When the shaman is called in, sources of strife are already
present and it only requires the pronouncements of the spirits which
speak through him to bring matters to a climax. Here the ready
participation of the audience, representing public opinion, is a crucial
element. For all those present can listen and participate. Thus, gossip
and scandal may be confirmed or denied; actions can be explained and
justified; confessions can be forced or retracted. Nor, in this compelling

OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
145
social drama, do the spirits mince their words. They eagerly deliver
pious homilies on the importance of correct conduct, denouncing moral
failings, condemning transgressions, and generally reducing their
victims to acquiescent contrition by a skilful combination of suggestive
probes, satire, and sarcasm which might do credit to the techniques of
corrective interrogation employed by the Red Guards in the Chinese
Peoples’ Republic.
In this cross-questioning, in which no holds are barred, a good
séance provides an occasion for bringing into the open all the hidden
troubles and problems of the local community. Petty disputes and
offences are brought to light and pondered, as well as major disruptive
issues. Thus the path towards settlement is opened, and a means found
to restore harmonious relationships and to reassert general amity.
Finally, judgement is delivered by the spirits through the mouth of the
shaman, who voices the consensus of the community.
Notwithstanding the heavy emphasis which is placed upon
immorality as the cause of sickness, there are, of course necessarily
other escape clauses which account for diseases where the patient is
generally considered to be guiltless. In much the same fashion as
amongst the Tungus, when misfortunes are not satisfactorily explained
in terms of moral misdemeanours, their causes are sought outside the
community. The Akawaio of each river area believe that some, at least,
of their ills are to be traced to the malevolence of other groups. Such
external enemies, for relations between different settlements are often
hostile, are thought to act as witches sending bad spirits and sickness
against their adversaries. In this context, the shaman of each group is
seen as the primary agent. As in the Tungus clan, he defends his own
people against attack by rival shamans from other regions, and, when
they strike, retaliates in kind. Competition is endemic between shamans
who symbolize the particularistic loyalties of their communities. A
favourite and particularly unpleasant trick employed is for one shaman
to cause his opponent’s spirit ladder to collapse while its owner is
holding a séance. The hapless shaman’s spirit is then trapped aloft and
deprived of the means of returning to his body. Such soul absence, if
prolonged, produces illness and may eventually lead to the death of the
unfortunate victim.
IV
In the examples which we have so far considered there is some variation

ECSTATIC RELIGION
146
in the extent to which the mystical powers involved are explicitly
endowed with moral attributes. But there is little difference in the way in
which, in practice, the spirits concerned intervene in human affairs so as
to directly sanction public morality. Uniformly, they act in such a way as
to maintain and safeguard social harmony. On the one hand, they chastise
those who infringe their neighbours’ rights; and on the other, they inspire
shamans to act as trouble-shooters and law-givers in community
relations. Here the moral code over which these spirits so resolutely stand
guard concerns the relations between man and man.
We come now to our final type of central possession religion where,
although the spirits involved are ostensibly dedicated to other aims,
much the same effect is ultimately achieved in a more roundabout way.
Here we shall take the Eskimos as our example. Like the Akawaio, the
Eskimos live in small, loosely structured communities where, although
informal positions of leadership exist, there are no clearly defined
political offices. In these circumstances, the shaman once more
assumes the centre of the stage as the public diagnostician and curer of
afflictions which are attributed to the spirits and which have to be
confessed before they can be expiated. Again, all this takes place within
a cosmological system where lofty nature spirits play a far more
significant role than the ancestors. Whereas, however, among the
Akawaio, illness and misfortune are seen as direct consequences of
tensions and disharmonies in human society, here they are viewed as
the result of contraventions of the code of relations between men and
nature. Amongst the Eskimo, it is offences against natural forces, rather
than against one’s fellow men, which lead to distress and require
shamanistic intervention if they are to be alleviated.
The following quotation from an Eskimo recorded by Rasmussen
(Rasmussen, 1929, p. 56), could well serve as the motto for their
traditional religion and ethos:
 
We fear the Weather Spirit of earth, that we must fight against to
wrest our food from land and sea. We fear Sila (the Weather Spirit).
We fear death and hunger in the cold snow huts. We fear
Takanakapsaluk, the Great Woman down at the bottom of the sea
that rules over all the beasts of the sea. We fear the sickness that we
meet with daily around us; not death, but the suffering. We fear the
evil spirits of life; those of the air, of the sea, and of the earth that
can help wicked shamans to harm their fellow men. We fear the
souls of dead human beings and of the animals we have killed.

OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
147
The final phrase of this baleful catalogue touches on the most crucial
theme of all for an understanding of Eskimo conceptions of sin and
taboo. For, as Rasmussen’s informant continues:
 
the greatest peril of life lies in the fact that human food consists
entirely of souls. All the creatures which we have to kill and eat,
all those that we have to strike down and destroy to make clothes
for ourselves, have souls, as we have, souls that do not perish
with the body and which therefore must be propitiated lest they
revenge themselves on us for taking away their bodies.
 
This is the basic assumption, strongly affecting the way in which the
Eskimos seek to control and utilize their environment, upon which their
extremely elaborate code of practice regulating the relations between
man and nature is built. As long as these rules are meticulously
followed, game animals allow themselves to be killed without
endangering man. The intricate taboo system which this code embodies
turns on the principle that those animals and pursuits with which the
Eskimos are concerned in the winter months must not be brought into
direct contact or mixed with those of the summer season. Thus the
produce of the sea, and of the land, must be kept separate and not
brought together unless special precautions are taken. Seals (winter
game) and everything pertaining to them must be insulated from all
contact or association with caribou (summer game). It is round this
seasonal axis of different patterns of hunting and fishing that the whole
structure of the taboo system revolves. Infringements which are
construed as sins resulting in illness and affliction and endangering the
success of the food quest occur whenever any of these rules are broken.
Significantly, the most heinous offence that men can commit is the
macabre one of engaging in sexual intercourse with animals, especially
caribou or seals which they have just killed, or with their dogs. But it is
above all women whose lives are especially taboo-ridden, who are the
commonest offenders and sources of danger.
These mystical game laws are all the more significant and binding in
that their transgression normally affects not merely the individual
culprit but also his neighbours and kin in the camp. Sins, indeed, are
commonly thought to envelop the guilty person in an evil-smelling
miasma which attracts further ills and misfortune and just as surely
repels game. Sinfulness has thus an almost tangible quality, and the
sinner is a direct danger to his fellows. This baneful state is remedied

ECSTATIC RELIGION
148
by the confession of taboo violations and the performance of
appropriate redemptive offerings and penances. Concealment of
misdeeds only compounds the injury and increases the risk of further
suffering. As among the Akawaio and in so many other cases we have
examined, such offences are explored and dealt with by means of the
séance conducted by the shaman. Without their shamans, who thus treat
the sick, secure favourable weather conditions, and forecast weather
changes and success in the chase, the Eskimos would, as they
themselves admit, be impotent before the multitude of dangers and
hostile forces which confront them at every side. Whether misfortune is
caused by the Sea Spirit, the weather powers, or the dead, ordinary
human beings are powerless. Only shamans can successfully intervene.
Whatever the purpose of the séance, the procedure followed by the
shaman conforms to a similar pattern. In trance, and possessed by his
helping spirits who speak through his mouth, often while his own soul-
spirit is voyaging to the upper world or to the under world, the shaman
relentlessly probes into the conduct of the guilty party in his search for
breaches of taboo which will account for the calamity which he is
called upon to remedy. Following his mystical ‘trips’, the shaman
announces to the receptive audience that he has ‘something to say’, and
receives the eager response: ‘Let us hear, let us hear!’ All those present
are now under strong pressure to confess any taboo violations which
they may have committed. Some offences are readily acknowledged;
others are only reluctantly divulged as the shaman insistently presses
his audience to reveal their misdeeds.
The séance group, and especially women whose taboo infractions
have generally more serious consequences, desperately search their
consciences and denounce their neighbours in the concerted quest for
the uncovering of sins which will account for their present distress.
Women named by others are led guiltily forward, shamefaced and
weeping, and urged to repentance by the shaman’s own cries of self-
reproach: ‘I seek and I strike where nothing is to be found! I seek and I
strike where nothing is to be found! If there is anything, you must say
so!’ Under this barrage of exhortations, a woman will confess some
misdeed. For example, she had a miscarriage but, living in a house
containing many other people, concealed the fact because she was
afraid of the consequences. Her dissembling, though condemned, is
readily understood, for had she revealed her condition custom would
have obliged her to have thrown away all the soft skins in her igloo,
including the hut’s complete internal skin lining. Such is the

OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
149
inconvenience of the ritual purification required that the temptation to
conceal a miscarriage is evidently very strong. However, in the séance,
forgotten omissions of this sort are forced into the open as the
confessional rite proceeds on its cathartic course, cleansing the
community of guilt under the enthusiastic direction of the shaman.
Once a sufficient number of sins, no matter how apparently esoteric or
venial, have been confessed, and the shaman has prescribed the
necessary penances, he can assure his audience that the spirits have
been appeased and that there will be no lack of game on the morrow.
In the treatment of the sick at public shamanistic séances of this kind
it is generally the patient who is thus ceaselessly harangued. The
following extracts from a case recorded by Rasmussen (Rasmussen,
1929, pp. 133ff) concerning a sick woman, indicate the general tenor of
the proceedings. The shaman begins his diagnosis: ‘I ask you my
helping spirit whence comes this illness from which this person is
suffering? Is it due to something I have eaten in defiance of taboo,
lately or long since? Or is it due to my wife? Or is it brought about by
the sick woman herself? Is she herself the cause of the disease?’ The
patient responds: ‘The sickness is due to my own fault. I have ill
fulfilled my duties. My thoughts have been bad and my actions evil.’
Shaman: ‘It looks like peat and yet it is not really peat. It is that which
is behind the ear, something which looks like the cartilage of the ear.
There is something that gleams white. It is the edge of a pipe, or what
can it be?’
The audience, impatient to get to the root of the matter, now join in:
‘She has smoked a pipe that she ought not to have smoked. But never
mind. We will not take any notice of that. Let her be forgiven.’
Shaman: ‘That is not all. There are other offences which have brought
about this disease. Is it due to me, or to the sick person herself?’
Patient: ‘It is due to myself alone. There was something the matter with
my abdomen, with my inside.’ Shaman: ‘She has split a meat bone
which she ought not to have touched.’ Audience, magnanimously: ‘Let
her be released from her offence.’ Shaman, who is far from concluding
his forensic analysis: ‘She is not released from her evil. It is dangerous.
It is a matter for anxiety. Helping spirit say what it is that plagues her.’
And so the séance continues, often for hours at a stretch, as
transgression after transgression is revealed by the afflicted patient.
Such treatment is also frequently repeated in further séances held at
morning, noon and night, until, after repeated admissions of guilt, the
shaman is satisfied that the patient is thoroughly purged and judges that

ECSTATIC RELIGION
150
recovery will follow now that so much has been confessed to ‘take the
sting out of the illness’.
With so elaborate a constellation of minutely detailed proscriptions,
which affects all aspects of daily living and which, if neglected, causes
the powers of nature to visit man with affliction or withdraw his supply
of game, it might be thought that there could scarcely be any Eskimo
group at any time without someone amongst its members who would
have committed an offence. Yet there are evidently those whose
conduct is in all respects impeccable. For in addition to this all-
embracing theory of merited misfortune, the Eskimos hedge their bets
by recognizing that there also exist mystical forces which can produce
undeserved disaster. Death, and other less irreversible calamities, may
be due to the malevolence of other living people, particularly to the
witchcraft of evil shamans. They may also be caused by capricious
malign spirits which act without reference to contraventions of what
Rasmussen calls ‘the rules of life’. Such terrors are again dealt with by
shamans who, at every misfortune, are called upon to intervene to save
man from the spiritual tyranny which he has fashioned for himself and
superimposed upon the cruel and hazardous physical environment in
which he lives.
With the aid of his helping spirits, the shaman entreats, cajoles,
threatens, and even does battle, in the most dramatically charged
séances, with these constantly menacing powers which he alone has the
skill to influence and control. His unique intimacy with these powers is
such that on some occasions he sends his own spirit soaring aloft to
visit the ‘People of Day’ for sheer joy. Such séances, which are not
necessarily held to remedy any specific affliction, are thrilling dramatic
performances when the shaman indulges in those well-known,
Houdini-style ‘tricks’ which have led superficial observers to denounce
these skilled Eskimo religious experts as mere charlatans.
These performances are certainly partly aimed at demonstrating the
efficacy of a particular shaman’s powers and at enhancing his
reputation, and are thus examples of what Voltaire, in his ironical way,
liked to call ‘priest-craft’. Yet they are also poignant religious
occasions. They represent joyous rites of communion between the
world of mortal men and those who have departed to the happy hunting
grounds in the upper world. Here, again, the shaman’s vital role as the
intermediary between man and the world of spiritual power which
surrounds and threatens to engulf him, is dramatically affirmed.
Also, as with the Akawaio, it is evident that through his direction of

OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
151
the séance confessional, the shaman exercises political and legal
functions in his manipulation of human crises. Although each
individual is held personally accountable for observing the strict code
which regulates the relations between nature and man, breaches of
these rules endanger other members of the community as well as the
miscreant himself. It is in this indirect fashion that the shamanistic
religion acquires moral significance in the life of Eskimo communities.
The séance fulfils the functions of a public court, investigating the
causes of affliction apportioning blame, and purging the affected group
through fervid confessions of guilt. It is, after all, the séance audience
which denounces those it considers culpable, and judges the extent and
severity of their shortcomings. It is moreover in terms of his
interpretation of the mood of this public confessional that the shaman
decides, through the vehicle of his spirits, that sufficient guilt has been
discharged to alleviate the misfortune which he is charged to remedy.
He too has the responsibility of determining whether specific afflictions
are to be explained in terms of sins committed by a member of the
group, or through other malevolent powers which are totally indifferent
to the ‘rules of life’.
Thus although the older ethnographic sources on which we depend
for our understanding of Eskimo society do not clearly show that social
disturbances lie at the root of spiritual intervention, as they do amongst
the Akawaio, we can at least see that, to a significant extent, the séance
here was also a mechanism of social control (cf. Balikci, 1963, pp.
380–96). Its importance in this respect was, moreover, all the greater,
because of the paucity among the Eskimos of other institutions with
parallel functions—notwithstanding the importance here of the famous
song-duels. We should note, however, that in as much as the mystical
powers involved are not directly endowed with moral characteristics,
and are employed to manipulate human crises, Eskimo shamanism is,
from certain points of view, analogous to the peripheral cults we have
discussed elsewhere. The difference lies less in the nature of the spirits
than in the fact that here a whole society is involved, and not simply
one, particularly disadvantaged, subordinate sector.
If then, as it seems we should, we treat this religion as a special form
of central morality (cf. Sonne, 1982), we have still to consider the
sexual identity of Eskimo shamans. Here we have to acknowledge that
the classical accounts for the Eskimos (as well as for the Chukchee and
other Siberian peoples) clearly indicate that the shaman’s vocation was
not restricted solely to the dominant sex. Czaplicka (Czaplicka, 1914;

ECSTATIC RELIGION
152
see also Hamayon, 1984), whose synthesis of this Siberian material
represents the classic work on the subject, concludes that, traditionally,
female shamans were particularly concerned with evil spirits of foreign
origin. If this was in fact the case, it suggests that we again encounter
here the same sexual division of labour between main and peripheral
cults which we have found elsewhere. Moreover, as Czaplicka
emphasizes, most of the primary sources on Siberian shamanism agree
that the period at the turn of the century was marked by an upsurge of
female shamans. Since this was also a time of great social upheaval,
when the impact of external influences and of Christianity was at its
height, (Bogoras, 1907, p. 414 records the replacement of ‘group’ by
‘individual’ shamanism at this time), we can perhaps infer a tendency
for the traditional cult to be relegated to a secondary position where it
could be taken up appropriately by women. This at least seems a
plausible interpretation, and one that is consistent with the pattern
elsewhere.
V
This concludes our detailed examination of possession in central
morality religions. Our examples cannot pretend to be exhaustive. But
they are, I think, sufficiently representative for us to be able to
generalize from them with some confidence.
Let us begin by noting points of difference and of resemblance
between these central religions and peripheral cults. First, differences.
In peripheral cults, or in separatist religious movements (whose
ambiguous character as an intermediary category we have already
noted), possession, interpreted as a religious experience, indeed as a
benediction, is open to all the participants. In central morality religions,
however, inspirational possession has a much more limited currency. It
is in fact the hallmark of a religious élite, those chosen by the gods and
personally commissioned by them to exercise divine authority among
men. Since, moreover, this is the idiom in which men compete for
power and authority, there are always more aspirants than positions to
fill. In this competitive situation where authentic enthusiasm is a scarce
commodity, and where many feel themselves called but few are
actually chosen, it is obviously essential to be able to discriminate
between genuine and spurious inspiration. It is also necessary to have a
foolproof means of discrediting those established shamans who are
considered to abuse their power, or who show undue reluctance in

OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
153
making way for younger, up-and-coming aspirants who enjoy a wider
measure of public support.
Both these requirements will be satisfied where two alternative and
mutually incompatible theories of possession exist. Thus, if the same
ostensible symptoms, or behaviour, can be seen, either as an intimation
of divine election, or as a dangerous intrusion of demonic power, this
will provide an adequate basis for acknowledging the claims of some
aspirants while rejecting those of others. Such distinctions will afford a
reliable means for controlling access to legitimate shamanistic power.
Now, let us look again at our empirical findings in the light of these
considerations. In earlier chapters, we have seen that peripheral
possession cults very often exist in societies where inspirational
possession plays no part in the central religion. The converse, however,
is not necessarily true. Central possession religions may occur alone, or
they may be accompanied by peripheral possession cults. Let us deal
first with the former possibility, where no subsidiary possession cult is
found. As we have seen amongst the Akawaio (and to some extent also,
apparently, in the pre-colonial situation of the Eskimo and Tungus), in
such circumstances the powers of the cosmos are not neatly arrayed in
two opposing ranks, the one beneficent and compassionate, the other
malevolent and threatening. On the contrary, all the mystical forces
which man acknowledges are felt to be equally ambivalent in character.
They can do good, but they can also do great harm. Here the crucial
distinction between what constitutes authentic shamanistic ecstasy, and
what is merely an undesirable spirit intrusion, ultimately depends upon
the ability of the victim to ‘master’ his affliction in a culturally
appropriate fashion. At the same time, those cases of possession which
are not seen as signs of genuine illumination are dismissed as illnesses
caused by the mystical malevolence of shamans belonging to other
groups.
Here those spirits which protect one’s own community are the
source of sickness elsewhere, and just as they are controlled internally
by the shaman, so they are controlled externally in the same way.
According to the moral condition of the victim, such externally caused
spirit afflictions can be interpreted either as justified punishments for
ills committed, or as unmerited misfortunes. Thus, in these relatively
monolithic religions, the existing enmities between rival local
communities, when projected on to the spiritual plane, provide the
means by which true inspiration can be distinguished from those other
conditions which are so readily confounded with it.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
154
Now let us examine the second possibility, where, as so often
happens, central and peripheral possession cults exist alongside each
other. In such dualistic cosmologies possession afflictions are always
open to two, similarly conflicting interpretations. Where the subject
belongs to the stratum of society from which establishment shamans
are drawn, his initial possession experience (the ‘primary phase’) may
be seen, either as a valid indication of divine approval, or as a hostile
intrusion by a malevolent peripheral spirit. There is no difference at all
in the symptoms, at least initially. What differs is the diagnosis; and
this, of course, ultimately reflects public opinion. If the aspiring
shaman enjoys a wide measure of local support, the appropriate
diagnosis is made, and, barring accidents, his career is assured. If,
however, this is not the case, then the authenticity of his experience is
denied by attributing it to an evil spirit, and exorcism is prescribed as
the appropriate treatment.
Here, obviously, the first interpretation endorses the subject’s
experience as authentic possession, while the second stigmatizes it as
inauthentic. These two diametrically opposed assessments do not
pertain to different religious systems (as the folk-view might seem to
imply), but, on the contrary, are mutually entailed aspects of a single
religious system in which peripheral spirits represent the sinister
counterparts of those benign powers which sustain public morality.
Where precisely the same symptoms occur in subjects drawn from
lower social strata, then, of course, the second interpretation, involving
peripheral spirits, is again selected. But, in this case, the ensuing
treatment is not so much designed to expel the possessing agency as to
domesticate it, thereby establishing a viable liaison between it and its
human host.
These two parallel channels of spirit activity are linked together in
an additional and highly revealing manner. When peripheral possession
is diagnosed in men of substance this is not the end of the matter.
Although this diagnosis effectively disposes of the subject’s
pretensions to be considered an aspiring shaman, the moral significance
of his possession affliction still remains to be determined. If the subject
is considered to have sinned, then his complaint can be seen as a
judgement, executed by a peripheral spirit, but determined by the gods
of the central morality which have withdrawn their protective
influence. When, however, the consensus of opinion is that the victim is
morally blameless, then his condition can be interpreted as a malicious
act of spirit-inspired witchcraft perpetrated by a low class shaman.

OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
155
These intricate patterns in the anatomy of possession throw into relief
the sharp division of labour and of moral responsibility between the two
types of ecstatic cult. But the distinction between them is not absolute, as
I have repeatedly emphasized, and there is nothing immutable in the
characterization of a particular cult as one rather than the other. Some
central shamanistic religions are indeed very close to peripheral cults. If,
for instance, Eskimo religion seems, in the way it works, to enshrine an
implicit morality, it could also be argued that, in effect, peripheral cults
do the same. For if the manipulated establishment responds to the spirit-
voiced appeals of its subordinates, in the final analysis, it may do so
because it recognizes, although this is not made explicit, that these reflect
natural justice. There must be some deep-rooted sense of common
humanity and moral responsibility in the sentiments which superiors feel
towards their subjects. If there were not this underlying sense of
communitas, as Victor Turner calls it (Turner, 1969), the establishment
could treat with impunity these oblique, but often very importunate
demands for respect and consideration. Nor, surely, if their consciences
were completely clear, would it be necessary for members of the
dominant strata to indulge in the whole complicated business of keeping
their inferiors at bay by accusing them of witchcraft. Hence, even if
peripheral cults involve frankly amoral mystical forces, in practice they
cannot be entirely divorced from moral judgement.
Again, as we have repeatedly seen, historically the lines which
seperate the two types of cult are not absolute or inviolable. Cults can
change their significance and status over time. Just as so many
peripheral cults are discarded established religions which have fallen
from respectability and grace, so equally those which begin as
clandestine curing rites on the fringes of society may evolve into new
morality religions. From this perspective, and in a very simplified way,
the history of religions can be seen to involve a cyclical pattern of
changes in the status and inspirational quality of cults, with movements
from and to the centre of public morality according to the
circumstances and social settings at different points in time. Sudden
outbursts of ecstatic effervescence may thus signal either a decline, or
rise, in religious fortunes. Possession may equally well represent the
kiss of life or of death in the historical development of religions. And
even if they were eventually co-opted by a central male establishment,
it seems that peripheral female ecstatics may often have pioneered new
religions. Women seem to have played a major if much ignored, role in
religious change and innovation.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
156
If, however, religions which are in the process of degenerating into
marginal cults tend to attract followers from the lower strata of society
by possession, there is an equally well-defined tendency for successful
inspirational religions to lose their ecstatic fervour and harden into
ecclesiastical establishments which claim a secure monopoly of
doctrinal knowledge. As Ronald Knox wryly reminds us: ‘Always the
first fervours evaporate; prophecy dies out, and the charismatic is
merged in the institutional’ (Knox, 1950, p. 1). Where this hardening of
the spiritual arteries ensues, religious authority is ultimately no longer
dependent for its validation upon possessional inspiration, but upon
ritual and dogma. Where, before, men were elected by the gods to hold
personal charismatic commissions, now these functions are exercised
by a self-perpetuating priesthood, recruited by other means, and
claiming a divine entitlement to religious authority.
Such a structure implies the notion of a stable capital of religious
legitimacy which has been made over by the gods to man to administer.
Such legitimacy is a ‘limited good’, access to which one person gains
at another’s expense. If inspiration figures at all, it represents little
more than a nodding gesture by the gods that they continue to endorse
the priestly hierarchy’s management of its spiritual endowment. This
form of religious organization, officially incarnating the deity, and
typically shrouded in a rich panoply of ritual, is clearly more stable,
more predictable, and more secure in its religious direction than a
shamanistic pattern of inspirational authority. In theory, at least, the
latter is always open to dramatic new revelations, to novel messages
from the gods, and not merely to re-interpretations of established
doctrine. Under these conditions, all that a shaman can bequeath to his
heirs is a body of technical expertise which may help a successor to
gain privileged intercourse with the gods, but cannot guarantee that this
will happen.
It is thus no accident that throughout history, and in many different
religions, established churches have sought to control and contain
personal inspiration. So if social stability seems to favour an emphasis
on ritual rather than on ecstatic expression, this again suggests that
enthusiasm thrives on instability.
In the same vein, the circumstances surrounding the rise of new
inspirational religions, from messianic eruptions in medieval Europe to
Cargo Cults in Oceania, point to-the crucial significance of factors of
acute social disruption and dislocation. This evidence corroborates our
findings on the necessary (if not sufficient) conditions for the rise of

OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
157
those analogous movements which we have called peripheral cults
particularly when these are associated with changes which are felt to
impose limitations on traditional freedoms and rights, or to benefit one
social group or category (e.g. men) at the expense of another (e.g.
women). In prompting the ecstatic response, the insecurity bred by
disorder may thus, paradoxically, be as potent a factor as the frustration
produced by excessive order and control. We are left, then, with the
problem of determining to what extent the same or similar pressures are
involved in the maintenance of central possession religions. Why do
such ecstatic religions not always develop established priesthoods
which would render enthusiasm redundant and dangerous? If the
extinction of enthusiasm is a built-in political tendency, what other
countervailing forces may keep possession on the boil?
Part of the answer again seems to lie in the existence of powerful
ecological and social pressures, where social groups are small and
fluctuating, and general instability prevails. These are generally the
conditions amongst the scattered, hunting and gathering Eskimos,
amongst the Tungus and other Arctic and Siberian peoples, and the
same holds true of the Veddas and Akawaio. More generally, in Latin
America, the prevalence of vigorous shamanic religions (cf. Santos,
1986) among the politically marginalized Indian communities is
perhaps not surprising, although we should clearly not discount the
ready availability for ritual use of powerful local hallucinogens. In the
case of our African examples, the significant pressures seem to arise
less from the physical environment than from the external social (and
political) circumstances. In both cases, where larger stable groups
form, shamanism acquires a more firmly institutionalized character,
and there is less emphasis on ecstasy. This is true not only of the Macha
in Ethiopia, or of the Korekore Shona (who in contrast to the Zezuru,
have a more rigid shamanistic hierarchy), but also of different groups
among the Tungus. Shirokogoroff s rich ehtnographic material
indicates that while the smaller, more unstable pastoral bands are led by
shamans who achieve their positions by ecstatic seizures, the larger
Tungus clans have developed stable shamanistic offices where
enthusiasm is muted or extinguished.
Hence if religious routinization discourages ecstasy, at the societal
level, the ecstatic tendency is likely to be promoted by intrusive
external pressures. Where such conditions prevail, each shaman builds
up a fund of personal authority which is dissipated with his death, or at
least can only be captured anew by a successor, through a new series of

ECSTATIC RELIGION
158
ecstatic inspirations. The shaman in main morality religions is thus the
religious analogue of the politically influential entrepreneur, or ‘big
man’; and, as we have seen amongst the Giriama, the Tonga, and to
some extent in our Ethiopian examples, as well as among the Eskimos,
the two roles may in fact be held by the same person.
This seems to suggest that far from being untypical or even bizarre
manifestations of tension and frustration, peripheral cults embody in
a specialized way many of the features of central possession
religions. Both are forms of religious expression which imply the
existence of acute pressures. In periphral cults these pressures arise
from the oppression to which subordinate members of the community
are subject. The self-assertion which possession represents here is
directed against the entrenched establishment, and is ultimately
contained in the way we have examined. In central ecstatic religions,
the constraints are external to the society as a whole, they are felt by
everyone, and possession, which asserts the claims of the possessed to
be considered the appointed agents of morally endowed gods, has a
significance which is much wider. In peripheral cults, those
subordinates who practise as shamans master spirits which, officially
at least, have no general moral significance. But in central religions,
establishment shamans incarnate and treat as equals the powers which
control the cosmos. Here the protest which possession embodies is
directed to the gods, as shamanism asserts that ultimately man is
master of his fate.
Since we shall pursue these themes further in the following chapter,
we can leave them for the present, and turn to summarize our findings
on the sexual identity of shamans. Here we may, I think, distinguish
three distinct, although not always completely exclusive patterns. First,
in central religions, where possession is a precondition for the full
exercise of the religious vocation, those selected by the deities are
typically men. Secondly, where an established male priesthood, which
does not depend upon ecstatic illumination for its authority, controls
the central morality cult, women and men of subordinate social
categories may be allowed a limited franchise as inspired auxiliaries.
Thirdly, these disadvantaged social categories are also those which
supply the membership of peripheral possession cults, irrespective of
whether ecstasy also occurs in the central religion. Thus in general, it
seems that the moral evaluation of possession tends to reflect social and
sexual distinctions. Amoral powers select their mounts from women or
socially restricted categories of men: those divinities which uphold

OTHER COSMOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
159
public morality are less narrowly circumscribed in their choice of
human hosts.
But if the spirits of so many different religions appear to show a nice
concern for status, we must not forget that in all societies there are
psychological ‘deviants’—such as effeminate, or homosexual men, for
example—whose problems urge them to defy the officially authorized
sex-linked roles. Their existence inevitably disturbs this tidy
apportionment of spiritual illumination. Thus while drawing the bulk of
their members from women and men of the socially appropriate
categories, peripheral cults invariably also attract a number of
individual men whose participation is less a function of their social
placement than of idiosyncratic features in their personality. This raises
the complicated problem of the psychological status of possession. So
far we have largely evaded this issue: now we must try to confront it
squarely.
 

160
Chapter Seven
 
POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
I
If there is one thing which traditionally unites most British social
anthropologists it is their fierce antagonism towards psychology and
psychiatry and their disregard for the psychological aspects of the
social phenomena which they study. In common with their intellectual
ancestor Durkheim, they seem to feel a positive obligation to relegate
the scope of psychology to individual abnormalities, and thus
misrepresent it as a field of study which is generally irrelevant to their
preoccupations. In fact, of course, most anthropological theorizing is
shot through with ill-considered, and usually unacknowledged
psychological assumptions (cf. Lewis, 1977, pp. 1–24; Johoda, 1982).
Some leading anthropologists have even developed quite sophisticated
defence mechanisms which are designed to protect their Olympian
‘naïveté’ (as the neglect of psychology is disarmingly called), and to
preserve their domain from psychological incursion.
The unprejudiced reader may well ask why considerations which
must seem of such fundamental importance in the study of possession
have been left to this late stage, before being raised explicitly and
examined. I hasten to say, therefore, that although this has been done
deliberately, it is not because I wish to follow so many of my
colleagues in surreptitiously sweeping psychology under the carpet. It
is simply that phenomena we so readily assimilate to the bizarre and
abnormal must be approached cautiously if the issues involved in their
assessment are not to be prejudged. Nothing after all is easier than
leaping to conclusions and projecting our own ethnocentric
psychological (or psychoanalytic) assumptions and interpretations on
to exotic evidence which may correspond only in superficial detail with
apparently similar data from our own culture. It has seemed essential,

POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
161
therefore, to explore the significance of ecstasy and possession in alien
cultures in their own setting before attempting to assess how they relate
to the often ostensibly similar material described and analysed by
psychoanalysts and psychiatrists in our society. With the findings of
previous chapters behind us, however, we are now fairly well equipped
to venture into this difficult field.
At the end of the last chapter, I referred to the presence in the cults
of a certain number of psychologically deviant individuals. This would
hardly surprise the majority of those who approach possession and
shamanism from a Euro-centric medical stance which, explicitly or
implicitly, tends to incorporate a psychoanalytic bias. Indeed one of the
best established traditions in the study of shamanism and possession
treats these phenomena as abnormalities, and sees them as peculiar
cultural elaborations designed by and for the benefit of the mentally
deranged. Just as the French psychiatrist, Levy-Valensi, has claimed
that in western society the spiritualist séance is often the ante-chamber
of the asylum, so shamanism is regularly seen as an institutionalized
madhouse for primitives. On this view, possession is not for
psychologically normal people, but only for the disturbed: the
spiritpossessed shaman is presented as a conflict-torn personality who
should be classified either as seriously neurotic or even psychotic.
Assessments of this sort abound in the anthropological as well as
psychiatric literature. Many of our authorities on Arctic shamanism, for
instance, assert that the shamans they encountered were usually
psychologically abnormal. Thus Bogoras reports that the Chukchee
shamans with whom he conversed were ‘as a whole extremely
excitable, almost hysterical, and not a few were half-crazy. Their
cunning in the use of deceit in their art closely resembled the cunning
of the lunatic’ (Bogoras, 1907, p. 415). And in another passage the
same authority speaks of these shamans as ‘almost on the verge of
insanity’. Shirokogoroff who, as a doctor, is a better qualified witness,
also judged that some of the Tungus shamans he met were probably
insane. More recently, Krader (an ethnographer) has characterized the
Buryat shaman as a ‘highly nervous person, one subject to nervous
disorders’ (Krader, 1954, pp. 322–51).
In this style, Ohlmarks has even sought to distinguish between what
he calls ‘Arctic and Subarctic shamanism’ in terms of the degree of
psychopathology allegedly exhibited by shamans in the two regions.
The same opinions are voiced for other areas by a host of authorities.
At the end of the last century, Wilken proposed that the origins of

ECSTATIC RELIGION
162
Indonesian shamanism were to be traced to mental disease. Loeb
similarly characterized the shamans of Niue as epileptics, or persons
suffering from nervous diseases, and held that they were drawn from
families with a history of hereditary nervous instability. More
generally, that much respected authority on primitive religion, Paul
Radin (Radin, 1937), urged the same equivalence between epileptics
and hysterics and medicine-men and shamans. It would be pointless to
cite further evidence of this widely held view that, by and large,
shamans are mad.
On the basis of this well-established judgement, and of the almost
universal fact that induction into the shamanistic career follows a
traumatic experience, the psychoanalytically-orientated anthropologist,
George Devereux, has powerfully argued that the shaman’s ‘madness’
constitutes a test case in the cross-cultural definition of normality and
abnormality. ‘How’, Devereux, rhetorically asks, ‘could anyone’s
symptoms be more florid than those of the budding Siberian shaman?’
Thus he considers that ‘there is no reason and no excuse for not
considering the shaman as a severe neurotic and even as a psychotic’.
Recognizing that shamanism is, to some extent at least, a culturally
accepted phenomenon where it occurs, Devereux is thus led to
characterize societies where shamanism is prevalent as being in some
sense anomic. For, in a ‘sick society’ he argues, the individual cannot
introject the mores of his community effectively, unless he is himself a
neurotic. Therefore in the society of the mad, the truly mentally healthy
person (in our terms) will be condemned as a lunatic. Hence
shamanism is ‘culture dystonic’, just as the shaman is ‘ego-dystonic’
(Devereux, 1956, pp. 23–48). In his magnificent study of medieval
European millennarian movements, Norman Cohn commits himself to
a similar view. He writes:
 
All phantasies which sustain such movements are those
commonly found in individual cases of paranoia. But a paranoic
delusion does not cease to be so because it is shared by many
individuals, nor yet because those individuals have real and
ample grounds for regarding themselves as victims of oppression.
(Cohn, 1957, p. 309).
 
This assessment corresponds closely with Bateson and Mead’s well-
known characterization of the Balinese as possessing a culture where
ordinary psychological adjustment approximates to that degree of

POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
163
maladjustment which, in a western setting, we call schizoid (Bateson
and Mead, 1942, p. xvi). In this vein, Silverman (Silverman, 1967, pp.
21–31) has recently produced a vigorously asserted assimilation of the
shaman’s putative personality to that of the acute schizophrenic. In his
judgement, which is based on secondary sources, the shaman’s
behaviour includes ‘gross non-reality ideation, abnormal perceptual
experiences, profound emotional upheavals, and bizarre
mannerisms’—all features which brand the shaman as a schizophrenic,
usually of the ‘non-paranoid’ type. With Devereux, Silverman
acknowledges that the essential difference between the schizoid
personality in our society, and that of the shaman in shamanistic
societies, is the degree to which in the latter ‘abnormal’ behavioural
characteristics are tolerated, even encouraged, and find an appropriate
and approved cultural outlet. As he notes, in western culture the
absence of acceptable and realistically valid labels for the feelings
which the shaman and schizophrenic are presumed to share leads in the
case of the latter to a heightened sense of guilt and to further mental
alienation. I shall return to the significance of this point later.
Again, in a series of publications on cases of possession in New
Guinea, Langness vehemently claims that these represent ‘hysterical
psychoses’ (Langness, 1965, pp. 258–77). And in an important
symposium assessing current research on mental health in Asia and the
Pacific, the psychiatrist P.M.Yap delivers the judgement that, in terms
of modern psychiatry, ‘most instances of possession must be defined as
abnormal’. In a review of what he calls the ‘culture-bound reactive
syndromes’, Yap classifies possession as a psychogenic psychosis—by
which he means a condition involving a severe degree of abnormal
psychic activity which has its origin in an external shock or trauma,
rather than in organic pathology (Yap, 1969, pp. 33–53; see also Kiev,
1972; Murphy, 1982; Littlewood and Lipsedge, 1982, 1985).
If, however, there is much in the recent as well as older literature
which seems to support these interpretations, there is an equal volume
of testimony, and one that is usually better informed and more
professionally qualified, which argues the precise opposite.
Shirokogoroff, for example, whom I quoted partially earlier, was
careful to point out that while he judged some Tungus shamans to be
insane, many were in perfect psychological health. Some were
egocentric while others were highly socialized; and some exhibited a
fervent faith in their calling, whereas others showed merely a
conventional acceptance. Similarly and more recently, the Soviet

ECSTATIC RELIGION
164
ethnographer Anisimov reports of Evenk shamans that although some
revealed hysterical neurotic characteristics, there were also many who
were extremely sober individuals. Likewise, Jane Murphy reports of the
Alaskan Eskimo shamans, whose personalities she examined, that
psychiatric disorder was definitely not a prerequisite for the assumption
of the shaman’s role. Well-known shamans were indeed ‘unusually
mentally healthy’ (Murphy, 1964, p. 76). Similarly, pace Bateson and
Mead, Dr P.M.van Wulfften Palthc, former head of the Dutch
psychiatric service in Java, distinguished between schizophrenic and
‘normal’ hysteric possession, classifying all the Balinese material in the
latter category (quoted in Belo, 1960, p. 6). And Nadel, in his classic
study of Nuba shamanism to which we shall return again later,
categorically insisted that:
 
Neither epilepsy, nor insanity, nor yet other mental derangements,
are in themselves regarded as symptoms of spirit possession. They
are diseases, abnormal disorders, not supernatural qualifications…
No shaman is in everyday life an ‘abnormal’ individual, a neurotic,
or a paranoic; if he were he would be classed as a lunatic, not
respected as a priest… I recorded no case of a shaman whose
professional hysteria deteriorated into serious mental disorders
(Nadel, 1946, pp. 25–37).
 
Similarly in the context of Haitian voodoo, both Herskovits and
Métraux—who do not always agree—insist that these phenomena
cannot be assimilated to psychopathology. Audrey Butt, likewise,
emphatically asserts the psychological normality of Akawaio shamans,
stressing that psychopathic symptoms in candidates for the profession,
far from being favoured, are considered seriously disadvantageous. Of
the Indians she knew who were subject to ‘fits’ not one was a shaman:
and epilepsy was not regarded as having any connection with
shamanism (Butt, 1967, p. 40). Careful research by psychiatrists, based
on direct study of the personalities of those involved, tends to confirm
these findings. Thus in the Bahia cult in Brazil, Stanbrook has shown
how while the hysteric who can manage his symptoms in conventional
ways may join the condomblé rite, the frank psychotic or schizophrenic
is screened out during the probationary period. The latter is considered
too idiosyncratic and unreliable in his behaviour and symptoms to be
successfully absorbed in the cult group (Stanbrook, 1952, pp. 330–35).
Again, of the cases which Yap studied in Hong Kong, the majority of

POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
165
those patients presenting what he calls the ‘possession syndrome’ were
hysterics, and a much smaller proportion schizophrenics. This finding
is all the more significant in that the sample of patients studied, being
those who sought hospital treatment, presumably contained a much
higher incidence of serious mental disturbance than that found in the
general population who seek relief in traditional possession cults rather
than in western psychiatry (Yap, 1960, pp. 114–37).
Finally, we should also note that where spirit possession is a regular
explanation of disease, the fact that certain forms of insanity and
epilepsy may also be regarded as manifestations of possession does not
necessarily mean that the people concerned are unable to differentiate
between them and other forms of possession. The range of conditions
which are interpreted in terms of possession is usually, as we have seen,
a very wide one; and within this insanity (or epilepsy) is usually clearly
distinguished from other possession states.
II
The disagreement between these two conflicting lines of interpretation
is ostensibly resolved, at least in part, by those who consider that the
shaman, if he was originally psychologically disturbed, has in
assuming his vocation successfully learnt to master his problems. This
view was I think first proposed by Ackerknecht and has been
authoritatively endorsed by Eliade and other writers on shamanism. As
Shirokogoroff puts it: ‘The shaman may begin his life career with a
psychosis, but he cannot carry on his functions if he cannot master
himself.’ Even Devereux also grudgingly admits this, though he
considers that the shaman, or ‘half-healed madman’, has only achieved
remission of symptoms and is not fully cured. In this more charitable
interpretation, the shamanistic healer is thus represented as an ‘auto-
normal’, compensated neurotic, or even psychotic, who has acquired
the insight to deal effectively with neurotic or quasi-psychotic
symptoms in others. This assessment, which in effect echoes Socrates’
judgement that ‘Our greatest blessings come to us by way of madness’,
recalls T.S.Eliot’s conception of the ‘wounded surgeon’. It also
corresponds closely to the emphasis which, as we have so abundantly
seen, shamanistic cultures place on traumatic experiences as necessary
pre-conditions for the assumption of this vocation.
However, even this modified view of the shaman’s mental state does
not constitute a fully satisfactory approach to the understanding of

ECSTATIC RELIGION
166
possession and shamanism. For whatever the actual mental health of
individual shamans, this view of the problem is as one-sided as it is
ethnocentric, and even smacks somewhat of professional jealousy. It is
like discussing, and dismissing Christianity (or any other religion) in
terms of psychotic symptoms in priests. Or perhaps more aptly, it is
directly comparable to evaluating the whole of psychoanalysis in terms
of the psychotic experiences of some analysts. Moreover it is surely
bizarre in the extreme to assess mental health in terms of the incidence
of syndromes in the healer rather than in their patients. We do not
generally judge the success of advances in medical science in terms of
doctors’ health!
As Nadel appositely remarks (Nadel, 1946, pp. 25–37), this one-
sided approach implies that the significance of shamanism depends
upon private experiences which separate the visionary from the rest of
his community, whereas in reality this is far from being the case. Thus
to reach a more realistic understanding of the true position, we must
recall that in the societies with which we are dealing belief in spirits
and in possession by them is normal and accepted. The reality of
possession by spirits, or for that matter of witchcraft, constitutes an
integral part of the total system of religious ideas and assumptions.
Where people thus believe generally that affliction can be caused by
possession by a malevolent spirit (or by witchcraft), disbelief in the
power of spirits (or of witches) would be a striking abnormality, a
bizarre and eccentric rejection of normal values. The cultural and
mental alienation of such dissenters would in fact be roughly equivalent
to that of those who in our western secular society today believe
themselves to be possessed or bewitched. Unlike most of their western
counterparts in the societies which we have examined, those in whom
possession is diagnosed as a presenting symptom are behaving in an
accepted and indeed expected fashion. Simply because we do not share
their ‘fantasies’ and find them echoed only in those whom in our own
society we label psychotic or mentally deranged gives us no warrant to
write off as mad those cultures whose beliefs in spirits and shamanism
we have examined in previous chapters.
Consistently with this, as more rigorous recent studies by psychiatrists
and psychologists with anthropological training are beginning to show,
the majority of those actively involved in peripheral possession cults are
only mildly or often temporarily neurotic in any valid sense. And the
same applies especially in the case of main morality possession religions
where we naturally find a fuller spectrum of the mental health picture of

POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
167
the community. In both types of cult, as we have seen, we do of course
meet some genuine schizophrenics and psychotics. But their number is
small compared with the mass of ordinary ‘normally’ neurotic people
who find some relief from anxiety and some resolution of everyday
conflicts and problems in such religious activity. Here the very marked
lack of response to the cathartic therapies employed in possession cults in
the case of seriously disturbed individuals, which we shall consider more
fully later, is itself a testimony to the robust mental health of the majority
of participants. As we have seen repeatedly, the latter have no difficulty at
all in communicating their problems. They operate within a culturally
standardized medium of communication. Nor, in contrast to the true self-
insulated psychotic, do they miss their ‘cues’. They respond in the
expected way, and others react equally predictably. The manipulated
husband’s response is just as stereotyped and anticipated as the
protesting wife’s strategy of possession. Above all, the total symbolism
involved is not private or idiosyncratic, but on the contrary public and
socially sanctioned.
In peripheral cults, as I have emphasized, the game of possession
only works as long as all the players know and observe the rules.
Consequently, the person who becomes possessed in response to
difficulties is at once provided with a means of coping with his
situation which does not alienate him disadvantageously from other
members of his community. Far from dismissing the force of the
patient’s power to influence other members of the community, but
bestowing the sea of divine approval possession enhances his influence
immeasurably. As Yap points out, this is achieved by ‘internalizing a
possessing agency with characteristics appropriate to the solution of the
conflict’. But to dub this an ‘unrealistic’ strategy, as he does, seems to
me ethnocentric, or biomedically biased. The whole point is that the
attributes of the possessing spirit are completely suited to the victim’s
milieu and position, and in these terms far from ‘unrealistic’.
While it cannot be excluded that severely neurotic individuals may,
occasionally, achieve prophetic cult status (cf. Littlewood, 1984), more
generally it would be wrong to reduce shamanism and spirit possession
as total cultural phenomena to expression of the private fantasies of
psychotic individuals. And despite the persuasive, and for some no
doubt attractive, analogy between the professional trauma which is a
prologue to the assumption of the shaman’s role and that sometimes
followed in induction into the psychiatric, and a fortiori psychoanalytic
profession, we cannot treat all shamans as simply self-healed neurotics

ECSTATIC RELIGION
168
or psychotics. As in psychiatry, this may be the case with some
practitioners, but it is not true for all. How then are we to interpret the
hysterically coloured afflictions, or seering experiences, which
typically herald the onset of the shamanistic vocation?
In all the cases we have considered in previous chapters, these are
certainly viewed as dangerous, even terrifying, experiences or as
illnesses. Experience of disorder in some form is thus an essential
feature in the recruitment of shamans. In peripheral possession cults
this initiatory illness looms so large that at first sight it almost
completely obscures their positive religious content. In central
possession cults, this preparatory experience is most stressed in the
case of those aspirants who lack satisfactory ascriptive qualifications
for the position of shaman, or with those who, though fully qualified, at
first resist the summons of the gods. Here Guy Moréchand’s findings
on the selection of Hmong shamans in Vietnam and Thailand epitomize
the general situation:
 
The more he ostensibly refuses this destiny, the more he resists,
the more striking will be the signs, the more gripping and
dramatic his vocation… Not only have the personal tastes of the
individual theoretically no part in this decision to make himself a
shaman, but they are also strongly denied. The accent is on the
contrary on the (acolyte’s) repugnance: the poor persecuted man
who could not do otherwise (Moréchand, 1968, p. 208).
 
In this vein Peter Fry’s study of spirit possession among the Zezuru
Shona, to which we have already referred, includes a brilliantly
detailed account of the onset and development of the professional
hysteria which overtook his Shona research assistant and led eventually
to his formal installation as an acknowledged shaman. Beginning with
peculiar allergies to tobacco smoke and beer, which Fry was able to
establish were only operative in relation to other Shona who saw these
as manifestations of spirit activity and whom the future medium sought
to impress, the new recruit developed a series of arresting dietary
abstentions which set him apart from other people. Continually
resisting an interpretation of his ailments in terms of possession, the
subject maintained his symptoms, consulting a series of different
diviners until he had succeeded in gaining a wide measure of attention
and expectancy for the ultimate announcement of his calling, which he
accepted from a particularly powerful and prestigious shaman.

POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
169
Thus the shaman’s initiatory experience is represented as an
involuntary surrender to disorder, as he is thrust protesting into the
chaos which the ordered and controlled life of society strives so hard to
deny, or at least to keep at bay. No matter how valiantly he struggles,
disorder eventually claims him and marks him with the brand of a
transcendental encounter. At its worst, in peripheral cults, this is seen as
a baneful intrusion of malign power. At its best, in central possession
religions it represents a danger-laden exposure to the power of the
cosmos. In both cases the initial experience withdraws the victim from
the secure world of society and of ordered existence, and exposes him
directly to those forces which, though they may be held to uphold the
social order, also ultimately threaten it.
But this symbolic wound which asserts the supremacy of the gods as
the arbiters of both disorder and of order (since both are in their gift), is
a necessary but not a sufficient condition for the assumption of the
shamanistic calling. The shaman is not the slave, but the master of
anomaly and chaos. The transcendental mystery which lies at the heart
of his vocation is the healer’s passion; his ultimate triumph over the
chaotic experience of raw power which threatened to drag him under.
Out of the agony of affliction and the dark night of the soul comes
literally the ecstasy of spiritual victory. In rising to the challenge of the
powers which rule his life and by valiantly overcoming them in this
crucial initiatory rite (cf. La Fontaine, 1985) which reimposes order on
chaos and despair, man reasserts his mastery of the universe and
affirms his control of destiny and fate.
The shaman is thus the symbol not of subjection and despondency
but of independence and hope. Through him the otherwise unfettered
power of the world beyond human society is harnessed purposefully
and applied to minister to the needs of the community. If by incarnating
spirits he embodies the most profound intrusion of the gods into the
realm of human society, his mastering of these powers dramatically
asserts man’s claim to control his spiritual environment and to treat
with the gods on terms of equality. In the person of the shaman, man
triumphantly proclaims his supremacy over elemental power which he
has mastered and transformed into a socially beneficent force. And this
hard-won control over the grounds of affliction is re-enacted in every
shamanistic séance. This, rather than the repetition of any personal
crisis, is the message of the séance. For at the séance the gods enter the
shaman at his bidding, and are thus brought into direct confrontation
with society and its problems. It is by dragging the gods down to his

ECSTATIC RELIGION
170
own level, as much by soaring aloft to meet them, that the shaman
enables man to deal with his deities on an equal or almost equal
footing.
The essential process in the making of a shaman is thus as follows.
Suffering interpreted as possession involves an invasion of the human
body which is usurped as a vehicle for the spirit. In trance the host’s
personality fades away and is replaced by the power of the possessing
agent. But while this is a general experience which may befall any
socially appropriate member of society, for the shaman it is merely the
first indication of his future vocation. By overcoming this spiritual
assault a new relationship is forged with the spirit which makes the
victim of this experience a shaman with a consequent change in his
status. As Eliade rightly insists and as we can now clearly see, this is
not to be understood in terms of individual psychopathology, but on the
contrary as a culturally defined initiation ritual. In both peripheral and
main morality possession cults, the effect is the same. An enhancement
of status accrues to the shamanistic candidate who succeeds in
mastering the grounds of affliction and thus proves to the world his
claim to be considered a healer. The temporary rise in status of the
possessed woman or downtrodden man in peripheral possession cults is
itself an intimation of the fuller and more permanent rewards which lie
in store if the acolyte perseveres to later become a fully-fledged
shaman.
Viewed in this light, we can now appreciate how singularly
appropriate the idiom of marriage is as a means of expressing the
shamanistic relationship. For the transition rite of marriage signifies
exactly what has occurred. From being subject, at the whim of the
gods, to involuntary, uncontrollable experiences of disorder, the
shaman has progressed to a point where he has achieved a stable and
dominant relationship with the grounds of affliction. If the shaman is
contractually bound as mortal partner to a divinity, that deity is equally
tied to its human spouse. Both are inseparably conjoined: each
possesses the other.
Elements of other transition rites in the human life cycle are also of
course present. Thus the shaman, when possessed and in full trance,
has ‘died’ and is ‘born’ anew with the personality of the spirit he
incarnates. But it seems to me that we can go further in interpreting the
significance of the selection of the rite of marriage as the most widely
favoured image for the relationship between the shaman and his
celestial partner. For while birth and death are both inescapable events,

POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
171
over which the individual has no control, and to which his lot is simply
to submit, marriage at once signals not merely a change of status, but
also an alliance, and permits at least some degree of choice. Hence
although the official shamanistic ideology emphasizes that it is the gods
who make the opening moves, and who relentlessly pursue their
victims until the latter submit, there still remains an element of human
choice. Not all those upon whom the spirits press their attentions
progress to that point of intimacy where they are joined in celestial
union. And even when they do, the decision to accept their divine
calling is at some level made by the subjects themselves. If, therefore,
in this case God proposes, ultimately man disposes. At the same time,
as Jean La Fontaine (1985, p. 67) notes, the imagery of conjugal union
may also be taken as implying that the possessed shamanic recruit is a
product of and a testament to the sexual potency of the gods.
In peripheral cults the catchment area of possession is so
circumscribed that those who occupy marginal social positions are
strongly at risk. Illness and misfortune are always liable to be
interpreted as spirit possession, and this readily leads to induction into
the healing cult in this clandestine form of divine election. Of course,
the extent to which different individuals of subordinate status are
actively involved will depend upon their particular life circumstances,
and especially upon the magnitude and severity of the stresses to which
they are subject. The happily married wife who is content with her lot
is much less likely to resort to possession than her harassed sister
whose married life is fraught with difficulty. Successful wives and
mothers may occasionally succumb to possession, but they are unlikely
to be drawn into permanent involvement in the possession cult groups.
The keenest recruits and the most committed enthusiasts are women
who, for one reason or another, do not make a success of their marital
roles, react against new domestic confinement or who, having fulfilled
these roles, seek a new career in which they can give free rein to the
desire to manage and dominate others (cf. Constantinides, 1985).
In main morality religions, an initial experience of disorder and its
mastering through controlled possession are particularly emphasized in
the case of those candidates who lack hereditary qualifications. For
such outsiders in the quest for shamanistic office, personal peculiarities
and anomalous experiences which society recognizes as expressions of
spiritual attention may indeed be exploited with advantage. But they
are of no value at all unless they can be conspicuously mastered. The
ability to contain and control the grounds of disorder remains the

ECSTATIC RELIGION
172
essential requirement; and obviously the greater the apparent trauma
which is so mastered, the greater the authority and power of the new
shaman.
Some such candidates are undoubtedly people who have found
culturally acceptable techniques for controlling private neurotic
proclivities. For these, the shamanistic role may well represent a
precarious haven within which their eccentricities are tolerated and
turned to advantage (cf. Little wood, 1984). Individuals of this kind,
however, seem, on the present evidence to constitute only a small
fraction of those who become successful shamans; and the part must
not be confused with the whole. Hence, if the idiom which is employed
universally to express the role of the shaman is that of the wounded
healer, this is above all a stereotype, a professional qualification, which
establishes the healer’s warrant to minister to his people’s needs as one
who knows how to control disorder. It does not necessarily tell us
anything about his psychiatric condition. What it does purport to
guarantee is that such a person has endured the experience of elemental
power and emerged, not merely unscathed, but strengthened and
empowered to help others who suffer affliction.
III
As has already been suggested, and as Jung himself reminds us in his
memoirs, in European culture the profession to which the conception of
the wounded surgeon most poignantly and aptly applies is
psychoanalysis. With this and other common features in mind, spirit
possession and shamanism have also been viewed as a pre-scientific
psychotherapy. Thus, remembering that, whatever else they are, spirits
are certainly hypotheses used to explain what we would regard as
psychological states, such students of hysteria as Ilza Veith have traced
the gradual transformation of these mystical theories into those of
modern psychiatry (Veith, 1965; Kenny, 981). Here the shaman is seen
in a historical perspective as a primitive psychiatrist and his
explanations of hysterical and other behaviour are treated as the
primitive precursors of the theories of contemporary psychological
medicine. The same equivalence has also been proposed on the basis of
studies of contemporary shamanism in exotic cultures. Thus in 1946
both Mars (Mars, 1946) and Nadel (Nadel, 1946) independently
advanced this view, the first in relation to Haitian voodoo, and the
second with respect to possession among the Nuba tribes of the Sudan.

POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
173
Shamanism, they considered, should be seen as a cathartic mechanism
with a crucial role to play in preventive psychiatry. Thus, rejecting the
old picture of the crazy shaman, Nadel urged that the institutionalized
catharsis of the shamanistic séance might nevertheless have ‘the
therapeutic effect of stabilizing hysteria and related psychoneuroses,
thus reducing a psychopathic incidence which would otherwise be
much larger’.
This approach to the problem was in fact also suggested by
Shirokogoroff in the context of Tungus shamanism over fifty years ago.
As this Russian pioneer in the field of what is now sometimes known as
‘trans-cultural psychiatry’ notes, shamans in reality treat only the
psychological aspects of disease. ‘They may strengthen the patient’s
psychic resolve and determination to recover, and also alleviate distress
amongst friends and relatives caused by really serious disease.’ They
succeed in exercising a positive effect if the community believes that
the pathogenic spirits involved are neutralized by being mastered or
expelled. And, as he puts it more generally, in terms which those
anthropologists (such as Robin Horton) who advocate an intellectualist
interpretation of religion would strongly approve: Spirits are
hypotheses, some of which are admitted by the
 
European complex as well, hypotheses which formulate
observations of the psychic life of the people and particularly
that of the shaman, and which are quite helpful in the regulation
of the psychomental complex to which the Tungus have come
after a long period of adaptation… The phenomenon of psychic
life is not understood in the same form as modern science
would understand it, but it is regulated, and its components are
perhaps better analysed (in spirit symbols) than is done by
psychologists operating with such conceptions as ‘instincts’ and
‘complexes’. In reality hysteria can be easily regulated
(Shirokogoroff, 1935, p. 370).
 
This assimilation of the shaman’s role to that of the psychiatrist has
also more recently been enthusiastically endorsed by that modern
Heraclitus of ethnology, Lévi-Strauss, whose sedulous search for
hidden oppositions and transformations is well known. Claiming that in
the séance the shaman always relives his original traumatic experience,
in this style Lévi-Strauss concludes that the shamanistic cure is the
exact counterpart of the psychoanalytic, but with ‘the inversion of all

ECSTATIC RELIGION
174
the elements’ (Lévi-Strauss, 1968, p. 199). Both aim at inducing an
experience and both succeed by re-enacting a myth which the patient
has to live or re-live. In psychoanalysis, according to Lévi-Strauss, the
patient constructs an individual myth with elements drawn from his
past; in the shamanistic séance the patient receives from the outside a
social myth which does not correspond to a former personal state. The
psychoanalyst listens: the shaman speaks. When a transference is
established, the patient puts words into the mouth of the psychoanalyst
by attributing to him alleged feelings and intentions. In the shamanistic
incantation, on the contrary, the shaman speaks for his patient.
This contrast which sees the psychoanalyst as a passive agent, a
mere sounding board for his patient’s psyche, and the shaman as an
active agent directing his patient’s psychic experience, seems to me so
contrived and so at variance with the facts that it can have little
significance or value. Certainly it does not do justice to that
considerable area of psychoanalytic practice where the analyst’s role is
far from being as passive as Lévi-Strauss supposes. Nor does it take
account, as is now well established, of the extent to which the
psychoanalyst’s mythology both evokes and moulds the putative
experiences of his patient. And while it may correspond to the
particular South American ethnography from which Lévi-Strauss is
generalizing, it is certainly not by any means universally the case that
in the shamanistic séance the patient always and inevitably plays
merely a passive foil to the active role assumed by the shaman. In both
instances patient and healer interact more fully and more subtly in ways
which deprive this facile antithesis of explanatory power.
To what extent then can we legitimately assimilate shamanism to
psychotherapy or psychoanalysis? The obvious way to begin seeking
an answer to this question is to look more closely at the shamanistic
séance. As we have seen, the séance is invariably, for part of the time at
least, an emotionally highly charged and dramatic performance. In
peripheral cults which ostensibly treat illness and where no moral
blame attaches to the patient, the séance provides a setting in which
free rein is given to the expression of problems and ambitions which
refer directly to the participants’ normally frustrating social
circumstances. The possessing familiar which the patient incarnates, or
impersonates, expresses very clearly the frustrated demands of the
dependent woman or downtrodden low class man. Women who seek
power and aspire to roles otherwise monopolized by men act out
thrusting male parts with impunity and with the full approval of the

POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
175
audience. The possessed person who in the séance is the centre of
attention says in effect, ‘Look at me, I am dancing’. Thus those forced
by society into subservience play exactly the opposite role with the
active encouragement of the séance audience. Like those of zar and
bori, Haitian voodoo ceremonies are quite clearly theatres, in which
problems and conflicts relating to the life situations of the participants
are dramatically enacted with great symbolic force.
The atmosphere, though controlled and not as anarchic as it may
seem, is essentially permissive and comforting. Everything takes on the
tone and character of modern psychodrama or group therapy.
Abreaction is the order of the day. Repressed urges and desires, the
idiosyncratic as well as the socially conditioned, are given free public
rein. No holds are barred. No interests or demands are too unseemly in
this setting not to receive sympathetic attention. Each dancer ideally
eventually achieves a state of ecstasy, and in stereotyped fashion
collapses in a trance from which he emerges purged and refreshed.
Where such experiences are genuine psychic adventures (and not, as is
often the case for many of the participants on some occasions, merely
routine or feigned), clearly a great deal of psychological satisfaction
may result. This is the point at which the psychoanalyst’s emphasis on
‘primary (psychic) gains’ becomes significant, although as we have
seen the ‘secondary gains’ in terms of social advantage, and which may
be achieved without recourse to genuine trance, are also usually
important.
In these terms the regular séances of peripheral possession cults may
be seen as danced psychodramas; ‘work-outs’ in which some measure
of psychic compensation for the injuries and vicissitudes of daily life is
obtained. Possession in this context is indeed a release, an escape from
harsh reality into a world of symbolism which, precisely because it is
not inappropriately detached from mundane life, is full of
compensatory potentialities and has great emotive appeal (cf. Siikala,
1978; Peters and Price-Williams, 1980). It is not an unrealistic flight
from fate, for such psychic benefit as the participants may in different
measure gain is supplemented in the more tangible, if from a
psychological point of view merely ‘secondary’, rewards which accrue
from this redressive strategy. The shamans who lead the proceedings
enter literally into the spirit of the occasion, being themselves
possessed by their familiars. They play a dual role. They stimulate and
direct the enthusiasm of the participants until the latter achieve a state
of full possession (trance, in our terminology), and they elicit the

ECSTATIC RELIGION
176
demands which the possessing spirits then make on behalf of their
human vehicles. They may also, as in some of the cases we have
examined, prescribe a restructuring of the patient’s relationships in the
best traditions of modern psychotherapy.
In an earlier chapter I referred to possession of this kind as a ‘game’.
But in so doing I did not wish to imply that it was not a serious game,
nor one in which the stakes were invariably of little account. The truth
of course is that different participants are psychologically engaged in
the possession rituals to different extents. For some individuals it
means a great deal, for others very little. Some participants, while
enjoying the religious aspects of the cult in a conventional way, have
their sights firmly and even consciously and calculatingly set on the
ancillary external benefits—the influencing of their superiors and the
exaction of propitiatory gifts from them. For others the direct psychic
rewards, the ‘primary gains’ of psychiatry, are of paramount
importance. Yet others are so psychologically ill that, try as they will
and notwithstanding all the shaman’s efforts to induce trance, they do
not succeed in achieving this blissful oblivion. As recent studies by
psychiatrists show, it is precisely these unfortunate people who cannot
fully express their problems in this conventional idiom who are
seriously psychologically disturbed. These refractory psychotics and
schizophrenics, who do not respond and who cannot satisfactorily enter
into the game, are the exceptions proving the rule that spirit possession
and shamanism deal essentially not with the hopelessly impaired, but
with ordinary ‘normally’ neurotic people. For the most part, as we have
seen, those problems with which peripheral possession is primarily
concerned are inherent in the structure of society. It is thus not
surprising that a number of psychiatric assessments of the efficacy of
these cathartic treatments—such, for example, as that by Kennedy of
Sudanese zar (Kennedy, 1967, p. 185)—should assert their great
therapeutic potential (cf. Leff, 1981). For after all if, as we know from
their social context, they involve basically normal people who merely
seek more attention and respect, once these are accorded we should
expect a good outcome.
Much of what has been said of peripheral possession séances applies
equally to those in main morality religions. For here although the
patient is in this case regarded as responsible for his plight and is held
to be morally culpable, the séance offers abreactive atonement. That
insistent refrain of the Eskimo séance—‘Let him be forgiven’—
epitomizes the confessional atmosphere of consoling support and

POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
177
understanding in which the afflicted victim is urged to repentance and
encouraged to discharge his guilt in the secure knowledge that
forgiveness and release are at hand. This, if we like, we can view as a
type of ‘control’ therapy where, contrary to what Lévi-Strauss
supposes, the accent is on re-organizing and re-orientating the patient
in terms of an ethos which is as compassionate as it is comprehensive
but does not absolve him of responsibility for his condition. The stress
on confession thus appears as a direct consequence of the importance
of moral obligation in central possession cults, where illness is a sin—
not merely an unkind stroke of fortune. Here the possession illness
does not constitute a legitimate escape or evasion of duty or of
authority. On the contrary, it amounts to an admission of guilt, a
recognition that authority and obligation have been wantonly ignored.
Nevertheless as soon as treatment commences, and once guilt has been
admitted, it proceeds as a cathartic abreaction. In opposition to this, the
shaman’s controlled possession, which is not an illness, represents an
assertion of authority, a demonstration of his moral fitness to act both
as a leader of men and as a spokesman of the gods.
The foregoing suggests that a persuasive argument does in fact exist
for equating shamanism with psychotherapy (or psychoanalysis). But
there are other factors which must also be taken into account. Although
with this assimilation in mind, a number of writers have claimed
(Loudon, 1959; Yap, 1960 and 1969) that in the illnesses in which
possession is diagnosed and for which the shamanistic cure is
prescribed only psychogenic complaints are involved, this is far from
being the general case. While shamanistic therapy may in reality only
accomplish what it claims in the case of psychiatric disorders, the range
of illnesses which are attributed to possession is far wider than this. In
many, if not most of the exotic cultures with which we are concerned,
medical specialization has obviously hardly proceeded to the point it
has reached in our culture. Consequently, unlike the western
psychiatrist, the shaman’s practice frequently includes patients with
real organic lesions, as well as those who are not so much physically ill
as the victims of misfortune. The shaman is moreover asked to placate
and control elemental nature, and to divine and prophesy in a manner
and to a degree which would daunt even the most optimistically
omniscient psychiatrist. Hence as Shirokogoroff correctly saw, but as
so many other students of shamanism have failed to appreciate, the
parallel applies only in respect of such aspects of the shaman’s practice
as concern the treatment of tensions, fears and conflicts which are, in

ECSTATIC RELIGION
178
reality, readily susceptible to psychotherapeutic control. In a word, the
shaman is not less than a psychiatrist, he is more.
In this argument in which I have followed others over the same
ground to reach generally different conclusions, I have assumed, as
they have, that psychiatry is a latent function of shamanism. It is one of
the things it does, although it is not fully aware of doing it. From a
different point of view, I gladly concede that spirit possession and
shamanism (as is also the case with witchcraft beliefs) may be said to
represent over-determined theories of psychiatric causation. They seem
to assume that psychogenic and other mental disturbances have their
roots in inter-personal and social conflict—as much of functional
psychiatry does today to a significant extent (see e.g. Leff, 1981;
Murphy, 1982). But they also hold that the causes of purely organic
disorders, as well as of misfortunes generally, can again be traced to the
same nexus—and to that extent they constitute an over-determined
psychiatry. Again, however, this brings us back to the same conclusion:
shamanism is more than psychiatry.
Thus the more meaningful equivalence is that psychiatry, and
especially psychoanalysis, as Jung would perhaps have admitted much
more freely than most Freudians would care to, represent limited and
imperfect forms of shamanism. The theme is developed in a very
interesting way to highlight the cultural relativity of western psychiatry
by Littlewood and Lipsedge (1986), mainstream British psychiatrists
who include anthropology in their expertise. Their basic aims are the
same: to maintain harmony between man and man, and between man
and nature. Hence we can, if we wish, group shamanism and
psychoanalysis (if not the whole of psychiatry) together under the
genus religion. But, if we choose to look at psychoanalysis and
shamanism in this light, we must remember that the abreaction of the
confessional is also employed by other faiths and ideologies.
IV
We are now left with the most formidable problem of all: why
possession? In previous chapters we have come some way towards
answering this question in sociological terms. We have now to see what
depth psychology has to say on the matter and whether its interpretations
agree or clash with ours. The clue here lies in the ‘professional’ hysteroid
character of possession, and the key to the psychiatric interpretation of
hysteria is of course Freud and Breuer’s classic study (Freud, 1912). As

POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
179
is well known, these founders of modern psychiatry explained hysteria as
the result of a conflict between the ego and some forbidden desire which
is therefore suppressed. Since the repression is only partial, the desired
aim is expressed indirectly and covertly, through ‘con version
reactions’—the oblique strategy which we have seen in operation in so
many cultures. This view has been skilfully deployed by Yap in his study
of what he calls the ‘possession syndrome’ in Hong Kong. Possession,
Yap argues, is a condition where problem-solving processes result in an
unusual dramatization of a certain part of the ‘me’ aspect of the self, that
part being constituted by forced and urgent identification with another
personality credited with transcendental power. The nature of the
possessing personality, or agency, can be understood psychologically—
and we have reviewed abundant examples of this—in the light of the
subject’s own personality needs, his life situation, and cultural
background which determine the normality or otherwise of the
condition.
From this eminently reasonable standpoint, Yap sees the dramatic
elements of possession as an adaptive, problem-solving behaviour
ranging from the acting out of a wish-fulfilment through an
experimental probing type of conduct, with various degrees of
abreactive satisfaction, to the direct manipulation of other persons
involved in the subject’s problems. Again in accordance with much of
our findings, Yap also recognizes that possession may appear in the
symptoms at a superficial level, with the achievement of secondary
gains without any true psychopathological significance.
For possession to occur, Yap holds, the following conditions are
necessary. The subject must be dependent and conforming in character,
probably occupying a position in society that does not allow for
reasonable self-assertion. He must be confronted with a problem which
he sees no hope of solving. Similarly from a more thorough-going
psychoanalytic position, Charles Rycroft has argued that what he calls
the hysterical defence is a type of submission in which normal self-
assertive tendencies are suppressed and satisfaction is obtained and
others influenced by ingratiation and manipulation. The basis for this
response, he suggests, lies in a deep conviction of defeat and
insignificance acquired in early childhood (Rycroft, 1968).
Both these interpretations fit closely the facts we have examined in
earlier chapters in relation to peripheral possession. They are indeed
only slightly different, and less positive ways of expressing the notion
that peripheral possession represents an oblique aggressive strategy.

ECSTATIC RELIGION
180
They can also be seen to correspond fairly closely to the fact that in
main morality religions the intensity of the future shaman’s
professional hysteria is in direct proportion to his lack of the requisite
hereditary qualifications and his ostensible resistance to accepting his
vocation. More generally, the sociological distinction which we have
been forced to draw between peripheral possession and witchcraft is
echoed in the contrast which psychiatrists draw between their
underlying ideologies—the introjective character of possession, and the
projective nature of witchcraft scapegoating. These two ideologies may,
however, as we have seen, be combined together as different facets of
the same role. For the paradox of the shaman’s position is that he is
credited with being capable of causing what he has learnt through
suffering to cure.
This ambivalence in the shaman’s role Devereux purports to explain
from a psychoanalytic stance in terms of an inferred degradation in the
personality of the ‘half-healed’ shaman. Initiation into the ranks of the
possession group and the assumption of a leading position in it have
only provided remission of symptoms and the primary defence of such
fundamentally distorted personalities soon breaks down. Thus healing
shamans degenerate into aggressive witches. This seems an
unconvincing explanation of what as we have seen earlier is a general
sociological process. For whatever the true personality and inner
feelings of the shaman it is society which regards him ambivalently as
at once a healer and, potentially at least, a witch. The peripheral
possession shaman who is branded as a witch is the leader of a protest
cult, and the accusation of witchcraft is designed to contain this oblique
aggression which has become too openly overbearing and threatening
to be safely tolerated. In psychological terms, consequently, the
explanation is not that of Devereux, but rather that the resentment and
aggression which peripheral possession invariably arouses among the
manipulated establishment fastens on those thrusting shamans who, in
daring to control spirits, make a bid for the tenure of roles and status
from which they are normally excluded because of the low social
categories to which they belong. In terms of Mary Douglas’ convenient
explanatory slogan (Douglas 1966), they represent ‘matter out of
place’, and have therefore to be put back in it by the accusation of
witchcraft. All this, of course, is not to say that there are not cases
where through psychiatric problems relapses occur, occasioning
eccentric behaviour which may fit into cultural stereotypes of
witchcraft.

POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
181
These distinctions and transformations between peripheral
possession and witchcraft are perhaps relevant in a different way to our
own psychological theories, which, of course, as I have been repeatedly
emphasizing, are themselves merely hypotheses rather than final truths.
Although frankly hysterical reactions are generally considered to be out
of fashion at the moment in western society, it does seem that many
temporary or mildly neurotic responses to conflict and tension in our
society lead to attention-seeking behaviour (even if this simply means
going to visit one’s family doctor). This may achieve the effect of a
satisfactory rallying round of friends and relations and even perhaps, as
some psychiatrists advocate, lead to an actual modification or
restructuring of relations towards the subject. Laing and others,
however, have suggested that sometimes in the case of those patients
who are rendered more seriously ill and are committed to a mental
hospital, they are to some extent being offered up as scapegoats in a
stressful situation (Laing and Esterson, 1964). As Lipsedge and
Littlewood (1982) have convincingly shown, this regularly applies
particularly to the high levels of what is diagnosed as florid
‘schizophrenia’ or ‘acute psychosis’ in patients from the immigrant
black community in the British Isles. Where this is so, the patient’s
condition is no longer analogous to that of the peripherally possessed
subordinate, but rather to that of the aggressive ‘witch’ who protests
too openly and too much.
I make these tentative suggestions to stress again how it is frequently
both more appropriate and more illuminating to assimilate psychiatry
to shamanism and witchcraft—although the latter deal primarily with
culturally normative forms of ‘paranoia’—than to read the equation in
the opposite direction. It is reassuring that such authoritative
psychiatrists as Littlewood and Lipsedge (1987) should consider it
worthwhile to pursue this theme.
V
Psychiatric or psychoanalytic theories of hysteria which attempt to
explain possession negatively as aggression on the part of the socially
repressed, or of the ascriptively unqualified shamanistic recruit who
protests his unfitness and reluctance to assume his high calling, only
solve part of our problem. They leave out of account those possession
religions which enshrine morality and where to a large extent the office
of shaman is filled ascriptively by candidates who, far from being

ECSTATIC RELIGION
182
drawn only from the margins of society, are of perfectly respectable
background. In terms of what was said earlier of the significance of the
shaman’s professional trauma, to account for possession in both these
very different social contexts we have to realize, I think, that possession
most generally expresses aggressive self-assertion. That in both these
contexts possession should assume the psychological colouring which
western science identifies as hysteria is no longer surprising. For, as
Weber clearly saw, it is not only in exotic marginal cults, or indeed in
‘primitive’ society generally, that leadership is tinged with hysteria.
Many of those who today study politics under the banner of ‘games
theory’, or of ‘transactional analysis’, assume that political man is little
more than a manipulative, power-hungry ‘hysteric’—a view which
differs very little from that held by Hobbes or, more recently, Adler.
Only our received view of hysteria inhibits our perception of the many
forms which hysterical manipulation may assume.
If we are right, thus, in seeing possession as primarily a response to
oppressive conditions, then as our evidence suggests, we may expect to
find central shamanic cults in societies whose members are, in their
total eco-political setting, under acute pressure. Such pressure may
result from external encapsulating forces when a whole society is
marginal or marginalized, and becomes itself peripheral in relation to a
wider, over-arching political system. (The terms ‘central’ and
‘marginal’ are, as we need to remember, themselves relative.) The
stimulus here, as in most peripheral cults, is an excess of oppressive
structure. Paradoxically, as others have argued (e.g. Douglas, 1970),
lack of structure and socio-political indeterminacy may very well have
much the same effect: after all, over—and understimulation are equally
effective triggers for states of altered consciousness (cf. Lewis, 1977).
Thus it is not surprising that radical social change should so often have
featured prominently in the settings in which we have found possession
and shamanism flourishing.
Here, I believe we should return to Nadel’s view of shamanism as an
attempt to enrich the spiritual armoury of a community beset by
chronic environmental uncertainty, or rapid and inexplicable social
change. As he correctly saw, generally instability provides the fertile
soil in which shamanism flourishes. This, however, is not necessarily to
thrust shamanism into the gaping maws of that low grade explanatory
catch-all ‘anomie’, for none of the societies which we have considered
can plausibly be characterized as truly normless. Such a state would in
fact be the antithesis of central shamanism with its strong moral

POSSESSION AND PSYCHIATRY
183
emphasis. The problem is therefore to identify the minimum degree of
insecurity (or excessive security) and pressure which is required to
elicit the possession reaction.
I do not pretend to have achieved this. But it does seem that the
pressure of adverse circumstance must be considerably higher than that
which is adequately met by other theologies and cosmologies where
possession is not enlisted as a basic feature in religious expression.
Belief in spirits is much more widespread than belief in possession: and
certainly religions which employ ecstasy seem much more sensitive to
the impact of changing circumstances than those which do not. In line
with this contrast, possession, as we have seen, represents an assertion,
in the most direct, dramatic, and conclusive form that the spirits are
mastered by man. What is proclaimed is not merely that God is with us,
but that He is in us. Shamanism is thus the religion par excellence of
the spirit made flesh, and this reassuring doctrine is demonstrably
substantiated in each incarnatory séance, which as Zempleni (1977), de
Heusch (1985), and others have observed, is, of course, also a sacrifice
of the human self to the spiritual other. (Skultans, 1987, describes an
intriguing Indian case where such sacrificial possession is offered on
behalf of a relative of the possessed person rather than for the benefit of
the possessed person herself.) Yet it is difficult to avoid the suspicion
that for all its confident optimism, shamanism protests a little too
much. For it, as I am arguing, possession is essentially a philosophy of
power, it also seems tinged with a kind of Nietzschian desperation. If
this is a valid inference, it seems again to confirm the high threshold of
adversity to which shamanism appears to respond.
In the sense of mediating recurrent and novel stress (whether of
endogenous or exogenous origin) in the consoling idiom of possession,
shamanism may well contribute to mental health by stabilizing the
incidence of nervous disorders, since it affords a means of ostensibly
controlling the powers which are believed to activate these destructive
forces. By identifying ecstatically with disturbing new experiences, or
with recurrent hazards which are impossible to withstand otherwise,
those who hold this spiritualistic philosophy yield pliantly to the savage
onslaughts of innovation and change and to the recurrent buffets of
fate. In thus bowing to the inevitable, and accepting it, as it were, with
open arms, they soften its impact, making it seem that they passionately
desire what they cannot avoid. And, if for those who do not believe in
spirits, all this can be no more than a kind of heroic shadow-boxing, it
nevertheless has significant psychological effects which permit the

ECSTATIC RELIGION
184
endurance of pressures that could not otherwise be tolerated.
Ultimately, therefore, we have to acknowledge that to a certain extent
in common with the unconscious and so many of our other
psychological concepts, spirits are at least hypotheses which, for those
who believe in them, afford a philosophy of final causes and a theory of
social tensions and power relationships. Our concentration in this book
on the politics of possession does not, of course, mean that we wish to
devalue or deny the important intellectual, aesthetic, dramatic, and
moral aspects which we have also touched on.
To conclude, let me refer again to our own religion. Traditional
Christianity portrays God as all-powerful and omnipotent, making man
seem puny and weak. This has led the Christian faith (and I exclude
Christian enthusiasm here) to be peculiarly vulnerable to advances in
science and technology. For, as man has acquired increasing mastery
over his environment, so those things which were thought to be
controlled only by God have passed out of His keeping. God’s stature
has thus inevitably diminished. Shamanistic religions do not make this
mistake. They assume from the start that, at least on certain occasions,
man can rise to the level of the gods. And since man is thus, from the
beginning, held to participate in the authority of the gods, there is
scarcely any more impressive power that he can acquire. What the
shamanistic séance thus protests is the dual omnipotence of God and
man. It celebrates a confident and egalitarian view of man’s relations
with the divine, and perpetuates that original accord between God and
man which those who have lost the ecstatic mystery can only
nostalgically recall in myths of creation, or desperately seek in
doctrines of personal salvation.

185
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ackerknecht, E., ‘Psychopathology, primitive medicine, and primitive cultures’,
Bulletin of the History of Medicine, 14, 1943.
——Medicine and Ethnology, Baltimore, John Hopkins Press, 1971.
Ahlberg, N., ‘Some psycho-physiological aspects of ecstasy in recent research’,
in N.G Holm (ed.), Religious Ecstasy, Stockholm, Almquist and Wiksell,
1982, pp. 63–73.
Alpers, E.A., ‘Ordinary household chores: ritual and power in a nineteenth-
century Swahili women’s spirit possession cult’, International Journal of
African Historical Studies, 17, 4, 1984, pp. 677–702.
al-Shahi, A., ‘Spirit possession and healing: the zar among the Shaygiyya of the
Northern Sudan’, Bulletin, British Society for Middle Eastern Studies, vol.
11, No. 1, 1984, pp. 28–44.
Anisimov, A.F., ‘The shaman’s tent of the Evenks and the origin of the
shamanistic rite’, in H.N.Michael (ed.), Studies in Siberian Shamanism,
Toronto University Press, 1963.
Balikci, Asen, ‘Shamanistic behaviour among the Netsilik Eskimos’, South
Western Journal of Anthropology, 19, 1963.
Banyai, E.I., ‘On the technique of hypnosis and ecstasy: an exceptional
psychophysiological approach’, in M.Hoppal (ed.), Shamanism in Eurasia,
Göttingen, Edition Herodot, 1984.
Bargen, D.G., ‘Jugao: a case of spirit possession in The Tale of Genji’, Mosaic,
xix, 3, 1986, pp. 15–24.
Barnett, MG., Indian Shakers: a messianic Cult of the Pacific North-West,
Carbon-dale, 1957.
Basilov, V.N., ‘The Study of Shamanism in Soviet Ethnography’ in M. Hoppal
(ed.), Shamanism in Eurasia, Göttingen, Edition Herodot, 1984, pp. 46–66.
——‘The Chiltan spirits’, in M.Hoppal (ed.), Shamanism in Eurasia,
Göttingen, Edition Herodot, 1984, pp. 253–67.
Bastide, R., African Civilisations in the New World, London, 1971.
Bateson, G. and Mead, M., Balinese Character, New York, 1942.
Belo, J., Trance in Bali, New York, 1960.
Berger, I., ‘Rebels or status-seekers? Women as spirit mediums in East Africa’,

BIBLIOGRAPHY
186
in N.J.Hafkin and E.G.Bay, Women in Africa, Stanford University Press,
1976. pp. 157–82.
Berger, I., Religion and Resistance: East African Kingdoms in the Pre-Colonial
Period, Tervuren, Musée Royale de 1’Afrique Centrale, 1981.
Berreman, G., Hindus of the Himalayas: Ethnography and Change, Berkeley,
1972.
Besmer, F.E., Horses, Musicians and Gods: the Hausa Cult of Possession-
trance, Massachussets, Bergin and Garvey, 1983.
Bjerke, S., Religion and misfortune: The Bacwezi complex and the other spirit
cults of the Zinza of northwestern Tanzania, Oslo, Universitetsforlaget, 1981.
Blacker, C., The Catalpa Bow: A Study of ShamanisticPractices in Japan,
London, 1975.
Bogoras, W., The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. 11, The Chukchee,
Leiden, 1907.
Bourguignon, E., ‘World distribution and patterns of possession states’, in
R.Prince (ed.), Trance and Possession States, Montreal, 1967.
——Possession, San Francisco, Chandler, 1976.
Brown, G. and Harris, T., Social Origins of Depression: A Study of Psychiatric
Disorder in Women, London, 1978.
Burkert, W., Greek Religion, Oxford, Blackwell, 1985.
Butt, A., Wavell, S., and Epton, Nina, Trances, London, 1967.
Caplan, A.P., Choice and Constraint in a Swahili Community, London, 1975.
Carstairs, G.M. and Kapur, R.L., The Great Universe of Kota: Stress, Change
and Mental Disorder in an Indian Village, London, 1976.
Clark, W., ‘Temporary madness as theatre in the eastern central highlands of
New Guinea’, Oceania, 43, 1973, pp. 198–214.
Cohn, N., The Pursuit of the Millennium, London, 1957.
Colson, E., ‘Spirit possession among the Tonga of Zambia’, in J.Beattie and
J.Middleton (eds), Spirit Mediumship and Society in Africa, London, 1969.
Constantinides, P., ‘Ill at ease and sick at heart: symbolic behaviour in a
Sudanese healing cult’, in Lewis, I.M. (ed.), Symbols and Sentiments,
London, 1977. pp. 61–84.
——‘Women heal women: spirit possession and sexual segregation in a Muslim
society’, Social Science Medicine, Vol. 21, No. 6, 1985, pp. 685–92.
Courlander, H. and Bastien, R., Religion and Politics in Haiti, Washington,
1966.
Crapanzano, V. and Garrison, V., Case Studies in Spirit Possession, New York,
Wiley, 1977.
Crapanzano, V., The Hamadsha: A Study in Moroccan Ethnopsychiatry,
Berkeley, University of California Press, 1973.
Culley, R.C. and Overholt, T.W., ‘Anthropological perspectives on Old
Testament prophecy’, Semia 21, 1982.
Czaplicka, M.A., Aboriginal Siberia, Oxford, 1914.
Davis, W., Dojo: Magic and Exorcism in Modern Japan, Stanford, Stanford
University Press, 1980.
Delaby, L., Chamanes Toungouses, Nanterre, Centred’Etudes Mongoles, 1976.
Dermenghem, E., LeCulte des saints dans TIslam maghrebin, Paris, Gallimard,
1954.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
187
Derrett, J.D.M., ‘Spirit-possession and the Gerasene Demoniac’, Man, 14, 2,
1979, pp. 286–93.
Devereux, G., ‘Normal and abnormal: the key problem of psychiatric
anthropology’ in J.B.Casagrande and T.Gladwin (eds), Some Uses of
Anthropology: Theoretical and Applied, Washington, 1956.
Dodds, E.R., The Greeks and the Irrational, Berkeley, University of California
Press, 1951.
Douglas, M., Purity and Danger, London, Routledge, 1966.
——Natural Symbols: Explorations in Cosmology, London, Barrie and
Rockcliff, 1970.
Dube, K.C., ‘A Study of prevalence of mental illness in U.P. India’, Acta
Psychiat. Scand., 46, 1970, pp. 327–59.
Echard, N., ‘La pratique religieuse des femmes dans une société d’hommes: les
Hausa du Niger’, Revue francaise de sociologie, xix, 1978, pp. 551–62.
Edsman, C.M. (ed.), Studies in Shamanism, Stockholm, 1967.
Eliade, Mircea, Le Chamanisme et les techniques archaiques de l’extase, Paris,
Payot, 1951.
Elwin, V., The Religion of an Indian Tribe, London, 1955.
Fairchild, W.P., ‘Shamanism in Japan’, Folklore Studies (Tokyo), 21, 1962.
Fakhouri, H., ‘The zar cult in an Egyptian village’, Anthropological Quarterly,
41, 1968, pp. 49–56.
Farah, Nuruddin, From a Crooked Rib, London, Heinemann, 1970.
Ferchiou, S., ‘Survivances mystiques et cultes de possession dans le
maraboutisme tunisien’, L’Homme, 12, 3, 1972, pp. 47–69.
Fields, K., Revival and Rebellion in Colonial Central Africa, Harvard, Harvard
University Press, 1985.
Firth, R., ‘Problem and assumption in an anthropological study of religion’,
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 39, 1959.
——Tikopia Ritual and Belief, London, 1967.
——‘Ritual and drama in Malay spirit mediumship’, Comparative Studies in
Society and History, ix, 2, 1967, pp. 190–207.
Freeman, D., Shaman and Incubus, Australian National University (mimeo.),
1965.
Freud, S., Selected Papers on Hysteria and other Psychoneuroses (trans.
A.A.Brill), New York, 1912.
Fry, P., Spirits of Protest: Spirit Mediums and the Articulation of Consensus
amongst the Zezuru of Southern Rhodesia, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1976.
Furst, P.T. (ed.), Flesh of the Gods: the Ritual use of Hallucinogens, New York,
1972.
Gallini, C., I Rituali dell’Argia, Padua, CEDAM, 1967.
Garbett, K.G., ‘Spirit mediums as mediators in Valley Korekore society’, in
J.Beattie and J.Middleton (eds) Spirit Mediumship and Society in Africa,
London, 1969.
Giannattasio, F., ‘Somalia: La terapia coreutico-musicale del Mingis’, Culture
Musicali, anno 11, 1983, pp. 93–119.
Giles, L. ‘Possession cults on the Swahili coast: a re-examination of theories of
marginality’, Africa, 57, 2, 1987, pp.2 34–58.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
188
Gomm, R., ‘Bargaining from weakness: spirit possession on the South Kenya
Coast’, Man (NS), 10 December, 1975, pp. 530–43.
Goodman, F.D., Henney J.H., and Pressel, E., Trance, Healing and
Hallucination, New York, Wiley, 1974.
Gough, K., ‘Cults of the dead among the Nayars’, Journal of American
Folklore, 71, 1958.
Graham, H., ‘The social image of pregnancy: pregnancy as spirit possession’,
The Sociological Review, May, 1976, pp. 291–308.
Grof, S., ‘The implications of psychedelic research for anthropology:
observations from LSD psychotherapy’, in Lewis, I.M. (ed.), Symbols and
Sentiments, London, 1977, pp. 141–74.
Gussow, Z., ‘Pibloktoq (hysteria) among the Polar Eskimo’, in Psychoanalysis
and the Social Sciences, 1, New York, 1960.
Hamayon, R., ‘Is there a typically female exercise of shamanism in patrilinear
societies such as the Buryat?’, in M.Hoppal (ed.), Shamanism in Eurasia,
Göttingen, Edition Herodot, 1984, pp. 307–18.
Harner, M.J. (ed.), Hallucinogens and Shamanism, New York, 1973.
Harper, E.B., ‘Spirit possession and Social Structure’, in B.Ratman (ed.),
Anthropology on the March, Madras, 1963.
Harris, G., ‘Possession “hysteria” in a Kenyan tribe’, American Anthropologist,
59, 1957.
Harvey, Y.Kim, Six Korean Women: The Socialization of Shamans, American
Ethnological Society Monograph 65, Minnesota, West Publishing Co., 1979.
Helman, C., Culture, Health and Illness, Bristol, Wright, 1984.
Heusch, L. de, ‘Cultes de possession et religions initiatiques de salut en
Afrique’, Annales du Centre d’Etudes des Religions, Brussels, 1962.
——Le Rwanda et la civilisation interlacustre, 1966.
——Pourquoi l’epouser?, Paris, Gallimard, 1971.
——Sacrifice in Africa, Manchester, Manchester University Press, 1985.
Hexham, I. and Poewe, K., Understanding Cults and New Religions, Michigan,
Eerdmans, 1986.
Hippler, A.E., ‘Possession and trance cults: a cross-cultural perspective’,
Transcultural Psychiatric Research, 10, 1973, p. 21.
Hitchcock, J.T. and Jones, R.L. (eds), Spirit Possession in the Nepal Himalayas,
Warminster, 1976.
Holden, P. (ed.), Women’s Religious Experience, London, Groom Helm, 1983.
Holm, N.G. (ed.), Religious Ecstasy, Uppsala, Almquist and Wiksell, 1982.
Hoppal, M., Shamanism in Eurasia, Göttingen, Edition Herodot, 1984.
Hori, Ichiro, Folk Religion in Japan: Continuity and Change, Chicago,
University of Chicago Press, 1968.
Humphrey, C., Karl Marx Collective, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
1983.
Jahoda, G., Psychology and Anthropology, New York, Academic Press, 1982.
Jahoda, G. and Lewis, I.M. (eds), Acquiring Culture: Cross-cultural Studies in
Child-Development, London, Groom Helm, 1987.
Jeanmaire, H., Le Culte de Dionysus, Paris, 1951.
Jones, E., On the Nightmare, London, 1949.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
189
Kapferer, B., A Celebration of Demons, Bloomington, Indiana University Press,
1983.
Katz, R., Boiling Energy: Community Healing among the Kalahari Kung,
Cambridge, Mass, Harvard University, 1982.
Kehoe, A.B. and Giletti, D.H., ‘Women’s preponderance in possession Cults:
the calcium-deficiency hypothesis extended’, American Anthropologist,
1981, 83, pp. 549–61.
Kendall, L., Shamans, Housewives and other Restless Spirits, Honolulu,
University of Hawaii Press, 1985.
Kennedy, J.G., ‘Nubian Zar ceremonies as psychotherapy’, Human
Organization, 1967.
Kenny, M.G., ‘Multiple personality and spirit possession’, Psychiatry, 44, 4,
1981, pp. 337–58.
Kessler, C.S., ‘Conflict and sovereignty, in Kelantanese Malay spirit séances’,
in Crapanzano, V. and Garrison, V. (eds), Case Studies in Spirit Possession,
New York, 1977, pp. 295–332.
Kiev, A., Transcultural Psychiatry, New York: The Free Press, 1972.
Kleinman, A., Patients and Healers in the Context of Culture, Berkeley,
University of California Press, 1980.
Knox, R.A., Enthusiasm, A Chapter in the History of Religion, Oxford, 1950.
Knutsson, K.E., Authority and Change: A Study of the Kallu Institution among
the Mocha Galla of Ethiopia, Goteborg, 1967.
——‘Possession and extra-institutional behaviour: an essay in anthropological
micro-analysis’, Ethnos, 1975, 40, pp. 244–72.
Koritschoner, H., ‘Ngoma ya Sheitani: an East African native treatment for
physical disorder’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 66, 1936.
Koss, J.D., ‘Spirits as socializing agents: a case study of a Puerto Rican girl
reared in a matricentric family’, in Crapanzano, V. and Garrison V. (eds),
Case Studies in Spirit Possession, New York, 1977, pp. 365–82.
——‘Social process, healing, and self-defeat among Puerto Rican spiritists’,
American Ethnologist, 4, 3, 1977, pp. 453–69.
Krader, L., ‘Buryat religion and society’, Southwestern Journal of
Anthropology, 10, 1954.
Kramer, F.W., Der rote Fes: Uber Bessessenheit und Kunst in Afrika, Frankfurt,
Athenaum, 1987.
Kuba, M., ‘A psychopathological and socio-cultural psychiatric study of the
possession syndrome’, Psychiatrica et Neurologica Japonica, 75, 1973, p. 169.
La Barre, W., The Ghost Dance, New York, Doubleday, 1970.
La Fontaine, J.S., Initiation: Ritual Drama and Secret Knowlege Across the
World, Harmondsworth, Penguin Books, 1985.
Laing R.D. and Esterson, T.Sanity, Madness and the Family, London, 1964.
Lambek, M., Human Spirits: A Cultural Account of Trance in Mayotte,
Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Lan, D., Guns and Rain: Guerillas and Spirit Mediums in Zimbabwe, London,
James Curry, 1985.
Langley, M., ‘Spirit-possession, exorcism and social context: an anthropological
perspective with theological implications’, Churchman, 84, 3, 1980, pp.
226–45.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
190
Langness, L., ‘Hysterical psychosis in the New Guinea highlands: a Bena-Bena
example’, Psychiatry, 28, 1965.
Lanternari, V., The Religions of the Oppressed, New York, Mentor Books, 1965.
Larose, S., ‘The meaning of Africa in Haitian Vodu’, in Lewis, I.M. (ed.),
Symbols and Sentiments, London, 1977, 85–115.
Last, M., ‘Some economic aspects of conversion in Hausaland (Nigeria)’, in
N.Levtzion, Conversion to Islam, New York, Holmes and Meier, 1979, pp.
236–46.
Leacock, S. and R., Spirits of the Deep: A Study of an Afro-Brazilian Cult, New
York, 1972.
Leff, J., Psychiatry Around the Globe: A Transcultural View, New York, Marcel
Dekker, 1981.
Leiris, M., La Possession et ses Aspects Theatraux Chez les Ethiopiens de
Gondar, Paris, 1958.
Lévi-Strauss, C., Structural Anthropology, London, 1968.
Lewis, H.S., ‘Spirit possession in Ethiopia: an essay in Interpretation’, in
S.Rubenson (ed.), Proceedings International Congress of Ethiopian Studies,
Uppsala, 1984.
Lewis, I.M., ‘Spirit-possession and deprivation cults’. Man, 1, 1966, pp. 307–29.
——‘Spirit-possession in northern Somaliland’, in J.Beattie and j.Middleton
(eds), Spirit Mediumship and Society in Africa, London, Routledge, 1969.
——(ed.), Symbols and Sentiments: Cross-cultural Studies in Symbolism,
London, Academic Press, 1977.
——‘Spirit-possession and biological reductionism: a rejoinder to Kehoe and
Giletti’, American Anthropologist, 85, 1983, 2, pp. 412–17.
——Religion in Context: Cults and Charisma, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1986.
Lindblom, G., The Akamba in British East Africa, Uppsala, 1920.
Littlewood, R., ‘The imitation of madness: the influence of psychopathology
upon culture’, Social Science and Medicine, Vol. 19, 7, 1984, pp. 705–15.
Littlewood, R. and Lipsedge, M., Aliens and Alienists, Harmondsworth,
Penguin Books, 1982.
——‘Culture-bound syndromes’, in K.Granville-Grossman (ed.), Recent
Advances in Clinical Psychiatry, Edinburgh, Churchill Livingstone, 1985,
pp. 105–42.
——‘The Butterfly and the Serpent: culture, psychopathology and
biomedicine’, Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 11, 1986, pp. 43–89.
Loeb, E.M., ‘The Shaman of Niue’, American Anthropologist, 26, 1924, pp.
393–402.
Loudon, J.B., ‘Psychogenic disorder and social conflict among the Zulu’, in
M.K.Opler (ed.), Culture and Mental Health, New York, 1959.
Mair, L., Witchcraft, London, 1969.
Maquet, J., The Premise of Inequality in Rwanda: A Study of Political Relations
in a Central Africa Kingdom, Oxford University Press, 1961.
Marazzi, U., Testi dell Sciamanesimo, Siberiano e Centroasiatico, Turin,
Unione Topografico-editrice Tourinese, 1984.
Mars, L., La Crise de possession dans le voudon: essai de psychiatrie
comparée, Port-au-Prince, 1946.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
191
Marshall, L., ‘The medicine dance of the ‘Kung Bushmen’, Africa, 39, 1969.
Martino, E. de, La Terre du remords, Paris, 1966.
Marwick, M., ‘The social context of Cewa witch beliefs’, Africa, 22, 1952.
Mary, A., ‘L’alternative de la vision et de la possession dans les sociétés
religieuses et therapeutiques du Gabon’, Cahiers d’Etudes Africaines, 91,
xxiii–3, 1983, pp. 281–310.
Masters, R.E.L. and Houston, J., The Varieties of Psychedelic Experience,
London, 1967.
Messing, S., ‘Group therapy and social status in the zar cult of Ethiopia’,
American Anthropologist, 60, 1958.
Métraux, A., Voodoo in Haiti (English translation), London, 1959.
Mischel, W. and F., ‘Psychological aspects of spirit possession in Trinidad’,
American Anthropologist, 60, 1958.
Mitchell, J., ‘Women: the longest revolution’, New Left Review, November-
December 1966.
Monfouga-Nicolas, J., Ambivalence et culte de Possession, Paris, Editions
Anthropos, 1972.
Morichand, G., ‘Le Chamanisme des Hmongs’, Bulletin de l’Ecole Francaise
de l’Extreme-orient, 1968, p. liv.
Morris, B., ‘Hill gods and ecstatic cults: notes on the religion of a hunting and
gathering people’, Man in India, 1981, 61, pp. 203–36.
Morsy, S.A., ‘Sex differences and folk illness in an Egyptian village’, in L.
Beck and N.Keddie (eds) Women in the Muslim World, Harvard, Harvard
University Press, 1977, pp. 599–616.
——‘Sex roles, power, and illness in an Egyptian village’, American
Ethnologist, Vol. 5, No. 1, 1978, pp. 135–50.
Morton, A., ‘Dawit: Competition and Integration in an Ethiopian Wugabi Cult
Group’, in V.Crapanzano and V.Garrison (eds), Case Studies in Spirit
Possession, New York, John Wiley, 1977.
Murphy, H.B.M., Comparative Psychiatry: The Internatinal and Intercultural
Distribution of Mental Illness, Berlin, Springer, 1982.
Murphy, J., ‘Psychiatric aspects of shamanism on St Lawrence Island, Alaska’,
in A.Kiev (ed.), Magic, Faith and Healing, 1964.
Nadel, S., ‘A study of Shamanism in the Nuba Hills’, Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute, 76, 1946.
Ngubane, H., Body and Mind in Zulu Medicine, London, Academic Press, 1977.
Nicolas, G. Dynamique Sociale et Apprehension du Monde au Sein d’un Societe
Hausa, Paris, Institut d’Ethnologie, 1975.
Nicolas, J., Les Juments des Dieux: Rites de possession et condition feminine en
pays Hausa, Niger, Etudes Nigeriennes, No. 21, 1967.
Obeyesekere, G., ‘The Idiom of Demonic Possession: a case study’, Social
Science and Medicine, July 1970, pp. 97–112.
——Medusa’s Hair: An Essay on Personal Symbols and Religious Experience,
Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1981.
O’Brien, Elmer, Varieties of Mystic Experience, Mentor-Omega Paperbacks,
London, 1965.
O’Connell, M.C., ‘Spirit-possession and role stress among the Xesibe of
Eastern Transkei’, Ethnology, 1982, xxi, pp. 21–37.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
192
Oesterreich, T.K., Possession, Demoniacal and Other, among Primitive Races,
in Antiquity, the Middle Ages and Modern Times, London, 1930 (authorized
translation of the 1921 original in German).
Ohlmarks, A., Studien zum Problem des Schamanismus, Lund, 1939.
Onweujeogwu, M., ‘The cult of the Bori spirits among the Hausa’, in M.
Douglas and P.Kaberry (eds), Man in Africa, London, 1969.
Opler, M.E., ‘Spirit-possession in a rural area of northern India’, in W.A. Lessa
and E.Z.Vogt (eds), Reader in Comparative Religion, New York, 1958.
Orent, Amnon, Lineage Structure and the Supernatural: the Kaffa of Southwest
Ethiopia, unpublished PhD thesis, Boston University, 1969.
Paques, V., L’Arbre cosmique dans la pensée populaire et dans la vie
quotidienne du nord-ouest africain, Paris, 1964.
Parkin, D., ‘The politics of ritual syncretism; Islam among the non-Muslim
Giriama of Kenya’, Africa, 40, 1970.
Parkin, D.J., Palms, Wine and Witnesses, London, Intertext Books, 1972.
Peters, L.G. and Price-Williams, Douglass, ‘Towards an experiential analysis of
shamanism’, American Ethnologist, 1980, 7, 397–418.
Pressel, E., ‘Negative spirit possession in experienced Brazilian Umibanda
spirit mediums’, in V.Crapanzano and V.Garrison (eds), Case Studies in
Spirit Possession, New York, Wiley, 1977, pp. 333–64.
Prince, R.H., ‘The problem of spirit possession as a treatment for psychiatric
disorders’, Ethos, 2, 1974, pp. 315–33.
——(ed.) Shamans and Endorphins (special issue of Ethos), Ethos, 10, 1982.
Radin, P., Primitive Religion: Its Nature and Origin, New York, 1937.
Raqiya, H.D.Abdalla, Sisters in Affliction. Circumcision and Infibulation of
Women in Africa, London, Zed Press, 1982.
Rasmussen, K., The Intellectual Culture of the Iglulik Eskimos, Copenhagen,
1929.
Reichel-Dolmatoff, G., Amazonian Cosmos, Chicago, University of Chicago
Press, 1971.
Reminick, R.A., ‘The evil eye belief among the Amhara of Ethiopia’,
Ethnology, 13, 1974, pp. 279–91.
Rouch, J., La Religion et le Magie Songhay, Paris, 1960.
Rouget, R., La Musique et la transe. Esquisse d’une théorie générale des
relations de la musique et de la possession, Paris, Gallimard, 1980.
Rycroft, C., Anxiety and Neurosis, London, 1968.
Santos Granero, F., ‘Power, ideology and the ritual of production in Lowland
South America’, Man, 1986, 21, pp. 657–79.
Sardan, J.P.Olivier de, Les sociétés Songhay-Zarma, Paris, Karthala, 1984.
Sargant, W., The Mind Possessed, London, 1973.
Sartre, J.P., In F.Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth, London, 1967.
Saunders, L.W., ‘Variance in Zar experience in an Egyptian village’, in
V.Crapanzano and V.Garrison (eds), Case Studies in Spirit Possession, New
York, John Wiley, 1977.
Scharer, H., Ngaju Religion (Translated by R.Needham), The Hague, 1963.
Schoffeleers, M., Pentecostalism andNeo-traditionalism, Amsterdam, Free
University Press, 1985.
Scholem, G., Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism, New York, 1941.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
193
Schultes, R.E. and Hofmann, A., Plants of the Gods: Origins of Hallucinogenic
Use, London, Hutchinson, 1980.
Seligman, C.G. and B.Z., The Veddas, Cambridge University Press, 1911.
Shack, W., The Gurage, London, Oxford University Press, 1966.
Shirokogoroff, S.M., Psychomental Complex of the Tungus, London, 1935.
Siikala, A.L., The Rite Technique of the Siberian Shaman, Helsinki, FF
Communications, Vol. 93, No. 220, 1978.
Silverman, J., ‘Shamans and acute schizophrenia’, American Anthropologist,
69, 1967.
Skultans, V., Intimacy and Ritual: A Study of Spiritualism, Mediums and
Groups, London, Routledge, 1974.
——‘Trance and the management of mental illness among Maharashtrian
Families’, Anthropology Today, Vol. 3, No. 1, 1987.
Sonne, B., ‘The professional ecstatic in his social and ritual position’, in N.G.
Holm (ed.), Religious Ecstasy, Uppsala, Almquist and Wiksell, 1982, pp.
128–50.
Spencer, P., The Samburu, A Study of Gerontocracy in a Nomadic Tribe,
London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1965.
Spiro, M.E., Burmese Supernaturalism, New Jersey, 1967.
Stanbrook, E., ‘Some characteristics of the psychopathology of schizophrenic
behaviour in Bahian society’, American Journal of Psychiatry, 109, 1952.
Stayt, H., The Bavenda, London, 1937.
Stewart, K., ‘Spirit-possession in native America’, Southwestern Journal of
Anthropology, 2, 1946.
Stirrat, R.L., ‘Demonic possession in Roman Catholic Sri Lanka’, Journal of
Anthropological Research, 33, 2, 1977, pp. 133–57.
Strathern, M., Women-in-between: female roles in a male world: Mount Hagen,
New Guinea, London, Seminar Press 1972.
Strobel, M., Muslim Women in Mombasa, 1890–1975, New Haven, Yale
University Press, 1979.
Sundkler, B., Bantu Prophets in South Africa, London, 1961.
Swantz, M.L., Ritual and Symbol in Transitional Zaramo Society, Uppsala, 1970.
Taylor, D.M., The Black Caribs of British Honduras, New York, 1951.
Taylor, R., The Death and Resurrection Show, London, Anthony Blond, 1985.
Teja, J.S., Khanna, B.S. and Subrahmanyam, T.B., ‘Possession states in Indian
patients’, Indian Journal of Psychiatry, 21, 1970, p. 71.
Todd, D., ‘Problems of comparative ecstasy’, Northeast African Studies, 1, 3,
1979–80, pp. 49–57.
Tremearne, A.J.N., The Ban of the Bori, London, 1914.
Tubiana, J., ‘Quete de Sawbadayt’, in J.Tubiana (ed.), Guirlande pour Abba
Jerome, Paris, Le Mois en Afrique, 1983.
Turner, V.W., The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure, London, 1969.
Veith, I., Hysteria, the History of a Disease, Chicago, 1965.
Voigt, V., ‘Shaman—person or word?’, in M.Hoppal (ed.), Shamanism in
Eurasia, Göttingen, Edition Herodot, 1984, pp. 13–21.
Wadley, Susan S., ‘The spirit “rides” or the spirit comes: possession in a north
Indian village’, in A.Bharati (ed.), The Realm of the Extra-human: Agents
and Audiences, The Hague, Mouton, 1976, pp. 233–52.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
194
Walker, S.S., Ceremonial Spirit Possession in Africa and Afro-America, Leiden:
E.J. Brill, 1972.
Wavell, S., Butt, A. and Epton, Nina, Trances, London, 1967.
Whisson, M.G., ‘Some aspects of functional disorders among the Kenya Luo’,
in A.Kiev (ed.), Magic, Faith and Healing, London, 1964.
Whyte, S.R., ‘Men, women and misfortune in Bunyole’, Man, 16, 3, 1981, pp.
350–66.
Wijesinghe, C.P., Dissanayake, S.A.W. and Mendis, N., ‘Possession trance in a
semi-urban community in Sri Lanka’, Australian and New Zealand Journal
of Psychiatry, 10, 1976, pp. 135–9.
Wilken, G.A., Het Shamanisme bij de Volken van den Indischen Archipel, 1887.
Wilson, P.J., ‘Status ambiguity and spirit possession’, Man, 2, 1967.
Wilson, R., Prophecy and Society in Ancient Israel, Philadelphia, Fortress
Press, 1980.
Woldetsadik, T., ‘The cult of Damwarnwit and the M way at organization’,
Social Research field workers’ meeting, Addis Ababa, 1967 (ms).
Worsely, P., The Trumpet Shall Sound, London, 1957.
Wyllie, R.W., ‘Introspective witchcraft among the Eflutu of southern Ghana’,
Man, 8, 1, 1973, pp. 74–9.
Yap, P.M., ‘The culture-bound reactive syndromes’, in W.Gaudill and Tsung-yi
Lin (eds), Mental Health Research in Asia and the Pacific, Honolulu, 1969.
——‘The possession syndrome—a comparison of Hong Kong and French
findings’, Journal of Mental Science, 106, 1960.
Young, A., ‘Why Amhara get Kureynya: sickness and possession in an
Ethiopian zar cult’, American Ethnologist, 2, (3), 1975, pp. 567–84.
Young, J., The Drugtakers, London, Paladin, 1972.
Zaehner, R.C., Mysticism, Sacred and Profane, Oxford, 1957.
Zempleni, A., ‘From symptom to sacrifice: the story of Khady Fall’, in V.
Crapanzano and V.Garrison (eds), Case Studies in Spirit Possession, 1977,
pp. 87–140.
 

195
Abelam, 36
abreaction, 35, 175, 176
Ackerknecht, E.H., 165
aggression, 28, 43, 77, 78, 105, 108,
115, 119, 145, 150, 158, 169–70,
179, 180, 181, 182
Akawaio Caribs, 41, 53, 63, 142–5, 146,
148, 150, 151, 153, 157, 164
Algeria, 105
Amhara, 91–2, 131, 135, 138, 139
ancestors, 29, 45, 64, 73, 78, 84, 101,
112, 120–33, 134
Anchorites, 32
Anges, Sister Jeanne des, 66
Anisimov, A.F., 140, 164, 185
Apollo, 51, 91
Arctic hysteria, 47–8, 74; see also
Eskimo
Asia, S.E., 75, 168
attack, mystical, 23, 25–6, 28, 140, 146,
153–4
authority, 115, 119, 122–3, 124–8, 130,
143, 156, 158, 177; see also politics
and Divine kings
Azande, 3
 
Bahia cult, 164
Bali, 53, 60, 162, 164
Balikci, A., 151, 185
Bambara, 92
Bantu (South African), 104, 111
Barnett, M.G., 39, 185
Bateson, G. & M.Mead, 162–3, 164, 185
Belgium, 36
Belo, J., 164, 185
Berbers, 93
Black brotherhoods, 93, 105; see also
Muhammadanism
Black Caribs, 49, 75
Black death, 36
Bogoras, W., 54, 61, 152, 161, 186
bori cults, 51, 73–4, 85, 86–7, 88–9, 91–4,
95, 98, 104, 175
Borneo, 52, 76
Bourguignon, E., 7, 49, 186
Brazil, 56
British Guiana (now Guyana), 41, 53,
142
British Honduras, 49, 75
Buddhism, 76, 86, 142
Burma, 52, 53, 76, 86
Burvat, 161
Bushmen, 42–3
Butt, A., 41, 142, 144, 164, 186
 
Caplan, A.P., 98, 186
cargo cults, 156; see also messianic
religions and social movements
Caribs, see Akawaio Caribs and Black
Caribs
Catholicism, 20, 35, 65, 66, 94–6; see
also Christianity
Ceylon, 76, 120–1, 125
Charcot, 40
charisma, 23, 156
Chile, 75
China, 76, 145, 164–5, 179
Christianity, 15, 16, 18–21, 24, 26, 34–5,
39, 52, 62, 70, 75, 81–2, 87, 89, 91,
92, 94, 107, 116, 117, 118, 126–7,
130, 131, 135, 139, 141, 142, 152,
165, 184; Anchorites, 32;
Catholicism, 20, 35, 65, 66, 94–6;
Jesus, 16, 52, 56, 62; Montanists, 26;
Pentecostalism, 35, 118;
Protestantism, 117; Quakers, 35, 39,
INDEX

INDEX
196
118; Virgin Mary, 37, 56, 95, 139;
Wesley, J., 18; see also saints
Chukchee, 44, 54, 61, 151, 161
Cohn, N., 162, 186
Collingwood, R.G., 86
Colson, E., 87, 128, 186
communication, with spirits, 15, 21, 51,
121, 167
confession, 144–5, 151, 176–7, 178
Congo, 101
cosmologies, 49, 95, 111, 135, 140
Courlander, H & R.Bastien, 96, 186
Cult(s); ancestor, see ancestors; Bahia,
164; bori, 51, 73–4, 85, 86–7, 88–9,
91–4, 95, 98, 104, 175; central
possession, see under possession,
spirit; Dochay (Kaffa),
131;Dionysus, 48, 49, 81, 91, 100;
peripheral possession, see under
possession, spirit; Shaker,
39;Shango, 60, 94; Waka (Galla),
135–9; zar 55, 66–71, 73, 87, 89, 91–2,
175, 176; see also voodoo
curing, see healing
curse, 136
Czaplicka, M.A., 151–2, 186
 
Dahomey, 53
Dayaks, 52
dead, messages from, 15; see also
communication with spirits, and
spiritualism
death, 143, 145, 150, 170
demons, 26, 75, 76, 112, 115, 116, 124,
140; see also Devil
Dermengham, E., 93, 186
Devereux, G., 162–3, 180, 186
Devil, 35, 37, 62, 97
Dionysus, cult of, 48, 49, 81, 91, 100
disease, 26, 45–6, 63, 64, 77, 86, 143–5,
149–50, 164–5, 173; see also illness
Divine kings (Kaffa), 129, 130; see also
authority and politics
diviners, 84, 103, 104, 112, 125, 128, 129
Dochay cult (Kaffa), 131
Dodds, E.R., 49, 91, 186
Douglas, M., 180, 186
dreams, 124
drugs, 17, 19, 21, 33, 34, 35, 39, 144,
168; L.S.D., 33, 34, 39
Durkheim, E., 1, 4, 5, 160
Duvalier, Dr (‘Papa Doc’), 96; see also
Haiti
ecstasy, 3–4, 5, 15–31, 32, 48, 63, 80,
134, 153, 156, 161, 169
Edsman, C.M., 62, 187
Egypt, 70
Eliade, M., 22, 26, 43–4, 48, 165, 170,
187
Eliot, T.S., 63, 165
Elwin, V., 53, 187
endorphins, 34
epilepsy, 36, 164, 165
Eskimo, 17, 32, 44, 61, 146–51, 153,
155, 157, 158, 164, 176
Ethiopia, 51, 53, 55, 59, 70, 87, 91–2,
99–100, 129–31, 135–9, 158
Evans-Pritchard, E.E., 2, 3
Evenk, 140–1, 164
exorcism, 40, 79, 96, 110–13, 132, 140
 
Fagerberg, Catharina (Swedish
medium), 62
Fairchild, W.P., 187
Fanon, F., 105
Faust, 50, 56
Fiji, 101–2
Firth, R., 49, 53, 187
Flournoy, T., 58
flower-power, 101, 102
Forge, A., 36
Fortes, M., 2
France, 66
Frazer, J.G., 2, 4, 107
Freeman, J., 76, 187
Freud, S., 74, 178–9, 187
Fry, P., 122, 168, 187
 
Galen of Pergamon (physician), 85
Galla, 59, 71, 92, 135–9, 140, 141, 157
Garbett, K., 122, 187
Germany, 36
Giriama, 116–7, 158
Golden Bough, The, 2
gossip, 144
Gough, K., 102, 187
Greek religion, 49, 51, 73, 86, 91
Gurage, 99–100
Gussow, Z., 74, 188
 
Haiti, 41, 51, 53, 55–6, 60, 94–6, 115,
164, 172, 175
Harper, E.B., 75, 188
Harris, G., 73, 188
Hausa, 51, 74, 86, 92, 98

INDEX
197
healing, 26, 63, 72–6, 79–80, 83–9, 97,
119, 126, 143–52, 166–8, 169, 170,
172–8; see also disease and illness
Hegel, 44
heresy, 35, 116
Herskovits, M., 164
Heusch, L. de., 41, 44, 48, 101, 183, 188
Hinduism, 53–4, 102–4
Hmong, 168
Hobbes, 182
Holland, 36
homosexuality, 54, 159; see also sexual
deviants
Hong Kong, 76, 164, 179
Houdini, 150
Humanism, 17
Hutu, 100–1; see also Tutsi and Twa
Huxley, A., 19, 66
hypnotism, 33
hysteria, 27, 38, 40, 47–8, 66, 72, 74, 85,
90, 161, 162, 164, 172, 178–82
 
Iban, 76
illness, 25, 27, 28, 40, 42, 63, 66–8, 69–
70, 72, 76, 79–83, 98, 102, 105, 110–
12, 115, 120–1, 123, 125, 129, 140,
141–2, 145, 146, 149–50, 168, 171,
174, 177; see also disease
incest, 52, 123
India, 41, 53–4, 75, 102–4, 108–9, 112
Indonesia, 76, 162
Islam, see Muhammadanism
Italy, 36–7, 80–3, 89, 90
 
Japan, 76–7
Java, 164
Jeanmaire, H., 91, 188
Jesus, 16, 52, 56, 62
jinns, see bori and zar
Joan of Arc, 62
Job, 78
Jones, E., 51, 188
Jung, C.J., 172, 178
 
Kaffa, 129–31, 135, 136, 137, 139
Kalahari, 42–3
Kamba, 71–2
Kennedy, J.G., 176, 188
Kenya, 35, 39, 72, 116, 117, 138
Knox, R., 18–19, 20, 26, 29, 156, 189
Knutsson, K.E., 59, 135, 189
Korekore, see Shona
Koritschoner, H., 72, 189
Krader, L., 161, 189
 
Laing, R.D. & T.Esterson, 181, 189
Langness, L., 163, 189
Lanternari, V., 115, 189
law, 123, 131, 135, 142, 143, 145, 146,
151; see also social order
Leiris, M., 70, 91, 190
Lévi-Strauss, C., 4, 78, 173–4, 177, 190
Levy-Valensi (French psychiatrist), 161
Lewis, I.M., 64, 190
Lindblom, G., 71, 190
Linton, R., 57
Loeb, E.M., 162
London, The Devils of, 66
Loudon, J.B., 177, 190
Lugbara, 108
Luo, 72–3
 
Macha Galla, see Galla
Mafia Island (Tanzania), 97–8
magic, 17, 62
Maharishi, 17
Mair, L., 107, 190
Malaysia, 12, 53, 76
Manchuria, 142
Manchus, 45
Mapuche, 75
Maquet, J., 100
marriage with spirits, 52–4, 55–6, 82–3,
170–1
Mars, L., 172, 190
Marshall, L., 43, 190
Martino, E. de., 37, 81, 82, 90, 190
Marwick, M., 108, 190
Masai, 71
Masters, R. & J.Houston, 33, 190
Mecca, 70; see also Muhammadanism
mediums, spirit; Fagerberg, C., 62;
Smith, Hélène, 58, 59; see also
priests and shamans
messianic religions, 101–2, 115, 117–18,
156–7, 162; see also cargo cults and
social movements
Messing, S., 70, 190
Métraux, A., 55, 60, 94, 95, 164, 191
Middle Ages, The, 36–7, 156, 162
millennial movements, see cargo cults,
messianic religions and social
movements
Milton, 54

INDEX
198
Mischel, W. & F., 60, 94, 191
misfortunes, 46, 102, 105, 115, 123, 125,
129, 142, 147, 151, 171, 177
Mitchell, J., 191
Monomotapa, kingdom, 123
Montanists, 26
morality, 4, 27, 29, 64, 68, 73, 84, 97,
114, 117–18, 120–33, 134–59, 171–2,
177, 181–2
Moréchand, G., 168, 191
Muhammadanism, 42, 52, 53, 64–71,
86–7, 89, 91–3, 97–9, 116–17,
139;see also Black brotherhoods,
bori, Mecca, Sufi brotherhoods and
zar
Murphy, J., 163, 191
‘mushroom madness’ (New Guinea), 36;
see also drugs
music, possession and, 34, 37, 46, 81–2,
96
Muslim religion, see Muhammadanism
mystical experiences, 16, 19, 24, 23, 31,
33, 40, 45, 54, 56, 63, 147, 153
mysticism, 19–20; see also spiritualism
myth, 174, 184
 
Nadel, S.F., 107, 164, 166, 172–3, 184,
191
Nayars, 102–3, 108–9
neurosis, 161–4, 166–8, 172, 176, 181
New Ethnography, The, 4
New Guinea, 36, 163
Nicolas, J., 92, 191
Nietzsche, 183
Niger (Republic of), 73, 92
Nigeria, 73–4, 92
Niue, 162
Nuba, 107, 164, 172
 
Obeyesekere, G., 76, 191
O’Brien, E., 19–20, 26, 191
occult powers, 16
Oesterreich, T.K., 21–2, 40, 191
Ohlmarks, A., 161
Onwuejeogwu, M., 74, 191
Opler, M.E., 75, 191
oracles, 49, 51; see also diviners
Orent, A., 129, 191
Origen (Christian mystic) 16; see also
Christianity
 
Paques, V., 93, 192
Parkin, D., 117, 192
Pentecostalism, 35, 118; see also
Christianity
Plato, 86
Pokomo, 97–8
politics, 2, 23, 27, 29, 45, 47, 96, 99,
107–8, 116, 122–8, 129–31, 132–3,
134–9, 141–3, 146, 153–4, 156–8,
182; see also authority and Divine
kings
Pondo, 112
‘pop’ culture, 16, 17
possession, spirit:
ancestors and, 120–33, 134; see also
ancestors; change in, 116–
18;central cults, 29, 30, 114–33,
134–59, 169–70, 177; contexts
of, 24, 26, 27–8, 46–7, 59–63,
65–89; definition of, 15–31, 40–
3, 48–9, 57; deprivation and, 36–7,
62, 63–71, 114, 171, 174–5;
function of, 28–9, 178–
9;morality and, 4, 27, 29, 64, 68,
73, 84, 97, 99, 114, 117–18, 120–
33, 134–59, 170, 171–2, 177,
181–2; peripheral cults, 27–31,
59–89, 90–113, 114–16, 119,
127, 128–9, 132, 133, 141–2,
152–9, 166, 167, 169, 170, 171,
175–6, 179–81, 182; social order
and, 23, 29–30, 117–18, 122–33,
145–6, 148–52, 157–8, 169;
status and, 90–109, 114, 116–17,
131, 159, 169–70, 175; theories
of, 1–5, 21–2, 24–6; women and,
26–7, 38, 51, 62–89, 90–4, 97–8,
101, 108, 112–13, 119, 121, 124–5,
127, 141, 147, 148–50, 152, 158,
170, 171, 174; see also
shamanism and trance
power, 2, 22, 23, 28, 29, 62, 89, 103,
114–15, 136, 145, 152, 169, 172, 182
priest, 23, 32, 59, 60, 96, 131, 137, 138,
139, 150, 156, 158; see also shaman
prostitution, 85, 92
protest, 26, 68, 83, 88, 89, 92, 94, 97,
100, 101, 102, 104–5, 107–13, 118,
129, 141, 158, 167, 182–3
Protestantism, 117; see also Christianity
psychiatry, 1, 17, 30, 33, 35, 76, 80,
160–84
psychology, 21, 30, 31, 33, 68, 85, 132,
159, 160–84

INDEX
199
psychosis, 162, 163, 164, 165–8, 176,
181
 
Quakers, 35, 39, 118; see also
Christianity
Quran, The, 68; see also
Muhammadanism
 
Radcliffe-Brown, A.R., 5
Radin, P., 162, 192
Rasmussen, K., 32, 50, 61, 146, 147,
149, 192
rebellions, 28, 100, 114, 122, 126
Red Guards, 145; see also China
Religious theories, 1–2, 3, 4, 5, 19–25
Rhodesia, Southern, 84, 101, 121–2,
126, 131, 139, 141
Rouch, J., 98, 192
Russia, 141, 142; see also Siberia
Rwanda, 100–1
Rycroft, C., 179, 192
 
Saints, Antony, 32 Augustine, 20
Bernard, 52 John (the Baptist), 36
Paul, 60, 81, 82, 83, 89 Peter, 82
Vitus, 36
Samburu, 35–6, 39, 42
Saora, 41, 53
Satan, see Devil
Sartre, J.-P., 105, 192
schizophrenia, 163, 167, 176, 181;see
also psychiatry
Scientology, 17
Scharer, A., 52, 192
séance, 16, 41, 46–7, 76, 123, 143–5,
148–51, 161, 169, 173, 174, 175, 176
Seligman, C.G. & B.Z., 120, 121, 192
sexes, conflict of, 26, 67–78, 85–9, 127
sexual deviants, 54, 78, 90–1, 147, 158–9;
see also homosexuality
sexual relations, 51, 57, 81, 131, 170–
1;see also marriage with spirits
Shack, W., 99, 192
Shaker cult, 39
Shakespeare, W., 66
shamans, 16, 17, 22, 23, 29, 31, 32, 41–2,
45–50, 51–6, 57, 59, 61–2, 63, 83–4,
85, 97, 110, 112, 119, 120–6, 127,
129–31, 134–59, 161–84; see also
mediums, spirit and priests; sex of,
151–2, 158
shamanism, 30, 31, 38, 43–9, 57, 59–63,
120–1, 122, 125, 134–59, 161–84;
definition of, 43–50, 161–2;see also
possession, spirit and trance
Shango cult, 60, 94
Shirokogoroff, S.M., 45, 46, 48, 141,
157, 161, 163, 165, 173, 177, 192
Shona, 84, 121–7; Korekore, 122–5, 126,
136, 157; Zezuru, 122, 125–7, 129,
131, 136, 139, 141, 157, 168
Siberia, 38, 140, 142, 151–2, 157, 162
Siberia (tribes of): Buryat,
161;Chukchee, 44, 54, 61, 151, 161;
Evenk, 140–1, 164; Manchus,
45;Tungus, 17, 38, 41, 43, 44–9, 50,
59, 62, 84, 140–2, 145, 153, 157,
161, 163, 177
sickness, see illness and disease
Sidamo, 51
Silverman, J., 163, 192
sin, 29, 78, 147–51, 176–7; see also
morality and taboo
slaves, 92–3
Slocum, John, 39
Smith, Hélène (medium), 58, 59
social change, 65–6, 88–9, 91–2, 105,
116–18, 121, 126–7, 157
social movements, 26, 101–2, 156–7;see
also cargo cults and messianic
religions
social order, 23, 28, 118–19, 122–32,
146, 149–51, 158, 169; see also law
Socrates, 165
Solomon, 51
Somalia, 42, 65–70, 92, 98
Songhay, 53, 92, 98–9
sorcery, 2–3, 22–3, 64, 103, 104, 105–9,
113, 116, 123; see also witchcraft
Sorko, 98–9
soul-loss, 26, 40–3, 57, 144, 145
South African Bantu, 104, 111
Spencer, P., 35, 193
spirit possession, see possession, spirit
Spiritualism, 15, 16, 17, 21, 35, 50–1,
57–8, 161
Spiro, M., 76, 193
Sri Lanka, see Ceylon
Stanbrook, E., 164, 193
status, social, 90–112, 114, 117, 131,
159, 170, 174–5
Stayt, H., 84, 85, 193
Stewart, K., 57, 193
structuralism, 4
Sudan, 3, 70, 89, 91, 107, 172, 176

INDEX
200
Sufi brotherhoods, 92; see also
Muhammadanism
Sundkler, B., 118, 193
supernatural, the, 15, 22, 29
Swahili, 72, 97–8, 116
Sweden, 62
symbols, 4, 22, 25, 26, 83, 167, 169, 175
 
taboo(s), 38, 129, 143, 147–8, 151
Taita, 73
Tanzania, 72, 87, 97–8
Tarantism, 36–8, 80–3, 84, 89, 90–1
tarantula, 38, 80, 81–3, 90
Taylor, D.M., 75, 193
tension, social, 23, 105–6, 146–52, 177,
181
Thailand, 168
theology, see religious theories
Tikopia, 53
Tonga, 158; Plateau, 88, 127–8;Valley,
88, 127–8
trance, 16, 17, 21, 25, 36–8, 39–42, 144,
170, 175, 176; definition of, 33–40;
see also possession, spirit and
shamanism
Tremearne, A.J.N., 93, 193
Trinidad, 60, 94
Tungus, 17, 38, 41, 43, 44–9, 50, 59,
62, 84, 140–2, 145, 153, 157, 161,
163, 177
Turner, V.W., 155, 193
Tutsi, 100–1; see also Hutu and Twa
Twa, 100; see also Hutu and Tutsi
 
Uganda, 108
Umbanda, 56
urban conditions, 88, 126–7, 129
U.S.A., 39, 106
vagina, 52, 81
Veddas, 120–1, 125, 157
Venda, 84–5
Veith, I., 86, 172, 193
Venezuela, 41
Vietnam, 168
Virgin Mary, 37, 56, 95, 139
Voltaire, 150
voodoo, 41, 51, 53, 55–6, 60, 94–6, 115,
164, 172, 175; see also Haiti
 
Waka cult (Galla), 135–9
Wavell, S., 16, 193
Weber, M., 1
Wesley, J., 18; see also Christianity
Whisson, M.G., 73, 193
Wilken, G.A., 162
Wilson, P.J., 67, 193
witchcraft, 1, 2–3, 22–3, 28, 64, 66, 97,
103, 104, 105–9, 110–13, 150, 155,
166, 178, 180–1; see also sorcery
women, possession and, 26–7, 38, 51,
62–89, 90–4, 97–8, 101, 108, 112–
13, 119, 121, 124–5, 127, 141, 147,
148–50, 152, 158, 170, 171, 174
Worsley, P., 102, 194
 
Yap, P.M., 76, 163, 164, 167, 177, 179,
194
Yaruro, 41
 
Zaehner, R.C., 19, 24, 194
Zambia, 88, 127–8
zar cults, 55, 66–71, 73, 87, 89, 91–2,
175, 176
Zaramo, 87
Zezura, see Shona
Zulu, 112

