Educating Future 
Teachers: Innovative 
Perspectives in 
Professional Experience
Jeana Kriewaldt · Angelina Ambrosetti
Doreen Rorrison · Ros Capeness   Editors
www.ebook3000.com

Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives 
in Professional Experience

Jeana Kriewaldt  •  Angelina Ambrosetti 
Doreen Rorrison  •  Ros Capeness
Editors
Educating Future Teachers: 
Innovative Perspectives in 
Professional Experience
www.ebook3000.com

ISBN 978-981-10-5483-9        ISBN 978-981-10-5484-6  (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017948869
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of 
the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, 
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information 
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology 
now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the 
editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors 
or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims 
in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Cover image credit: Created during Bronwen Wade-Leeuwen’s intercultural workshop, 2016
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721, 
Singapore
Editors
Jeana Kriewaldt
Melbourne Graduate School of Education
The University of Melbourne
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Doreen Rorrison
University of Adelaide 
Adelaide, SA, Australia
Charles Sturt University
Bathurst, NSW, Australia
Angelina Ambrosetti
Central Queensland University
Noosaville, QLD, Australia
Ros Capeness
Queensland College of Teachers
Toowong, QLD, Australia

This book is dedicated to all those who help 
shape, support and educate future 
generations of teachers.
www.ebook3000.com

vii
Foreword
‘Practice’ and ‘Practise’: Tricky Concepts
Reflection on the words ‘practice’ and ‘practise’ immediately surfaces a number of 
queries and issues. Are we concerned with practice – the noun, this practice or that 
practice? Or, perhaps, practise the verb – to practise? Or practice as an adjective, 
practice-teaching (but never practice-learning)? Educating Future Teachers: 
Innovative Perspectives in Professional Experience is all about practice and prac-
tise: the practice of educating preservice teachers in all of its guises; practising 
becoming a teacher with all of its challenges; and engagement in programs and 
activities that bring the theory of teaching and learning into the classroom and what 
it is that teachers and those who support them do in apprenticing those intending to 
become teachers.
Bill Green (2009) in his introduction to Understanding and Researching 
Professional Practice argues the case for more careful work to be undertaken with 
regard to the agreements and solidarities that need to be framed, the new under-
standings that are to be negotiated and articulated and the challenges that confront 
us in scholarly inquiry. He focuses, in particular, on professional practice ‘that is at 
the heart of all these concerns and questions, and yet this is something that is argu-
ably still in need of clarification and elaboration, as is indeed the concept of practice 
itself’ (p. 1), a challenge that is met by this important book.
Practice is theorised by Nicolini (2013) as embodying social transactions, activ-
ity, performance, work and relationships, and importantly he points to issues in 
relation to power, conflict and politics. All of these and more are covered in the four 
sections of the book: ‘Partnership Arrangements and New Learning Spaces’; 
‘Guiding, Supporting and Mentoring’; ‘Enabling Dialogues’; and ‘Reframing 
Professional Practice’.
Contributors are cognisant of the importance of context that governs the norms 
and regulations of the various sites within which professional practice in initial 
teacher education occurs. If we turn for a moment to the concept of ‘practice archi-
tecture’ as proposed by Kemmis et al. (2014), it is possible to unravel the various 

viii
conceptions of what practice/practise looks like, who benefits, who is challenged, 
how have matters come to be as they are, what could be changed and so on. All of 
these matters ‘hang together’ in what Schatzki (2012, p. 16), who has exercised a 
significant influence on Kemmis and associates, sees as ‘practice arrangement 
bundles’.
Developing these arrangements through partnerships is critical to the enterprise 
of educating preservice teachers. The form and function of partnerships varies. 
They may be bureaucratic, designed to meet a set of predetermined requirements 
such as the burgeoning ethos of constructing teaching standards; organisational, to 
do with logistics, for example, the placement of students; democratic, subject to 
negotiation; and participatory, contributing to the development of new and innova-
tive relationships.
Irrespective of the motivation to form partnerships, with regard to initial teacher 
education, an underlying requirement is the manner in which networks that will 
enable such partnerships evolve. Networking embodies ‘the processes through 
which professional knowledge is received and transmitted by means of personal 
relationships … (It) is a social process which occurs both within and between the 
formal structures and boundaries of organisations’ (Anderson-Gough et al. 2006, 
p. 232). For those charged with the responsibility of designing and implementing 
professional experience in schools, it is essential that the emergent plans are founded 
on the kind of network experience that ties the various contexts together, but impor-
tantly does not trammel them such that they result is some kind of cultural 
reproduction.
Schooling embodies a range of cultural formations that are extremely robust and 
enduring and are transmitted from one generation to another through the action of 
its agents. While not making an argument for schooling as a cultural singularity, 
trapped in a time warp, it is nonetheless possible to claim that there are features of 
schooling that persist within the institution of the school and the classroom through 
the roles and behaviours of those who are in residence. Destabilising the cultural 
forms of schooling is a major challenge. Arguably, it is only possible to contribute 
to change at the margins. It is for this reason that the invocation of ‘the third space’, 
discussed so eloquently in this book, is so significant as a means of a more powerful 
and profound interruption.
It is not the intention of this foreword to draw attention to each individual chap-
ter, but I have chosen to spend some time on Chap. 3, as for me, it embodies a criti-
cal dimension that will inform the reading of the subsequent chapters. It moves us 
beyond professional experience to ongoing professional learning, to address issues 
of compliance, conformity and cooperation and the tension between being class-
room ready and classroom concerned, and considers the complexity of creating 
professional learning experiences in the field. Its thrust is to enter the ‘third space’ 
between teacher education in the university sector and practice/practise in schools 
by drawing attention to programs, complexity and identity. The chapter reflects the 
strong arguments made by Rorrison (2005) that the perceived theory-practice gap is 
not only figurative but also literal leading to confusion and uncertainty. In a poi-
gnant reference in the chapter, Williams (2013, p. 128) points to her own dilemmas 
Foreword
www.ebook3000.com

ix
in constructing her identity as she moved from a professional in the classroom to 
becoming an academic in a university. She concluded that:
... the boundary practices of the third space require a delicate balancing act of acknowledg-
ing and respecting the personal and professional identities of all involved…The challenges 
and tensions involved in developing these boundary practices are essential elements of my 
evolving identity and practice as a teacher educator.
Lingard and Renshaw (2010) have been ever alert to the perceived gap between 
the two sectors and argue for teaching as a research-informed and research- 
informing profession and for teachers to have a ‘researcherly disposition’, effec-
tively inhabiting the third space along with their academic colleagues. Of course the 
notion of a ‘third space’ is a metaphoric one and other writers in the book, while not 
specifically invoking the concept, are referencing it as a dimension within which 
new and different relationships can emerge such as in the practice of mentoring.
Finally, Kemmis (2009) insists upon a social view of practice with a demarcation 
between that and the prevailing individualistic stance that overly attends to indi-
vidual behaviours and attributes. He argues that practice is always shaped by ideas, 
meanings and intentions that are socially formed and always involves values, raising 
questions about professional responsibility. He is optimistic that in spite of histori-
cal constraints governing habits of mind, there is always the potential for practice to 
be transformative. The authors of Educating Future Teachers: Innovative 
Perspectives in Professional Experience, drawing as they do upon a wide range of 
theories infused with experience as illustrated by a number of case studies, have 
made an important contribution to our understanding of these tricky concepts, 
‘practice’ and ‘practise’, and have contributed to what I have called ‘a reflexive 
turn’ in evolving these into ‘praxis’ as morally informed action (Groundwater-­
Smith 2017).
References
Anderson-Gough, F., Grey, C., & Robson, K. (2006). Professionals, networking and the networked 
professional. In R. Greenwood, R. Suddaby, & M. McDougald (Eds.), Professional service 
firms. Research in the sociology of organisations (Vol. 24, pp. 231–256). Bingley, UK: Emerald 
Group Publishing.
Green, B. (Ed.). (2009). Understanding and researching professional practice. Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Groundwater-Smith, S. (2017). From practice to praxis: A reflexive turn. London: Routledge.
Kemmis, S. (2009). Understanding professional practice: A synoptic framework. In B.  Green 
(Ed.), Understanding and researching professional practice (pp.  19–38). Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Kemmis, S., Wilkinson, J., Edwards-Groves, C., Hardy, I., Grootenboer, P., & Bristol, L. (2014). 
Changing practices, changing education. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Springer.
The University of Sydney
Susan Groundwater-Smith 
NSW, Australia
Foreword

x
Lingard, B., & Renshaw, P. (2010). Teaching as a research informed and research informing pro-
fession. In A. Campbell & S. Groundwater-Smith (Eds.), Connecting inquiry and professional 
learning in education (pp. 26–39). London: Routledge.
Nicolini, D. (2013). Practice theory, work and organization: An introduction. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press.
Rorrison, D. (2005). Turning a critical lens on the practicum in secondary preservice teacher 
education programs. Paper presented at the Australian Association for Research in Education 
Annual Conference, Parramatta, NSW.
Schatzki, T. (2012). A primer on practices. In J. Higgs, R. Barnett, S. Billett, M. Hutchings, & 
F. Trede (Eds.), Practice based education (pp. 13–26). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense 
Publishers.
Williams, J. (2013). Boundary crossing and working in the third space: Implications for a teacher 
educator’s identity and practice. Studying Teacher Education, 9(2), 118–129.
Foreword
www.ebook3000.com

xi
Acknowledgements
Individuals, schools, institutions, universities and professional associations have 
contributed to this book through different kinds of participation.
This edited volume reflects the core business of the Australian Association for 
Research in Education (AARE) to support Australian educational researchers and to 
facilitate the sharing of their research. With 30 contributors from 20 institutions, the 
authorship represents nearly half of the universities in Australia. The empirical 
research presented in the chapters would have touched the lives of hundreds of pre-
service teachers, scholars, academics and administrators and, through them, thou-
sands of Australian young people. In the end, it is the future of Australian children 
that motivates such an edition, and it is the vision of a better future that sustains the 
project. We thank those who have participated for their enormous good will and for 
sharing our vision.
We salute AARE who provided seed funding towards the initial working confer-
ence and Springer, particularly Nick Melchior, for supporting this project. In the 
final phase of the project, manuscripts were subject to anonymous peer review. We 
are grateful to the scholars who were so generous with their time and guidance.
We also extend our sincere appreciation to Central Queensland University for the 
use of their superb facilities for the initial working conference held in late January 
2016 and the University of Melbourne for supporting the final process through man-
uscript preparation.
Special thanks are extended to our families for all their support and 
understanding.

xiii
Contents
	1	
Introduction: Researching Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience.....................................................................	
1
Doreen Rorrison, Angelina Ambrosetti, Ros Capeness,  
and Jeana Kriewaldt
Part I  Partnership Arrangements and New Learning Spaces
	2	
Exploring the Australian Teacher Education ‘Partnership’  
Policy Landscape: Four Case Studies...................................................	
13
Simone White, Sharon Tindall-Ford, Deborah Heck,  
and Susan Ledger
	3	
Theorising the Third Space of Professional Experience  
Partnerships.............................................................................................	
33
Rachel Forgasz, Deborah Heck, Judy Williams,  
Angelina Ambrosetti, and Linda-Dianne Willis
	4	
Exploring Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher Education  
School-University Partnerships Using the Methodology  
of Metalogue............................................................................................	
49
Linda-Dianne Willis, Helen Grimmett, and Deborah Heck
	5	
Boundary Objects and Brokers in Professional  
Experience: An Activity Theory Analysis.............................................	
71
Tony Loughland and Hoa Thi Mai Nguyen
Part II  Guiding, Supporting and Mentoring
	6	
Distinguishing Spaces of Mentoring: Mentoring as Praxis.................	
91
Debra Talbot
www.ebook3000.com

xiv
	7	
Reconsidering the Communicative Space:  
Learning to Be.........................................................................................	 105
Mia O’Brien, Bronwen Wade-Leeuwen, Fay Hadley,  
Rebecca Andrews, Nick Kelly, and Steven Kickbusch
	8	
Raising the Quality of Praxis in Online Mentoring.............................	 123
Nick Kelly, Steven Kickbusch, Fay Hadley, Rebecca Andrews, 
Bronwen Wade-Leeuwen, and Mia O’Brien
Part III  Enabling Dialogues
	9	
Using a Developmental Assessment Rubric to Revitalise  
Stakeholder Conversations in Professional Experience......................	 137
Trudy-Ann Sweeney and Barbara Nielsen
	10	 Fostering Professional Learning Through Evidence-Informed  
Mentoring Dialogues in School Settings...............................................	 157
Jeana Kriewaldt, Melanie Nash, Sally Windsor, Jane Thornton,  
and Catherine Reid
Part IV  Reframing Professional Practice
	11	 Professional Experience and Project-Based Learning  
as Service Learning.................................................................................	 175
Bill Eckersley, Kellie Tobin, and Sally Windsor
	12	 Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring Four  
Models for Developing ‘Classroom-­Ready’ Teachers..........................	 193
Sharon Tindall-Ford, Susan Ledger, Judy Williams,  
and Angelina Ambrosetti
	13	 Paired Placements in Intensified School and University  
Environments: Advantages and Barriers..............................................	 217
Catherine Lang and Hoa Thi Mai Nguyen
	14	 Educating Future Teachers: Insights, Conclusions  
and Challenges........................................................................................	 235
Angelina Ambrosetti, Ros Capeness, Jeana Kriewaldt,  
and Doreen Rorrison
Index.................................................................................................................	 245
Contents

xv
About the Authors
Angelina  Ambrosetti  is a senior lecturer and head of course in the School of 
Education and the Arts at Central Queensland University. Angelina is an experi-
enced primary school teacher and taught in Queensland primary schools for 16 years 
prior to her move to initial teacher education, where she works with undergraduate 
preservice teachers in pedagogical practices, and designs and coordinates the in-
school professional practice experiences in which they engage. Angelina’s doctoral 
research focused on developing an alternative mentoring model for preservice 
teachers and their mentors during the professional practice experience. Her ongoing 
research interests include mentoring in preservice teacher education, mentoring in 
workplace learning, the professional practice experience in initial teacher education 
and professional development for teachers.
Rebecca  Andrews  is a lecturer at the Department of Educational Studies, 
Macquarie University. Rebecca is an early childhood specialist who worked in the 
early childhood sector as an early intervention adviser and teacher for several years. 
Beginning at Macquarie University in 2001, she now lectures and teaches early 
childhood philosophy and pedagogy as part of the student experience in early pro-
fessional experience units. She has researched and developed programs for diploma-
qualified students integrating into their first professional experience unit as part of a 
bachelor of education (early childhood) degree, within the university environment. 
She is involved in writing professional development courses on mentoring for early 
childhood teacher accreditation.
Ros  Capeness  has a 40-year career in education across a range of teaching, 
research and management roles in schools, universities and government depart-
ments. She joined the Queensland College of Teachers (QCT) in 2010 to manage 
the Queensland Review of Teacher Education and School Induction and the 
Implementation Taskforce tasked with actioning the recommendations from the 
review. Her current role at the QCT is manager of Accreditation and Professional 
Standards. This involves working with Queensland higher education institutions in 
the national accreditation of their initial teacher education programs and the 
www.ebook3000.com

xvi
engagement of registered teachers in the Australian Professional Standards for 
Teachers throughout their professional careers.
Bill Eckersley  is associate professor of teacher education in the College of Arts 
and Education at Victoria University in Melbourne. Bill has had extensive teaching 
experience in Australia and the United States in schools and in undergraduate and 
postgraduate programs in higher education. His research interests focus on post-
graduate student experience; educational partnerships; teaching and learning; and 
organisational culture, social inclusion and educational leadership. He currently 
supervises a number of postgraduate students who are completing their MEd, DEd 
and PhD degrees. He has led, contributed to and evaluated a range of successful 
internal and external research projects with industry links to organisations such as 
the Victorian Institute of Teaching, Teaching Australia and the Victorian Department 
of Education and Training.
Rachel Forgasz  is a teacher educator and researcher in the Faculty of Education at 
Monash University where she is also a fellow of the Monash Education Academy. 
All of Rachel’s research centres on the pedagogy of teacher education. She pub-
lishes in the fields of mentor professional learning, professional experience learn-
ing, embodied pedagogies and self-study of teacher education practices. Rachel has 
also designed, implemented and written about a range of innovative professional 
experience models. These include the community/cohort model for early profes-
sional experiences, the mentee/mentor professional learning model and a profes-
sional association partnership model for performing arts teacher education.
Helen Grimmett  is a lecturer in the Faculty of Education at Monash University. 
She is an experienced generalist primary teacher and music specialist and taught in 
a variety of suburban, rural, government and independent primary schools before 
becoming a teacher educator in 2013. Helen’s 2014 book, The Practice of Teachers’ 
Professional Development: A Cultural-Historical Approach, is based on her doc-
toral research. Her current research interests include creating innovative approaches 
to professional experience for preservice teachers, supporting future primary music 
specialist teachers and understanding the use of children’s voice in informing the 
planning of school transition programs.
Fay Hadley  is a senior lecturer and director of initial teacher education programs 
at Macquarie University. Fay’s expertise is in leadership, mentoring, professional 
experience and working with diverse families. She has been researching in these 
areas for the past 10 years. In 2008, she was awarded the Early Childhood Australia 
Doctoral Thesis Award for her PhD which investigated the relationships between 
families and early childhood staff in long day-care settings. Prior to her PhD, Fay 
was a teacher and/or director in long day-care centres in NSW and the ACT. Since 
2004, she has been a member of the editorial subcommittee of the Australian 
Journal of Early Childhood and is also currently the chair of the publications com-
mittee for Early Childhood Australia.
About the Authors

xvii
Deborah Heck  is an associate professor and the portfolio leader of postgraduate 
and research higher degree programs in the School of Education at the University of 
the Sunshine Coast. She is also the program coordinator for graduate certificate in 
education, master of education and master of education by research. Debbie has an 
interest in research that explores participation and change in educational contexts 
and has been involved in a number of projects that have explored qualitative 
approaches to research. She has a keen interest in engaging with Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander teachers in schools as part of her focus on participation and 
change. In conjunction with Independent Schools Queensland, Debbie is leading 
research on the Sunshine Coast that explores the development of partnerships 
between universities, schools and peak bodies that support the development of qual-
ity teachers. This work makes a contribution towards the development of initial 
teacher education programs.
Nick Kelly  is a senior research fellow at Queensland University of Technology and 
an adjunct senior research fellow at the University of Southern Queensland. His 
recent work has investigated online communities of teachers, beginning teacher 
support, higher education learning analytics and the cognition of creativity. He 
holds a PhD in design computing from the University of Sydney, and his academic 
practice is founded upon applying design theory to educational technology and to 
supporting teachers. He is the author of over 60 scholarly works including the recent 
book Online Learning Networks for Preservice and Early Career Teachers. His 
research website is www.nickkellyresearch.com
Steven Kickbusch  has worked extensively as an educator, facilitator and educa-
tional designer across all levels of the education industry, the government sector and 
within corporate environments. In his role as a learning designer with Queensland 
University of Technology, he oversees the design, development and implementation 
of engaging student-focused education experiences. His most recent work is within 
the national program: Enhancing the Training of Mathematics and Science Teachers 
and focused on improving the quality of secondary STEM teachers through inquiry-
based learning. Steven is a founding co-leader of the TeachConnect initiative and 
has been instrumental in establishing relationships, overseeing development, man-
aging operational priorities and coordinating the uptake of TeachConnect.
Jeana Kriewaldt  is a senior lecturer in the Graduate School of Education at the 
University of Melbourne. She is also the senior leader of clinical teaching practice, 
overseeing work-integrated learning programs across the graduate school. Her 
research focuses on teaching standards, teacher learning and their interrelation-
ships. She is currently investigating the impact of learners’ perspectives in deepen-
ing the quality of teacher education programs and the potential of clinical reasoning 
and reflective practice in educating in the professions. Additionally, Jeana leads 
research in the field of geography education and publishes in this area.
About the Authors
www.ebook3000.com

xviii
Catherine Lang  is an associate professor and the director of initial teacher educa-
tion programs in the School of Education, La Trobe University. Her research focus 
on the under-representation of women in ICT led to the ARC-funded Linkage proj-
ect: Digital Divas: developing and implementing a curriculum initiative for second-
ary school girls (see www.digitaldivasclub.org). Currently, her focus is on teacher 
and preservice teacher technical self-efficacy (the STEM agenda), as well as preser-
vice teacher professional experience models and the development of intercultural 
competencies through international professional placements.
Susan Ledger  is an educator who has a passion for connecting people, places and 
projects. She has had a range of leadership roles in schools and higher education and 
is currently associate dean – Engagement and School Partnerships in the School of 
Education at Murdoch University. She is the deputy chair of the newly formed 
Network of Associate Deans of Professional Experience. Susan investigates educa-
tional policies, practices and issues related to teaching, preparing to teach in diverse 
contexts (international, rural, remote and virtual schooling), and their impact on 
schooling and initial teacher education. Susan is global and collaborative in her 
approach to research and engagement activities. She is currently exploring how 
rural and international fields of study complement and compete with each other and 
the importance of global competencies within these contexts.
Tony Loughland  is a senior lecturer in the School of Education at the University 
of New South Wales. Prior to this appointment, he was the director of professional 
experience in the Faculty of Education and Social Work at the University of Sydney. 
He is currently working on a classroom observation instrument focused on teacher 
adaptive practices that take advantage of opportunities within lessons to promote 
creative and critical thinking in students.
Melanie Nash  is a lecturer in the curriculum and pedagogy area at the Melbourne 
Graduate School of Education at the University of Melbourne. She is responsible 
for teaching both postgraduate and undergraduate students in the subjects physical 
education, sport coaching and sport sociology. Her research interests include the 
development of professional identity and pedagogic practice in learning communi-
ties, learning in alternative environments and the promotion of interdisciplinary 
learning through sport and physical activity.
Hoa Thi Mai Nguyen  is a lecturer in teacher professional learning in the School 
of Education at the University of New South Wales and specialises in teacher learn-
ing, mentoring, TESOL and sociocultural theory. Through her work, she advocates 
a professional experience reform based on the notions of collaboration, reciprocity 
and critical reflection. She has experience in teaching and training preservice and 
in-service teachers in Asia and Australia. She enjoys working with teachers, in their 
role as mentors to student teachers and early career teachers, and has a strong com-
mitment and passion to develop teachers’ professional learning. She is currently 
holding an honorary research position at the University of Sydney.
About the Authors

xix
Barbara Nielsen  was a classroom teacher for 20 years and a primary school prin-
cipal before becoming interested in researching learning difficulties in literacy. She 
was appointed the lecturer in English curriculum studies at Flinders University 
while completing the writing up of this PhD research. Because of her rich experi-
ences in schools, she was subsequently also appointed as coordinator of profes-
sional experience for all preservice teachers at Flinders University, a position she 
has held for 5 years. In this position, she has extended her research interests to 
explore best practices in professional experience for preservice teachers.
Mia O’Brien  is a senior lecturer and coordinator of initial teacher education in the 
School of Education and Professional Studies at Griffith University. She has led two 
ARC-funded research projects and two OLT-funded teaching and learning projects, 
which collectively focus on understanding the development of pedagogical exper-
tise in the context of innovative teaching and learning practices. In her current role, 
she leads the design, implementation and research of preservice teacher learning 
through professional experience placements within undergraduate and postgraduate 
initial teacher education programs.
Catherine Reid  is a lecturer in language and literacy education in the Melbourne 
Graduate School of Education (MGSE), the University of Melbourne. Catherine 
teaches in a number of preservice and postgraduate teacher education programs, and 
in one of her former roles, she was responsible for the oversight and coordination of 
the secondary professional practice programs. Her research interests include school-
university partnerships, models of evidence-based teaching and learning and litera-
cies across the curriculum. Prior to joining MGSE, Catherine taught in a number of 
secondary schools across metropolitan Melbourne.
Doreen Rorrison  is a critical theorist with an eclectic mix of educational experi-
ences. She held a range of teaching and leadership roles in both public and private 
sector secondary and R-12 schools from 1974 to 1999 and taught at Flinders 
University and what was soon be known as the University of South Australia in the 
1980s and again in the early 2000s. In the 1990s, she also worked in educational 
radio and completed a master of teaching at Flinders University. From 2002 to 2010, 
Doreen lectured and coordinated a range of programs at Charles Darwin University 
and Charles Sturt University as well as completed her doctor of philosophy, spend-
ing a year at a campus in Ontario, Canada, and for 6  months as chair at the 
Department of Didactic Sciences and Early Childhood Education, at the Stockholm 
Institute of Education. More recently, as a retired academic, Doreen has worked as 
a sessional lecturer at Curtin University, is a visiting scholar at the University of 
Adelaide and is an adjunct of Charles Sturt University.
Trudy-Ann Sweeney  is a senior lecturer and associate dean (teaching and learn-
ing) in the School of Education at Flinders University in South Australia. Her teach-
ing and research interests include technology-enhanced assessment and the use of 
educational technologies to transform student-learning outcomes. Through this 
About the Authors
www.ebook3000.com

xx
work, she aims to support preservice teachers to connect research, policy and 
evidence-­based practice. Prior to her move to initial teacher education, Trudy 
worked for the Department of Education and Children’s Services for 17 years as a 
primary school teacher, ICT coordinator, assistant principal (teaching and learning) 
and educational consultant, and leadership and ICT project coordinator at the 
Technology School of the Future. Trudy’s doctoral research focused on understand-
ing teachers’ work in a context of global and local school reform.
Debra Talbot  is a lecturer in education and director of professional experience and 
professional learning, Sydney School of Education and Social Work, University of 
Sydney. She has more than 20 years’ experience as a classroom teacher, head of 
department in government and independent sectors and professional learning con-
sultant. Debra’s current research inquiry focuses on the simple and complex forma-
tions for teacher education arising out of universities and schools entering into 
‘partnerships’. It seeks to understand how support for professional learning in com-
bination with support for professional experience placements has impacted on 
developing the effectiveness of teachers to improve learning outcomes for their 
teacher colleagues and their students.
Jane Thornton  is a leading teacher and school-based teacher educator. In her role 
as teaching fellow at Koonung Secondary College, she guides and supports preser-
vice teachers and their mentors in a corps of local partnership schools, while teach-
ing physical education and psychology. Jane’s focus in her higher degree study is 
mentoring – clinical teaching at the University of Melbourne. Leading a collabora-
tion with university-based teacher educators, mentors and preservice teachers, Jane 
has developed a digital tool to capture and give evidence-based, instant feedback 
called the Teaching Tracker Tool. The Teaching Academy for Professional Practice 
group continues to develop and refine the tool and to research its impact.
Sharon Tindall-Ford  is a senior lecturer in the School of Education, Faculty of 
Social Science, University of Wollongong. Sharon is an experienced teacher who 
has worked in public and independent school sectors in South Australia, Queensland 
and New South Wales. She teaches in the areas of educational psychology and pre-
service teachers’ professional learning. Her research focus includes preservice 
teachers’ nonacademic qualities required for teaching and supervising teachers’ 
mentoring and professional judgements of preservice teachers’ capabilities on 
practicum.
Kellie Tobin  is a lecturer and course director in the Faculty of Arts and Education 
at Deakin University. Her current doctoral research is investigating the challenge of 
creating and maintaining enduring school-university partnerships in initial teacher 
education with a focus on preparing preservice teachers to be classroom ready. 
Kellie’s current academic role and previous work as a teacher in secondary schools 
has focused on social justice education. She has worked across various education 
fields to build access and equity for students, building strong partnerships in initial 
About the Authors

xxi
teacher education. Kellie is a chief investigator on an HEPPP-funded research proj-
ect investigating strategies to improve access to higher education. She teaches in the 
areas of middle years education, teaching Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander stu-
dents literacy and numeracy.
Bronwen Wade-Leeuwen  is lecturer and senior research officer in the Department 
of Educational Studies at Macquarie University. She specialises in creative arts edu-
cation, spatial reasoning, drama and visual arts research and teaching. Co-founder 
of STEAM Education Australia, she has an international reputation for developing 
intercultural workshops connected to professional practice experience for teachers. 
Her publications focus on how to foster creativity in teacher education programs 
based on ACARA (2014) cross-cultural priorities including sustainability, deepen-
ing relationships with Asia and working collaboratively with Australian Indigenous 
cultures. Her ongoing research interests include fostering critical and creative think-
ing skills (CCT), reflective practice and mentoring innovative perspectives in pre-
service teacher education.
Simone White  is the chair of teacher education in the Faculty of Education at 
Monash University and the immediate past president of the Australian Teacher 
Education Association (ATEA). Simone’s publications, research and teaching are 
focused on the key question of how to best prepare teachers and leaders for diverse 
communities. Her current research areas focus on teacher education policy and 
research, professional experience and building and maintaining university-school/
community partnerships. Through this work, she aims to connect research, policy 
and practice in ways that bring school and university teacher educators together and 
break down traditional borders between academics, policymakers, communities and 
practitioners.
Judy Williams  is a senior lecturer in the Faculty of Education, Monash University. 
She is an experienced primary teacher and teaches in primary undergraduate and 
graduate courses in the areas of professional studies and practice, supervising 
research projects. She is also course leader for the primary programs in the faculty. 
Judy’s research interests include teacher and teacher educator professional learning, 
teacher identity, professional experience  – including international professional 
experience – and self-study of teacher education practices. This research helps to 
inform practitioners and policymakers on the professional learning needs of gradu-
ate and experienced teachers and provides new perspectives on the work of teacher 
educators.
Linda-Dianne Willis  is director of the master of teaching (primary) program and 
lecturer of curriculum studies in the School of Education at the University of 
Queensland. Linda possesses breadth and depth of knowledge and experience in 
curriculum and pedagogy gained from working in universities and previously in 
public and independent schools. Linda’s research interests include initial teacher 
education, school-university partnerships, parent engagement, coteaching, civics 
About the Authors
www.ebook3000.com

xxii
and citizenship education, literacy education, inquiry curriculum and multiliteracies 
pedagogy. Her research is underpinned by sociological concepts and theories for 
research and analysis such as cogenerativity, ethics of responsibility, dialogic 
exchange, agentive pedagogy and communities of practice. Linda’s research aims to 
bridge traditional theory-practice divides by exploring how effective sustainable 
educational partnerships that include universities, schools, parents, researchers, 
teacher educators and policymakers may be realised.
Sally Windsor  is a senior lecturer in the Department of Pedagogical, Curricular 
and Professional Studies at the University of Gothenburg, Sweden. She is currently 
teaching in the education for sustainable development area and researching school 
sustainability initiatives. Previously working in the Graduate School of Education at 
the University of Melbourne, Sally was the professional practice coordinator and 
taught educational sociology, psychology, humanities and Indigenous education. 
Her research focused on practicum experiences as part of a team investigating col-
laborative professional conversations and the use of descriptive observation tools in 
preservice teacher professional experience. Before becoming a teacher educator, 
Sally taught geography, humanities, sustainability and English with a focus on the 
middle years in both Australia and Sweden. Her doctoral research looked at federal 
policy and subsequent initiatives for teacher recruitment and preparation that spe-
cifically claimed to address the need for higher teacher quality in ‘disadvantaged’ 
schools.
About the Authors

1
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_1
Chapter 1
Introduction: Researching Innovative 
Perspectives in Professional Experience
Doreen Rorrison, Angelina Ambrosetti, Ros Capeness, and Jeana Kriewaldt
Abstract  Professional experience in initial teacher education has always been val-
ued, though there is limited agreement in Australia around the structure and knowl-
edge base. Teacher educators from a wide range of institutions and jurisdictions 
worked together at a conference in early 2016 to share, critique and celebrate their 
different perspectives and innovative programs. The result is this edited volume of 
14 chapters, representing the work of 30 authors from 18 different Australian uni-
versities, a secondary school and a state regulatory authority. Through collabora-
tions across borders and within the field, a more nuanced understanding of the 
varied elements of professional experience, including new and renewed knowledge, 
has been recorded. This chapter provides the background, aims, rationale and syn-
opsis of sections and chapters in the volume.
D. Rorrison (*) 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia 
Charles Sturt University, Bathurst, NSW, Australia
e-mail: drorrison@csu.edu.au 
A. Ambrosetti 
Central Queensland University, Noosaville, QLD, Australia 
R. Capeness 
Queensland College of Teachers, Toowong, QLD, Australia 
J. Kriewaldt 
Melbourne Graduate School of Education, The University of Melbourne,  
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
www.ebook3000.com

2
Background
Changes in policy directives in teacher education and, in particular, professional 
experience have been frequent, often political and framed differently across 
Australian teacher education programs. Since the 1970s teacher education has been 
the focus of intense public scrutiny in Australia, with more than 100 reviews con-
ducted into a variety of program components (Mayer et al., 2015). Consistent with 
this sustained ‘improvement agenda’, in February 2015 the Commonwealth 
Government released another report, Action Now: Classroom Ready Teachers, 
developed by the Teacher Education Ministerial Advisory Group (TEMAG); this 
was followed by the government’s response to the report. The TEMAG (2015) 
report made 38 recommendations designed to improve initial teacher education in 
Australia and better prepare teachers for the profession. The professional experi-
ence component of teacher preparation featured prominently in these 
recommendations.
These recent policy directions in teacher education, and teacher educators’ 
responses to each wave of reviews, proposals, funding offers and incentives, inform 
this edited volume. Our focus is on innovative perspectives in professional experi-
ence. The promising accounts outlined here of initiatives that enhance professional 
experience make a contribution to the field to better inform scholars, teacher educa-
tors and policy makers. It is our intention that the narratives, comparisons, tentative 
theories, arrangements and arguments in the chapters will provide evidence of 
robust, broad and contemporary perspectives of professional experience practice. 
Through this opportunity to collaborate, problematise and critique, both established 
and emerging researchers across a range of institutions have uncovered new under-
standings of their own and others’ perspectives.
The origin of this volume was an initiative that was funded by an Australian 
Association for Research in Education (AARE) competitive grant awarded to the 
Teacher Education Research and Innovation (TERI) Special Interest Group in 2015. 
Teacher educators throughout Australia and New Zealand were invited to share their 
innovative professional experience practices and perspectives. Participants were 
selected and grouped through themes that emerged in their application narratives, 
and they were invited to attend a working conference at Central Queensland 
University, Noosa Campus, on 27–28 January 2016. After sharing their ‘stories’ and 
research in progress, writing teams with a similar focus or supporting interests were 
arranged. Their distinct and unifying ideas were then consolidated through open and 
critical discussion convened by the conference leaders, resulting in a framework for 
this edited volume. Through the alignment of disparate university initiatives and by 
bringing together teacher educators across all levels of experience, a diverse range 
of current perspectives are shared and analysed in this volume. As Allard, Mayer, 
and Moss (2014) assert, sharing experiences is critical if ‘teacher educators [are] to 
reinsert themselves as key players in the debates around quality beginning teaching, 
rather than being viewed as a source of the problem’ (p. 425).
D. Rorrison et al.

3
Aims
Professional experience (previously and elsewhere known as practicum, student 
teaching, practice teaching, internship, teaching rounds, clinical practice, work-­
integrated learning, field experience and school-based experience) remains a foun-
dational component of all preservice teacher education programs and is one that is 
highly valued by preservice teachers, educators, administrators and schools alike 
(Le Cornu, 2016). Although the nomenclature carries with it a ‘host of assumptions 
and expectations about the place, purpose and nature of practice within initial 
teacher education programs’ (White & Forgasz, 2016, p. 231), to the uncritical eye, 
the professional experience component of most preservice teacher education pro-
grams in Australia appears to be similar in design, requirements and structure 
(Goodnough, Galway, Badenhorst, & Kelly, 2013; Mattsson, Eilertsen, & Rorrison, 
2011). However, as co-convenors of the Australian Association for Research in 
Education (AARE) special interest group focusing on ‘teacher education research 
and innovation’ (TERI), we discovered through reviewing hundreds of conference 
presentation submissions from 2012 to 2015 that there was evidence of many inno-
vative ideas embedded within professional experience. The majority had been 
developed to meet specific challenges and contexts but, due to their local nature and 
reliance on the goodwill and commitment of participants, were seldom shared or 
published. We contend that the process of collaboratively negotiating these differ-
ences in innovation and perspective, rather than managing mandated policies and 
imposed frameworks, is the key to ensuring future generations of teachers develop 
the skills and knowledge that will be needed to effectively manage teaching and 
learning in their local contexts during times of rapid policy and social change. 
Edwards, Tsui, and Stimpson (2009) remind us of the limited agreement of concep-
tual frameworks for professional experience and note that ‘until recently very little 
of the research on school university partnership has utilised explicit theoretical 
frameworks’ (p. 9), while White (2016) also reflects our view of the importance of 
context observing that it is important:
to align strategically smaller-scale studies that when analysed and viewed together will 
highlight common themes, as well as shine a light on diversity and context relevant matters. 
(p. vi)
Most of the chapters in this edition were written collaboratively to present a 
multilayered understanding of a particular perspective or theme across a range of 
settings, and most will additionally present clear examples from current practice. 
Established and experienced lead authors guided and supported the writing process. 
As editors we challenged authors to position each chapter within the extant litera-
ture as well as theorise and deeply critique their contribution to both interrogate and 
celebrate current practices to encourage further innovation. The diverse back-
grounds and expertise of the collaborating authors is a distinctive feature of this 
volume, and the blend of early career and experienced writers and researchers pro-
motes a balance between the new and the reimagined, which as editors we have 
nurtured and supported.
1  Introduction: Researching Innovative Perspectives in Professional Experience
www.ebook3000.com

4
This edition makes a significant contribution by going beyond describing initia-
tives to reconceptualise theoretical frameworks. It also aligns the locally focussed 
research to build and develop theories that have wider relevance, illuminating con-
cepts beyond a sum of the individual innovations. Furthermore, this volume is 
informed by collaborative international research in Malta, Sweden, Australia and 
the Netherlands that also expands boundaries to reconceptualise the place of context 
in school-based practice for preservice teachers. As our international colleagues 
suggest:
[W]e are aware that practicum arrangements are developed incorporating several models 
and consequently we are suggesting a move from a descriptive view based on ‘models’ to a 
process-oriented view based on ‘arrangements’. We see this as a natural evolution, as what 
is actually happening in different contexts is that those responsible for professional learning 
are creating their own arrangements to meet the needs or constraints of their context. 
(Rorrison, Hennissen, Bonanno, & Männikkö Barbutiu, 2016, p. 125)
It appears to us that a more nuanced view of professional experience is impli-
cated. The focus is changing through partnerships, local initiatives, government 
directives and most importantly a renewed call to open the debates around teaching 
and teacher education and share more comprehensively our experiences. The fol-
lowing chapters have provided broad evidence of successful and disparate 
innovations.
Positioning
In the introduction of the thirteenth volume in the Springer series, Professional 
Learning and Development in Schools and Higher Education, edited by Christopher 
Day and Judyth Sachs, the volume editors call for a shift in paradigms of learning 
and teaching and new ways of confronting the many challenges (Lee & Day, 2016, 
p. 12). Bringing together many of the leaders in the field of research into teacher 
education across Western and Chinese perspectives, they stress the difficulties and 
complexities of harnessing and explaining current reforms and initiatives due to the 
sheer enormity and diversity of contextual influences, as well as the limited atten-
tion given to an agreed ‘knowledge base of teaching and teacher education’ (p. 12). 
Despite an analysis of rigorous research into the changes and initiatives led by both 
teacher educators and governments across the globe, these authors still find that ‘no 
one approach or combination of approaches appears to satisfy the aspirations for 
high-quality teachers and teaching’ (p. 13) that is clearly expected by school com-
munities and governments. Indeed they call for new mindsets and present teacher 
educators with the challenge to equip teachers with ‘qualities, values, knowledge 
and practical classroom skills’ (p. 13) to respond to all circumstances.
Zeichner, Payne, and Brayko (2015) also point out the labour intensity of cross-­
institutional collaborations and the extant international literature (see, for example 
Hennissen, Beckers, & Moerkerke, 2017) makes it clear that there cannot be a one-­
size-­fits-all approach to teacher education, just as there cannot be a uniform approach 
D. Rorrison et al.

5
to classroom teaching. Issues of equity and justice and diversity and humanness are 
always going to confound those who try to enforce rigorously controlled rules and 
regulations (and accreditation requirements). It is important for governments to 
have confidence in the quality and consistency of teacher preparation and graduates 
across a range of different programs, but local knowledge, conditions and contexts 
should still be seen as the drivers for effective practice.
Through clear presentation of different perspectives and programs, we demon-
strate how commitment, research and analysis can transform action and ultimately 
help teachers teach more effectively. We wish to unsettle and contradict the neolib-
eral focus on mandate and sameness through the potential of collaborative action to 
interrogate the field and to inform and strengthen the political debates. In Chap. 4 
the authors write, ‘[f]rom our conversation, we developed solidarity and gained 
reassurance that we were not alone in striving for innovation in professional experi-
ence’, and as editors we are committed to expanding the knowledge base of teacher 
education referred to by Lee and Day (above) in our quest to open up the field. We 
also provide local evidence to conclusively contradict the focus on testing and eco-
nomic imperatives (Lingard, Martino, & Rezai-Rashti, 2013, p. 553) that has gained 
strength both here and overseas. We heed Lingard and colleagues’ warning to cir-
cumvent the ‘strengthening of technologies of governance in education … and a 
weakening of political debates’ through providing evidence of how to avoid the 
inherent dangers of policy borrowing from the United States and the United 
Kingdom (Lingard, 2010). We offer a broad range of Australian research and inno-
vation to support our claim.
Right from the start, we avoided stereotypes, starting our working conference 
with Moku-chi (ink-splash with energy) presented by its designer Bronwen Wade-­
Leeuwen (2015). Through using particular strategies from the ‘Chinese Four 
Treasures: stone, ink-stick, water and paper’ (Wade-Leeuwen, private conversation, 
January 27, 2016), the group was provided with opportunities to open different 
dimensional levels of creative thinking and collaborative action, resulting in a col-
lective vision of what the working conference might achieve. The cover photo for 
this edition presents one of the unique creations depicting the release of inhibitions 
and the garnering of creativity.
Synopsis of Chapters
This edited volume is divided into four sections based on the themes that first 
evolved at the working conference. Although each chapter is constructed to stand 
alone, concepts are aligned and developed in the chapters within each section. Due 
to the vicissitudes in ideas over the 18 months of development, and the expansion of 
initial findings through deep analysis in the iterative writing phases, the section 
headings could now be considered as an orienting feature rather than a descriptive 
title.
1  Introduction: Researching Innovative Perspectives in Professional Experience
www.ebook3000.com

6
Chapter 2 is authored by Simone White, Sharon Tindall-Ford, Debbie Heck and 
Susan Ledger – a mix of experienced and early career researchers from four differ-
ent universities. The chapter focuses on school–university partnerships in Australia 
and positions the current situation within the policy changes over the last 20 years. 
Using illustrative cases from four different settings, the authors analyse the oppor-
tunities and challenges for future partnerships and provide recommendations for 
teacher educators working to sustain such partnerships. They identify that a 
­reculturation of the ways schools and universities view partnerships is necessary 
and stress the importance of allowing for flexibility and diversity of partnership 
types if true equity is to be achieved.
Chapter 3 critiques the spatial metaphor of ‘third space’ and its use and misuse 
in the extant literature. Through a thorough and scholarly analysis of the seminal 
works of Bhabba and Soja, and contrasting the quite different view of Gutiérrez, 
who challenges the policy neutralising of the transformative potential of the ‘third 
space’, the authors unravel the genealogy of the concept beyond its relationship to 
Zeichner’s hybrid third space. From four different institutions and across two state 
jurisdictions, practicing teacher educators Debbie Heck, Judy Williams, Angelina 
Ambrosetti and Linda Willis are led by Rachel Forgasz to review the literature 
around ‘third space theory’ and how it has been used to frame partnership models, 
explore preservice teacher identity and conceptualise tensions in the theory–prac-
tice ‘gap’.
Chapter 4 introduces the term ‘cogenerativity’ to reimagine and realise partner-
ships that provide innovative professional experience for preservice teachers. 
Established scholars Linda Willis, Helen Grimmett and Debbie Heck explore three 
Australian preservice teacher education partnership projects through the use of 
‘metalogue’, which they offer as a unique research methodology for education 
researchers. In their conversation about the notion of cogenerativity, they model 
how the method can be used, analysing cogenerativity as it is reflected in the litera-
ture and in their own projects. Issues of power sharing, knowledge pooling and deep 
negotiation characterise the concept, and the authors conclude that cogenerativity 
may be useful for framing the critical conversations that are important in initial 
teacher education as well as managing the evolving nature of the field.
In Chap. 5 Tony Loughland and early career researcher Hoa Thi Mai Nguyen 
discuss how cultural–historical activity theory (CHAT) (Engeström, 1987) can 
intersect with Wenger’s (1998) communities of practice theories to provide a gen-
erative theoretical lens and conceptual framework for professional experience. 
Through identifying university taught teaching methods/strategies and the reflective 
practitioner approach as boundary objects, the authors argue most cogently that 
these ‘artefacts’ are then ‘brokered’ by the university mentor to facilitate boundary 
crossing for preservice teachers. Implicit in the spaces that are then created is a 
coordination and alignment of perspectives that supports the collaborative partner-
ships that are sought between schools and universities. By recognising the entities 
of the two different communities and the important roles of boundary objects and 
brokers, other teacher educators can apply these concepts to inform the develop-
ment of their collaborative professional experience programs.
D. Rorrison et al.

7
In Chap. 6, Distinguishing Spaces of Mentoring: Mentoring as Praxis, Debra 
Talbot continues the theme of ‘spaces’ in her concern with the spaces in which 
mentoring might occur. She develops a strong and challenging argument to justify 
why she believes it is necessary to the interests of ongoing teacher education, and 
particularly initial teacher education, to trouble the existing paradigm and enact-
ments of mentoring that continue in many institutions. Through consideration of the 
activities of those involved in mentoring relationships, she aims to contribute to a 
conceptualisation of mentoring as praxis that is transformative and mutually educa-
tive. She discusses the mentor/mentee relationship as reciprocal and fluid and refers 
to ‘communities of practice’ (Hord & Sommers, 2008; Lave & Wenger, 1991) as 
she positions her claims. Traversing the literature on mentoring in teacher educa-
tion, the author provides evidence of a contested and under-theorised terrain, popu-
lated by the great thinkers in our critical–theoretical history (the likes of Homer, 
Bakhtin, Marx, Aristotle and Voloshinov) as well as more recent major Australian 
influences (the likes of Kemmis, Lave and Wenger) with emerging themes of col-
laboration and dialectical spaces.
Chapter 7, Reconsidering the Communicative Space: Learning to Be, offers 
three ‘vignettes’ as stories to illustrate how professional experience offers opportu-
nities for preservice teachers to ‘learn to be’. Mia O’Brien, Bronwen Wade-­
Leeuwen, Fay Hadley, Rebecca Andrews, Nick Kelly and Steven Kickbusch ask the 
reader to review their perceptions of mentoring and being mentored as an iterative 
process where identity is continually being renegotiated through praxis. Regulatory 
bodies tend to focus on ‘what we know’ and ‘how we act’, yet this chapter provides 
a theoretical lens to help us understand how we ‘become’ as a teacher. The develop-
ment of creativity, the diversity of preservice teacher background and the impor-
tance of disposition are presented as ‘spaces’ for revisioning how teacher identity 
can develop.
Chapter 8, Raising the Quality of Praxis in Online Mentoring, authored by Nick 
Kelly, Steven Kickbusch, Fay Hadley, Rebecca Andrews, Bronwen Wade-Leeuwen 
and Mia O’Brien provides a deep interrogation of the quality of the praxis of men-
toring, particularly online mentoring, drawing on Habermas’s conception of praxis 
and Freire’s critical theoretical lens. Acknowledging the role of ‘systems’ in organ-
ising the knowledge of preservice teachers during professional experience, the 
authors also align with Hudson’s (2004) ‘five-factor model’ of mentoring. They 
demonstrate how the varied elements of mentoring can be enriched through asking 
the critical questions of moral and ethical practice. Although the TeachConnect 
online mentoring system has not yet achieved what the designers had hoped for, the 
opportunity to share their aspirations, particularly as a way to bridge the gap between 
teachers and designers, has been critical to the further development of their project. 
This chapter is an example of how the opportunities afforded to the participants at 
the Noosa workshop enabled them to engage with a range of ideas from participants 
with quite different backgrounds.
Chapter 9, Using a Developmental Assessment Rubric to Revitalise Stakeholder 
Conversations in Professional Experience, is the first chapter in the section Enabling 
Dialogues where innovations come together to provide evidence of the variety and 
1  Introduction: Researching Innovative Perspectives in Professional Experience
www.ebook3000.com

8
quality of responses across Australia around the important conversations during 
professional experience. Trudy-Ann Sweeney and Barbara Nielsen report on an 
assessment rubric they have designed and trialled in Flinders University, which they 
compare rigorously with a rubric used at Malmo University in Sweden (Jonsson & 
Mattsson, 2011; Jonsson & Svingby, 2007; Panadero & Jonsson, 2013). Through 
adding the formative levels of ‘novice’ and ‘emerging’ to the graduate level of the 
Australian Professional Standards for Teachers (APST) in an assessment rubric for 
all mentors to use during professional experience, there is evidence of transformed 
processes, understandings and outcomes. With findings of more professional con-
versations between preservice teachers and their mentors, better relationships with 
partnership schools due to the clarity of the assessment tool, and enhanced involve-
ment and thus increasing agency of preservice teachers, the use of the rubric has 
recently been extended to all teacher preparation courses in the authors’ School of 
Education.
Chapter 10, Fostering Professional Learning Through Evidence-Informed 
Mentoring Dialogues in School Settings, continues the theme of dialogues as well 
as stressing the importance of the mentoring role. Jeana Kriewaldt, Melanie Nash, 
Sally Windsor, Catherine Reid and Jane Thornton examine how the use of a descrip-
tive observation tool enhances mentor teachers’ post-lesson conversations with pre-
service teachers. Relational agency is used as a conceptual framework particularly 
related to reflective phases of the process. Through an interpretivist case study 
approach, the authors offer strong evidence to support their findings through mul-
tiple extracts from participants and deep analysis of their data. Although acknowl-
edging that perspective shapes what one notices, and that in turn depends on what 
we turn our attention to, the Teacher Tracking Tool is providing openings for more 
open and focussed learning conversations and has fostered an inquiring and collab-
orative stance.
Chapter 11, Professional Experience and Project-Based Learning as Service 
Learning, is the first in the final section Reframing Professional Practice. Teacher 
educators Kellie Tobin and Sally Windsor are led by experienced scholar and 
researcher Bill Eckersley to discuss well-established projects at three different 
Victorian universities that focus on ‘communities of practice’ in regions of low 
socio-economic status. Although the projects are quite distinct – one involves teach-
ing in a remote indigenous setting, another regularly taking school students onto the 
university campus and yet another providing professional experience through 
designing curriculum projects within schools – the outcomes of strong partnerships 
and mutual benefits are enlightening and reflect deep engagement with the local 
context. The authors clearly establish that their innovative professional experience 
arrangements integrate the important elements of team work, leadership, negotia-
tion, evaluation and collaboration that benefit both preservice teachers and the com-
munities where they are placed.
Chapter 12, Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring Four Models for 
Developing ‘Classroom-Ready’ Teachers, explores how immersion programs 
develop ‘classroom-ready’ teachers. Sharon Tindall-Ford, Susan Ledger, Judy 
Williams and Angelina Ambrosetti present the purpose, structure and intended 
D. Rorrison et al.

9
­outcomes of four different immersion models in four different jurisdictions across 
Australia. The programs are as varied as they are similar, and the authors begin to 
problematise the issues that emerge. Through the examination of each model, guid-
ing principles are highlighted for the establishment and success of an immersion 
program. All authors are deeply committed to the advantages of immersive experi-
ences in their context, and the chapter establishes the need for further study in this 
area.
Chapter 13, Paired Placements in Intensified School and University Environments: 
Advantages and Barriers, continues the theme of different ‘arrangements’ for pro-
fessional experience and investigates the complexities of the pairing of placements 
during professional experience. Paired placement is an attractive solution to the 
problem of providing placements for all preservice teachers who are enrolled in 
teacher education programs, yet the authors believe that the practice is under-­
researched. Through a review of the literature and the application of the findings to 
their own projects, a range of enabling and constraining elements are uncovered. 
The authors, Catherine Lang and Hoa Thi Mai Nguyen, find that commitment by all 
participants and the development of trust between the preservice teachers, as well as 
strong communication pathways, are critical to success. The careful and creative 
management of these elements is also essential. The quality of the relationships that 
develop both between the preservice teachers and with their mentors is crucial for 
successful learning outcomes. In this triadic approach to teaching and learning, 
peers can provide a source of support and can complement the development of 
deeper reflective practice.
The final chapter presents our insights, conclusions and future challenges as we 
interrogate what we have shared, what we have learned and where the gaps continue 
to be. While we have endeavoured to keep alive the conversations around profes-
sional experience in teacher education, it is critical that collaborative, cross-­
institutional and cross-border research becomes more established in our field to 
nurture early career researchers and turn fresh lenses on some established perspec-
tives. This chapter addresses these issues.
References
Allard, A. C., Mayer, D., & Moss, J. (2014). Authentically assessing graduate teaching: Outside 
and beyond neo-liberal constructs. Australian Educational Researcher, 41(4), 425–443.
Edwards, G., Tsui, A. B. M., & Stimpson, P. (2009). Contexts for learning in school-university 
partnership. In A.  B. M.  Tsui, G.  Edwards, & F.  Lopez-Real (Eds.), Learning in school-­
university partnership: Sociocultural perspectives. New York: Routledge.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental 
research. Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-Konsultit.
Goodnough, K., Galway, G., Badenhorst, C., & Kelly, R. (Eds.). (2013). Inspiration and innova-
tion in teaching and teacher education. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Hennissen, P., Beckers, H., & Moerkerke, G. (2017). Linking practice to theory in teacher educa-
tion: A growth in cognitive structures. Teaching and Teacher Education, 63, 314–325.
1  Introduction: Researching Innovative Perspectives in Professional Experience
www.ebook3000.com

10
Hord, S.  M., & Sommers, W.  A. (2008). Leading professional learning communities. Voices 
from research and practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press and National Association of 
Secondary School Principals.
Hudson, P. (2004). Specific mentoring: A theory and model for developing primary science teach-
ing practices. European Journal of Teacher Education, 27(2), 139–146.
Jonsson, A., & Mattsson, M. (2011). Assessing teacher competency during practicum. In 
M. Mattsson, T. V. Eilertsen, & D. Rorrison (Eds.), A practicum turn in teacher education 
(pp. 169–187). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Jonsson, A., & Svingby, G. (2007). The use of scoring rubrics: Reliability, validity and educational 
consequences. Educational Research Review, 2, 130–144. doi:10.1016/j.edurev.2007.05.002.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Le Cornu, R. (2016). Professional experience: Learning from the past to build the future. Asia-­
Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 44(1), 80–101. doi:10.1080/1359866x.2015.1102200.
Lee, J. C. K., & Day, C. (2016). Quality and change in teacher education. Western and Chinese 
perspectives. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.
Lingard, B. (2010). Policy borrowing, policy learning: Testing times in Australian schooling. 
Critical Studies in Education, 51(2), 129–147.
Lingard, B., Martino, W., & Rezai-Rashti, G. (2013). Testing regimes, accountabilities and educa-
tion policy: Commensurate global and national developments. Journal of Education Policy, 
28(5), 539–556. doi:10.1080/02680939.2013.820042.
Mattsson, M., Eilertsen, T., & Rorrison, D. (2011). A practicum turn in teacher education. 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Mayer, D., Allard, A., Bates, R., Dixon, M., Doecke, B., Kostogriz, A.,. .. Kline, J. (2015). Studying 
the effectiveness of teacher education – Final report, Australia. Geelong, Australia: Deakin 
University.
Panadero, E., & Jonsson, A. (2013). The use of scoring rubrics for formative assessment pur-
poses revisited: A review. Educational Research Review, 9, 129–144. doi:10.1016/j.
edurev.2013.01.002.
Rorrison, D., Hennissen, P., Bonanno, P., & Männikkö Barbutiu, S. (2016). Problematising practi-
cum arrangements. Sharing experiences from different traditions and contexts. European 
Journal of Teacher Education ATEE 41st Annual Conference Educating the Best Teachers: a 
Challenge for Teacher Education. Published Conference Proceedings (peer reviewed).
Teacher Education Ministerial Advisory Group (TEMAG). (2015). Action now: Classroom ready 
teachers. Canberra, Australia: Australian Government.
Wade-Leeuwen, B. (2015). Out of the shadows: Fostering creativity in preservice teachers in 
creative arts programs. Sydney, Australia: Australasian Digital Theses Publisher, Macquarie 
University.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
White, S. (2016). Teacher education: Innovation, intervention and impact (preface). In 
R. Brandenburg, S. McDonough, J. Burke, & S. White (Eds.), Teacher education: Innovation, 
intervention and impact. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
White, S., & Forgasz, R. (2016). The practicum: The place of experience? In J.  Loughran & 
M. Hamilton (Eds.), International handbook of teacher education. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: 
Springer.
Zeichner, K., Payne, K. A., & Brayko, K. (2015). Democratizing teacher education. Journal of 
Teacher Education, 66(2), 122–135.
D. Rorrison et al.

Part I
Partnership Arrangements and New 
Learning Spaces
www.ebook3000.com

13
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_2
Chapter 2
Exploring the Australian Teacher Education 
‘Partnership’ Policy Landscape: Four Case 
Studies
Simone White, Sharon Tindall-Ford, Deborah Heck, and Susan Ledger
Abstract  Schools have long been integrally involved in initial teacher education 
particularly through the professional experience component. In recent decades 
however, there have been specific policy calls for greater involvement of schools in 
teacher preparation. These calls have come in two distinct waves of partnership 
policy reforms in Australia. The first began in earnest with the Australian 
Government announcement through the National Partnership Agreement on 
Improving Teacher Quality (Council of Australian Governments (COAG) National 
partnership agreement on improving teacher quality, 2008), which identified two 
priorities. Firstly, it championed a systemic response to strengthening linkages 
between schools and universities, and secondly, it recognised the professional 
learning opportunities of preservice teachers and in-service teachers working 
together as co-producers of knowledge. The second wave, influenced by the 
Melbourne Declaration (Ministerial Council on Education, Employment, Training 
and Youth Affairs MCEETYA.  Melbourne declaration on educational goals for 
young Australians, 2008), resulted in the government response to the Teacher 
Education Ministerial Advisory Group (TEMAG) report (Teacher Education 
Ministerial Advisory Group (TEMAG). Action now: classroom ready teachers. 
Australian Government, Canberra, 2015) and the accompanying move to mandate 
school-university partnerships for the purpose of teacher education program 
­accreditation. These national partnership priorities have been taken up in different 
S. White (*) 
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
e-mail: simone.white@monash.edu 
S. Tindall-Ford 
University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW, Australia 
D. Heck 
University of the Sunshine Coast, Sunshine Coast, QLD, Australia 
S. Ledger 
Murdoch University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia

14
ways across the various states and territories and by universities and schools. This 
chapter maps the policy reforms both nationally and at the various jurisdictional 
levels and uses four illustrative cases to analyse the opportunities and challenges for 
future partnerships and recommendations for teacher educators working to sustain 
such partnerships.
Introduction
Schools have always been integrally involved in initial teacher education in 
Australia. At different times throughout the history of teacher preparation, schools 
have either been the central site of learning to teach or positioned in partnership 
with universities via the provision of professional experience. Aspland (2006) neatly 
maps the historical trends in teacher preparation in Australia beginning with the 
establishment of ‘normal schools’ at the end of the nineteenth century responsible 
for the training of ‘pupil students’ as teachers in the tradition of an apprenticeship 
model: through to the move of teacher preparation from teaching colleges to univer-
sities in the late period of the twentieth century, which heralded the professionalisa-
tion of teaching. No matter the level of school involvement on this continuum 
throughout each historical period, there has also been accompanying critique and 
debates about the best ways of learning about theory and practice (White & Forgasz, 
2016). The turn of the century, however, has seen these debates intensify with an 
ever-increasing level of scrutiny with initial teacher education now a national policy 
focus like never before (Fitzgerald & Knipe, 2016).
Accompanying the debates have been numerous reviews into teacher education 
as outlined by Louden (2008) in his paper 101 Damnations: The Persistence of 
Criticism and the Absence of Evidence About Teacher Education in Australia. More 
recently Bahr and Mellor’s (2016) review paper Building Quality in Teaching and 
Teacher Education explores the idea of quality teaching within Australia, with a 
focus on the role of teacher education and teacher educators in ensuring the gradu-
ation of quality teachers. They also problematise the current focus on quality teach-
ing as a more public and political view of teaching rather than a view informed by 
and for the profession. Underpinning current critiques about teacher education are 
long-held historical tensions between the perceived divide between ‘theory’ and 
‘practice’ and the best approaches and places to prepare teachers (see White & 
Forgasz, 2016).
The latest global policy response is a trend in teacher education back to earlier 
historical school-based models. Such approaches appear to be characterised by a 
return to an apprenticeship and training model, with a greater focus on the central 
involvement of schools in initial teacher education, and call for more time in schools 
for preservice teachers. Current policy reforms require more formal links to be 
made between schools and universities through a ‘partnership’ agenda. The changes 
S. White et al.
www.ebook3000.com

15
to current policy in the national accreditation requirements for initial teacher educa-
tion providers (AITSL, 2015, 2016) herald the formalisation of links between 
schools and universities through newly mandated partnership agreements.
This chapter examines the current Australian partnership policy agenda noting 
the changing historical document policy landscape and discussing the implications 
for universities and schools enacted across four state-based jurisdictions. The four 
cases are drawn across different states, namely, New South Wales, Queensland, 
Victoria and Western Australia. The authors, each based in one of the four jurisdic-
tions, conducted a qualitative study using document analysis to interrogate the 
national and state-based teacher education policy documents to better understand 
the current trends and epistemological views underpinning them. These school-­
university partnership cases, drawn from various locations in Australia, were then 
purposefully connected to better understand the policy implications for diverse 
settings.
While the four cases are independent of each other and remain as policy case 
studies in their own right, the authors have deliberately connected them through a 
series of research questions as part of an overarching study as outlined further in the 
chapter. By purposefully overlaying the studies, the authors have also responded to 
the challenge for teacher educators ‘to align strategically smaller-scale studies that 
when analysed and viewed together will highlight common themes, as well as shine 
a light on diversity and context relevant matters’ (White, 2016, p. vii). The chapter 
concludes with contextual insights into the partnership policy-practice nexus and 
highlights recommendations for future partnership endeavours and agreements.
Connecting Partnership Policy: An Exploration Across Our 
Jurisdictions
Policy convergence and divergence (Ball, 2005) related to partnerships in different 
contexts in teacher education are the focus of this chapter. We examine the ways in 
which the national initial teacher education policy documents are influenced by 
global policies and in turn enacted at the state and more local levels. As authors, we 
take up what Ball (2015) notes as the distinction between ‘policy as text’ and ‘pol-
icy as discourse’. He notes:
[P]olicies are both ‘contested’, mediated and differentially represented by different actors 
in different contexts (policy as text), but on the other hand, at the same time produced and 
formed by taken-for-granted and implicit knowledges and assumptions about the world and 
ourselves (policy as discourse). (p. 311)
We explore partnership policy texts and discourses across four Australian states. 
The examination is framed by a policy trajectory approach to policy analysis (Ball, 
1994). A policy trajectory approach seeks to identify the genesis and various 
­iterations a policy can take as it makes its way to implementation and practice. Ball 
2  Exploring the Australian Teacher Education ‘Partnership’ Policy Landscape…

16
outlined five contexts of the policy process: policy influences; policy text produc-
tion and policy practices/effects; policy outcomes and political strategies. Ball’s 
policy trajectory approach has been supplemented by scalar analyses that consider 
policy levels from global to local levels. Ledger, Vidovich, and O’Donoghue (2015) 
argued that in an era of accelerating globalisation, key policy processes are no lon-
ger confined within national boundaries and analysis needs to extend from global to 
national to local or institutional levels, with at times the addition of intermediate 
levels such as regional and state, depending on the particular policy. With this in 
mind, we considered the global policy contexts and looked for evidence of policy as 
discourse within the various state-based policy documents. This chapter specifically 
focusses on the first three contexts and trajectory levels. A series of research ques-
tions aligned to these contexts were developed to better understand the policy and 
practices involved across Australia.
The research questions applied across the texts, discourses and practices were:
	1.	 What are the main partnership themes emerging from the national initial teacher 
education policy documents?
	2.	 How do the national policies circulate in state-based initial teacher education 
policy documents?
	3.	 What are the commonalities and differences in the policy practices/effects across 
the four states?
	4.	 What are the longer-term policy implications of policies and practices on future 
teacher education partnerships?
In setting out the response to these four questions, the first and second questions 
are examined through document analysis at the national level and state level for 
each case and through discussion of the global trends currently impacting on 
Australia. The third and fourth questions are then considered by looking across the 
four cases in reference to policy-practice links and longer-term implications and 
recommendations.
Teacher Education and the Partnership Policy Reform 
Agenda: Policy as Text
In recent decades across many countries, there have been political calls for greater 
involvement of schools and teachers in initial teacher preparation (see, for example 
Furlong, McNamara, Campbell, Howson, & Lewis, 2008). This has been largely 
expressed in the policy reform literature as school-university partnerships with the 
desire to both connect the perceived divide between theory and practice and promote 
professional development for teachers and teacher educators (Smith, 2016). Mattsson, 
Eilertsen, and Rorrison (2011) characterise this change as ‘a practicum turn in teacher 
education’ (p. 17). The focus on situated learning and its contribution to practice-based 
knowledge in the workplace (Lave & Wenger, 1991) and the need for connections 
S. White et al.
www.ebook3000.com

17
between teacher education programs and schools to build quality teacher education 
(Darling-Hammond, 2000, 2006) identify a shift in the value of practice-based knowl-
edge in teacher education. Reid (2011) similarly identifies the current reforms as a 
‘practice turn’. While policy debates might focus on increasing the number of days for 
preservice teachers to spend in schools, Reid notes the importance of moving beyond 
measuring the number of days of professional experience within schools and calls for 
the return to a focus on practices that integrates and relates student experiences.
The exact forms of partnership work – and the associated ‘boundary crossings’ 
(Zeichner, 2010) for teachers and teacher educators as well as the professional 
learning involved for schools and universities – vary across time and international 
contexts and are often driven by specific policy changes. Ascribing stronger school-­
university partnerships as a path to improve teacher education, while an increasing 
feature of the political gaze, is not new in Australia. Many variations of school-­
university models and partnerships have been documented. (For a full historical 
analysis, see Vick, 2006.)
Despite the long-standing debates about the best models of teacher preparation 
and persistent reviews into teacher education (Louden, 2008; White & Forgasz, 
2016), the concept of partnerships has become the focus of policymakers as a vehi-
cle to resolve the issue of the perceived theory/practice divide that has long plagued 
teacher education. In this policy document analysis, we found that the document 
Quality Matters: Revitalising Teaching: Critical Times, Critical Choices (Ramsey, 
2000) was a historical catalyst for renewed interest in strengthening school and 
university partnerships. Over almost two decades ago, this report advocated that a 
quality professional experience was central to an effective initial teacher education 
program which could only be realised through close partnerships between universi-
ties and schools. As a result of the report, the New South Wales Institute of Teachers 
(NSWIT) was established in 2004 under the Institute of Teachers Act with one of its 
objectives to advance the quality of initial teacher education (ITE) by assessing ITE 
programs against a set of rigorous requirements. One key requirement was that ITE 
programs must demonstrate how they ensured and supported high-quality profes-
sional experience within their teacher education programs.
The call for a National Partnership fund proposed at the time was answered by 
the Australian Government announcement through the National Partnership 
Agreement on Improving Teacher Quality (Council of Australian Governments, 
2008) with the following priorities:
1.	 The systemic response to strengthening linkages between initial teacher educa-
tion programs and transition to beginning teaching and teacher induction,
2.	 The professional learning implications of preservice teachers and in-­service 
teachers working together as co-producers of knowledge (p. 4).
Over $550 million was provided for this initiative with $444 million directed to 
states and territories. A wide range of partnership programs was initiated during this 
time, though the language to describe partnerships differed across jurisdictions with 
each taking its own terminology. Across the life of the initiative, terms have included 
academies of practice, partnership schools, schools of excellence, centres of excel-
2  Exploring the Australian Teacher Education ‘Partnership’ Policy Landscape…

18
lence and training schools. Partnerships between schools, sectors and universities 
were strengthened during this time and stronger links established between universi-
ties and work force planning sectors (Broadley, Ledger, & Sharplin, 2013; Ledger, 
2015) resulting in a range of tripartite initiatives discussed later in the chapter.
Most recently the Australian Government has moved from incentivising partner-
ships to now mandating them (AITSL 2015, 2016) through the initial teacher educa-
tion accreditation process. The recent Teacher Education Ministerial Advisory 
Group (TEMAG) report and subsequent extensive policy ensemble, including 
Melbourne Declaration (MCEETYA, 2008), Australian Professional Standards for 
Teachers (AITSL, 2011), Australian Professional Standard for Principals, national 
curriculum, national teacher registration boards and national testing regimes for 
students in schools and in teacher education programs, are examples of this move. 
Louden (2015) suggests that the latest Australian policy assemblage resemble pol-
icy associated to what Sahlberg (2014) has termed ‘the Global Education Reform 
Movement’ (GERM). More recently, Dinham (2015) also expressed his concern 
that the GERM ‘are finding support and traction in Australia’ (p. 12).
Many of the case examples discussed later in this chapter had their roots in the 
first wave of new policy reform influenced by the Melbourne Declaration (2008) 
and National Partnership funding. The Melbourne Declaration (2008) was pivotal in 
establishing a national agenda where schools are central to the development and 
well-being of all young Australians and to the country’s social and economic pros-
perity. The second partnership policy wave has only recently occurred although 
various state-based jurisdictions have already taken up the policy discourse. Two 
particular documents heralded the increased focus on strengthened and mandated 
partnerships. The first is the recent review and report into initial teacher education, 
Action Now: Classroom Ready Teachers (TEMAG, 2015), and the second the new 
standards and procedures for the accreditation of initial teacher education providers 
and the accompanying guidelines (Australian Institute for Teaching and School 
Leadership, 2015, 2016). Amongst many other recommendations, the Action Now: 
Classroom Ready Teachers report focusses on partnerships and the important work 
of the supervisor/mentor in improving initial teacher education. It states:
To ensure new teachers are entering classrooms with sufficient practical skills, the 
Advisory Group recommends ensuring experiences of appropriate timing; length and fre-
quency are available to all teacher education students. Placements must be supported by 
highly-skilled supervising teachers who are able to demonstrate and assess what is needed 
to be an effective teacher. The Advisory Group strongly states that better partnerships 
between universities and schools are needed to deliver high quality practical experience. 
(TEMAG, 2015, p. 7)
The emphasis on placements, partnerships and supervising teachers outlined in 
the report is also found in international literature. It has long been recognised that in 
Australia, we are influenced by many of the past policies of the USA and England 
(Mayer, 2014; Gilroy, 2014). In England, for example, government legislation from 
1992 onwards made it mandatory for initial teacher education (ITE) providers to 
offer preservice courses with schools, thus making partnership a ‘core principle of 
provision’ (Furlong, Barton, Miles, Whiting, & Whitty, 2000, p.  33). Menter, 
S. White et al.
www.ebook3000.com

19
Hulme, Elliot, and Lewin (2010) and Conroy, Hulme, and Menter (2013) described 
the rise of teacher training schools, hub schools advanced in Scotland (Donaldson, 
2011) or professional learning schools across a number of countries as part of the 
practice-based reform agenda.
School-University Partnerships: Policy as Discourse
As discussed earlier, the case examples below provide policy data related to four 
Australian states (New South Wales, Queensland, Victoria and Western Australia). 
The discussion is presented in four main sections that parallel the research questions 
noted earlier. A close examination of the policy trajectory is provided, and brief 
examples are also given in relation to practice.
Case: New South Wales
We argue earlier in the chapter that the Quality Matters (Ramsey, 2000) NSW report 
was the first of a formalised policy partnership response. As an outcome of the 2008 
federal funding initiative, the New South Wales State Government established 50 
schools as ‘centres of excellence’ (CoE). The CoEs were selected based on schools 
that had been seen to demonstrate increases in student learning outcomes based on 
standardised testing. Selected schools were then connected to a university with the 
purpose of sharing high-quality teaching practices between teachers, teacher educa-
tion academics and preservice teachers, with preservice teachers being immersed in 
the CoE schools, observing high-quality teaching and experiencing high-quality 
supervision. The underpinning logic was that schools with excellent National 
Assessment Program – Literacy and Numeracy (NAPLAN) results would be ideal 
sites for preservice teacher learning. This approach mirrors the views in the English 
‘academy’ models where schools have been selected for teacher training on the 
basis of standardised results only. The concerns expressed in this approach is that 
preservice teachers are not participating in diverse schools and consequences reveal 
a shortage of teachers willing and prepared to work particularly in challenging 
environments.
The documented success of the 2009 Centres of Excellence initiative was limited 
to individual schools/university partnerships and a relatively small number of pre-
service teachers. As a response to this limitation and to societal concerns with 
broader teacher quality nationally, the New South Wales Government released 
Great Teaching, Inspired Learning-A Blueprint for Action (New South Wales 
Government, 2013), which was a policy response focussed on quality education for 
all students. The blueprint outlined 47 actions to ensure continual improvement in 
teaching and learning within NSW Schools. Great Teaching, Inspired Learning-A 
Blueprint for Action (GTIL) argued that professional experience was pivotal to the 
2  Exploring the Australian Teacher Education ‘Partnership’ Policy Landscape…

20
strengthening and improvement of teacher preparation and established a series of 
actions in respect to professional experience and university/school partnerships. For 
example, GTIL advocated for the establishment of partnership agreements between 
initial teacher education providers and schools and school systems, clarity of the 
roles and responsibilities for all stakeholders involved, an evidence guide to support 
the supervision of preservice teachers and common assessment of preservice teach-
ers based on the Australian Professional Standards for Teachers (APST).
The Board of Studies Teaching and Educational Standards (BOSTES) published 
A Framework for High Quality Professional Experience in New South Wales Schools 
in June 2014. The framework detailed what initial teacher education providers must 
include within their professional experience programs. This included a formalised 
arrangement between the initial teacher education provider and school/schooling 
system; clarity around roles, responsibilities and processes for professional experi-
ence; and professional development for teachers supervising preservice teachers. 
The Australian Professional Standards for Teachers (APST) is foundational to all 
documentation, assessment and professional learning.
The New South Wales Department of Education in 2015 committed to establish-
ing professional experience agreements between universities and NSW Department 
of Education Schools. The Board of Studies Teaching and Educational Standards 
(BOSTES) Professional Experience Framework underpinned the agreements, and 
in October 2015, universities in NSW were partnered with what was described as a 
‘hub school’. The formal partnership required the school (secondary or primary) 
and the university to work in a collaborative partnership to develop and trial an 
innovative professional experience program. The agreement was extended in May 
2016 with each university partnered with an additional hub school. How this was to 
be fulfilled was not specified; rather universities with their hub school were to work 
together to implement and evaluate a range of models of professional experience 
and professional learning over a funding period of 2.5 years, with funding allocated 
to each hub school. Universities were not allocated funding.
This new 2015 professional experience agreement has some similarities to the 
2009 Centres of Excellence (CoE) with university and schools working together to 
share quality teaching and learning practice, with the primary objective to strengthen 
professional experience practices. However, the new agreement added the expecta-
tion that universities and hub schools would build professional learning communi-
ties where research on innovations in teaching, learning and professional experience 
would be shared and professional development of mentor/supervising teachers 
would be supported. A new focus of this policy initiative was the expectation that 
research would be undertaken to inform further partnership development.
S. White et al.
www.ebook3000.com

21
Case: Victoria
In Victoria, under the first partnership policy wave, the Victorian School Centres of 
Teaching Excellence (SCTE) (State Government Victoria, 2011a) were established, 
and funding was provided to universities in partnership with a cluster of schools. 
Unlike New South Wales, a much smaller number of centres or partnerships were 
formed, and universities were responsible for the distribution of funding and partner-
ing. This key feature ensured an equal commitment existed from both school and 
universities throughout the partnership. The School Centres of Teaching Excellence 
(SCTE) funded seven centres each with a university and network or cluster of schools. 
In the Victorian case (unlike the Queensland example shared below), all schools in 
the first wave were state schools. Again, unlike NSW, the selection of schools 
involved was decided upon jointly by the universities and schools, and there were no 
criteria based on performance of schools in standardised tests. ‘Clusters’ of schools 
formed geographically enabling a far greater outreach and participation of schools 
and inclusion of schools in diverse contexts, for example, inner city, regional, rural 
and remote. While NSW moved to follow more English-based academy models, 
Victoria looked to both England and the USA with reference in the documentation to 
‘residency models’ and ‘professional learning schools’.
The School Centres of Teaching Excellence (SCTE) discussion paper specifi-
cally referred to international policies in its rationale to move to school-university 
partnerships. The example below highlights reference to US policy documentation. 
Specifically the document states:
The US Federal Secretary of Education asserted that ‘America’s university-based teacher 
preparation programs need revolutionary change – not evolutionary tinkering’, and has sub-
sequently led a national reform to restructure teaching as a practice-based profession simi-
lar to medicine or nursing. Student teachers will have a more closely-monitored induction 
period, followed up with ongoing professional development. The National Council for 
Accreditation of Teacher Education is investigating ‘scalable ways to improve in-the-­
classroom training and strengthen relationships between school districts and the colleges 
and universities that prepare their teachers’. (State Government Victoria, 2011b, p. 5)
The second wave of partnership policy in Victoria has been named the Victorian 
Teaching Academies of Professional Practice (State Government of Victoria, 2015). 
It is interesting to note the change in terminology drawn from English school-led 
training models named ‘academies’. While this term is similar to the term used to 
describe school-led teacher education models in England, the focus has not been the 
same. Rather academies in the Victorian model have a focus to improve professional 
learning of mentors, improve assessment of preservice teachers and improve class-
room practice. The Victorian Government’s From New Directions to Action: World 
Class Teaching and School Leadership (State Government of Victoria, 2013) states 
that:
An Academy will exist as a partnership of universities and schools and is designed to estab-
lish leading practice in providing quality pre-service teacher education, continuing profes-
sional learning and research opportunities. It will explore options for the delivery of 
2  Exploring the Australian Teacher Education ‘Partnership’ Policy Landscape…

22
pre-service teacher education with a school-based focus and the ways in which pre-service 
teachers are immersed in effective professional practice. (p. 1)
The second wave of policy reform has seen funding go to schools and not to 
universities making resourcing an issue. The seven academies that represent the 
school-university partnership has been extended to 12 with almost all Victorian uni-
versities involved and now including catholic schools as well as state schools.
Some of the key features of both waves have included clustering primary and 
secondary schools together so that teams of university-based and school-based col-
leagues can connect together. ‘Clusters’ are traditionally a group of schools located 
geographically together and connected with common professional learning foci. 
Benefits have been recorded (White & Forgasz, 2017) for a number of stakeholders 
including mentor teachers emerging as a key professional learning group. The 
authors’ note:
The dual focus on participants becoming research-informed mentors and thinking of them-
selves as school-based teacher educators was a key feature of this mentor professional 
learning program which enabled the development of a shared vision for teacher education 
that cut across school and university boundaries.
Case Study: Queensland
Queensland is a geographically large state with the majority of universities clus-
tered in the lower south-east seaboard. Travelling long distances challenges the 
establishment and nurturing of mutually beneficial school-university partnerships. 
However, like the other states, Queensland has historically engaged with a range of 
different types of schools that are managed in different ways including faith-based 
schools, independent schools and public schooling. Partnerships’ programs between 
systems, groups of schools and initial teacher education institutions developed in 
very different ways across this broad schooling sector in Queensland. Partnerships 
between schools and higher education institutions were identified as important in 
The Review of Teacher Education and School Induction (Caldwell & Sutton, 2010a, 
2010b). A sector-wide government policy A Fresh Start: Improving the Preparation 
and Quality of Teachers for Queensland Schools (2013a) articulated the develop-
ment of partnerships as formal professional experience agreements that recognise 
the mutual contribution of schools and higher education institutions towards pro-
viding quality professional experience opportunities for initial teacher education 
students (Department of Education Training and Employment Queensland 
Government, 2014).
The focus of these agreements was to redress concerns that there were no formal 
requirements or agreements for schools to provide places for initial teacher educa-
tion students to undertake placement (Department of Education Training and 
Employment Queensland Government, 2013b) even though there were accredita-
tion mandates for higher education institutions that require placements to be 
S. White et al.
www.ebook3000.com

23
­undertaken in schools. The focus of this policy agenda was ‘on ensuring that all 
Queensland schools have access to the teaching workforce they need to boost stu-
dent performance and ensure young Queenslanders are well-prepared for life after 
school’ (Department of Education Training and Employment Queensland 
Government, 2013b, p. 1). Unlike both previous examples, the federal government 
National Partnership agreement on improving teacher quality (Council of Australian 
Governments (COAG), 2008) agenda provided funding to support different models 
of engagement between schools and universities to emerge across the sector. 
Education Queensland focussed on the development of ‘centres of excellence’ in 
partnership with universities to extend the experience of high performing graduates 
with the aim of recruiting high-quality initial teacher education students for rural 
and remote schooling locations (Department of Education and Training Queensland 
Government, 2015). There was a strong agenda focussed on workforce planning in 
Queensland especially in relation to the provision of quality teachers for rural and 
remote schools.
One of the challenges identified by the development of partnerships was the bur-
den on individual schools in the development of these agreements. In 2014, 
Independent Schools Queensland (ISQ) expanded their existing ‘centres of excel-
lence in preservice training’ program to facilitate the development of partnership 
agreements between peak bodies, schools and initial teacher education providers. 
This is just one example of the second wave of partnership development. In 
Queensland, the second wave was supported by an analysis of enduring partner-
ships by the Queensland College of Teachers that identified four aspects of enduring 
partnerships: commitment to mutual learning, agreed and well-articulated roles and 
responsibilities, commitment to genuine collaboration and responsiveness between 
the partners (Rossner & Commins, 2012). On the basis of these findings, Independent 
Schools Queensland adapted their funded ‘centre of excellence program’ to include 
a partnership between Independent Schools Queensland, a university and schools 
for a period of 2 years. Schools were required to apply to host a centre of excellence 
and agree to engage with Independent Schools Queensland and a partner university. 
The work began with a draft service agreement between Independent Schools 
Queensland and the university.
To illustrate the complexity of partnership agreements, one university experience 
is discussed. The collaboration between the participants and genuine dialogue saw 
the service agreement develop into a partnership agreement that initially articulated 
the roles and responsibilities of Independent Schools Queensland and the university. 
Later this expanded to include the roles of the schools in the partnership. Funding 
support was provided directly to the schools in response to a project plan negotiated 
between the partners. The initial challenge for all parties was the negotiation of 
formal agreements in the context of the various institutions. The process began in 
August 2014 and concluded in December with 18 iterations of the agreement being 
exchanged. Upon reflection, the detailed and sustained conversations that the part-
nership negotiation represented provided a strong foundation for the work that fol-
lowed and provided the groundwork for the team to maintain the responsiveness 
required to ensure this work contributed to the development of the quality teaching 
2  Exploring the Australian Teacher Education ‘Partnership’ Policy Landscape…

24
agenda. The focus within this partnership was the development of mutual learning 
as a contribution towards quality teaching for all the stakeholders’ preservice teach-
ers, teachers, school leaders, Independent Schools Queensland (ISQ) staff and 
teacher educators from the university context. The agenda within the independent 
schooling sector was closely aligned with achieving the outcomes of the state gov-
ernment Fresh Start agenda, namely, developing effective partnerships that facili-
tated improving the professional experience for preservice teachers. This was 
achieved through a community of practice that explored practice analysis focussed 
on the professional standards for graduates and teachers that also supported teachers 
to make consistent judgements about preservice teacher performance while on pro-
fessional experience.
Case Study: Western Australia
Western Australia is also a large state with specific rural and remote staffing needs. 
The five universities are also centralised in Perth, the state’s capital. Western 
Australia’s response to the National Partnership program was very much influenced 
by university leadership and access to funding. Across the state, all universities, 
public and private, were involved in establishing ‘training schools’ for preservice 
teachers. Western Australian use of the training terminology heralded a shift to an 
apprenticeship model drawing from English policy. The term ‘training schools’ was 
not embraced by many of the universities; however it was the term used to fulfil the 
nomenclature of the tender process in Western Australia. National Partnership fund-
ing was awarded to all universities, although three public universities, Murdoch 
University, Curtin University and the University of Western Australia, joined 
together to form the WA Universities Training Schools (WACUTS) program and 
worked collaboratively to offer a select entry internship for high-­calibre final-year 
Bachelor of Education preservice teachers. Murdoch University, for example, led 
the WACUTS 12-month internship program. Interns were assigned as co-teachers at 
one school for the whole calendar year. The program graduated a total of 50 interns 
spanning Early Childhood Education, Primary and Secondary programs each year 
for 3 years (2010–2013) in rural and metropolitan contexts. Similarly, Edith Cowan 
University and University of Notre Dame offered a ‘residency program’ similar to 
the US model, specific to its Graduate Diploma cohort, and placed preservice 
­teachers in two different schools over the year (one per semester) for 3  years 
­(2010–2013). Over 100 preservice teachers graduated each year from the residency 
program.
Both WA Universities Training Schools program and the residency program 
were supported by a series of associated ‘training schools’. These schools were 
chosen based on their partnerships with the universities and their ongoing commit-
ment and capacity to support preservice teachers over 6 months at a time (Residency) 
or 12 months (WA Universities Training Schools program). One unique aspect of 
the identified training schools for each program was their ­capacity to support 
S. White et al.
www.ebook3000.com

25
interns from different universities. The program was well timed as the new policy 
reform for initial teacher education meant schools and universities were collec-
tively grappling with the new Australian Professional Standards for Teachers 
(AITSL, 2011) and associated assessment requirements for preservice teachers. 
During this period of national policy reform, the tripartite relationship between 
universities, schools and education sectors was strengthened as each body worked 
together for a common goal of producing ‘classroom-ready’ graduates in response 
to the second wave of policy reform outlined in Action Now: Classroom Ready 
Teachers (TEMAG, 2015).
The legacy of National Partnership funding is a sustained commitment to intern-
ships in Western Australia by the department, universities and schools. Once fund-
ing ceased in 2013, the Department of Education continued its support for 
internships, offering financial support for secondary interns in areas of workforce 
planning needs, as well as professional support for early childhood and primary 
12-month internships. However, only Murdoch University continued internships 
after funding ceased using the WA Universities Training Schools (WACUTS) pro-
gram model as a blueprint. It has graduated approximately 40 high-calibre interns 
annually across programs and contexts since 2011. After a hiatus of 2–3 years, Edith 
Cowan University is currently redesigning a residency program, and the University 
of Western Australia and Curtin University are independently conceptualising or 
implementing different models of internships suitable for their programs. Identified 
‘training schools’ in WA generated from the original National Partnership funding 
have continued to support preservice teachers across a range of placement types 
including internships, shorter-term ‘block’ or 3–6  week placements, distributed 
placements and more recently the employment-based model used by Teach for 
Australia (TFA) linking Victoria and Western Australia more closely.
In addition to National Partnership-funded training schools’ programs that 
­targeted preservice teachers, the Department of Education has established nearly 70 
Teacher Development Schools more akin to the NSW ‘centres’ with the sole pur-
pose to guide teachers on curriculum content and professional standards outlined in 
the Australian Institute for Teaching and Learning (AITSL) suite of policy texts as 
part of the second wave of policy reform for teacher education. It is not surprising 
that these schools include many of the National Partnership Training Schools.
Findings and Discussion
The four case examples demonstrate both partnership policy convergence and diver-
gence. All state-based policy initiatives aimed, to different degrees, to formalise 
agreements between schools and universities and provide some form of framework 
to guide their creation and sustainability. Frameworks for the types of partnerships 
were negotiated by the universities (as in the Victoria case) or more flexibly (as in 
New South Wales) where no one model of partnership was mandated; rather each 
hub school, centre or academy was encouraged to develop a partnership model 
2  Exploring the Australian Teacher Education ‘Partnership’ Policy Landscape…

26
based on their own specific needs and context. In Queensland, there were examples 
of both these levels of partnership being more prescribed to address the issue of 
availability of teachers to supervise professional experience placements and the 
more flexible partnership models such as the one developed across peak bodies, 
schools and university as partners.
The common aspect of each of the partnership cases presented is that resourcing 
was aligned with policy and funding and was for a set period of time. In all cases, 
funding supported personnel from university, schools and school systems to imple-
ment the envisaged government partnership policy. Such funding was key no matter 
how the funding was allocated, whether it be to schools, as in the case of New South 
Wales where an individual hub school was allocated funding over a specific time 
period, or in the case of Western Australia where university(s) submitted a tender to 
access funding to establish and support yearlong preservice internships at partner-
ship schools. What cannot be disputed is for sustained partnerships, resourcing, 
money and committed personnel from all sectors involved in the partnership agree-
ment are fundamental to success. Resourcing one component of the partnership and 
not the other does not appear to enable effective partnerships and relationships to 
flourish. Funding models in the future need to be allocated to both partners and 
specifically to the allocation of supporting the emergence of new roles and work 
accompanied in connecting and bridging the relationships between schools and 
universities.
Although the outcome for each of the policy cases presented was to establish 
effective school-university partnerships with a primary focus on enhanced profes-
sional experience for preservice teachers, each of the cases discussed is unique. In 
the case of Victoria and Queensland, a university was partnered with a number of 
schools to develop what may be viewed as a ‘community of practice’ (Lave & 
Wenger, 1991; Rossner & Commins, 2012). In contrast, New South Wales partner-
ship policy required a university to be partnered initially with only one school, with 
the aim to develop an integrated mentoring-professional experience model.
In both the case of Western Australia and New South Wales, the government 
university-school partnership policy was built on pre-existing relationships between 
a university and particular school(s). In these cases, the state policymakers enacted 
policy that built on what was in most cases an informal university-school partner-
ship. While in the case of Queensland, the state-driven partnerships were new and 
provided an opportunity to secure commitment from the profession to support qual-
ity preservice teacher professional experience placements. The enactment of this 
policy as the development of a future workforce had a significant impact on the 
engagement of schools in professional experience. The smaller-scale partnership 
agreements successfully shifted more of the focus on the need for genuine collabo-
ration and mutual learning possible in authentic partnerships as a contribution 
towards the quality teaching agenda.
There are long-term implications that can be garnered from our initiative to pres-
ent the comparison of the four cases. Firstly, there is no one effective partnership 
model that can be applied to all jurisdictions. Future government policy reforms 
need to acknowledge and support the flexibility between universities and schools all 
S. White et al.
www.ebook3000.com

27
of which have unique contexts. In these cases to date, a ‘cluster’ model was more 
effective in enabling cross-institutional collaboration and a collegial approach to 
linking preservice and in-service professional learning. It also appears important 
that all schools, not just those who have high NAPLAN results, should have the 
opportunity to participate in initial teacher education with preservice teachers. 
Schools can benefit from working with a university in multiple ways including 
opportunities for professional learning and research. Likewise universities can ben-
efit by connecting with practitioners and drawing on their professional expertise in 
curriculum renewal. Most importantly preservice teachers benefit from diverse set-
tings and contexts and being a part of a professional learning community. As the 
partnership policy is extended, we strongly encourage models that will further 
enable rural, regional and remote schools to be included and for any policy develop-
ment to be wary of a metropolitan-centric partnership model by default. Any new 
cluster models with rural and remote schools could be enabled through technology, 
and innovative approaches should be welcomed.
Another finding garnered from our data suggests that continued funding is 
required to support long-term development and the sustainment of partnership pro-
grams. Once funding ceases, partnerships often dissolve, as seen in the Western 
Australian case where only one university and their partnership schools continued 
to offer an extended internship program. Aligned with funding is the need to have 
personnel at schools, university and government that are committed to school-­
university partnerships and who have a deep understanding of each sector and the 
complexities of integrating educational bodies whose structures and purpose may 
be difficult to align. The need for research as part of the policy reform agenda that 
is theoretically based has been largely ignored within current government policy 
thus far, as most funding has supported only the implementation of the partnership 
innovation itself. Research is seldom funded as part of the initiative, and the long-­
term outcomes of the quality teaching agenda remain under-researched. This raises 
the important need for research on school-university partnerships to be central to 
policy agreements. It is the authors’ experience that the assembling and contrasting 
of the research on small-scale university-school partnerships can inform further 
policy and partnership initiatives (White, 2016), consistent with the aim of this 
chapter.
Conclusion
This chapter provides a review of policy texts, discourses and practices related to 
two waves of policy reform impacting initial teacher education in Australia. It 
emphasises the importance of partnerships in schools and universities as a result of 
the National Partnership Agreement of Improving Teacher Quality Report (2009–
2013). The chapter highlights the importance of contexts and reveals variability in 
policy outcomes across the states in response to recent reform – in so doing expos-
ing a range of opportunities and challenges for key stakeholders across all the 
2  Exploring the Australian Teacher Education ‘Partnership’ Policy Landscape…

28
sectors. The opportunities presented across the case studies relate primarily to part-
nership types, access, participation and re-culturation of the ways in which schools 
and universities can partner together, whereas the challenges relate to sustainability, 
equity and scalability. While supporting the traditional partnership approach that 
relies on individual connections between schools and universities, the variability 
across the states and even within states calls for a more strategic systems’ level 
approach to defining, monitoring and maintaining partnerships (see Le Cornu, 
2015). But conversely, it recognises the need to allow for flexibility and diversity of 
partnership types across Australian jurisdictions to ensure a truly equitable model 
for all.
Partnerships between university and schools facilitated the enactment of the 
National Partnership initial teacher education policy reform in Australia; more 
importantly ‘tripartite relationships’ developed between university, school and edu-
cation sectors within individual states during the recent wave of policy implementa-
tion. These partnerships resulted in cross-systems’ level approaches to program 
development and resulted in sustainability with stronger and more direct links to 
issues surrounding workforce planning (Ledger, 2015). This ‘shared responsibility’ 
and systems-based integrated approach to initial teacher education are also a recom-
mendation in the TEMAG report (2014) from which the policy text Action Now: 
Classroom Ready Teachers (2015) was generated. However, building inter-­
institutional collaborations is labour intensive (Zeichner, Payne, & Brayko, 2015) 
and relies on changing the institutional culture and restructuring of current practices 
(Le Cornu, 2015).
Teacher education and the partnership policy reform agenda have produced a 
suite of new policies ‘as text’ and associated ‘policies as practice’ (Ball, 2015). The 
recommendations that emerge from this study relate not to the types of partnerships 
that were developed during the National Partnership policy reform but rather focus 
on the outcomes of the partnerships that were established. The outcomes show vari-
ability and diversity related to success, recognition and sustainability of partnership 
programs. It also highlights the need for further funded research in this space.
References
Aspland, T. (2006). Changing patterns of teacher education in Australia. Education Research and 
Perspectives, 33(2), 140.
Australian Government (2015). Action now: Classroom ready teachers – Australian Government 
Response. Retrieved from http://docs.education.gov.au/node/36789
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL). (2011). Australian 
professional 
standards 
for 
teachers. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.aitsl.edu.au/
australian-professional-standards-for-teachers
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL). (2015). Accreditation of initial 
teacher education programs in Australia: Standards and procedures. Retrieved from http://
www.aitsl.edu.au/docs/default-source/initial-teacher-education-resources/accreditation-of-ite-
programs-in-australia.pdf
S. White et al.
www.ebook3000.com

29
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL). (2016). Guidelines for the 
accreditation of initial teacher education programs in Australia. Retrieved from http://www.
aitsl.edu.au/docs/default-source/initial-teacher-education-resources/guidance-for-the-accredi-
tation-of-initial-teacher-education-in-australia.pdf
Bahr, N., & Mellor, S. (2016). Building quality in teaching and teacher education. Melbourne, 
Australia: ACER. Retrieved from http://research.acer.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=102
5&context=aer
Ball, S. (1994). Education reform: A critical and post structural approach. Buckingham, UK: 
Open University Press.
Ball, S. J. (2005). Education policy and social class : The selected works of Stephen Ball. London: 
Routledge.
Ball, S. J. (2015). What is policy? 21 years later: Reflections on the possibilities of policy research. 
Discourse Studies in the Cultural Politics of. Education, 36(3), 306–313.
Board of Studies Teaching and Educational Standards (BOSTES). (2014). Professional experi-
ence framework. Retrieved June, 2016, from http://nswteachers.nsw.edu.au/taas-schools/
principals-supervisors/professional-experience-framework/
Broadley, T., Ledger, S., & Sharplin, E. (2013). New frontiers or old certainties: The pre-service 
teacher internship. In D. Lynch & T. Yeigh (Eds.), Teacher education in Australia: Investigations 
into programming, practicum and partnerships (pp. 94–108). Tarragindi, Australia: Oxford 
Global Press.
Caldwell, B., & Sutton, D. (2010a). Review of teacher education and school induction, First 
report. Retrieved from http://flyingstart.qld.gov.au/SiteCollectionDocuments/review-teacher-
education-school-induction-first-full-report.pdf
Caldwell, B., & Sutton, D. (2010b). Review of teacher education and school induction, Second 
report. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://education.qld.gov.au/students/higher-education/resources/
review-teacher-education-school-induction-full-report.pdf
Centres of Excellence. From http://education.qld.gov.au/staff/development/pdfs/tece-factsheet.pdf
Conroy, J., Hulme, M., & Menter, I. (2013). Developing a model for teacher education. Journal of 
Education for Teaching: International Research and Pedagogy, 39(5), 557–573.
Council of Australian Governments (COAG). (2008). National partnership agreement on 
improving teacher quality. Retrieved from http://www.aitsl.edu.au/docs/default-source/
default-document-library/national_partnership_on_improving_teacher_quality
Darling-Hammond, L. (2000). Teacher quality and student achievement: A review of state policy 
evidence. Education policy analysis archives, Vol. 8 (1). Tucson, AZ: College of Education.
Darling-Hammond, L. (2006). Constructing 21st-century teacher education. Journal of Teacher 
Education, 57(3), 300–314. doi:10.1177/0022487105285962.
Department of Education and Early Childhood Development. (2011). School centres for teach-
ing excellence. Retrieved from http://www.education.vic.gov.au/Documents/about/programs/
partnerships/schoolcentresteachexcelfactsheet.pdf
Department of Education and Training Queensland Government. (2015). Teacher education.
Department of Education Training and Employment Queensland Govnerment. (2013a). A fresh 
start: Improving the preparation and quality of teachers for Queensland schools. Retrieved 
from http://flyingstart.qld.gov.au/SiteCollectionDocuments/A-Fresh-Start-strategy.pdf
Department of Education Training and Employment Queensland Government. (2013b). A fresh 
start professional experience partnership agreements. Retrieved from http://flyingstart.qld.gov.
au/SiteCollectionDocuments/factsheet-fresh-start_Prof-Exp-Agreements.pdf
Dinham, S. (2015). The worst of both worlds: How U.S and U.K models are influencing Australian 
education. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 23(49), 1–20. Retrieved from http://epaa.asu.
edu/ojs/article/viewFile/1865/1615.
Donaldson, G. (2011). Teaching Scotland’s future: Report of a review of teacher education in 
Scotland. Edinburgh, UK: Scottish Government APS Group.
Fitzgerald, T., & Knipe, S. (2016). Policy reform: Testing times for teacher education in Australia. 
Journal of Educational Administration and History, 48(4), 358–369. doi:10.1080/00220620.2
016.1210588.
2  Exploring the Australian Teacher Education ‘Partnership’ Policy Landscape…

30
Furlong, J., Barton, L., Miles, S., Whiting, C., & Whitty, G. (2000). Teacher education in transi-
tion: Reforming professionalism. Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.
Furlong, J., McNamara, O., Campbell, A., Howson, J., & Lewis, S. (2008). Partnership, policy and 
politics: Initial teacher education in England under new labour. Teachers and Teaching, 14(4), 
307–318.
Gilroy, P. (2014). Policy intervention in teacher education: Sharing the English experience. Journal 
of Education for Teaching, 40(5), 622–632. https://doi.org/10.1080/02607476.2014.957996.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Le Cornu, R. (2015). Key components of effective professional experience in initial teacher 
education in Australia. Melbourne, Australia: Australian Institute for Teaching and School 
Leadership.
Ledger, S. (2015). Don’t follow the Americans on teacher education policy reform. Online 
Opinion- Australia’s e-journal of social and political debate 8th September, 2015. http://www.
onlineopinion.com.au/view.asp?article=17656
Ledger, S., Vidovich, L., & O’Donoghue, T. (2015). International and remote schooling: Global to 
local curriculum policy dynamics in Indonesia. The Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 24(4), 
695–703. doi:10.1007/s40299-014-0222-1.
Louden, W. (2008). 101 Damnations: The persistence of criticism and the absence of evidence 
about teacher education in Australia. Teachers and Teaching, 14(4), 357–368. https://doi.
org/10.1080/13540600802037777.
Louden, W. (2015, July). Mentoring in teacher education (Centre for Strategic Education, Seminar 
Series Paper No. 245). Victoria.
Mattsson, M., Eilertsen, T. V., & Rorrison, D. (2011). A practicum turn in teacher education. 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publisher.
Mayer, D. (2014). Forty years of teacher education in Australia: 1974–2014. Journal of Education 
for Teaching, 40(5), 461–473. doi:10.1080/02607476.2014.956536.
Menter, I., Hulme, M., Elliot, D., & Lewin, J. (2010). Literature review on teacher education in 
the 21st century. Edinburgh, UK: Education Analytical Services, Schools Research, Scottish 
Government.
Ministerial Council on Education, Employment, Training and Youth Affairs MCEETYA. (2008). 
Melbourne declaration on educational goals for young Australians. Retrieved from http://
www.curriculum.edu.au/verve/_resources/National_Declaration_on_the_Educational_Goals_
for_Young_Australians.pdf
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE). (2010). Transforming teacher 
education through clinical practice: A national strategy to prepare effective teachers. Retrieved 
from http://www.ncate.org/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=zzeiB1OoqPk%3D&tabid=7
New South Wales Government. (2013). Great teaching, inspired learning. Sydney, Australia: 
NSW Government.
Ramsey, G. (2000). Quality Matters. Revitalising teaching: Critical times, critical choices. 
Retrieved from https://www.det.nsw.edu.au/teachrev/reports/reports.pdf
Reid, J.  A. (2011). A practice turn for teacher education? Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher 
Education, 39(4), 293–310. doi:10.1080/1359866X.2011.614688.
Rossner, P., & Commins, D. (2012). Defining ‘enduring partnerships’: Can a well-worn path be 
an effective, sustainable and mutually beneficial relationship? Retrieved from http://www.qct.
edu.au/PDF/DefiningEnduringPartnerships.pdf
Sahlberg, P. (2014). Facts, true facts and research in improving education systems, paper presented 
to the British Education Research Association, London, 21st May.
Smith, K. (2016). Partnerships in teacher education – Going beyond the rhetoric, with reference to 
the Norwegian context. Center for Educational Policy Studies Journal, 6(3), 17–36.
State Government Victoria. (2011a). School centres for teaching excellence. Retrieved from http://
www.education.vic.gov.au/Documents/about/programs/partnerships/schoolcentresteachexcel-
factsheet.pdf
S. White et al.
www.ebook3000.com

31
State Government Victoria. (2011b). School centres for teaching excellence: Discussion paper. 
Retrieved from http://www.education.vic.gov.au/Documents/about/programs/partnerships/dis-
cussionpaper.pdf
State Government Victoria. (2013). From new directions to action: World class teaching and 
school leadership. Retrieved from http://www.education.vic.gov.au/Documents/about/depart-
ment/teachingprofession.pdf
State Government Victoria. (2015). Teaching academies of professional practice. Retrieved from 
http://www.education.vic.gov.au/about/programs/partnerships/Pages/tapp.aspx.
Teacher Education Ministerial Advisory Group (TEMAG). (2015). Action now: Classroom ready 
teachers. Canberra, Australia: Australian Government.
Vick, M. (2006). “It’s a difficult matter”: Historical perspectives on the enduring problem of the 
practicum in teacher preparation. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 34(2), 181–198. 
doi:10.1080/13598660600720579.
White, S. (2016). In R. Brandenburg, S. McDonough, J. Burke, & S. White (Eds.), Preface in 
teacher education: Innovation, intervention and impact. Singapore, Singapore: Springer.
White, S., & Forgasz, R. (2016). The practicum: The place of experience? In J. Loughran & M. L. 
Hamilton (Eds.), International handbook of teacher education. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: 
Springer.
White, S., & Forgasz, R. (2017). Supporting mentoring and assessment in practicum settings: A 
new professional development approach for school-based teacher educators. In M. A. Peters, 
B. Cowie, & I. Mentor (Eds.), A companion to research in teacher education. Singapore, 
Singapore: Springer.
Zeichner, K. (2010). Rethinking the connections between campus courses and field experiences in 
college and university-based teacher education. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1–2), 89–99. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11165-009-9141-1.
Zeichner, K., Payne, K.A., & Brayko, K. (2015). Democratising teacher education. Journal of 
Teacher Education, 66(2), 122–135.
2  Exploring the Australian Teacher Education ‘Partnership’ Policy Landscape…

33
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_3
Chapter 3
Theorising the Third Space of Professional 
Experience Partnerships
Rachel Forgasz, Deborah Heck, Judy Williams, Angelina Ambrosetti, 
and Linda-Dianne Willis
Abstract  Across the international research literature, references to the problematic 
‘theory-practice gap’ in initial teacher education abound. Essentially, this refers to 
the dialectical positioning of university-based learning about teaching as abstracted 
theory in opposition to situated school-based learning about teaching through prac-
tice. This perceived theory-practice gap is exacerbated by the fact that the distinc-
tion between university-based and school-based learning is not only figurative but 
also literal, resulting in confusion amongst preservice teachers who often perceive 
an irreconcilable tension between the theories learned at the university and the prac-
tices observed during their professional experience in schools.
Policy reform and popular debate around this persistent problem tend to focus 
attention on rebalancing the ratios of theoretical and practical learning in initial 
teacher education. But recent scholarship on the subject offers a new paradigm in 
which theory meets practice and in which university- and school-based learning 
come together in a third space of mutuality, hybridity and collaboration. Popularised 
by Ken Zeichner, third space theory is gathering momentum as a framework for 
closing the theory-practice gap in initial teacher education, especially as it plays out 
in the professional experience component. Third space theory is being variously 
applied across contexts to (re)frame school-university partnerships and the role and 
position of various stakeholders within them.
R. Forgasz (*) • J. Williams 
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
e-mail: Rachel.Forgasz@monash.edu 
D. Heck 
University of the Sunshine Coast, Sunshine Coast, QLD, Australia 
A. Ambrosetti 
Central Queensland University, Noosaville, QLD, Australia 
L.-D. Willis 
The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
www.ebook3000.com

34
So, what is third space theory all about? What makes it useful for reconceptualis-
ing partnerships in initial teacher education? What is its genealogy as a conceptual, 
philosophical and political framework? And what kinds of attendant considerations 
should be taken into account by teacher education scholars looking to apply it to 
their thinking? These questions form the focus of this chapter, which offers a critical 
analysis of the development of third space theory and an interrogation of the possi-
bilities and limitations of its application to the professional experience context.
Introduction
Across the teacher education research literature, references to the problematic 
‘theory-­practice gap’ in initial teacher education abound. Essentially, this refers to 
the dialectical positioning of university-based learning about teaching as abstracted 
theory in opposition to situated, school-based learning about teaching through prac-
tice (Ng, Nicholas, & Williams, 2010; Sinner, 2010). This perceived theory-practice 
gap is exacerbated by the fact that the division between university-based and school-­
based learning is not only figurative but also literal; that is, teacher education is 
taught partly by academics in the university setting and partly by mentors and teach-
ers in schools. This separation accentuates confusion amongst preservice teachers 
who often perceive irreconcilable tensions between the theories learned at the uni-
versity and the practices observed during their professional experience in schools 
(Rorrison, 2005).
Policy reform and popular debate around this persistent problem tend to focus 
attention on rebalancing the ratios of theoretical and practical learning in initial 
teacher education. But recent scholarship on the subject offers a paradigm in which 
theory meets practice and in which university- and school-based learning come 
together in a ‘third space’ of mutuality, hybridity and collaboration. Popularised in 
professional experience research by Zeichner (2010), ‘the third space’ is frequently 
invoked as a conceptual framework for addressing the theory-practice gap in initial 
teacher education, especially as it plays out in its professional experience compo-
nent. It is not difficult to understand its appeal. The spatial metaphor of ‘third space’ 
readily encompasses a number of associations that powerfully and tangibly express 
the complex interrelationships between people, institutions and knowledges; for 
example, we might speak of the centre and the periphery, the borders of knowledge, 
of marking out territory, exploring new frontiers, crossing boundaries and carving 
out new spaces. The possibilities are seemingly endless. And yet, ‘third space’ is 
also more than a helpful metaphor for describing relationships and tensions. Third 
space theory has transdisciplinary origins that track back some 20  years before 
Zeichner’s uptake of the concept. Indeed, third space theory has multiple, simulta-
neous disciplinary genealogies, each of which inscribes the metaphor of the ‘third 
space’ with a particular meaning (Bhabha, 1990; Gutiérrez, Rymes, & Larson, 
1995; Soja, 1996).
R. Forgasz et al.

35
The purpose of this chapter is to explore the use of third space theory in the con-
text of initial teacher education, in particular, in relation to professional experience 
partnerships between universities, schools and communities that facilitate preser-
vice teacher learning within various professional contexts. The chapter begins with 
a critical analysis of third space theory as argued by several oft-cited theorists. The 
analysis examines the specifics of each theorist’s conceptualisation of third space 
and offers some observations regarding the possibilities and limitations for educa-
tors when applying third space theory to theorise aspects of professional experience 
partnerships within initial teacher education. Attention then turns to the critical 
review and systematic analysis of recent scholarship that applied third space theory 
to teacher education and professional experience partnerships. The outcome of the 
analysis indicates that since its popularisation by Zeichner in 2010, third space the-
ory has been applied to three aspects of professional experience partnerships in 
teacher education: to frame the development of new programs and practices, to 
understand the complexity of preservice teacher learning and identity and to explore 
the tensions in teacher educator identities.
Critical Analysis of Third Space Theory
The most frequently cited third space theorists across the international teacher edu-
cation research literature are Bhabha (1990, 1994), Mitchell (1995), Soja (1996) 
and Gutiérrez in collaboration with various co-authors (Gutiérrez, 2008; Gutiérrez 
et al., 1995). Common across all three conceptualisations of the third space is the 
political act of disrupting both unified and binary ways of seeing through the intro-
duction of a ‘third’ possibility. Their various philosophical assumptions, underpin-
nings and purposes are otherwise different in sometimes subtle, yet ultimately 
significant ways. And while it is perfectly appropriate for researchers to stretch, 
combine and play with these existing concepts in order to theorise their own unique 
knowledge contributions, lack of awareness of the differences risks the misappro-
priation and dilution of the third space construct. Conversely, paying attention to the 
details of different third space theories may offer even greater promise for the appli-
cation of third space theory as a framework for theorising, problematising and 
reconceptualising the tensions and possibilities of professional experience partner-
ships within initial teacher education.
Bhabha’s Third Space of Hybridity
Understood with a post-colonial sensibility, Bhabha’s first space may be understood 
to refer to indigenous cultural knowledge and identity. The second space, therefore, 
refers to the coloniser’s imposed knowledges, cultures and structures. The colonised 
in this cultural construction has two choices: either assimilate and relinquish 
3  Theorising the Third Space of Professional Experience Partnerships
www.ebook3000.com

36
indigenous identity altogether or be read as culturally ‘Other’. Invoked to describe 
the point at which first and second space cultural identities rub uncomfortably 
together, Bhabha’s third space of hybridity offers another alternative. Deemed to be 
a ‘split-space of enunciation’ (Bhabha, 1994, p. 56), the third space is the in-between 
space of hybridity in which it is possible ‘to live on the cusp, to deal with two con-
tradictory [identities] at the same time without either transcending or repressing that 
contradiction’ (Bhabha as cited in Mitchell, 1995, np). Within the third space, new 
knowledges and new cultural expressions and identities emerge, which are traceable 
neither to the first nor to the second space but instead are the unique product of 
hybridity.
Significantly, Bhabha’s third space of ‘cultural and historical hybridity’ (1994, 
p. 31) is not something we choose to create or enter. It is, rather, a way of under-
standing the in-between experience of cultural difference that acknowledges, with-
out seeking to unite, multiple and sometimes contradictory identities, knowledges 
and cultures. As ‘the margin of hybridity, where cultural differences “contingently” 
and conflictually touch’ (Bhabha, 1994, p. 296), the third space can produce both 
anxious and agentic social actors. With this dual focus on the discomfort and the 
possibilities of contingent, hybrid identities, Bhabha’s conceptualisation of the third 
space offers a useful way in which to theorise the tensions in identity and knowl-
edge construction that can arise for preservice teachers, teacher educators and 
school-based personnel as they negotiate their roles and identities within profes-
sional experience partnerships.
Soja’s Thirdspace and Thirding-as-Othering
The ‘Thirdspace’ introduced in Soja (1996) Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles 
and other real-and-imagined places draws conceptually not from Bhabha’s post-­
colonial third space theorisation of cultural hybridity but from French philosopher 
Henri Lefebvre’s various philosophies of trialectic reasoning and social spatiality. 
According to Soja (1996), ‘[w]ithout ever using the specific term, Lefebvre was 
probably the first to discover, describe, and insightfully explore Thirdspace as a 
radically different way of looking at, interpreting, and acting to change the embrac-
ing spatiality of human life’ (p. 29). The ‘spatiality of human life’ to which Soja 
refers is both literal and metaphorical. A postmodern geographer, Soja is concerned 
with both revaluing the significance of the ‘spatial dimension of our lives’ (p. 1) and 
with the theoretical and philosophical insights opened up through the expansion of 
our ‘spatial and geographical imaginations’ (p. 1).
Soja’s Thirdspace offers what he describes as a ‘recombinatorial and radically 
open perspective’ that uses the critical strategy of ‘thirding-as-Othering’ in order to 
‘open up our spatial imaginaries to ways of thinking and acting politically that 
respond to all binarisms, to any attempt to confine thought and political action to 
only two alternatives, by interjecting an-Other set of choices’ (p. 5). The technique 
of ‘thirding-as-Othering’ has its roots in Lefebvre’s philosophical resistance to 
R. Forgasz et al.

37
­dialectical thinking. Soja explains that, for Lefebvre, ‘[t]here is always the Other, a 
third term that disrupts, disorders, and begins to reconstitute the conventional binary 
opposition into an-Other that comprehends but is more than the sum of two parts’ 
(p. 31). He describes Lefebvre’s response to either/or binaries ‘by choosing instead 
an-Other alternative, marked by the openness of the both/and also’ (p. 7). Although 
rarely attributed to either Soja or Lefebvre, the language of ‘both/and also’ is fre-
quently invoked in teacher education research in what may be read as the critical 
thirding of familiar binaries such as university/school and theory/practice.
Soja enacts various examples of critical thirding, even challenging epistemologi-
cal perspectives such as modernism and postmodernism that otherwise appear to be 
‘incompatible, uncombinable’ (p.  6) binaries. Elsewhere, critical thirding of the 
Firstspace of the ‘real’ material world versus the Secondspace of ‘imagined’ repre-
sentations of spatiality creates a Thirdspace of ‘real-and-imagined places’ (p. 6). 
Even Bhabha’s hybridity is offered up by Soja as an example of thirding-as-­
Othering, providing as it does an-Other alternative to the unenviable choice between 
indigenous-oppressed-other and assimilated-homogenous-colonised (see Soja, 
1996, pp. 139–145).
Whereas Bhabha’s third space emerges to account for an identity which might be 
described as neither first nor second space, Soja’s (and Lefebvre’s) Thirdspace pro-
duces an-Other alternative which is inclusive of both. Furthermore, where hybrid 
subjects inexorably find themselves in Bhabha’s third space, Soja’s Thirdspace is 
intentionally created via ‘a creative process of restructuring that draws selectively 
and strategically from the two opposing categories to open up new alternatives’ 
(p. 5). According to Soja (1996), embracing the third space of cultural identity is a 
kind of ‘chosen marginality’ since it ‘explicitly challenges hegemonic historiogra-
phy’ (p. 140). Despite these differences, the interest that Bhabha and Soja share is 
disrupting the hegemonic assumptions that underpin binary thinking, by highlight-
ing (Bhabha) and creating (Soja) alternative spaces and perspectives.
Gutiérrez’s Third Space of Dialogue
Despite writing about the third space at a similar time as Bhabha and Soja, Gutiérrez 
et al. (1995) invoked the term to describe yet another related but distinctly different 
phenomenon. While Soja explicitly addressed the relationship between his 
Thirdspace and Bhabha’s third space, Richardson Bruna (2009) observes that 
Gutiérrez claimed to have had no knowledge of Bhabha’s invocation of either ‘third 
space’ or ‘hybridity’ as its defining feature when she too began to use both terms in 
order to theorise an aspect of classroom dynamics which is essentially concerned 
with knowledge and power. In fact, Gutiérrez (2008) tracks the development of her 
own third space metaphor over time.
Grounded in Bakhtinian notions of ‘dialogic meaning and social heteroglossia’ 
(Gutiérrez et al., 1995, p. 446), Gutiérrez’s third space refers to the ways in which 
teachers and students can share knowledge and power, in order to challenge 
3  Theorising the Third Space of Professional Experience Partnerships
www.ebook3000.com

38
­dominant discourses, by entering into a space of improvised, dialogical exchange. 
For Gutiérrez, the teacher’s ‘script’ is spoken from the first—or official—space. 
Students’ ‘counterscripts’ are spoken from the second, unofficial space. Both these 
spaces are ultimately dominated, however, by the ‘transcendent script’ that is soci-
ety’s overarching hegemonic discourse. For Gutiérrez et  al., the third space is 
Bhaktin’s ‘heteroglossia’, an unscripted space where ‘“what counts as knowledge” 
is negotiated between student and teacher, and the possibility of contesting a larger 
societal, or transcendent, script emerges’ (p. 452). In this context, teachers are not 
the agents of colonisation, imperialism or hegemony. Rather, the teacher’s position-
ing in the third space is just as vital as that of students in challenging hegemony 
through the improvisation of hybrid knowledges and understandings that emerge 
through authentic dialogue.
Beyond its classroom applications, Gutiérrez’s third space theory offers a way of 
theorising dialogue as strategy for recognising and rebalancing the power differen-
tials in professional experience relationships (e.g. mentor/mentee, teacher/teacher 
educator and teacher/student) that see some speak the official script and others the 
unofficial counterscript. But perhaps even more useful to professional experience 
research is that Gutiérrez’s approach recognises that even within the power differ-
entials of these relationships, the agency of all social actors participating in the 
professional experience is determined by a transcendent script that they cannot con-
trol, only challenge through dialogue and genuine exchange. Thus, a third space of 
improvised dialogue may offer new opportunities in the context of developing a 
partnership agenda.
Exploring the Use of Third Space Theory in Teacher 
Education Research into Professional Experience 
Partnerships
In the previous section, we offered an analysis of the disciplinary origins of third 
space, and we began to theorise some of the possibilities and limitations of applying 
each of these third space theories to teacher education professional experience part-
nership research. We now go on to offer a systematic, critical review of data-driven 
teacher education studies in which third space theory was, indeed, applied.
The review was driven by the central inquiry: how has third space theory been 
taken up in teacher education research into professional experience partnerships 
since its application by Zeichner in 2010? Searches within education databases 
identified 15 papers published between 2010 and early 2016 that referred explicitly 
to the third space as it applies to teacher education, with specific focus on the pro-
fessional experience partnership dimension of teacher education. We systematically 
coded the papers’ definitions and applications of third space theory in order to offer 
a critical analysis of the uptake of third space theory in professional experience 
research.
R. Forgasz et al.

39
The findings of the review confirmed the central role of Zeichner (2010) in the 
popularisation of the concept in teacher education discourse since that time. In that 
work, Zeichner cited all three third space theorists (Soja, Bhabha and Gutiérrez) to 
frame his own application of the term ‘third space’ to describe a ‘paradigm shift in 
the epistemology of teacher education programs’ involving the development of 
‘hybrid spaces in teacher education where academic and practitioner knowledge 
and knowledge that exists in communities come together in new less hierarchical 
ways in the service of teacher learning’ (p. 89). One of the problems we identified 
in our review was the tendency in subsequent papers to primarily attribute third 
space theory to Zeichner’s seminal work while also making sometimes glib and ad 
hoc references to any or all of Bhabha, Soja and Gutiérrez, without apparent appre-
ciation of the differences in the various purposes, underpinnings and assumptions of 
their respective theorisations of third space.
It is important to note that even before the popularisation of third space theory by 
Zeichner (2010), the concept had been taken up across a range of education research 
contexts. Across these studies, too, there is evidence of the three main conceptuali-
sations of third space being frequently conflated and confused and with good rea-
son. Both Bhabha and Soja write of the emergence of hybrid identities and hybrid 
knowledges that counter hegemonic discourse. The key difference between them 
lies in whether this hybridity emerges out of the tension of belonging neither to the 
first nor the second space (Bhabha) or whether it is intentionally created as an-Other 
alternative (Soja). And then there is Gutiérrez who, like Bhabha, speaks of ‘hybrid-
ity’ as a disruptive and empowering stance. She is interested in troubling hegemony 
by foregrounding and revaluing marginalised knowledges, identities and cultures. 
But, like Soja, she sees the third space as one in which multiple knowledges can be 
deliberately drawn in and recombined in order to create an-Other hybrid 
alternative.
Richardson Bruna (2009) is scathing in her assessment of the ‘fetishizing of third 
space’ (p. 227) in education research, arguing that ‘Bhabha’s understanding of lib-
eratory Third Space has been distorted, in education, through teacher-centred and 
power-neutral multicultural discourse’ (p.  221). Explicitly citing the work of 
Gutiérrez, Richardson Bruna argues that the post-colonial repositioning of power at 
the heart of Bhabha’s third space is lost when, for example, ‘the locus of attention 
becomes how teachers ‘create’ hybridity in the classroom rather than how students 
bring hybrid practices along and productively use them not only for enhancing their 
learning but also for influencing teaching as well’ (p. 227). However, in this cri-
tique, Richardson Bruna falls into the very same trap of misrepresentation, failing 
to recognise that Gutiérrez’s hybridity is decidedly political and that it is rooted not 
in Bhabha’s post-colonialism but in Bakhtinian dialogism. Indeed, in 2008, 
Gutiérrez lamented the ways in which the politics of her own socioculturally situ-
ated conceptualisation of the third space had been taken up in politically neutral 
ways that failed to take account of the promise of the third space as a ‘transforma-
tive space where the potential for an expanded form of learning and the develop-
ment of new knowledge are heightened’ (p. 152).
3  Theorising the Third Space of Professional Experience Partnerships
www.ebook3000.com

40
Through our review of the recent third space professional experience scholarship 
that follows, it is our intention to analyse how third space theory has so far been 
applied to understand professional experience partnerships, to make suggestions 
that might reduce the risk of further dilution and misappropriation of the theory and 
to identify opportunities for further research into its value. Three themes emerged 
from our analysis of the research on third space partnerships and professional expe-
rience. They are presented and discussed in detail as follows: First, the application 
of third space theory to frame new professional experience partnership models and 
practices in schools and the community; second, the application of third space as a 
way to explore and understand preservice teacher identity; and third, the use of third 
space to explore and explain the tensions inherent in teacher educator identity in the 
context of their professional experience work.
Third Space as Way of Framing New Professional Experience 
Models and Practices
The professional experience component of preservice teacher education programs 
often relies heavily on cooperation between universities and schools for authentic 
opportunities for professional learning. It has been long argued that without coop-
eration, and indeed partnership between the two spaces, the disconnection between 
theory and practice will continue to grow. In his seminal paper, Zeichner (2010) 
called for a paradigm shift and renewed focus on the ‘hybrid spaces in teacher edu-
cation where academic and practitioner knowledge and knowledge that exists in 
communities come together in new, less hierarchical ways in the service of teacher 
learning’ (p. 89). There are several examples within the literature that explore the 
purposeful creation of hybrid spaces, and therefore hybrid roles and relationships, 
within professional practice partnerships.
The recent changes in funding models in Initial Teacher Education (ITE) in 
England are an example of an alternative context for such hybrid spaces to emerge. 
In the English context, funding that traditionally went to universities is now being 
redirected towards schools to recruit and train teachers. Jackson and Burch (2016) 
report on ‘School Direct’, a program whereby schools apply for funding to train 
teachers on site, thus usurping the role traditionally played by the university. The 
schools in this model take ownership of teacher knowledge and the application of 
such knowledge. However, in this hybrid third space, schools are required to work 
in partnership with an ITE provider who becomes responsible for the quality of the 
training. The third space created in this model enables the intersection of practitio-
ner and academic knowledge and thus assists in reducing the gap between the 
theory-­practice divide (Zeichner, 2010). The model as described by Jackson and 
Burch turns traditional roles and relationships upside down with the participants in 
the model grappling with the creation of new roles, new identities and new ways of 
interacting. As such, although a purposefully created ‘space’, the consequences of 
R. Forgasz et al.

41
this model links to Bhabha’s conceptualisation of cultural and historical third space 
hybridity (1994).
In a second example, Le Cornu (2012) discusses a partnership model that frames 
the roles that participants play in a professional experience placement within a 
learning community, thus providing an alternative hybrid space that allows the par-
ticipants to ‘work differently and more collaboratively’ (p. 29). The learning com-
munities’ model challenges the traditional conceptions of the role of the school-based 
coordinator. Traditionally, this role is administrative; however, within the learning 
communities’ model, they become ‘leaders of learning’ (p. 19) through the use of 
learning circles that enable professional conversations to occur on a regular basis. 
As such, Le Cornu argues that the school-based coordinator enables the creation of 
a third space whereby pedagogical practices are discussed, and links between prac-
titioner and academic knowledge can be illuminated. The notion of third space in 
this context described by Le Cornu identifies the third space as the one created by 
teacher educators and school coordinators for the purpose of creating new possibili-
ties. While not identified specifically by the author, this application of third space in 
the professional partnership context suggests an affinity with Soja’s conception of 
thirding-as-Othering.
Similarly, Taylor, Klein, and Abrams (2014) describe a teacher residency pro-
gram that endeavours to challenge the traditional roles played by the participants of 
a teacher education program. The program aims to overcome traditional divides that 
occur between universities and schools by equally valuing the knowledge of the 
community, faculty, teachers and preservice teachers. The urban teacher residency 
model described in the research by Taylor and colleagues sees preservice teachers 
placed alongside a mentor teacher for a school year who co-constructs learning in 
the school context with the preservice teacher. In this respect, the researchers 
describe the third space as being the program itself, stating that ‘teacher education 
in this instance, occurs not only in university and in the school, but also in a third 
space unique to itself’ (p. 3). The work authentically contributes to the political 
disruption of teacher education partnerships. The identification of three specific 
spaces is strongly connected to the work of Gutiérrez and offers new ways for part-
ners in teacher education to negotiate power differentials. Like Le Cornu’s partner-
ship model, this unique space of other provides multiple sources of expertise that 
negate traditional hierarchical structures of teacher education. Hence, it also sug-
gests connections to Soja’s thirding-as-Othering.
Another interesting but different partnership model that creates a hybrid third 
space is the inclusion of a professional experience opportunity where the university 
teacher educator works alongside preservice teachers and mentors in partner 
schools. Martin, Snow, and Torrez (2011) describe the teacher educators in this 
model using Zeichner’s terminology of ‘hybrid teacher educators’ (p. 299); thus, the 
roles undertaken within the school context foster third spaces across the partnership. 
The researchers describe the model as having the potential to intersect the different 
kinds of knowledge that the participants interact with, but also to challenge the rela-
tionships that traditionally occur in professional experience. The hybrid teachers 
indicated that:
3  Theorising the Third Space of Professional Experience Partnerships
www.ebook3000.com

42
We took on roles at the school sites designed to strengthen collaboration and foster relation-
ship building within and across the different groups. Negotiating this resulting web of rela-
tionships seemed, to us, much like a complicated dance involving ongoing decision-making 
processes situated in specific contexts; the complexity arising from the ‘variety of perspec-
tives, needs, and interests of the many involved parties’. (Martin et al., 2011, p. 305)
Although the partnership model in Martin and colleagues research can be linked 
to Guiterrez’s collective third space, the challenges faced by the teacher educator 
towards their role were neither first nor second space and therefore link more spe-
cifically to Soja’s conceptualisation of thirding-as-Othering. In this respect, the 
opportunities that the roles and the associated participatory interactions created lead 
towards an alternative construction of identities and learning consistent with Soja. 
The role of the teacher educators in this example was reconstructed according to the 
context of the professional experience and the nature of the interactions that occurred 
as a result of the goals set out to be achieved.
The examples presented and described in this section of university-school part-
nerships have highlighted how hybrid spaces can create opportunities for preservice 
teacher learning that takes advantage of multiple sources of expertise to support 
high-quality teaching, as espoused in Zeichner’s conception of third space (Zeichner, 
2010). In this respect, the literature provides examples of how the third space can 
offer alternative school-university partnerships that allow the creation of new 
knowledge where practitioner and academic knowledge, or the practice and theory, 
intersects. More specifically, such spaces allow new knowledge to emerge from the 
connections made by the preservice teachers ‘in and from practice’ (p. 91) and inte-
grates what is often seen as competing discourses in new ways. Although the third 
space challenges the participants in professional experience about new ways of 
thinking and doing, the third space offers alternative possibilities which may enable 
ITE providers and schools to create authentic partnerships, but also strengthen them 
for future learning.
Third Space as a Way of Understanding the Complexity 
of Preservice Teacher Identity
Persistent disconnections between what preservice teachers are taught during uni-
versity coursework and the opportunities to enact what they learn in schools and 
classrooms during field experience have limited the roles preservice teachers can 
play. The conceptualisation of a third space as discussed in this chapter may enable 
preservice teachers to develop new and different identities that bridge the traditional 
theory-practice divide. Three studies from the literature are discussed and analysed 
below to provide learning and insight into how this may be possible.
In the first example, Cahill et al. (2016) conceived a third space as one in which 
dialogic exchange enabled preservice teachers to work with teachers and teacher 
educators as well as students. The research involved 120 University of Melbourne 
preservice teachers undertaking a Master of Teaching (Secondary) program and 125 
R. Forgasz et al.

43
high school students in years 7–10. The study was part of a course designed to forge 
a university-school ‘learning partnership’. In the space, the high school students 
were positioned as advisors and consultants as they engaged in participatory tasks 
(e.g. role plays) together with the preservice teachers. Through the use of dialogic 
methods (e.g. the inclusion of student ‘voice’), the course provided opportunities 
for the school students to formally contribute to the professional development of the 
preservice teachers. The deliberate opening up of spatial and geographic dimen-
sions in Cahill et al.’s study could be considered a reflection of Soja’s (1996) con-
ceptualisation of Thirdspace. However, the emphasis on preservice teachers learning 
with and from students about how to enhance their engagement and well-being 
seems more aligned with Gutiérrez’s (2008) ideas of a collective third space. Greca 
(2016) and McDonough (2014) observe that Gutiérrez’s work has often been used 
within the literature in the context of the development of new programs that focused 
on dialogue between partners. The power of conceptualising Cahill et al.’s research 
through the lens offered by Gutiérrez is in seeing the transformative potential of a 
third space. Cahill et al. showed that it is possible to recast preservice teacher iden-
tity by providing opportunities for them to work together with students to decon-
struct the discourses that shape expectations and simultaneously to co-construct 
new storylines about what is possible in teacher-student relations.
In the second example, research by Youens, Smethem, and Sullivan (2014) 
described how university teacher educator visits during professional experience 
were reconceptualised as spaces for learning conversations amongst mentor teach-
ers, preservice teachers and teacher educators. Youens et al. found that subsequent 
analyses of preservice teacher-selected videos of classroom practice constituted a 
powerful tool for creating dialogic spaces ‘physically and emotionally removed 
from the busyness of classrooms and the ‘remoteness’ of a university campus’ 
(p. 109). They elaborated that ‘In this way, the course of the discussions swiftly 
circumvented the culture and practices historically associated with ‘university tutor 
visits’ to an in-depth analysis of issues around pupil learning and the influence of 
theory on practice’ (p. 109). As a result, they concluded that the use of video capture 
enabled the preservice teachers to develop their identities as professional teachers 
through interactional spaces in which they were recognised and credited as valuable 
contributors to the learning of all involved (Youens et al., 2014). In Youens et al.’s 
research, using video captures to bring together stakeholders who traditionally play 
separate and distinct roles in preservice teacher education illustrates Bhabha’s 
(1994) idea of cultural hybridity as a third space. In this space, the mentor teachers, 
preservice teachers and teacher educators maintained their usual contradictory iden-
tities while simultaneously transcending those identities in ways that repressed 
those contradictions (see Bhabha as cited in Mitchell, 1995). New knowledges, new 
cultural expressions and new identities were therefore possible. These expressions 
emerged through dialogic exchange and cogenerated action amongst all partici-
pants. Hence, Gutiérrez’s (2008) ideas of a collective third space were also demon-
strated. In connecting the ideas of Bhabha and Gutiérrez, Youens et al.’s research 
shows the transformative potential of third space conceptualisation for [re]develop-
ing preservice teachers’ identity as agentive, collegial, reflexive professionals.
3  Theorising the Third Space of Professional Experience Partnerships
www.ebook3000.com

44
In the third example, Greca’s (2016) research in inquiry teaching in science also 
explored a third space through the use of discursive spaces in which teachers, pre-
service teachers and teacher educators participated. Such spaces were generated by 
the teacher educators who developed activities in which the preservice teachers 
actively participated. These activities included preservice teachers reflecting on sci-
ence teaching events and designing and implementing a science inquiry sequence 
during their professional experience. The research unearthed a number of tensions 
for the preservice teachers such as confidence in their teaching ability, student group 
work and class behaviour, using inquiry design for teaching science and not know-
ing their ‘place’ in the school community. According to Greca, the source of these 
tensions concerned contradictions between the preservice teachers’ knowledge of 
theory in universities and practice in schools. Rather than ignore them, generating a 
third space in which these tensions could be a focus for discussion proved key to 
increasing the preservice teachers’ learning. Like Youens et al.’s (2014) research, 
Greca’s study illustrates the emergence of both a hybrid third space (Bhabha, 1994) 
and a collective third space (Gutiérrez, 2008). Conceptualisation of third space in 
these distinct yet simultaneous and connected ways shows how new possible solu-
tions to the challenges of traversing the usually contradictory worlds of universities 
and schools were generated. As a result, the preservice teachers were positioned to 
better construct their identity as effective science teachers.
In each of these three examples, conceptualisation of a third space yielded 
knowledge and understanding about ways to bridge the traditional theory-practice 
gap. Seen through different, sometimes overlapping, third space lenses, these stud-
ies showed how the intersection of knowledges from preservice teachers, teachers, 
teacher educators and students created new knowledges, new practices and new 
hybrid roles. Consequently, the development of new professional preservice teacher 
identities was possible.
Third Space as a Way of Understanding the Tensions in Teacher 
Educator Identity
When teacher educators work in the area of professional experience, and have close 
contact with preservice teachers and supervising teachers in schools, their contexts 
of professional practice can change considerably. Several researchers have written 
about their experiences in these contexts as operating within a ‘third space’ and 
have drawn either directly or indirectly on the work of third space theorists. Some 
would suggest that this work leads to the development of new perspectives on the 
nature of learning and teaching and of themselves as teacher educators. As a school 
teacher transitioning to the role of university-based teacher educator, Williams 
(2013) did not specifically refer to any of the theorists outlined above in this chapter 
and relied mostly on literature that explores the interactions between school- and 
university-based teacher educators. However, in finding that her shifting identity as 
R. Forgasz et al.

45
a teacher/educator led to new perspectives on what it means to learn to become a 
teacher, Williams appears to be representing a concept similar to that theorised by 
Bhabha, that is, that her ‘third space’ of professional practice emerged out of the 
tensions she felt as a teacher transitioning to the academic work and identity of a 
teacher educator. Williams’ self-study revealed that working in the so-called third 
space created many challenges and rewards, including shifting identities between 
related but distinct professional selves (classroom teacher and teacher educator), 
changing perspectives on learning to become a teacher and negotiating relationships 
with mentors and preservice teachers. Williams concluded that:
... the boundary practices of the third space require a delicate balancing act of acknowledg-
ing and respecting the personal and professional identities of all involved …The challenges 
and tensions involved in developing these boundary practices are essential elements of my 
evolving identity and practice as a teacher educator. (p. 128)
In another self-study, McDonough (2014) explored her experiences within an 
intentionally created third space (Soja), in which she ‘developed and implemented 
a partnership between an independent P-12 school and a regional university to cre-
ate a third space for teacher education focused on exploring new opportunities for 
mentoring of pre-service teachers and working with supervising teachers’ (p. 213). 
In recounting her experiences as both a university-based teacher educator and a 
secondary teacher providing support for preservice teachers during professional 
experience, McDonough found that her work ‘was characterized by navigating ten-
sions of loyalty, advocacy and obligation in my relationships with pre-service and 
supervising teachers’ (p. 211). As both a practicing school teacher and employed by 
the university to work in practicum supervision, McDonough faced tensions around 
her sense of loyalty, advocacy and obligation to the different stakeholders involved 
in the practicum—preservice teachers, teachers in schools, students in schools, 
teacher educator colleagues and the regulatory bodies that provide the framework in 
which professional experience takes place. Early on in this work, McDonough 
found that she was ‘bound by issues of who to speak for as I found my hybrid iden-
tity as teacher, university mentor and teacher caused me to experience shifting, and 
at times, conflicting emotions about who I was loyal to, who I would advocate for, 
and who I was obliged to act with or for’ (p. 215). As she became more involved in 
the work of this third space, McDonough began to understand herself and her hybrid 
role more deeply. She concluded that she ‘needed to begin to rewrite the script of 
what it means to be a mentor in these kinds of spaces through processes of transla-
tion and mediation’ (p. 218). Although McDonough was working in an intentionally 
created third space, which aligns with Soja’s conceptualisation, she also encoun-
tered the tensions that Bhabha referred to when people assume hybrid identities, 
that is, when they are neither one (teacher) nor the other (teacher educator) but both.
3  Theorising the Third Space of Professional Experience Partnerships
www.ebook3000.com

46
Conclusion
A review of the literature has revealed that third space theorists provide different yet 
complimentary theoretical frames through which to view the professional experi-
ence component of teacher education. The different conceptions of third space pre-
sented in this chapter include hybridity, thirding-as-Othering and dialogue.
Soja’s thirding-as-Othering is the typical application of third space theory in 
research about building new models of school-university partnerships. The focus on 
creating professional experiences that are neither representative of school nor uni-
versity knowledge forms, but something entirely new, is a unifying theme within 
this work. With its emphasis on preservice teacher agency and voice, research into 
the development of preservice teachers’ identities during their professional experi-
ence largely reflects Gutiérrez’s approach to third space as dialogue. Finally, 
research into teacher educators’ identities and roles during the professional experi-
ence reflects both Soja’s notion of deliberately creating third spaces of possibility 
and Bhabha’s notion of the tensions that arise from hybrid identities.
This chapter attests that third space theory has been applied to recent partner-
ships and professional experience scholarship within the field of teacher education. 
Viewing the professional experience through the lens of various third space theories 
certainly helps us to problematise teacher education and to gain greater insights into 
the learning of preservice teachers, teacher educators and educators in school con-
texts. We propose that the potential of third space theory for understanding the com-
plexities of the professional experience can only be heightened with closer attention 
paid to the nuance that each third space theory offers. We also note that while exist-
ing research applies third space theory to program development and preservice 
teacher and teacher educator identity, further research possibilities include explor-
ing the third spaces of professional experience from the perspectives of mentor 
teachers and school coordinators.
References
Bhabha, H. (1990). The third space. In J. Rutherford (Ed.), Identity: Community, culture and dif-
ference (pp. 207–221). London: Lawerence and Wishart.
Bhabha, H. (1994). The location of culture. London: Routledge.
Cahill, H., Coffey, J., McLean Davies, L., Kriewaldt, J., Freeman, E., Acquaro, D., et al. (2016). 
Learning with and from: Positioning school students as advisors in pre-service teacher educa-
tion. Teacher Development, 20(3), 295–312. doi:10.1080/13664530.2016.1155478.
Greca, I. M. (2016). Supporting pre-service elementary teachers in their understanding of inquiry 
teaching through the construction of a third discursive space. International Journal of Science 
Education, 38(5), 791–813. doi:10.1080/09500693.2016.1165892.
Gutiérrez, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading Research 
Quarterly, 43(2), 148–164. doi:10.1598/RRQ.43.2.3.
Gutiérrez, K. D., Rymes, B., & Larson, J. (1995). Script, counterscript, and underlife in the class-
room: James Brown v. Board of Education. Harvard Educational Review, 65(3), 445.
R. Forgasz et al.

47
Jackson, A., & Burch, J. (2016). School direct, a policy for initial teacher training in England: 
Plotting a principled pedagogical path through a changing landscape. Professional Development 
in Education, 42(4), 511–526. doi:10.1080/19415257.2015.1052090.
Le Cornu, R.  J. (2012). School co-ordinators: Leaders of learning in professional experience. 
Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 37(3), 18–33.
Martin, S. D., Snow, J. L., & Torrez, C. A. (2011). Navigating the terrain of third space: Tensions 
with/in relationships in school-university partnerships. Journal of Teacher Education, 62(3), 
299–311. doi:10.1177/0022487110396096.
McDonough, S. (2014). Rewriting the script of mentoring pre-service teachers in third space: 
Exploring tensions of loyalty, obligation and advocacy. Studying Teacher Education, 10(3), 
210–221. doi:10.1080/17425964.2014.949658.
Mitchell, W. J. T. (1995). Interview with cultural theorist Homi Bhabha. Artforum International 
Magazine, 33(7), 80–84.
Ng, W., Nicholas, H., & Williams, A. (2010). School experience influences on pre-service teach-
ers’ evolving beliefs about effective teaching. Teaching and Teacher Education, 26(2), 278–
289. doi:10.1016/j.tate.2009.03.010.
Richardson Bruna, K. (2009). Jesús and María in the jungle: An essay on possibility and con-
straint in the third-shift third space. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 4(1), 221–237. 
doi:10.1007/s11422-008-9159-0.
Rorrison, D. (2005). Turning a critical lens on the practicum in secondary pre-service teacher 
education programs. Paper presented at the AARE 2005 International education research con-
ference, UWS Parramatta.
Sinner, A. (2010). Negotiating spaces: The in-betweenness of becoming a teacher. Asia-Pacific 
Journal of Teacher Education, 38(1), 23–27. doi:10.1080/13598660903474171.
Soja, E. W. (1996). Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and other real-and-imagined places. 
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Taylor, M., Klein, E. J., & Abrams, L. (2014). Tensions of reimagining our roles as teacher educa-
tors in a third space: Revisiting a co/autoethnography through a faculty lens. Studying Teacher 
Education, 10(1), 3–19. doi:10.1080/17425964.2013.866549.
Williams, J. (2013). Boundary crossing and working in the third space: Implications for a teacher 
educator’s identity and practice. Studying Teacher Education, 9(2), 118–129. doi:10.1080/17
425964.2013.808046.
Youens, B., Smethem, L., & Sullivan, S. (2014). Promoting collaborative practice and reciproc-
ity in initial teacher education: Realising a ‘dialogic space’ through video capture analysis. 
Journal of Education for Teaching, 40(2), 101–113. doi:10.1080/02607476.2013.871163.
Zeichner, K. (2010). Rethinking the connections between campus courses and field experiences 
in college- and university-based teacher education. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1–2), 
89–99. doi:10.1177/0022487109347671.
3  Theorising the Third Space of Professional Experience Partnerships
www.ebook3000.com

49
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_4
Chapter 4
Exploring Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher 
Education School-University Partnerships 
Using the Methodology of Metalogue
Linda-Dianne Willis, Helen Grimmett, and Deborah Heck
Abstract  This chapter explores the concept of ‘cogenerativity’ by providing three 
different examples of initial teacher education school-university partnership proj-
ects in Australia. The first of these professional experience projects drew on the use 
of participatory approaches in a new Master of Teaching program; the second 
involved a project of co-teaching triads; and the third concerned the development of 
university, school and system partnerships. The authors used the methodology of 
metalogue to engage in dialogical exchange about the notion of cogenerativity in 
relation to the literature and through the lens of each project to examine the nature 
of the concept for developing and sustaining professional experience partnerships. 
The chapter concludes that cogenerativity may be useful for conceptualising why 
and how initial teacher education school-university partnerships flourish. The 
knowledge developed may assist educators and researchers not only to create sup-
portive conditions for the development of initial teacher education school-university 
partnerships but also to [re]imagine the possibilities of such partnerships to realise 
continual expansive transformative learning for all involved. The use of metalogue 
offered a unique research methodology for the authors who each explored their 
experience of school-university partnerships. At the same time, the use of metal-
ogue illustrated cogenerativity in practice. The approach also enabled the authors to 
highlight possible challenges and limitations for creating and sustaining cogenera-
tivity in the context of initial teacher education school-university partnerships.
L.-D. Willis (*) 
The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
e-mail: l.willis@uq.edu.au 
H. Grimmett 
Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia 
D. Heck 
University of the Sunshine Coast, Sunshine Coast, QLD, Australia

50
Background
The genesis for this chapter emerged when we, Linda, Helen and Debbie (authors), 
met for the first time at an Australian Association for Research in Education (AARE) 
Special Interest Group (SIG) workshop. Here Linda shared how she had contem-
plated the philosophical and theoretical notion of ‘cogenerativity’ to describe and 
explain how educators and researchers might create the conditions for initial teacher 
education (ITE) school-university partnerships to develop and flourish. Linda’s con-
templations of her recent work as program director of a new graduate-entry teacher 
education program that involved school-university partnerships resonated with both 
Helen and Debbie. Helen recognised parallels with her work that involved co-­
teaching triads, and Debbie saw resemblances to her work in developing university, 
school and system partnerships that support professional experience. Developing 
and sustaining school-university partnerships have become recent additions to the 
accreditation and reaccreditation processes for initial teacher education programs in 
Australia (Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL), 2015, 
2016).
In this chapter, we use the methodology of ‘metalogue’ – used previously by 
Linda (see Willis & Exley, 2016; Willis, Kretschmann, Lewis, & Montes, 2014; 
Willis & Menzie, 2012) – to explore our growing understanding of cogenerativity 
and its potential to inform initial teacher education (ITE) school-university partner-
ships. Originally coined by Bateson (1972, 1987), the term, metalogue, is defined as 
‘a conversation about some problematic subject [where ideally] the structure of the 
conversation as a whole is also relevant to the same subject’ (p. 12). Bateson’s 
example of a conversation with his daughter about ‘muddles’ is therefore deliber-
ately muddled in its structure. Likewise, in our case, the structure of our conversa-
tion works to actually cogenerate a shared understanding of the concept of 
cogenerativity. Readers should be aware that as the form of the conversation con-
tributes as much as the content to both developing and presenting our understanding 
of the concept, it requires a different level of reading in which attention is paid 
simultaneously to both the process and product of the dialogue. A metalogue resem-
bles a metanarrative where information, ideas and even emotions that emerge in 
conversation fold back into the conversation to enable the participants to reflexively 
consider the problem. Calling on Bateson’s (1980) work, Roth and Tobin (2002) 
elaborated that:
Metalogues are conversations that take previous texts or conversations and analyse them at 
a new, meta-level. Metalogues therefore are a means to represent analyses that move 
through several levels of complexity (or logical order/type as Gregory Bateson called it). 
Metalogues … [enable] previous analyses to become the topic of reflection and/or discus-
sion. That is, metalogues constitute a practice of reflexivity. (p. xxiii)
These conversations not only enable potentially new and different perspectives 
about, and solutions to, the problem being considered but also allow the participants 
to gain new knowledge and insights about the problem, one another, the world in 
general and themselves personally. In this case, we were interested in discussing 
L.-D. Willis et al.
www.ebook3000.com

51
ways to develop effective initial teacher education school-university partnerships 
and at the same time to explore whether cogenerativity offered a way to conceptu-
alise why and how such partnerships develop and continue operating. Our metal-
ogue comprised three group conversations on Skype over several weeks which were 
initially transcribed and then revisited, reworked and added to, to improve clarity of 
meaning and strengthen ideas by including supporting literature.
These reworked conversations are presented here as a metalogue in three parts. 
The first part involves our discussion of the possible meaning and nature of cogen-
erativity in relation to the literature. Second, we each provide a snapshot from our 
different professional experience partnership projects in order to describe and anal-
yse the role of cogenerativity and to gain deeper knowledge and understanding of 
the concept and its nature. In part three, we reflect together on the potential as well 
as the challenges and limitations of using cogenerativity to conceptualise the devel-
opment and continuation of initial teacher education school-university partnerships. 
The three sections thus work together to help develop new understanding of cogen-
erativity as a useful concept for informing collaborative research and practice trans-
formations. Recommendations and implications for future research and practice 
conclude the chapter.
Metalogue Part One
Cogenerativity and the Literature
Linda
When we came together for the workshop, I’d been attempting to define cogenera-
tivity using what I’d learnt during my PhD research. My research had used ‘co-­
teaching’ and ‘cogenerative dialoguing’ to investigate parent-teacher engagement in 
a co-teaching community of practice in which a teacher, two parents and I (researcher 
and co-teacher) participated (see Willis, 2013). Co-teaching is described when two 
or more teachers purposefully decide to pool their knowledge, skills, experience and 
expertise in order to learn with and from one another about how best to teach a 
group of students. Cogenerative dialoguing describes the interactive social spaces – 
actual and virtual – set up by participants to enable dialogic exchange about a par-
ticular co-teaching enterprise. These spaces are characterised by respectful and 
inclusive practices such as listening actively, inviting equitable contributions from 
each participant, weighing ideas and arguments deliberatively, reaching shared 
understandings, making mutual decisions and acting in ways throughout co-­teaching 
that reflect these shared understandings and decisions (see Willis, 2013). Since my 
initial research, I’ve continued to ponder on the idea of cogenerativity and was par-
ticularly encouraged to explore the concept further through discussions with those 
who attended the workshop. This has led to an article in the International Journal 
of Educational Research (IJER) in which I explore cogenerativity in my 
4  Exploring Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher Education School-University…

52
parent-teacher engagement research using ideas about the topic of power that 
emerged during one-on-one cogenerative dialogues between the case teacher and 
myself (Willis, 2016). By tracing threads of ideas from these conversations, I 
showed how understandings about power emerged and contributed to the co-­
teaching community’s initial learning and ongoing operations (Willis, 2016). In 
coming to this metalogue, I also bring an understanding of cogenerativity that draws 
on the derivation of the word where ‘co’ as in co-teaching emphasises the collabora-
tion possible among individual participants and groups as they contribute their var-
ied expertise in a community of practice. I understand the meaning of ‘generativity’ 
from similar future-focused words such as ‘generation’ and ‘generative’. It refers to 
the processes that enable the successful formation, continuation, expansion and 
transformation of a community of practice as members work together towards com-
mon goals to mutually benefit all involved (Willis, 2016). These processes benefit 
from dialogic exchange possible during cogenerative dialogues and were certainly 
what I found during my previous research into parent-teacher engagement. These 
findings form the basis of my current work to investigate how initial teacher educa-
tion (ITE) school-university partnerships can be developed and sustained.
Debbie
In listening to you at the workshop and later reading your publication (see Willis, 
2016), it was your description of cogenerativity as a transformative process that 
influenced me in terms of thinking about the kinds of things that I was trying to do 
in my work in initial teacher education (ITE) school-university partnerships. In par-
ticular, it was the way you spoke about the interactions and transactions regarding 
how participants think, speak and act that caused me to consider the terminology of 
cogenerativity as actually giving a name to what I was trying to achieve. I hadn’t 
encountered the term before but creating cogenerativity was what I was aiming to 
do. I think being able to identify the components of that process and how these were 
negotiated was important. I am particularly thinking of the idea of power. In your 
research, you looked at how parents have traditionally been positioned as having 
little or no power in terms of the roles they can play in formal education (see Willis, 
2013). In the context of ITE, preservice teachers have typically played roles that 
operate from a deficit perspective compared to those of mentor teachers in schools 
and teacher educators in universities. In my work, the aim for the school-university 
partnership process was to establish a different power dynamic among the partici-
pants. Participants in the project included personnel from Independent Schools 
Queensland (ISQ), teachers and administrators from schools, teacher educators 
from universities and preservice teachers. At the level of ISQ there was an acknowl-
edgement that partnerships which included ISQ, schools and a university needed to 
be negotiated to support the development of quality mentoring in schools. The lit-
erature clearly supports the notion that coordinated school-university partnerships 
contribute to the development of quality teaching (Allen, 2011; Ronfeldt & 
L.-D. Willis et al.
www.ebook3000.com

53
Reininger, 2012; Yan & He, 2010) and the development of quality teacher education 
(Allen, Howells, & Radford, 2013). The improvement of teacher quality was identi-
fied as important in the development of the ISQ School Centres of Excellence (CoE) 
in Preservice Teaching program (ISQ, 2011–2016). The program aimed to establish 
a regional professional learning community focusing on excellence in professional 
experience for preservice teachers. The inclusion of universities as part of the pro-
cess was incorporated into the program in 2014. Hence, one focus of the develop-
ment of the partnership was to reduce the power differentials among the different 
participants while improving the quality of teaching.
The partnership in which I was involved began as a discussion between 
Independent Schools Queensland (ISQ) as a peak body and the University of the 
Sunshine Coast where I worked. Starting with one school, the partnership extended 
to include two schools, forming the Sunshine Coast ISQ School Centres of 
Excellence (CoE) in Preservice Teaching program (ISQ, 2011–2016). It was impor-
tant that the partnership did not just focus on the development of quality teaching 
for the preservice teachers; the partnership needed to focus on the learning that 
would occur for all participants. Professional development for teachers who under-
take mentor roles was paramount in considerations about the program. Hudson 
(2013) acknowledges that teachers who undertake mentor teacher roles develop 
communication and leadership skills as well as enhance their own pedagogical 
knowledge. The challenge for those involved in setting up the partnership was how 
to meaningfully connect the learning of all participants while simultaneously 
removing the vertical hierarchies that traditionally separate initial teacher education 
(ITE) players. Our solution was to develop communities of practice in which teach-
ers and administrators, teacher educators, preservice teachers and ISQ staff 
participated.
Linda
Debbie, I do recall you talking that way about your work in ITE school-university 
partnerships and saying, ‘Yes, now I have a name for what I was doing’. Helen, I’m 
wondering whether cogenerativity was at work in your context, or if you might have 
used a different name for the same idea, or have a different understanding of 
cogenerativity.
Helen
My professional experience project involved ‘co-teaching triads’, and like you, 
Linda, the project was an expansion of my own PhD research (see Grimmett, 2012) 
in which I drew extensively on the co-teaching and cogenerative dialogue literature 
(e.g. Roth & Tobin, 2002; Murphy & Scantlebury, 2010). I wouldn’t say though that 
I had used the term cogenerativity as a concept in its own right before. In setting up 
4  Exploring Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher Education School-University…

54
the new project, I certainly came to it with knowledge of those ideas you talked 
about such as dialogic exchange, and of purposefully using the principles of mutual 
respect and inclusivity, and the language associated with what we’re describing now 
as cogenerativity, even if I wasn’t using that actual word.
Linda
In my professional experience project, when I took on the role in 2014 as coordina-
tor of a new Master of Teaching (Primary) (MTeach) program, my then head of 
school encouraged me to use cogenerativity to build effective partnerships between 
partner schools and the university. He knew about my parent-teacher engagement 
research and indicated that I should use similar ideas and principles in the new con-
text. To his surprise, I commented that I didn’t think the term cogenerativity was 
prevalent in the literature. I later conducted a thorough literature search and could 
find the term used in the title of only one article by Stetsenko (2008). Stetsenko’s 
article drew on the sociocultural work of Vygotsky (1987) and Bakhtin (1986) to 
show how an individual’s learning is connected not only to the roles immediate oth-
ers play in their lives but also to society and culture which embodies and represents 
others. Stetsenko wrote that knowledge emerges from interacting with others as 
exchanges of information and ideas are by nature dialectical and relational. Hence, 
cogenerativity relies on the process of dialogical exchange as participants enter into 
relational spaces with others in a ‘continuing and expansive collaborative quest for 
knowledge and the practical pursuits associated with this quest’ (Stetsenko, 2008, 
p. 524). So, we can never ‘arrive’ in this quest as we’re always comprehending and 
engaging with others in ways that are new, and information and ideas that emerge 
are inevitably taken up by others in new and different ways (Stetsenko, 2008; Willis, 
2016).
Helen
I agree with what you’ve just said. I think even in trying to understand the nature of 
cogenerativity itself, there is never any point of ‘arrival’ because the concept will 
continue to change and develop and build constantly – in every new project. I think 
this makes it hard to come to a conclusive definition of cogenerativity, because the 
nature of the concept is that it is constantly changing.
Linda
I’m wondering what literature each of you drew on for your professional experience 
projects and how this compares to our developing understanding of cogenerativity.
L.-D. Willis et al.
www.ebook3000.com

55
Debbie
For me, the main literature was communities of practice as a means of supporting 
the development of learning across the lifespan of teachers’ careers that includes the 
context of teacher education (Le Cornu & Ewing, 2008; Lynch & Smith, 2012). A 
community of practice is defined as ‘groups of people who share a concern, a set of 
problems, or a passion about a topic, and who deepen their knowledge and expertise 
in this area by interacting on an ongoing basis’ (Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder, 
2002, p. 4). The approach is based on the notion of situated learning that highlights 
the importance of the social aspect of learning within professional contexts (Lave & 
Wenger, 1991). In my project, a community of practice provided the space for situ-
ated learning to take place focused on the development or change in professional 
practice. It also provided opportunities for processing ideas and collaboratively 
developing new knowledge (Golden, 2016; Herbers, Antelo, Ettling, & Buck, 2011; 
Kennelly & McCormack, 2015). Communities of practice have been identified as 
mechanisms for impact, mediating change and driving curriculum development 
(Parker, Patton, Madden, & Sinclair, 2010). In the context of professional develop-
ment, communities of practice provide an approach that supports the development 
of the connection between theory and practice for mentor teachers, administrators, 
teacher educators and preservice teachers. Adopting a community of practice 
approach in the system partnership project provided a process and time for collabo-
ration. The meetings developed trust among the membership, allowing members to 
engage in ‘deprivatising’ practice and to develop shared understandings about 
expectations. Although Levine (2011) initially identified these features as important 
for effective professional communities for mentor teachers, they guided the devel-
opment of the community of practice process in the project and proved important 
for all participants. One reason was how these features connected with the notion of 
the importance of building relationships that subsequently allows teachers to change 
their practice based on reflection on their work (Morgan, Brown, Heck, Pendergast, 
& Kanasa, 2013).
Helen
Apart from the co-teaching and cogenerative dialogue literature that we’ve already 
mentioned, I drew particularly on Anne Edwards’ (2005, 2007, 2010) idea of ‘rela-
tional agency’ and also on the idea of ‘mutual appropriation’ (Downing-Wilson, 
Lecusay, & Cole, 2011). If I can read from Edwards’ (2010) work, she defines rela-
tional agency as:
In brief, it involves a capacity for working with others to strengthen purposeful responses 
to complex problems. It is helpful to see it (relational agency) arising from a two-stage 
process within a constant dynamic which consists of:
(i) working with others to expand the ‘object of activity’ or task being work[ed] on by 
recognising the motives and the resources that others bring to bear as they, too, interpret it; 
and
4  Exploring Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher Education School-University…

56
(ii) aligning one’s own responses to the newly enhanced interpretations with the 
responses being made by the other professionals while acting on the expanded object. 
(p. 14)
Edwards (2010) goes on to argue that relational agency is a capacity that can be 
learned and is crucial in the types of multidisciplinary teams that function across 
several professions. For example, you might have a speech therapist, a physiothera-
pist, a teacher and several other participants all working together on meeting the 
particular needs of a child. They’re not just bringing their different individual exper-
tise to the group but also working relationally to understand and respond to others’ 
interpretations of the complex situation, so that the solutions they jointly create are 
beyond what any of them might have been able to do for the child individually. 
Likewise, Downing-Wilson et al. (2011) use the term mutual appropriation in a par-
ticular way to emphasise the hybrid activities that are created when different partici-
pants work together. During this work, the participants ‘mutually appropriate’ each 
other’s practices while striving to act in ‘mutually appropriate’ ways that allow all 
partners to achieve not only their own unique goals but also new mutually shared 
goals.
Linda
So, from what we’ve talked about, what are we feeling about the concept of cogen-
erativity that’s novel or different from the existing literature?
Helen
That’s a good question.
Debbie
That is a good question because I suppose what I’m drawn to with cogenerativity is 
the focus on transformation. Cogenerativity seems to be about creating a space for 
transformation. I’m not saying that the idea of creating a space for transformation is 
not also featured in the literature we’ve discussed, just that with cogenerativity it is 
accentuated more.
Helen
I suppose that’s the nature of ‘generativity’ – that you’ll generate something new – 
and ‘co’, that we’re doing it together. What I think is really important, and I’m not 
sure that this isn’t also in the existing literature, is that because of what each 
L.-D. Willis et al.
www.ebook3000.com

57
participant brings to the interactive space in which the dialogue takes place, you end 
up with something that actually none of those participants could have individually 
thought of. It’s like someone comes in with an idea but because of some other idea 
that’s added by someone else, actually something completely different from either 
of those two different ideas ends up being created, which, I suppose, is what rela-
tional agency and mutual appropriation are about: the idea that ‘the whole is more 
than the sum of its parts’.
Debbie
I think the literature on communities of practice talks about the community creating 
products or artefacts that can be shared. The development of products is a process 
that is identified as occurring as the community of practice begins to mature (Wenger 
et al., 2002). I wonder whether this notion of product or artefact development has 
similarities to what you’re saying Helen – that notion of actually capturing the pro-
cess or the dialogue that different participants bring together to create products that 
no one person could actually achieve on their own. I think there is an undertone in 
the community of practice literature focused around the time when the community 
seeks to organise their knowledge. I feel that there is strength in the term cogenera-
tivity because it really encompasses the collective work of the participants that 
might occur at any point rather than during the maturing phase of the community of 
practice. I also feel the term has a more everyday meaning that would connect with 
teachers and preservice teachers. Although we are mostly exploring conceptual 
ideas in this chapter, I wonder whether cogenerativity offers a term that is much 
more easily understood by participants in all different parts of the initial teacher 
education world. I know that teachers and preservice teachers were challenged by 
the meaning of community of practice during my project.
Helen
I’m also thinking that the difference is about the dialectical idea of process and 
product. Relational agency is perhaps more about the participants’ capacity to con-
tribute to the process, while the idea of communities of practice focuses more on the 
product or artefact. Cogenerativity might be conceived dialectically as process and 
product since, in thinking about the concept, these two aspects are inseparable: 
you’re creating a product through the course of creating the process. So maybe 
rather than it necessarily being different from the concepts in the other literature, it’s 
a more encompassing term that incorporates those other ideas as elements or aspects 
of what we’re coming to see as cogenerativity. As a concept itself, it too is more than 
the sum of those other parts.
4  Exploring Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher Education School-University…

58
Linda
Yes, you gain a sense that together the participants are creating something com-
pletely different as process and product; so their joint work continues to unfold 
rather than there being an end point. In other words, cogenerativity refers to ongo-
ing dialectical ways of thinking and operating with a focus on the future in that, for 
as long as those involved want to cogenerate, their work as a community will con-
tinue to expand and transform – potentially indefinitely. At this point in our metal-
ogue, it might be worthwhile to provide a specific example from our professional 
experience projects to further probe the notion of cogenerativity and to illustrate its 
nature and potential in initial teacher education school-university partnerships.
Metalogue Part Two
The Role of Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher Education 
Partnerships
Example 1: Linda
I spoke earlier about my professional experience project example to explore cogen-
erativity beginning 3  years ago when I was coordinator, teacher educator and 
researcher in the first year of a new MTeach program at an Australian university. My 
various roles afforded me different opportunities to investigate cogenerativity as a 
conceptual lens for developing a new school-university partnership. The MTeach 
was an intense four-semester program that comprised 17 courses offered over 
18 months. When thinking about it, the seeds for cogenerativity were probably sown 
initially by the program’s existing structure which saw aspects of the first semester 
professional experience course delivered in situ by the principal, head of curriculum 
and mentor teachers at what was then the sole MTeach partner school. This con-
trasted with the usual arrangement where professional experience courses were 
delivered at the university by teacher educators. However, I recognised a possible 
opportunity to purposefully enable the work of cogenerativity in the context of a 
second semester social education course that I coordinated. The course had been 
co-taught since 2011, and I invited the head of curriculum at the partner school, 
Estelle, to join the co-teaching team (see Willis et al., 2014).
The course took place at the university for 9 weeks and involved a 2-h co-taught 
workshop followed by 1-h tutorials with individual teacher educators. There were 
102 preservice teachers in the course – 7 from the MTeach and 95 from the Bachelor 
of Education (Primary) (BEd) programs – as the workshops for the MTeach and 
BEd equivalent course were taught together. During the semester, Estelle co-taught 
with me and another teacher educator four times. However, cogenerative dialoguing 
about what happened during co-teaching, co-planning and discussing the preservice 
teachers’ coursework occurred throughout the 9  weeks during face-to-face and 
L.-D. Willis et al.
www.ebook3000.com

59
online meetings. The course was interrupted between weeks 4 and 5 by a scheduled 
4-week professional experience block which the MTeach preservice teachers under-
took at the partner school.
Co-teaching on-campus allowed Estelle to experience the MTeach program and 
social education course together with the preservice teachers. In one cogenerative 
dialogue, Estelle indicated that co-teaching assisted her not only to make connec-
tions with what the preservice teachers were learning but also to ask, ‘What does 
this mean in the real world?’ (Cogenerative dialogue, 18 September 2014). She 
described the impact of her thinking on what she did during their professional 
experience:
I think the work with the MTeach preservice teachers has given me scope, permission; yeah, 
you feel a responsibility in everything. It’s like I approach them and say, “Look, I’m having 
this staff meeting”. I never say that to a preservice teacher! And what I’ve found is that I’m 
doing things differently with these preservice teachers. For example, I sat down with one of 
them to talk about a lesson, I modelled it, and then we co-taught a small group together. I 
gave him the theory behind what I was doing. (Cogenerative dialogue, 18 September, 2014)
Estelle also invited the preservice teachers to year-level planning sessions, 
reflecting that:
Some of them now have been to two planning sessions and they are more confident to have 
a say. A lot of what we do is digging into the curriculum and having a say about what we do 
and “what does that look like”, and they’re being included, but they are saying things, and 
I’ll acknowledge it and say, “That’s great that you’re picking that up” and that builds their 
confidence. That’s a scary thing to do as a beginning teacher. (Cogenerative dialogue, 18 
September 2014)
Cogenerativity is evident in the transformed ways Estelle thought, spoke and 
acted during the MTeach preservice teachers’ professional experience; she not only 
did things differently, she did different things. In later speaking about the planning 
sessions which involved looking at data in numeracy, Estelle indicated that she con-
sidered it would benefit the preservice teachers to participate in substantive conver-
sations with teachers about interpretations of data and implications for future 
teaching. She elaborated that they ‘got to see some of the real business of teaching’ 
as they engaged in open professional discussions and that ‘it wasn’t everybody sit-
ting around being told what to do’ (Informal discussion, 16 October, 2014). Estelle 
also indicated that she distributed a research article at one planning session and gave 
the preservice teachers a copy, explaining that ‘taking on board new findings and 
information from research was part of the role of teachers’ (Informal discussion, 16 
October, 2014). These examples show that Estelle shifted her view of the preservice 
teachers as being ‘not really teachers’ to seeing them more as ‘professional col-
leagues’ (Willis et al., 2014, p. 7).
Co-teaching and cogenerative dialoguing saw information and ideas exchanged 
among the co-teachers that were continued and expanded whenever Estelle and the 
preservice teachers engaged in conversations and activities. This exchange and 
engagement enabled ongoing dialectical possibilities between processes and prod-
ucts as Estelle adopted inclusive, responsive and reflexive practices and created 
opportunities to enhance their knowledge, skills and dispositions throughout their 
4  Exploring Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher Education School-University…

60
professional experience and later when the preservice teachers resumed their co-­
taught course at the university. These processes and products continually unfolded 
in new, different and previously unimagined ways, illustrating the work of cogene-
rativity and its power as a concept to simultaneously encourage the development 
and learning of the MTeach preservice teachers and to facilitate the school-­university 
partnership.
Example 2: Helen
As I mentioned earlier, my example is the piloting of a co-teaching triads model of 
professional experience, where two preservice teachers are placed with one mentor 
teacher so that all three of them co-plan, co-teach and co-evaluate together. I was 
able to introduce this approach under the umbrella of the larger, Victorian 
government-­funded, Teaching Academies of Professional Practice (TAPP) partner-
ship project involving six primary schools, three secondary schools and a university. 
This partnership structure provided time and space to cogenerate new ways of doing 
professional experience that were beyond any of our previous expectations.
The co-teaching triads were an extension of the ‘WITHIN practice PD’ model 
developed as part of my PhD research on in-service teachers’ professional develop-
ment (PD) (see Grimmett, 2012). The premise of this model is that co-teaching and 
cogenerative dialoguing WITH teachers, IN their own practice, provide shared 
experiences for developing teachers’ conscious awareness of unified concepts 
(intertwining of theoretical and practical aspects) of teaching and learning and sup-
port deliberate and thoughtful expansions of their professional practice (Grimmett, 
2014). I considered that the same principles that made this such an effective 
approach for in-service teachers would also apply to preservice teachers’ develop-
ment, so set about working with two of the Teaching Academies of Professional 
Practice (TAPP) schools to pilot this approach with second-year preservice teachers 
in an undergraduate early years and primary specialisation initial teacher education 
program.
After initially floating the idea of co-teaching triads with the two schools, the 
Teaching Academies of Professional Practice (TAPP) leader and I organised a half-­
day planning session with representative mentor teachers and leaders from each 
school. I introduced some of the theory behind the proposed idea and then gave each 
school team time to discuss and plan what that might look like in their own particu-
lar context. One school had a play-based ‘discovery time’ session each day, so they 
were very excited about the possibility of extra teaching helpers in the classroom to 
assist with the numerous demands for assistance that the children make during this 
time. The other school was very data driven and started imagining how each preser-
vice teacher could take responsibility for a small focus group in mathematics during 
their placement and measure the impact of their own teaching on the children’s 
growth in understanding of that topic through pre- and post-testing. These data 
would then be used as the focus for cogenerative dialogue sessions for the whole 
L.-D. Willis et al.
www.ebook3000.com

61
cohort of preservice teachers at the school to share and compare the teaching strate-
gies they had used.
Although neither of these plans were what my university colleague and I were 
expecting, or even imagining as possibilities for implementing co-teaching triads, 
we recognised that these were entirely appropriate instantiations for each particular 
context. What’s more, in sharing their plans with the rest of the group, the plans 
started to cross-fertilise and inspire new ideas for each school team, so that the data-­
driven school also decided to involve the preservice teachers in establishing ‘pop-up 
play’ activities in lunch sessions, and the play-based school thought about ways 
they could create whole cohort cogenerative dialogues about the innovative teach-
ing approaches used in the school.
The actual reality of how the co-teaching triads played out in each school was, of 
course, slightly different again, as unforeseen constraints and new possibilities 
appeared in each setting once the preservice teachers entered the picture and also 
negotiated their own ways of working with their partners and mentor teachers. 
However, each school was sufficiently pleased with the benefits they saw not only 
for the preservice teachers but also for their own teachers and their own students 
that they were willing to continue further iterations of the program in subsequent 
semesters with new preservice teacher cohorts. By looking at post-placement sur-
vey data from the preservice teachers and reflecting on their own experiences, the 
teacher mentors have continued to make modifications so that learning is enhanced 
for all participants. Importantly, they have also shared their successes and chal-
lenges with other schools in the TAPP cluster, showing how an initial idea can be 
developed, adapted and expanded to fit their own unique contexts. Several other 
TAPP schools have since implemented their own versions of co-teaching triads, 
continuing to build and expand our collective imagination about how professional 
experience can be enacted in a developmental environment.
Example 3: Debbie
In my example, I worked as a representative of the Sunshine Coast University with 
Independent Schools Queensland (ISQ) and two schools to develop a partnership 
agreement. The ISQ Centres of Excellence (CoE) in Preservice Teaching program 
sought to achieve four outcomes: developing effective partnerships, engaging in the 
analysis of teaching and mentoring as practice, developing the capacity to make 
judgements based on evidence and developing teacher and preservice teacher under-
standing of the Australian Professional Standards for Teachers (APST) (Australian 
Institute for Teaching & School Leadership [AITSL], 2011). Our first example of 
cogenerativity as both a process and product was the collaboration of all four part-
ners to jointly create a formal agreement outlining the roles, responsibilities and 
outputs for our partnership. This process was iterative and generative, and the final 
partnership agreement was later de-identified by ISQ with agreement from all part-
ners so it could be shared with others who might like to also develop similar 
agreements.
4  Exploring Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher Education School-University…

62
Another level of cogenerativity occurred at the site of each school where the 
partnership agreement was enacted in different ways in each context. In both con-
texts, after exploring different approaches, communities of practice were identified 
as an approach to professional learning. The development of communities of prac-
tice at each school site consisted of teachers, both those who mentor and those aspir-
ing to mentor preservice teachers, preservice teachers allocated to the school for 
that particular calendar year, me (Debbie) as a teacher educator and the professional 
learning liaison allocated to the school for professional experience placements, the 
coordinators of professional experience at each school site and the project officer 
from Independent Schools Queensland (ISQ) who attended some meetings. The 
specific way the communities of practice developed at each site was a cogenerative 
activity that occurred between me as the university partner and the school coordina-
tor at each site. Each school worked in similar but unique ways to generate and 
sustain their community of practice within each school for the 2-year project 
timeframe.
In summary, both school sites invited current and aspiring mentor teachers to 
participate in the community of practice as part of the Independent Schools 
Queensland Centres of Excellence (ISQ CoE) in Preservice Teaching project. An 
initial meeting was held with mentor teachers, the school coordinator and teacher 
educators to establish a meeting agenda format and possible topics that the group 
might like to explore. Each P-12 school developed its own agenda format and agreed 
to meet for a period of 3 h once a term for 2 years. Hence, the communities of prac-
tice at each school site worked together to create or cogenerate their community of 
practice format and agenda. Funding provided by ISQ facilitated teacher release so 
that community of practice meetings could be held during school time. Preservice 
teachers joined while they were on professional experience and often returned to 
additional meetings following their professional experience. At the end of the first 
meeting, the topic for the next meeting was identified. The topic was then connected 
to the Australian Professional Standards for Teachers (APST) at the various levels 
of graduate, proficient, highly accomplished and lead teacher (see AITSL, 2011) to 
connect our conversation to the project outcomes: analysing practice, making judge-
ments based on evidence and developing understanding of the APST.
At each meeting, all participants reflected on the identified topic and brought a 
positive example of their practice related to the theme to discuss how the example 
evidenced the Australian Professional Standards for Teachers (APST) and at what 
level. Some examples of community of practice meeting topics included communi-
cating with parents, assessing student learning and differentiating learning in the 
classroom context. In addition to the sharing of practice at each meeting, the agenda 
included time for community building, reflecting on the previous meeting and shar-
ing any news or updates, an opportunity to build knowledge on the selected topic 
usually with some input from a guest speaker and time at the conclusion of the ses-
sion to reflect and identify the topic for the next meeting. Hence, these school site 
meetings were an example of cogenerativity in action as each school generated a 
community of practice in their own context that included mentor teachers, adminis-
trators, teacher educators and preservice teachers. As the communities continued to 
L.-D. Willis et al.
www.ebook3000.com

63
meet and share their ideas, public products were developed and shared outside of 
our community of practice, first within the school, then with other schools and later 
through national conferences that included teacher education practitioners and 
researchers.
Metalogue Part Three
Learnings and Insights About Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher 
Education Partnerships
Linda
In light of our exploration of the literature and each of our specific examples, what 
learnings and insights about cogenerativity have we gained from our metalogue so 
far?
Helen
Thinking about our workshop discussions and the examples we’ve shared, it’s quite 
clear that you, Linda, deliberately set out from the beginning to use the concept of 
cogenerativity in creating a school-university partnership. When Debbie heard us 
talking about the idea at the workshop, she thought, ‘Oh yeah, I can see cogenerativ-
ity in the work I’ve done’ without actually having used or heard the word before, 
whereas I was somewhere in between.
Linda
Helen, the ideas and example you described showed that you quite purposefully 
drew on your knowledge and understanding of cogenerativity as informed by your 
research, even if you weren’t calling it that.
Debbie
I think that in each of your cases, Linda and Helen, knowing about cogenerativity 
was really empowering. Cogenerativity connects to notions of agency (i.e. the 
capacity to act in a particular sociocultural context [see Ahearn, 2001; Bateson, 
1972, 1987; Sewell, 1992]). Within those spaces that were created among partici-
pants such as Estelle and the preservice teachers in the MTeach program (Linda) 
and in the co-teaching triads (Helen), and implicit in the concept of cogenerativity, 
was a sense of ‘permission’ to generate new things. Similarly, in my Independent 
4  Exploring Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher Education School-University…

64
Schools Queensland Centres of Excellence (ISQ CoE) in Preservice Teaching pro-
gram, permission to [re]imagine professional experience partnerships occurred 
within institutional frameworks that operate at schools and universities by opening 
up spaces where this potentially transformative work was ‘allowed’.
Linda and Helen
Yes (said together).
Linda
That is actually a really good point about cogenerativity being able to occur within 
prevailing organisational frameworks, that is, it doesn’t require a complete change 
in the way organisations are set up but can occur within already existing structures. 
The difference is that individuals are positioned to enter into new spaces with a 
cogenerative mindset and way of operating.
Debbie
Cogenerativity also needs drivers, individuals who can imagine the usual partici-
pants involved in initial teacher education partnerships in new roles, part of which 
is giving the participants permission to think and act differently than they have in 
the past. I wonder whether adopting the lens of cogenerativity enables you to look 
at changing the usual ITE power structures and create the spaces where participants 
can do things differently, is that how you generate cultural change? Because in the 
system partnership example that I shared, there’s been a definite shift in the way 
preservice teachers are engaged within the schools. They are treated in a totally dif-
ferent way now than before the project started: they are considered more like staff 
members; they are given a lot more time to develop and learn things; the mentor 
teachers are given a lot more time to work with the preservice teachers; and those 
involved in the partnership make time to have conversations. I think that’s a big shift 
in the school context where the perception previously was, ‘We’re doing the univer-
sity a favour by having these preservice teachers here’. Now the discourse is more 
‘We’re collaboratively creating the next generation of teachers and there’s some-
thing in this for everyone’. Hence, there has been a recognition that the mentor 
teachers stood to benefit personally and professionally and that the partnership had 
the potential to improve school culture in real and concrete ways. At the same time, 
the mentor teachers in this context felt a much stronger connection to the teacher 
education program as a whole and developed understandings about how university 
coursework connected with professional experience.
L.-D. Willis et al.
www.ebook3000.com

65
Helen
That’s definitely been the case in the co-teaching triad project as well. As our pilot 
schools talked to the other Teaching Academies of Professional Practice (TAPP) 
schools, you could see each school team start to think about how the ideas could be 
applicable to them and what they would be able to get out of it in their own particu-
lar context. You’re right about the sense of permission. It was not just those of us 
who work in universities coming in and saying, ‘This is how you must do it’, but us 
coming in and saying, ‘Here are some things to think about and some tools for you 
to use as you go about doing what you need to do’. The drivers, as Debbie talked 
about, have got to be prepared to offer ideas to get the ball rolling but also prepared 
to hold those ideas very ‘loosely’ or flexibly so that the ideas can take off in different 
directions. I think this notion of permission is really important in creating a space to 
do things differently from how they’ve always been done before. It’s not necessarily 
always explicitly stated. Rather we create the sense of permission in the conditions 
that we establish through respecting each individual’s ideas and showing them that 
their ideas are valued and useful. It’s the way we act that can demonstrate that we’re 
giving permission, setting up the conditions for creating agency. It’s not just what 
we say, but also what we do that’s important.
Linda
Another insight that I’ve taken from our metalogue is the versatility of the concept 
of cogenerativity for thinking about ITE school-university partnerships. Our differ-
ent examples have not only illustrated the range of different situations and contexts 
in which the concept is useful but also highlighted levels of scale. Given its nature 
and size, the MTeach program, for example, showed cogenerativity at work on what 
could be considered a micro-scale. Helen’s example in which participants from one 
school cogenerated with each other and then with a team from another school 
showed cogenerativity on a meso-level. Debbie’s system partnership agreement 
example occurred on a much larger or macro-scale. However, in each case, similar 
principles and practices were adopted. The participants were invited to enter inter-
active social spaces for the purpose of dialogic exchange about topics of mutual 
interest and concern. These opportunities allowed the participants to ask questions 
about professional experience partnerships such as: ‘What’s really happening?’, 
‘How are things working?’, ‘How might things work differently?’ and ‘What else 
might be possible?’. These conversations not only enabled ideas to be pooled but 
also to be purposefully connected continually (processes), leading to cogenerated 
decision-making (products) such that enhanced participant agency manifested in 
new and different ways of thinking, speaking and acting  – individually and 
collectively.
4  Exploring Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher Education School-University…

66
Helen
We’ve also noticed in our metalogue that to set cogenerativity in motion is not easy. 
It’s difficult for mentor teachers, for example, to create something different espe-
cially when they might think ‘This is the way professional experience has always 
been done’. It’s hard for participants in initial teacher education to see that just 
because things may have worked in the past doesn’t mean that they’re going to keep 
working in the future. Building the kind of knowledge and skills needed to work 
collaboratively to create positive change to support future generations of teachers is 
a complex work. It presents a constant challenge for those involved in initial teacher 
education in schools and universities.
Debbie
I think if we reflect on each of our examples, we also see the importance of time and 
how much time it takes to set things up. That’s a particular challenge in the current 
higher education context when there are so many things to do.
Linda
Your point Debbie links to a particular challenge that I’ve experienced as the driver 
in the school-university partnerships in the MTeach program. I found the concept of 
cogenerativity valuable in assisting me initially to envisage and create a unique 
initial teacher education school-university partnership. However, given its nature, it 
is difficult to take advantage of all the opportunities and possibilities that cogenera-
tivity might afford as has been the case for me given the rapid growth in the MTeach 
program over the last 3 years – the number of school-university partnerships has 
increased from one to seven, and preservice teacher numbers have increased from 7 
to 50. At the same time, human (e.g. school and university personnel) and physical 
(e.g. financial support) resources have mostly stayed the same. The challenge for me 
has been to look at how I might harness the resources available to [re]imagine 
school-university partnerships beyond what began as a small program. Yet, I don’t 
see this challenge diminishing the value of cogenerativity. Indeed, the concept is 
powerful, refreshing and even tantalising given its promise and hope that through 
more meaningful and sustained cooperation and collaboration among educational 
partners, the quality of preservice teacher mentoring and teaching in schools gener-
ally can continually be improved. However, to ensure the continuing, expanding and 
transformative work of cogenerativity into the future, I have realised not only the 
importance of beginning but also of continuing to begin. This will be especially 
important for those of us who work in ITE with its world of competing priorities and 
rapidly changing landscape.
L.-D. Willis et al.
www.ebook3000.com

67
Recommendations and Implications for Future Research 
and Practice
This chapter explored our evolving understanding of the meaning and nature of 
cogenerativity in the context of professional experience in initial teacher education 
school-university partnerships. Each of our examples provided insights and learn-
ings into how knowledge and understanding of cogenerativity may assist to create 
the conditions for such partnerships to develop and flourish. These examples also 
highlighted the promise and hope of cogenerativity for assisting to [re]imagine pos-
sible futures for ITE partnerships in which all participants benefit from continual 
expansive transformative learning. As such, the findings from this chapter open a 
window to future research possibilities. These include probing the work of cogene-
rativity in other examples of ITE school-university partnerships and the idea of 
‘hope’, implicit in cogenerativity, which we have only begun to consider here. More 
research on the role and important characteristics of those who act as drivers for 
cogenerativity is also necessary.
This chapter is significant for helping build knowledge about the little explored 
concept of cogenerativity. Of further significance is the unique context for this 
exploration, namely, ITE school-university partnerships. So too is our use of meta-
logue as an innovative methodology. By cogenerating new understanding of cogen-
erativity through our dialogical exchange, we have heeded Bateson’s (1972, 1987) 
charge that the structure of the metalogue conversation should mirror the subject of 
the conversation. The metalogue enabled us to collectively develop our ideas of 
cogenerativity through discussion and analysis of the different ways cogenerativity 
worked in each of our initial teacher education (ITE) examples. This discussion 
generated insights about important aspects of cogenerativity as well as some chal-
lenges and limitations from which others can draw for future research and practice 
in their particular contexts and situations. Our discussion also spoke to gaps in the 
literature where the focus is often on individual small-scale cases. The metalogue 
provided a vehicle to draw our examples together to highlight the similarities and 
differences in the ways ITE school-university partnerships are developing.
At the same time, our use of metalogue to discuss cogenerativity provided an 
example of the concept’s continuing expanding transformative work. The metal-
ogue provided an interactive social space in which processes (e.g. respectful turn-­
taking in the conversation and building on ideas) and products (e.g. descriptions and 
explanations of our initial teacher education (ITE) examples) unfolded dialectically 
as together we explored and simultaneously demonstrated cogenerativity in prac-
tice. Hence, this chapter has made a contribution to research and scholarship by 
discussing what cogenerativity is, and through metalogue illustrated the work of 
cogenerativity, helping us to further advance knowledge and understanding of the 
concept and its potential. Indeed, our metalogue was a form of cogenerative action. 
Another value of metalogue was in the benefits of listening to and learning from one 
another. From our conversation, we developed solidarity and gained reassurance 
that we were not alone in striving for innovation in professional experience in ITE 
4  Exploring Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher Education School-University…

68
school-university partnerships. It is our hope that our explorations of developing 
knowledge and understanding of cogenerativity will strengthen this work for all 
involved in this important enterprise.
References
Ahearn, L. M. (2001). Language and agency. Annual Review of Anthropology, 30, 109–137.
Allen, J.  M. (2011). Stakeholders’ perspectives of the nature and role of assessment during 
practicum. Teaching and Teacher Education, 27(4), 742–750. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
tate.2010.12.004.
Allen, J. M., Howells, K., & Radford, R. (2013). A ‘Partnership in Teaching Excellence’: Ways 
in which one school-university partnership has fostered teacher development. Asia-Pacific 
Journal of Teacher Education, 41(1), 99–110. doi:10.1080/1359866X.2012.753988.
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL). (2011). Australian 
professional 
standards 
for 
teachers. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.aitsl.edu.au/
australian-professional-standards-for-teachers
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL). (2015). Accreditation of initial 
teacher education programs in Australia: Standards and Procedures. Retrieved from http://
www.aitsl.edu.au/docs/default-source/initial-teacher-education-resources/accreditation-of-ite-
programs-in-australia.pdf
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL). (2016). Guidance for the 
accreditation of initial teacher education in Australia. Retrieved from http://www.aitsl.edu.
au/docs/default-source/initial-teacher-education-resources/guidance-for-the-accreditation-of-
initial-teacher-education-in-australia.pdf
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays (V. McGee, Trans.; C. Emerson & 
M. Holquist, Eds.). Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Bateson, G. (1972, 1987). Steps to an ecology of mind. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.
Bateson, G. (1980). Mind and nature: A necessary unity. Toronto, Canada: Bantam Books.
Downing-Wilson, D., Lecusay, R., & Cole, M. (2011). Design experimentation and mutual appro-
priation: Two strategies for university/community collaborative after-school interventions. 
Theory and Psychology, 21(5), 656–680. doi:10.1177/0959354311414456.
Edwards, A. (2005). Relational agency: Learning to be a resourceful practitioner. International 
Journal of Educational Research, 43(3), 168–182. doi:10.1016/j.ijer.2006.06.010.
Edwards, A. (2007). Relational agency in professional practice: A CHAT analysis. Action: An 
International Journal of Human Activity Theory, 1, 1–17.
Edwards, A. (2010). Being an expert professional practitioner: The relational turn in expertise. 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Golden, J. E. (2016). Supporting online faculty through communities of practice: Finding the fac-
ulty voice. Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 53(1), 84–93. doi:10.1080/1
4703297.2014.910129.
Grimmett, H. (2012). Developing WITHIN practice PD: A cultural-historical approach to under-
standing the institutional practice of teachers’ professional development. (PhD thesis), Monash 
University, Melbourne. Retrieved from http://arrow.monash.edu.au/hdl/1959.1/709156.
Grimmett, H. (2014). The practice of teachers’ professional development: A cultural-historical 
approach. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Herbers, M.  S., Antelo, A., Ettling, D., & Buck, M.  A. (2011). Improving teaching 
through a community of practice. Journal of Transformative Education, 9(2), 89–108. 
doi:10.1177/1541344611430688.
Hudson, P. (2013). Mentoring as professional development: ‘Growth for both’ mentor and mentee. 
Professional Development in Education, 39(5), 771–783.
L.-D. Willis et al.
www.ebook3000.com

69
Independent Schools Queensland (ISQ). (2011–2016). Preservice. Retrieved from: http://www.isq.
qld.edu.au/preservice
Kennelly, R., & McCormack, C. (2015). Creating more ‘elbow room’ for collaborative reflec-
tive practice in the competitive, performative culture of today’s university. Higher Education 
Research and Development. 2015, 34(5), 942–956. doi:10.1080/07294360.2014.911259.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Le Cornu, R., & Ewing, R. (2008). Reconceptualising professional experiences in pre-service 
teacher education. Reconstructing the past to embrace the future. Teaching and Teacher 
Education: An International Journal of Research and Studies, 24(7), 1799–1812.
Levine, T. H. (2011). Features and strategies of supervisor professional community as a means 
of improving the supervision of preservice teachers. Teaching and Teacher Education, 27(5), 
930–941. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2011.03.004.
Lynch, D., & Smith, R. (2012). Teacher education partnerships: An Australian research-based per-
spective. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 37(11).
Morgan, A., Brown, R., Heck, D., Pendergast, D., & Kanasa, H. (2013). Professional identity path-
ways of educators in alternative schools: The utility of reflective practice groups for educator 
induction and professional learning. Reflective Practice, 14(2), 258–270. doi:10.1080/146239
43.2012.749227.
Murphy, C., & Scantlebury, K. (Eds.). (2010). Coteaching in international contexts: Research and 
practice. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Parker, M., Patton, K., Madden, M., & Sinclair, C. (2010). From committee to community: The 
development and maintenance of a community of practice. Journal of Teaching in Physical 
Education, 29(4), 337–357.
Ronfeldt, M., & Reininger, M. (2012). More or better student teaching? Teaching and Teacher 
Education, 28(8), 1091–1106. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2012.06.003.
Roth, W.-M., & Tobin, K. (2002). At the elbow of another: Learning to teach by coteaching. 
New York: Peter Lang.
Sewell, W. H. (1992). A theory of structure: Duality, agency, and transformation. American Journal 
of Sociology, 98(1), 1–29.
Stetsenko, A. (2008). Collaboration and cogenerativity: On bridging the gaps and separating 
theory-­practice and cognition-emotion. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 3(2), 521–533.
Vygotsky, L.  S. (1987). Thinking and speech (N.  Minick, Trans.). In R.  W. Rieber & A.  S. 
Carton (Eds.), The collected works of L. S. Vygotsky: Vol. 1, Problems of general psychology 
(pp. 39–285). New York: Plenum Press.
Wenger, E., McDermott, R. A., & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating communities of practice: A guide 
to managing knowledge. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Willis, L.-D. (2013). Parent-teacher engagement: A coteaching and cogenerative dialogu-
ing approach (Unpublished doctoral dissertation), Queensland University of Technology, 
Brisbane, Australia.
Willis, L.-D. (2016). Exploring cogenerativity for developing a coteaching community of practice 
in a parent-teacher engagement project. International Journal of Educational Research, 80, 
124–133. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2016.08.009.
Willis, L.-D., & Exley, B. (2016). Language variation and change in the Australian Curriculum 
English: Integrating sub-strands through a pedagogy of metalogue. English in Australia  – 
Special Edition, 51(2), 74–84.
Willis, L.-D., Kretschmann, G., Lewis, K., & Montes, C. (2014). An engaging pedagogy for social 
education: Coteaching in a teacher education program. The Social Educator, 32(3), 23–36.
Willis, L.-D., & Menzie, K. (2012). Coteaching social education: An oasis in changing times. The 
Social Educator, 30(1), 15–22.
Yan, C., & He, C. (2010). Transforming the existing model of teaching practicum: A study of 
Chinese EFL student teachers’ perceptions. Journal of Education for Teaching, 36(1), 57–73. 
doi:10.1080/02607470903462065.
4  Exploring Cogenerativity in Initial Teacher Education School-University…

71
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_5
Chapter 5
Boundary Objects and Brokers in Professional 
Experience: An Activity Theory Analysis
Tony Loughland and Hoa Thi Mai Nguyen
Abstract  Professional experience (PE) is a key element in the preparation of future 
teachers. However, a growing number of researchers have raised concerns about the 
need to enhance the effectiveness of the professional experience in teacher educa-
tion programs and have called for innovations that will enhance the current school-­
based experiences within these programs. In response to this call, there have been 
many innovations which have been implemented worldwide. Most of the innova-
tions place emphasis on bridging the gap between theory and practice by enhancing 
the quality of school-based experiences, including the one we describe in this chap-
ter. Within the scope of this chapter, we report the findings of a case study that 
explored the learning experiences of preservice teachers through professional expe-
rience. The focus of this chapter is to examine the boundary objects and brokers that 
assisted the preservice teachers’ boundary crossing between the university and 
school context. The innovation in this chapter is the novel use of activity theory to 
examine preservice teacher learning in professional experience.
Introduction
There is a trend towards restructuring teacher education around a clinical practice 
model that emphasises the shared responsibility and mutual benefits of schools and 
universities to educate prospective teachers. These efforts range from the inten-
sively resourced and well-theorised model established by the Graduate School of 
Education at the University of Melbourne (McLean Davies et al., 2012) to radical 
school-based models that accentuate learning in practice as exemplified by the 
Teach For Australia program (Teach For Australia, 2009).
School and university partnerships have been a key strategy within a clinical 
practice model in an effort to improve the quality of initial teacher education. 
Accordingly, school-university partnerships have received significant attention in 
the literature (Allen, Howells, & Radford, 2013; Brady, 2002; Burton & Greher, 
T. Loughland (*) • H.T.M. Nguyen 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia
e-mail: tony.loughland@unsw.edu.au
www.ebook3000.com

72
2007; Darling-Hammond, 2006; Day & Smethem, 2010). Some of this research has 
examined partnership initiatives established for the purpose of developing more 
connections between schools and universities in teacher education (Brady, 2002; 
James & Worrall, 2000; Moss, 2008; Trent & Lim, 2010; Tsui & Law, 2007). Most 
of these studies identified the benefits of these partnerships, such as transformative 
change at both the university level and school level, a bridging of the theory-­practice 
gap (Baumfield & Butterworth, 2007; Kershner, Pedder, & Doddington, 2012; 
Kruse, 2011), facilitating the development of teacher identity, contributing to 
teacher socialisation (Kruse, 2011) and promoting the learning of preservice teach-
ers, school students, lecturers and teachers (Allen et al., 2013; Brady, 2002).
There is no consensus in the research literature that school-university partner-
ships automatically lead to better outcomes for all stakeholders (Douglas & Ellis, 
2011; Johnston, 2010; Ledoux & McHenry, 2008; McLaughlin & Black-Hawkins, 
2007; Moss, 2008; Smedley, 2010; White, Bloomfield, & Le Cornu, 2010). In a 
thorough review of literature on university and school partnership, Smedley (2001) 
identified a number of impediments to the partnership such as:
… institutional inertia; the low status of teacher education and even lower status of field 
work; restructured and expanding workloads of teachers and lecturers; availability of suit-
able staff; the differing school and university cultures; the vulnerability of new ventures; the 
maintenance of initial enthusiasms; and, finally, the various financial and political pres-
sures. (p. 203)
Given this finding, some analytical attention should be paid to the operation of 
these partnerships to ascertain if there are common factors that contribute to their 
effectiveness.
There is existing research that points to some of the factors that contribute to 
effective school-university partnerships. Using activity theory as a theoretical lens, 
Yamagata-Lynch and Smaldino (2007) identified three major factors significant to 
effective partnerships, namely, communication, a balance between theory and prac-
tice and winning stakeholder commitment. In a similar vein, Edwards, Tsui, and 
Stimpson (2009), who conducted a comprehensive review of the research literature 
on school-university partnerships, revealed the four factors that impact on the effec-
tive school-university partnership are collaboration, complementarity, equivalence 
and community. Bloomfield (2009) referred to the time and resource pressures 
experienced by both parties as well as highlighting the common understandings and 
commitments of the key stakeholders.
In a comprehensive study on school-university partnerships in Australia, Kruger, 
Davies, Eckersley, Newell, and Cherednichenko (2009) found that successful 
school-university partnerships were enhanced and sustained through committed 
efforts by key individuals involved. They also found that these successful partner-
ships were characterised by conditions of ‘trust, mutuality and reciprocity among 
preservice teachers, teachers and other school colleagues and teacher educators’ 
(2009, p. 16) but were also contingent on the provision of effective resources. One 
of the study’s key recommendations was the need for conjoint policy development 
to guide partnership development beyond individual initiatives (Kruger et al., 2009).
T. Loughland and H.T.M. Nguyen

73
Since the publication of the Kruger et al. review in 2009, there have been some 
federal government initiatives to establish school-university partnerships under the 
Smarter Schools National Partnerships project. Unfortunately they were not the 
product of conjoint policy development, as state government departments of educa-
tion received the federal funding and shaped the agenda in their respective jurisdic-
tions. However, there was a requirement to engage with teacher education faculties. 
One such example was a Partnership in Teaching Excellence (PiTE) centre of excel-
lence partnership program in the state of Tasmania.
The PiTE was established between the Tasmanian Department of Education and 
the University of Tasmania. The goal of the project was to build a team and inquiry-­
based orientation in graduates of a teacher education program. Master of Teaching 
students were selected through a competitive application process and were placed in 
low socio-economic schools (SES) for both their mandatory professional experi-
ences and spending two weeks at the beginning of the school year, a day a week 
during semester one and two days a week in semester two. The factors that sustained 
this effective partnership, according to the authors, were ‘coherence and alignment 
between schools and the university’; ‘communication, logistics and systemic con-
siderations’; and ‘equity issues’ (Allen et al., 2013, p. 99). Similar initiatives to 
establish hub schools for school-university partnerships were implemented in New 
South Wales (NSW) from 2015 onwards.
The school-university partnership innovation for professional experience exam-
ined in this chapter originated the year before the publication of the Kruger et al. 
(2009) report. The innovation did not evolve through any conjoint policy develop-
ment with government departments. It was more in the vein of ‘determined efforts 
by key individuals’ as the directors of professional experience sought to enhance the 
first professional experience of all undergraduate and graduate teacher education 
students in a large faculty of education. In this chapter, we describe the changes 
implemented in the professional experience and employ activity theory as an inno-
vative frame from which to explore the objects and brokers that assisted preservice 
teachers to do the boundary crossing between school and university.
Theoretical Framework of the Project
Historically, the majority of the research on school-university partnerships in pro-
fessional experience has been exploratory and descriptive. The research has in the 
main focussed on issues arising from implementation of discreet initiatives with-
out the application of explicit theoretical frameworks (Edwards et al., 2009). There 
is an opportunity, therefore, for the application of theoretical frameworks to aid in 
the understanding of the complexity of interactions that occur in the context of 
school-­university partnerships in professional experience. Activity theory is one 
such framework that has been employed in a small number of studies of school-­
university partnerships in a number of different contexts (Edwards & Mutton, 
2007; Edwards & Protheroe, 2004; Roth & Tobin, 2002; Wilson, 2004). The data 
5  Boundary Objects and Brokers in Professional Experience
www.ebook3000.com

74
from the partnership program we describe in this chapter is analysed using activity 
theory (Engeström, 1987, 2001) and, more specifically, literature around boundary 
practices between activity systems (Akkerman & Bakker, 2011; Kimble, Grenier, 
& Goglio-Primard, 2010; Tuomi-Gröhn & Engeström, 2003; Waitoller & Kozleski, 
2013).
The analysis of the professional learning partnership model is framed by 
Engeström’s third-generation activity system. Cultural Historical Activity Theory 
(CHAT) (Engeström, 1987) is used to explore the activity system in which learning 
is socially situated and mediated by artefacts. Engeström proposes that CHAT has 
evolved through three generations of theoretical development. The first generation 
is based on Vygotsky’s (1978) idea of the mediating role of artefacts (objects and 
people) in learning and focusses on individuals. Second-generation activity theory, 
further developed by Alexei Leont’ev (1978), emphasised the contextualisation of 
learning and situated individual and group activity within a collective activity sys-
tem. It expands the subject-mediation-object triad with three added elements: rules, 
community and division of labour (Engeström, 1987) (Fig. 5.1). This generation 
marked the shift from an individual focus (on learning, meaning making or practice) 
to a collective activity system. It is typically represented using the triangle featured 
in Fig. 5.1.
The components of second-generation activity systems included the subject, the 
individual or the group of people involved in the activity, endeavouring to achieve 
an outcome through acting on an object using mediating artefacts/tools to achieve 
that outcome (see Fig. 5.1). Action is regulated in the social element of the system 
which includes the community within and for which the activity occurs, rules or 
norms regulating the subject’s participation in an activity and division of labour 
(Engeström, Miettinen, & Punamaki, 1999).
In his proposal for a third generation of the theory, Engeström (2001) advocates 
a conceptual tool ‘to understand dialogue, multiple perspectives, and networks of 
interacting activity systems’ (p. 135). The third generation of activity theory uses a 
joint activity system, which includes at least two interacting activity systems 
(Fig.  5.2). The third-generation model highlights the role of contradictions that 
occur within and between activity systems. These contradictions can be countered 
through the mediation of boundary objects that facilitate boundary crossing.
Instruments
Object
Outcome
Subject
Rules
Community
Division of Labor
Fig. 5.1  The structure of a 
human activity system 
(Engeström, 1987, p. 78)
T. Loughland and H.T.M. Nguyen

75
Boundaries, objects, brokers and crossings are generative conceptual ideas from 
which to analyse professional experience. According to Akkerman and Bakker 
(2011):
a boundary can be seen as a sociocultural difference leading to discontinuity in action or 
interaction. Boundaries simultaneously suggest a sameness and continuity in the sense that, 
within discontinuity, two or more sites are relevant to one another in a particular way. 
(p.133)
Tsui and Law (2007) suggest the way to overcome contradictions between super-
vising teachers and tertiary mentors is to create a space where all participants can 
generate collective knowledge by crossing community boundaries in the profes-
sional experience. This third space creates conditions for boundary crossing 
(Akkerman & Bakker, 2011). Engeström, Engeström, and Kärkkäine (1995) argue 
that the negotiation and the use of the boundary object potentially facilitate bound-
ary crossing. Akkerman and Bakker (2011) call for further exploration of the learn-
ing potential of boundaries.
In this chapter, we use third-generation Cultural Historical Activity Theory 
(CHAT) because it offers an understanding of the third space of the partnership 
between the university and school where professional experience resides. This 
chapter further develops Bloomfield and Nguyen’s (2015) proposed theoretical 
framework for professional experience partnerships based on third-generation 
CHAT (see Fig. 5.3). Bloomfield and Nguyen argue that the primary focus of such 
a partnership is on developing a collective ‘third space’ (Bhabha, 1994; Gutierréz, 
2008) which renegotiates and accommodates different elements of the two systems. 
In this case study of preservice teachers’ learning in a ‘boundary zone’ (Tuomi-­
Gröhn & Engeström, 2003), the focus was on the space where the participants in 
both activity systems brokered their boundary objects to construct new understand-
ing and practices.
The boundary broker is a critical actor in third-generation CHAT. The broker’s 
role has been depicted as that of the interlocutor (Kimble et al., 2010). Wenger 
(1998) described it in the following way:
Fig. 5.2  Two interacting activity systems as a minimal model for third generation of activity the-
ory (Engeström, 2001, p. 136)
5  Boundary Objects and Brokers in Professional Experience
www.ebook3000.com

76
The job of brokering is complex. It involves processes of translation, coordination and 
alignment between perspectives. It requires enough legitimacy to influence the develop-
ment of a practice ... it also requires the ability to link practices by facilitating transactions 
between them and to cause learning by introducing into a practice, elements of another. 
(p 109)
The broker needs to be skilled at building productive relationships and needs to 
possess deft political skills as well as have the conceptual depth to do the necessary 
knowledge translation work from one group to the other (Kimble et al., 2010).
Boundary objects are critical elements in the communication between activity 
systems. The term has an interesting history, and it originally came from Star and 
Griesemer’s (1989) study of Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology where they 
describe a boundary object as ‘an object that lives in multiple social worlds and 
which has different identities in each’ (p 409). The term ‘object’ can be misleading 
as they can be both virtual and physical entities. Boundary objects can be referred 
to as ‘technologies, although they can be drawings, sets of rules, research projects 
or documents’ (Kimble et al., 2010, p. 441) or they can be ‘an analytical concept of 
those objects’ (Wong & Edwards, 2009, p. 133). Carlile (2002) further argues that 
familiar and routine situations only require a simple boundary object, such as a 
single word, to coordinate activities. During the professional experience where the 
learning context is complex, participant stakeholders including preservice teachers, 
supervising teachers and university mentors need to create a common ground that is 
shared among themselves. This requires the boundary object to be flexible and fea-
sible in order to accommodate different needs from people from different communi-
ties of practice. However this does not always reap fruitful outcomes as it encounters 
the tensions and contradictions as the result of the political nature of these processes 
(Carlile, 2002).
Fig. 5.3  Third-generation activity theory: Professional experience (After Engeström, 2001, in 
Bloomfield & Nguyen, 2015)
T. Loughland and H.T.M. Nguyen

77
Professional Experience Initiative
The changes to professional experience were implemented across the major teach-
ing degrees in this faculty from 2008 to 2014. It was first implemented in the Master 
of Teaching (primary) program in 2008 followed by the Bachelor of Education (pri-
mary) program in 2009. The Master of Teaching (secondary) adopted the approach 
in 2013, and the Combined Degree (secondary) commenced in 2014. The innova-
tion began with eight partnership schools in 2008, which increased to 56 schools by 
2014. Each school was assigned a mentor from the university who developed and 
maintained a productive relationship with the school and acted as the communica-
tion conduit with the faculty. The university mentor conducted weekly group meet-
ings with those preservice teachers placed in the school and liaised closely with 
their supervising teachers and the school professional experience coordinator. The 
group meeting with the university mentor discussed the focussed observations that 
preservice teachers had made of classroom teaching and learning and discussed 
issues around their learning using the Australian Professional Standards for Teachers 
(APST) at the graduate level as a guide for reflection and critical inquiries. At some 
schools, the university mentor scheduled separate group meetings with both the 
supervising teachers and preservice teachers. At some schools, the supervising 
teachers did not want to make this extra commitment, and at others the school sup-
ported the initiative by allocating extra time for cooperating teachers to participate 
in the project.
Preservice teachers were allocated to schools in groups of six or eight. Preservice 
teachers worked with a partner in pairs either on the same class, grade or faculty and 
conducted peer observations as part of the requirements of the professional experi-
ence. Preservice teachers were supported to make focussed observations of their 
supervising teachers and peers using a scaffold that focussed on descriptors from 
the Australian Professional Standards for Teachers at the graduate level.
Research Methodology
Using activity theory framework, this case study set out to examine what factors 
supported preservice teachers to mediate the two activity systems in order to 
enhance their learning whilst on professional experience. A case study research 
design was employed to explore the learning experiences of 20 volunteer preservice 
teachers in their first professional experience in their Master of Teaching program. 
Data were collected from ongoing and retrospective interviews with preservice 
teachers, supervising teachers and university mentors during and after their first 
4-week professional experience in their graduate teaching program. The researchers 
also had access to a database generated from an overarching postdoctoral project 
that included lesson observation notes, professional experience reports, transcripts 
of supervising teacher mentoring conversations and university mentor meetings. 
5  Boundary Objects and Brokers in Professional Experience
www.ebook3000.com

78
This study primarily analysed the interview data, but the exposure of the authors to 
the broader study expedited the process of thematic and selective coding.
Findings
Boundary objects and brokers are common objects that serve to bring two different 
activity systems together. Boundary objects and brokers are important objects of 
analysis for professional experience, such as this case study, where the preservice 
teachers’ learning involves the interaction between the activity systems of the school 
and university. This chapter reports on the two elements which were important for 
the preservice teachers’ learning on professional experience in our case study: 
teaching methods as a boundary object and university mentors as brokers.
Teaching Methods as Boundary Objects
As argued earlier in this chapter, boundary objects are often technologies, although 
they can be drawings, sets of rules, research projects or documents. In this case 
study, we argue that teaching methods learnt at university act as a boundary object 
for preservice teachers on professional experience. The term teaching methods is 
used deliberately here in recognition that preservice teachers learn teaching strate-
gies (or methods as we call them), in their curriculum units at university that they 
attempt to apply on professional experience. Herein is the manifestation of the 
theory-­practice gap.
The teaching methods learned by the preservice teachers at the university were 
mediating artefacts that acted as boundary crossing objects between the university 
and school activity system. Their induction into the school activity system was 
made easier when they were able to translate some of their methods into classroom 
practice. The translation ranged from direct transference of strategies and lessons 
learned at university to a critically reflexive adaption of theories and methods into 
their practice.
On their first professional experience, these preservice teachers saw the worth of 
basic teaching strategies such as lesson introductions and questioning techniques 
that they had learnt on-campus. Both introductions and questioning are evident in 
the following excerpt from an interview with a preservice teacher:
Yeah, in terms of the introduction they always say ‘Ask them questions, get them to think 
about the last lesson, don’t just let them sit there and feed them information, get them 
involved’. I think that was the main thing about today in maths that was good, they were all 
involved.
T. Loughland and H.T.M. Nguyen

79
Another preservice teacher explained how they valued the questioning strategies 
that they had learned on-campus:
And a lot of prompting and questioning and getting them to think more than us just telling 
them has been really helpful, like in guided reading asking ‘What’s this story about?’, that 
kind of thing.
These very basic but fundamental teaching methods outlined in the above quotes 
mediated these preservice teachers’ induction into their first professional experi-
ence providing them with strategies they could employ from day one.
It might be expected that preservice teachers on their first professional experi-
ence would be concerned about managing their class. One preservice teacher could 
identify the techniques learned on-campus as contributing to learning:
I guess behaviour management techniques, we learnt them and now putting them into action 
I realise what’s actually really beneficial for learning in class.
This direct link of classroom management to student learning demonstrates that 
the teaching methods learned at university mediated this preservice teacher’s induc-
tion into their first professional experience.
The preservice teachers in this study recognised the quality of the lesson models 
that they had been exposed to in their on-campus learning. One preservice teacher 
in their postexperience interview recalled these lessons as the most memorable for 
the following reasons:
… and then I did some lessons that I’d learnt at uni and really liked, and those were the 
lessons I’ve remembered most. I guess because I saw them as higher order thinking lessons 
and interesting lessons and given the fact that I was given the opportunity to teach those 
interesting lessons I also learnt from the experience.
The preservice teacher describes their own learning occurring because they were 
teaching interesting lessons that involved higher-order thinking. This is further evi-
dence that the teaching methods learned on-campus mediated these preservice 
teachers’ entry into the profession during their first professional experience.
It is noteworthy that these preservice teachers on their first professional experi-
ence were able to see beyond their own learning to those of the students they were 
teaching. One preservice teacher in their postexperience interview described the 
challenge of teaching a diverse range of learners:
… because we’ve done a lot about different learners, which is something that I kind of 
thought about. But I didn’t realise how big an effect it is when you have a child that’s all the 
way down the bottom and then you have a really high achieving child in your class, I think 
the spectrum has been really overwhelming.
It is impossible to claim from this excerpt that an awareness of diverse learners 
mediated a successful teaching response on the part of this particular preservice 
teacher. However, this awareness is something that sometimes eludes much more 
experienced teachers and is quite an achievement for a preservice teacher on their 
first professional experience, who is generally more concerned with their own learn-
ing than the learning of the students they are teaching.
5  Boundary Objects and Brokers in Professional Experience
www.ebook3000.com

80
In this study, critical reflexivity was a key aspect of the preservice teachers’ 
methods. Critical reflection of the preservice teachers ranged from the simple 
awareness that they were applying teaching methods’ theory learnt at university to 
a broader conceptualisation of their professional learning trajectory. The adoption 
of a reflective practitioner approach might be regarded as a separate mediating arte-
fact acting as a boundary object between the two activity systems.
The acknowledgement of the transference of university learning to professional 
experience was the first level of reflection evident among the preservice teachers in 
this study. This is apparent in an interview from the postexperience interview of one 
preservice teacher:
Because even though I feel we would have started the prac [practicum] thinking ‘Oh my 
god I don’t know anything’ but you do, it’s just about taking all that knowledge and apply-
ing it.
This is the most basic level of translation, but it still exists as a repudiation of the 
discourse that establishes a false binary between theory and practice. This discourse 
is evident in the following excerpt from another postexperience interview with a 
preservice teacher:
And even teachers will say ‘forget what they taught you at uni, now you’re in a school’ and 
[preservice] students will say ‘we learnt more in those three weeks than we did in the whole 
semester’ and I get cranky when they say that because it’s different learning, it’s not better 
learning.
The different learning alluded to here is amplified by this preservice teacher:
You’re not just learning about behaviour management theories like Skinner’s and Glasser’s; 
they’re not just people, you don’t just say ‘Glasser says this and Skinner does that’. It’s to 
give you a grounding in what you see in the classroom so when you think about what you’re 
doing [so] you realise how you’re positioning yourself in the equation. I think if you make 
that context [the school] obvious then hopefully the learning’s a bit more meaningful.
The preservice teacher is translating the theories of Glasser and Skinner into 
their context and practice in their words ‘positioning yourself in the equation’. This 
is evidence that teaching methods combined with a critically reflexive approach can 
act as boundary crossing objects for preservice teachers on their first professional 
experience. It can be seen that in this case, a reflective approach and the teaching 
knowledge they learned in university-based courses can develop their capacity to 
cross boundaries to develop their effective teacher repertoire. It is important to see 
evidence of the preservice teachers’ theory and practice application in this profes-
sional experience.
The University Mentor as Boundary Broker
The community is an important aspect of the activity system. In our model, there are 
two different communities situated in the activity systems of the school and the 
university. The university mentor and preservice teachers are the only people 
T. Loughland and H.T.M. Nguyen

81
common to both of these activity systems involved in professional experience. In 
Wenger’s (1998) words, they are ‘boundary crossers’ or ‘brokers’. Wenger (1998, 
p. 109) posits that brokering is a complex process of ‘translation, coordination and 
alignment between perspectives’. The university mentor in this case study played a 
critical role in assisting students to bridge the theory-practice gap as well as to con-
tribute to a supportive and cohesive learning environment for preservice teachers 
and supervising teachers.
The theory-practice gap is a common theme in the professional experience litera-
ture. In this study, the university mentor perceives that one of their roles is to medi-
ate this gap:
We need to have theory and we need them to strongly see how it’s implemented. Not one or 
the other. Not ‘this is how the school does it and this is what they told me at uni’. We need 
it to be brought together.
As part of both the university and school activity systems, the university mentor 
is in a good position to enhance the praxis for preservice teachers during profes-
sional experience. In this respect, the university mentor is an important boundary 
broker between the two activity systems in professional experience.
The university mentor is also a key community builder as they join in an ongoing 
relationship with the same school. In this study, the university mentors identified 
that working with the same schools allowed them to build a robust, dynamic rela-
tionship that involved reciprocity in professional learning that constitutes boundary 
crossing in professional experience. One of the simple innovations in this study was 
to implement measures that assured university mentors visited the same schools 
over a 5-year period. One of the university mentors commented that this led to a 
feeling of authenticity:
I really like it when I get to go to the same schools because then I can establish a relation-
ship with the principal, with the teachers and the prac coordinator and it becomes very 
authentic and we can help each other.
This is supported by another university mentor who believes that:
… what I wanted to do [is to] develop strong ties with schools so that our [preservice] stu-
dents weren’t sent out randomly to someone who said ‘I want a student’. They were going 
to the same site every year, and at that site the same person would be there so that they 
would be happy to talk to the university from the point of view of knowing the person. They 
don’t have to ring up and ask ‘I’ve got a problem here’, they know who’s going to be there 
and we put a face to it. So all the inclusion developments that we want at the university, I 
thought this was a strong grassroots way to do it where we actually brought professionals 
together.
Such genuine and ongoing relationships are of great assistance when there are 
problems experienced by the preservice teacher on professional experience accord-
ing to one of the mentors:
… if the mentor has a strong relationship with the school it’s much easier for everybody, for 
that [preservice] student, because we can ease over the problems, but also to guarantee 
future placements because they understand that everyone can’t be perfect.
5  Boundary Objects and Brokers in Professional Experience
www.ebook3000.com

82
This university mentor recognises that a strong relationship between the two 
activity systems can help to ameliorate the inevitable challenges that occur on pro-
fessional experience.
The university mentor is in a strong position to act as a boundary broker for the 
supervising teachers in the school as well. This can occur outside the realm of the 
professional experience according to one mentor:
It should be an ongoing dynamic relationship that can be helped and nurtured by people like 
me who are in the school on a frequent basis.
One of the ways that this mentor nurtured the relationship was through ad hoc 
and formally organised professional learning sessions with supervising teachers:
I’ve done staff meetings or I’ve sat with teachers and helped with their planning and 
programming.
In this way, the university mentor can act as a boundary broker for both preser-
vice and supervising teachers as they build a learning community that spans the two 
activity systems of the school and university. Most of the university mentors were 
professional learning advisors for schools. Some of them conducted a number of 
professional learning workshops on teaching methods with schools. They were bro-
kers in the sense that they created a connection across the school and university 
community. This assisted the teachers in the partnership schools to become familiar 
with the teaching methods taught at university.
The establishment of a community of learners facilitated by the university men-
tor that can bridge the activity systems of the school and university is of great assis-
tance to preservice teachers completing their first professional experience. A 
university mentor describes this community of practice in an interview:
I think that’s important and it comes back to what I was saying before about teaching being 
more than a class and a teacher, it’s about a community and I think our professional experi-
ence is that too. The relationships [that] mentors build up between teachers and schools can 
support the [preservice] student too.
A preservice teacher was also able to recognise the support provided by this 
community of learners:
Well the school’s been very supportive, which is good. We’re student teachers but they treat 
us like we’re teachers and it’s a quite good professional relationship …
An expression of this support was the willingness of other teachers in the school 
to participate in the learning of the preservice teachers; or in the words of one of the 
preservice teachers:
… the cooperation of other teachers who aren’t the cooperating [supervising] teachers but 
are quite happy for you to sit in their classroom and see how they teach.
This learning community is different from a traditional master-apprentice model 
where the preservice teacher may only have access to the support of their supervis-
ing teacher.
In summary, the university mentors played a critical role as brokers who assisted 
the learning of the supervising teachers and preservice teachers. Through the 
T. Loughland and H.T.M. Nguyen

83
­professional learning relationships with the supervising teachers and school, they 
brokered the theory taught by the university. Through the weekly meetings with 
preservice teachers, they negotiated this theory to assist preservice teachers towards 
effective teaching practices in schools.
Discussion
We argued earlier in this chapter that boundary crossing is a generative standpoint 
from which to understand the cross-institutional collaboration required for effective 
professional experience. In the findings reported in the previous section, we were 
able to identify a boundary object and broker that mediated the boundary crossing 
from university to school for preservice teachers on their first professional experi-
ence. These were teaching methods as the boundary object and the university men-
tor as boundary broker. In this section of the chapter, we discuss how this boundary 
object and broker mediated a third learning space for preservice teachers on their 
first professional experience.
The teaching methods the preservice teachers learnt on-campus enabled their 
boundary crossing into successful classroom lessons on their first professional 
experience. Engeström, Engeström, and Kärkkäine (1995) argue that the potential 
for boundary crossing depends on several factors such as the way boundary objects 
are used and negotiated by all stakeholders. It was evident from this case study that 
only some of the preservice teachers were able to negotiate the implementation of 
the teaching strategies learnt on-campus. This finding suggests that the context will 
not always be conducive for this boundary object to mediate learning as well as the 
importance of the interaction of this boundary object with a boundary broker doing 
the political and philosophical work of negotiation and translation.
The boundary broker that mediated border crossing for the preservice teachers in 
this case study was the university mentor. The actions of the university mentors 
reported here are emblematic of Tsui and Laws’ (2007) suggestion that the way to 
overcome contradictions between supervising teachers and university mentors is to 
create a space where all participants can generate collective knowledge by crossing 
community boundaries in the professional experience. The university mentors in 
this study helped to create that space through offering informal professional learn-
ing for supervising teachers and building a relationship of trust over time. In this 
case study, the university mentor seemed to be a key person in the creation of a 
shared community of practice between the school and university that facilitated the 
boundary crossing of these preservice teachers on their first professional experi-
ence. This evidence raises the awareness of the importance of the role of university 
mentors in the school-university partnership as the boundary brokers in transform-
ing the preservice teachers’ learning in the professional experience.
5  Boundary Objects and Brokers in Professional Experience
www.ebook3000.com

84
Conclusion
We complete this chapter by noting the implications of our case study for the prac-
tice and research of innovation in professional experience. The implications for 
practice relate to boundary objects and learning communities, whilst the implica-
tions for research focus on the use of Cultural Historical Activity Theory (CHAT) as 
a generative tool as well as a call for researchers to be aware of the politically con-
tested nature of research in professional experience.
This case study has drawn attention to the importance of boundary objects and 
brokers when innovation is attempted in professional experience. An implication 
that might be drawn from this is that teacher educators should identify the boundary 
objects or brokers that mediate boundary crossing when attempting innovation in 
their own professional experience programs. They can then ensure that these objects 
(or people) do not fall prey to arbitrary budget cuts or other program changes. 
Professional experience programs should prioritise strong relationships with part-
nership schools and endeavour to build robust learning communities of practice that 
include high-level academic and school staff.
This case study has provided some evidence that Cultural Historical Activity 
Theory (CHAT) is a generative theoretical lens with which to examine innovations 
in professional experience. The theoretical work in CHAT around boundary objects 
and crossing boundaries is particularly fruitful for examining professional experi-
ence that exists as a contested third space between the activity systems of the school 
and university (Akkerman & Bakker, 2011; Engeström et al., 1995). Furthermore, 
CHAT can be used as a framework for establishing, planning, analysing and evalu-
ating systematic reforms in professional experience. CHAT has been used exten-
sively by Engeström and colleagues in the Centre for Research on Activity, 
Development and Learning at the University of Oslo as a framework to guide for-
mative interventions to understand and improve organisational culture and learning 
(Engeström, Sannino, & Virkkunen, 2014).
Acknowledgement  This research was supported under the University of Sydney Postdoctoral 
Research Fellowship Scheme at the University of Sydney, Australia.
References
Akkerman, S.  F., & Bakker, A. (2011). Boundary crossing and boundary objects. Review of 
Educational Research, 81(2), 132–169. doi:10.3102/0034654311404435.
Allen, J. M., Howells, K., & Radford, R. (2013). A ‘Partnership in Teaching Excellence’: Ways 
in which one school–university partnership has fostered teacher development. Asia-Pacific 
Journal of Teacher Education, 41(1), 99–110. doi:10.1080/1359866x.2012.753988.
Baumfield, V., & Butterworth, M. (2007). Creating and translating knowledge about teaching 
and learning in collaborative school–university research partnerships: An analysis of what is 
exchanged across the partnerships, by whom and how. Teachers and Teaching, 13(4), 411–427. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13540600701391960.
T. Loughland and H.T.M. Nguyen

85
Bhabha, H. K. (1994). The location of culture. London: Routledge.
Bloomfield, D. (2009). Working within and against neoliberal accreditation agendas: Opportunities 
for professional experience. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 37(1), 27–44. 
doi:10.1080/13598660802530503.
Bloomfield, D., & Nguyen, H. T. M. (2015). Creating and sustaining professional learning partner-
ships: Activity theory as an analytic tool. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 40, 22–44. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.14221/ajte.2015v40n11.2.
Brady, L. (2002). School university partnerships: What do the schools want? Australian Journal of 
Teacher Education, 27(1), 1–8.
Burton, S. L., & Greher, G. R. (2007). School-University partnerships: What do we know and 
why do they matter? Arts Education Policy Review, 109(1), 13–24. https://doi.org/10.3200/
aepr.109.1.13-24.
Carlile, P. R. (2002). A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries: Boundary objects in new 
product development. Organization Science, 13, 442–455.
Darling-Hammond, L. (2006). Constructing 21st-century teacher education. Journal of Teacher 
Education, 57(3), 300–314. doi:10.1177/0022487105285962.
Day, C., & Smethem, L. (2010). Partnerships between schools and higher education. In P.  P. 
B. McGaw (Ed.), International encyclopedia of education (3rd ed., pp. 757–763). Oxford,UK: 
Elsevier.
Douglas, A. S., & Ellis, V. (2011). Connecting does not necessarily mean learning. Journal of 
Teacher Education, 62(5), 465–476. doi:10.1177/0022487111413605.
Edwards, A., & Mutton, T. (2007). Looking forward: Rethinking professional learning through 
partnership arrangements in initial teacher education. Oxford Review of Education, 33(4), 503–
519. doi:10.1080/03054980701450928.
Edwards, A., & Protheroe, L. (2004). Teaching by proxy: Understanding how mentors are posi-
tioned in partnerships. Oxford Review of Education, 30(2), 183–197. doi:10.1080/030549804
2000215511.
Edwards, G., Tsui, A. B. M., & Stimpson, P. (2009). Contexts for learning in school-university 
partnership. In A. B. M. Tsui, G. Edwards, & F. Lopez-Real (Eds.), Learning in school- univer-
sity partnership: Sociocultural perspectives. New York: Routledge.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental 
research. Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-Konsultit.
Engeström, Y. (2001). Expansive learning at work: Toward an activity theoretical reconceptualiza-
tion. Journal of Education and Work, 14(1), 133–156. doi:10.1080/13639080020028747.
Engeström, Y., Engeström, R., & Kärkkäinen, M. (1995). Polycontextuality and boundary crossing 
in expert cognition: Learning and problem solving in complex work activities. Learning and 
Instruction, 5(4), 319–336. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0959-4752(95)00021-6.
Engeström, Y., Miettinen, R., & Punamaki, R. L. (1999). Perspectives on activity theory. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Engeström, Y., Sannino, A., & Virkkunen, J. (2014). On the methodological demands of formative 
interventions. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 21(2), 118–128. doi:10.1080/10749039.2014.8918
68.
Gutierréz, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading Research 
Quarterly, 43(2), 148–164.
James, M., & Worrall, N. (2000). Building a reflective community: Development through collabo-
ration between a higher education institution and one school over 10 years. Educational. Action 
Research, 8(1), 93–114. https://doi.org/10.1080/09650790000200105.
Johnston, D. H. (2010). ‘Losing the joy’: Student teachers’ experiences of problematic relations 
with host teachers on school placement. Teacher Development, 14(3), 307–320. doi:10.1080/
13664530.2010.504012.
Kershner, R., Pedder, D., & Doddington, C. (2012). Professional learning during a schools–uni-
versity partnership master of education course: Teachers’ perspectives of their learning experi-
ences. Teachers and Teaching, 19(1), 33–49. doi:10.1080/13540602.2013.744197.
5  Boundary Objects and Brokers in Professional Experience
www.ebook3000.com

86
Kimble, C., Grenier, C., & Goglio-Primard, K. (2010). Innovation and knowledge sharing 
across professional boundaries: Political interplay between boundary objects and brokers. 
International Journal of Information Management, 30(5), 437–444.
Kruger, T., Davies, A., Eckersley, R., Newell, F., & Cherednichenko, B. (2009). Effective and 
Sustainable University-School Partnerships. Beyond determined efforts by inspired individu-
als. Canberra: Teaching Australia.
Kruse, N. B. (2011). Sociological perspectives of school-university partnerships: Contextual learn-
ing through three lenses. Arts Education Policy Review, 112(3), 115–121. doi:10.1080/10632
913.2011.566080.
Ledoux, M. W., & McHenry, N. (2008). Pitfalls of school-university partnerships. The Clearing 
House: A Journal of Educational Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 81(4), 155–160. doi:10.3200/
tchs.81.4.155-160.
Leont’ev, A.  N. (1978). Activity, consciousness and personality. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall.
McLaughlin, C., & Black-Hawkins, K. (2007). School–university partnerships for educational 
research—distinctions, dilemmas and challenges. The Curriculum Journal, 18(3), 327–341. 
doi:10.1080/09585170701589967.
McLean Davies, L., Anderson, M., Deans, J., Dinham, S., Griffin, P., Kameniar, B., et al. (2012). 
Masterly preparation: Embedding clinical practice in a graduate pre-service teacher education 
programme. Journal of Education for Teaching, 39(1), 93–106. https://doi.org/10.1080/02607
476.2012.733193.
Moss, J.  (2008). Leading professional learning in an Australian secondary school through 
school-university partnerships. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 36(4), 345–357. 
doi:10.1080/13598660802375941.
Roth, W.-M., & Tobin, K. (2002). Redesigning an “urban” teacher education program: An 
activity theory perspective. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 9(2), 108–131. doi:10.1207/
s15327884mca0902_03.
Smedley, L. (2001). Impediments to partnership: A literature review of school-university links. 
Teachers and Teaching, 7(2), 189–209. doi:10.1080/13540600120054973.
Star, S. L., & Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology, translations and boundary objects: 
Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology. Social Studies of 
Science, 19(3), 387–420.
Teach For Australia. (2009). Training and support for teaching. Retrieved from http://www.teach-
foraustralia.org/the-associate-experience/training-and-support.
Trent, J., & Lim, J.  (2010). Teacher identity construction in school-university partnerships: 
Discourse and practice. Teaching and Teacher Education, 26(8), 1609–1618.
Tsui, A. B. M., & Law, D. Y. K. (2007). Learning as boundary-crossing in school–university part-
nership. Teaching and Teacher Education, 23(8), 1289–1301. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
tate.2006.06.003.
Tuomi-Gröhn, T., & Engeström, Y. (Eds.). (2003). Between school and work : New perspectives on 
transfer and boundary-crossing. Amsterdam: Pergamon.
Vygotsky, L.  S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Waitoller, F. R., & Kozleski, E. B. (2013). Working in boundary practices: Identity development 
and learning in partnerships for inclusive education. Teaching and Teacher Education, 31(0), 
35–45. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2012.11.006.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
White, S., Bloomfield, D., & Le Cornu, R. (2010). Professional experience in new times: Issues 
and responses to a changing education landscape. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 
38(3), 181–193.
T. Loughland and H.T.M. Nguyen

87
Wilson, E. (2004). Using activity theory as a lens to analyse interaction in a university–school ini-
tial teacher education and training partnership. Educational Action Research, 12(4), 587–612. 
doi:10.1080/09650790400200259.
Wong, A., & Edwards, G. (2009). Connecting communities of practice. In A.  B. M.  Tsui, 
G. Edwards, & F. Lopez-Real (Eds.), Learning in school-university partnership (pp. 132–147). 
London: Routledge.
Yamagata-Lynch, L. C., & Smaldino, S. (2007). Using activity theory to evaluate and improve 
K-12 school and university partnerships. Evaluation and Program Planning, 30(4), 364–380.
5  Boundary Objects and Brokers in Professional Experience
www.ebook3000.com

Part II
Guiding, Supporting and Mentoring

91
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_6
Chapter 6
Distinguishing Spaces of Mentoring: 
Mentoring as Praxis
Debra Talbot
Abstract  Against a landscape of accreditation and accountability mechanisms that 
seek to govern the work of teachers from afar, this chapter draws on research and 
recent innovations in mentoring practices to move discussion on from an historical 
focus on definitions of the roles of mentors and mentees to consideration of the 
actual doings of those involved in mentoring relationships. In so doing, it aims to 
contribute to a conceptualisation of mentoring as praxis, that is, a morally and ethi-
cally informed practice. A vignette of dialogic mentoring involving a preservice 
teacher with a school-based and a university-based teacher educator is drawn on to 
illustrate the enactment of mentoring as praxis in which all three learn more about 
the complicated and complex practice of teaching.
Introduction
Given the pace with which the profession has evolved in the past decade, it is impor-
tant to revisit mentoring as praxis, with a view to the work that is currently being 
done in Australia, particularly in relation to teacher accreditation and accountability 
mechanisms. In this chapter I draw on relevant research and recent innovations in 
mentoring practices to move discussion on from an historical focus on definitions of 
the roles of mentors and mentees, in what might be considered as largely ‘supervi-
sory arrangements’, to consideration of the actual doings of those involved in men-
toring relationships. In so doing, I aim to contribute to a conceptualisation of 
mentoring as praxis – morally and ethically informed practice (Kemmis & Smith, 
2008) – that it is transformative and mutually educative.
This chapter is concerned with the spaces in which mentoring might occur, par-
ticularly physical spaces, who might be in those spaces and what might they be 
doing there that constitutes a mutually educative approach to mentoring. It seeks to 
offer a justification of why I believe it is necessary to the interests of ongoing teacher 
education, and particularly initial teacher education, to trouble the existing ­paradigm 
D. Talbot (*) 
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
e-mail: debra.talbot@sydney.edu.au
www.ebook3000.com

92
and enactments of mentoring that continue in many institutions. These reimagined 
spaces of mentoring acknowledge notions of working dialogically, learning to be, 
the importance of context and the possibilities for online mentoring. Together, these 
reimagined spaces contribute to an understanding of the praxis of mentoring.
It is timely for the mentorship of both preservice and beginning teachers to be 
considered in a more expansive way. Too often mentoring is considered as an iso-
lated activity akin to supervision, in which a designated mentor and a mentee are 
given structure and time for conversations that are conceived of as an induction into 
‘how we do things here’. By way of contrast, mentoring may be considered as:
•	 A broad activity that takes place in a wide range of contexts and arrangements 
yet always involves the opening up of a communicative space in which mutual 
learning takes place.
•	 Involving the greater community of teachers. Even when it is enacted as a one-­
on-­one dialogue between a mentor and mentee, it is both influenced by and influ-
ences this greater community. Richer mentorship programs can be developed 
through conscious involvement of this greater community.
•	 An intersubjective activity that extends beyond the boundaries of professional 
activity. A consciousness – and perhaps playfulness – around this role of mentor-
ing in developing individuals, who are learning to be, can give nuance to the 
pedagogical approach of mentors and contribute to a higher quality of praxis of 
preservice and beginning teachers.
•	 Playing a role in transforming the profession through dialogic interactions as an 
influential way in which knowledge, understanding and values are negotiated 
and developed by teachers. A high quality of praxis in mentorship contributes to 
a high quality of praxis in teaching, a base for the profession to continue to adapt, 
grow and transform.
•	 An integral part of professional experience and the process of becoming in which 
a teacher learns to be.
Mentoring relationships involving preservice, early career and mentor teachers 
cannot be prescriptive or defined by fixed expert-novice relationships. The learning 
needs of each participant in the relationship and the context of the learning must 
always be considered. Mentoring relationships are more fluid and flexible when 
learning needs are met through a differentiated approach that is sensitive to educa-
tional setting in early childhood, primary school, secondary school and tertiary con-
texts. Within the various spaces for mentoring discussed in this chapter, ‘learning to 
be’ emerges as an important consideration for the effectiveness, sustainability and 
transformative potential of mentoring relationships.
D. Talbot

93
Mentoring as Support
The concept of mentoring might have first been written about in Homer’s poem The 
Odyssey. The poem is often cited as a touchstone for the space in which ‘mentoring’ 
once occurred and how the actions associated with ‘mentoring’ appeared (Anderson 
& Shannon, 1988; Orland-Barak, 2014). In the poem, Athena, goddess of wisdom, 
appears to Telemachus in human form as Mentor. It is Mentor’s responsibility to 
develop Telemachus to his full potential, offering himself as a role model while 
simultaneously allowing Telemachus to develop his own perspective and style. 
Mentor’s actions could be viewed as constituting a ‘supporting and guiding’ model 
of mentoring in which a mentor assists a mentee to reflect on their practice and sup-
ports them to explore and experiment with their practice, providing suitable chal-
lenges and advice along the way. Many teacher mentors would recognise their own 
actions within this model of mentoring as they engage in a professional learning 
space with preservice, early career and, sometimes, more experienced colleagues. 
Thus, for them, the most common conception of a space for mentoring is within 
educational settings, both inside and outside the classroom, and the actors in that 
space are preservice, beginning and supervising teachers. The ‘supervising’ role, 
however, is also a common conception of how teacher mentors in these spaces carry 
out their role. This is because the actions of these people are so often perceived of 
as primarily evaluative (Kemmis, Heikkinen, Fransson, Aspfors, & Edward-Groves, 
2014). An alternative conception of teacher mentor would see those in the role focus 
on processes of collaborative and mutual ongoing education.
According to Hobson, Ashby, Malderez, and Tomlinson (2009), mentoring, as a 
relational space in which ongoing teacher education might occur, has featured in 
research literature since the 1980s. Those involved in mentoring relationships, how-
ever, hold different views as to the purpose and practices of mentoring, and such 
views often reflect both the context and the times (Ambrosetti, 2010; Devos, 2010), 
particularly in relation to education policy. Thus, as Kemmis et al. (2014, p. 155) 
explain, mentoring remains a contested concept in need of further exploration and 
elucidation. In mentoring relationships, the mentor is usually considered as the 
‘expert’ person and the mentee as the ‘novice’. Indeed, the Australian Professional 
Standards for Teachers (Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership 
(AITSL), 2012) make it clear that only those teachers working at the level of ‘Highly 
Accomplished’ would be offering support and advice, as a more experienced 
teacher, to another colleague.
Unlike traditional pairings, where these roles are fixed for the duration of the 
relationship, I see the mentor/mentee roles as fluid and reciprocal. In any given 
mentoring relationship, the mentor is the person who takes the lead in facilitating 
the learning process at a particular point in time. In the next learning moment, they 
may be the mentee. The aim of mentoring is not to preserve the status quo (Kennedy, 
2005) by inducting new teachers into ‘the way we do things here’ but rather to trans-
form teaching work through the ongoing education of all involved. Thus, transfor-
mation implies change, but I do not advocate change for its own sake. Rather, the 
6  Distinguishing Spaces of Mentoring: Mentoring as Praxis
www.ebook3000.com

94
focus is on teacher education that enables teachers to grow and renew aspects of 
their teaching work in order to better respond to the needs of their learners, whether 
those learners be fellow teachers or students. The notion of mentoring as ongoing 
teacher education points to an expansion of the mentoring space, beyond practices 
associated with feedback to the mentee and also to the inclusion of other actors in 
this space. It also implies an expansion of the notion of teacher educator to include 
school-based as well as university-based teacher educators in a collaborative 
endeavour aimed at ongoing teacher education for all those involved in the enter-
prise of education.
Mentoring in educational settings during the professional experience component 
of initial teacher education can involve a variety of participants in the mentoring 
space. Such educational settings range from early childhood centres through to sec-
ondary schools and may also include students with both short- and long-term spe-
cial needs, for example, intensive English centres. Experienced teachers and leaders, 
preservice and beginning teachers and university-based teacher educators may 
engage in this space in generative relationships focused on contextualised learning 
about teaching work. A collaborative space between university and the educational 
settings (Le Cornu, 2015), both inside and outside classrooms, offers the potential 
for sharing in relationships that are more equal and democratic in their acknowl-
edgement of what each party brings to the relationship. Within the mentoring rela-
tionship, mentor and mentee may share philosophies of practice along with technical 
skills and professional and personal support simultaneous with challenge and exper-
imentation. Such relationships can serve as a stepping stone to the elusive ‘com-
munity of practice’ (Hord & Sommers, 2008; Lave & Wenger, 1991) and can make 
an important contribution to professional learning that leads to changes in the cul-
ture of the educational setting when the mentoring is focused on transforming 
teaching work. It is in this collaborative space that the quality of conversations 
(Coombs & Goodwin, 2013; Timperley, 2001) can open up or shut down the learn-
ing resulting from mentoring work. The vignette offered later in this chapter illus-
trates one case of how such collaboration between school-based and university-based 
teacher educators resulted in transformative learning for those involved.
From Support to Supervision
The space of mentoring has been dramatically altered by the introduction of profes-
sional teaching standards in Australia (AITSL, 2012) and elsewhere, which seek to 
describe and mandate the actions of both mentees and mentors for the purpose of 
teacher accreditation. The processes of accreditation and registration of teachers 
against such standards can serve to entrench a ‘supervisory’ model of mentoring 
focused on the documentation of a mentee’s performance using ‘specialist dis-
courses of …professional standards’ (Kemmis et al., 2014, p. 159) for the purposes 
of compliance. In the Australian Professional Standards for Teachers (AITSL 2012), 
the actions associated with mentoring are described in the standards for ‘Highly 
D. Talbot

95
Accomplished’. In order to gain or maintain accreditation at ‘Highly Accomplished’, 
a teacher must engage in accredited professional learning that is designed to meet 
these professional standards. Thus, the supervisory model of mentoring and many 
of the professional learning programs designed to assist mentor teachers develop 
their mentoring practices in line with the use of standards run the risk of normalis-
ing the governing of teacher learning by professional standards (Bloomfield & 
Nguyen, 2015; Devos, 2010) in line with accountability agendas. The focus of the 
actions associated with mentoring shifts from support for the immediacy of teach-
ers’ work at the frontline to a text-based process of compliance and accountability 
as teachers produce portfolios of evidence designed to demonstrate that they have 
met these standards. Such a process assumes that all mentees in all contexts have the 
same learning needs. Mentor teachers do not have the flexibility to produce a rich 
and extensive portfolio of evidence that demonstrates how they have responded to 
the differentiated learning needs of their mentee if such mentoring meets too few of 
the standards. Policymakers thus become important actors in this mentoring space 
as they seek to govern teachers’ work and learning from a distance (Smith, 2006; 
Talbot, 2015) through processes that influence both the design and accreditation of 
professional learning.
The historical model of ‘supportive’ mentoring, which includes a focus on the 
mentee’s professional and personal well-being (Ambrosetti, Knight, & Dekkers, 
2014), may be supplanted by a more bureaucratic and supervisory attention to 
checklists of standard statements and reduced to ‘coaching’, which is much more 
focused on the acquisition of technical skills (Kennedy, 2005). Lesson observation 
schedules, supplied by many universities for the purposes of mentoring preservice 
teachers, routinely include lists of professional teaching standards that the supervis-
ing teacher is required to check against, thus focusing the supervising teachers’ 
attention on technical descriptors of practice. Incidentally, professional standards 
are not the only factor that has contributed to a ‘supervisory’ model of mentoring, 
particularly of preservice teachers. It has long been part of professional experience 
practice in most universities that either the supervising teacher or the tertiary mentor 
is responsible for writing the evaluative final report that determines the preservice 
teacher’s fate as either a ‘classroom-ready’ teacher, or not.
If accountability agendas, operationalised by professional standards, support and 
entrench supervisory models of mentoring, I ask what, if anything, can be done to 
move towards mentoring as a democratic practice or praxis? How might university 
mentors and mentors in other educational settings learn to improve their mentoring 
practices without succumbing to the dangers of ‘institutional capture’ (Smith, 2005, 
p. 156) whereby they become complicit in supporting the accountability regime that 
governs their practice in restrictive ways? How do mentors learn to resist mentoring 
that attempts to create a ‘mini-me’ – the mentor expects the mentee to emulate their 
practice  – and enter into more equal learning relationships with their mentee? 
Recent research around teacher professional learning and mentoring practices has 
sought to engage with such questions and to build something of a foundation for 
envisioning mentoring in ways that offer a space of resistance to models focused on 
6  Distinguishing Spaces of Mentoring: Mentoring as Praxis
www.ebook3000.com

96
supervision and accountability (Coombs & Goodwin, 2013; Kemmis et al., 2014; 
Talbot, 2016; Timperley, 2001).
Transformative Teacher Education
Moving forward to consider an expanded notion of the potential of mentoring for 
ongoing teacher education requires insight into what we know about mentoring as a 
means for transforming how educators change, grow and renew their practices in 
response to both learners and context. It seems, however, that what exactly mentees 
learn from mentoring in formal mentoring arrangements, whether good or bad, 
remains a largely unanswered question (Rajuan, Beijaard, & Verloop, 2008). What 
we do know is that mentoring can be ‘haphazard’ (Hudson, 2007, p. 363), can be 
largely variable and can even be ‘harmful’ (Hobson et al., 2009, p. 214). Some 
‘teacher-mentors themselves hold a ‘transmission perspective’ on teaching and 
learning and thus focus almost exclusively on matters of ‘technical rationality’ 
(Hobson et al., 2009, p. 211) that tend to reinforce the ‘mini-me’ model through 
advice that encourages the mentee to unquestioningly adopt the methods of the 
mentor. But before we throw our collective hands in the air and abandon mentoring 
in favour of learning in isolation from one’s own experiences, let’s consider this 
warning offered by Schwille: ‘… experience without guidance and reflection can 
often be a fickle and misleading teacher’ (2008, p. 156).
Learning in isolation presents a troubling consideration, particularly from an 
equity perspective, and can be highly dependent on context. For instance, there is 
often a lack of access to formal mentoring arrangements for early childhood educa-
tors in the prior to school sector due to the complexity of this sector. If mentoring is 
supportive of teacher learning, then it should be available to all educators irrespec-
tive of the age group of students they teach or the educational setting, including 
universities, in which they are employed. While it may occur in some very remote 
locations that an educator works alone in their institution, it seems reasonable to 
assume that it should be possible, with access to supportive technologies, for educa-
tors to form mentor-mentee relationships that are mutually educative.
Unfortunately, being a good classroom teacher, in whatever the educational con-
text, is not sufficient to guarantee that one will be a good mentor (Schwille, 2008, 
p.  139). There are specific ‘pedagogical knowledge practices’ (Hudson, 2013, 
p. 363) that include ‘broad picture strategies’ and ‘deeper, more focused strategies’ 
(pp. 376–377) that must be learned, implemented, reflected upon and refined over 
time. Herein lies the next barrier to establishing transformative mentoring relation-
ships. Prospective mentors will need a ‘space’ in which they have opportunities to, 
at the very least, audit their existing mentoring practice, read and reflect on research 
concerned with both the pedagogical skills of mentoring and the development of 
mentoring as an educative stance and implement and critique innovations in their 
mentoring practice. Several Australian universities are currently working to develop 
new approaches to mentoring courses that provide opportunities for teacher 
D. Talbot

97
­educators in all educational settings to work together on mentoring practices. Such 
approaches are mindful that good mentoring is differentiated to meet the specific 
needs of the mentee (Schwille, 2008) and are sensitive to context (Devos, 2010; 
Kline, White, & Lock, 2013). To this end, some mentoring courses are coupled with 
opportunities for practitioner inquiry as not only an authentic means to connect 
practice to context (Timperley, 2001; Talbot et al., 2017) but as an educative inter-
vention in which mentor and mentee explore teaching and learning practice together.
Traditionally however, the roles of mentor and mentee, whether that is between 
university-based educators and teachers or experienced teachers and beginning or 
preservice teachers, are fixed in their designation for a given period of time and thus 
incorporate certain relationships of power in terms of knowledge and expertise 
(Aspfors & Fransson, 2015; Orland-Barak, 2014). Such fixed power relationships 
can work against the development of collaborative relationships that contribute to 
the learning of both mentor and mentee, but this need not be the case. Taking the 
case of learning how to teach literacy, Comber (2006) explains how experienced 
classroom practitioners and beginning teachers with up-to-date theoretical knowl-
edge of literacy teaching practice worked together as co-researchers in mentor-­
mentee relationships that were temporally flexible. What Comber illustrates in this 
research is supportive of the claim that mentor-mentee relationships work well 
when there is an acknowledgement at the outset that one participant cannot always 
be the ‘expert’ and the other always the ‘novice’.
Mentoring is a relational practice that relies heavily on conversations for learning 
between mentor and mentee. Learning to be a good mentor, therefore, should 
include opportunities to develop skills for conducting mentoring conversations, 
including online opportunities (Coombs & Goodwin, 2013; Schwille, 2008; 
Timperley, 2001). Mentoring conversations, however, also vary in their quality and 
usefulness to the purpose of transforming practice. When mentoring conversations 
are limited to the mentor advising the mentee what they themselves would have 
done in a similar situation, they fail to acknowledge the mentee’s teaching philoso-
phy that gave rise to their actions that may indeed be different from the mentor’s 
own. When mentoring conversations avoid analysis and problem-solving directed 
towards difficult situations that have arisen in some aspect of the mentee’s practice, 
they fail to assist the mentee in transforming their practice. Timperley (2001) posits 
that a quality mentoring conversation should begin with the mentor articulating an 
area of concern and finding out whether the mentee shares the concern. This gives 
the mentee time and a space in which they might explain the underlying reasons for 
and philosophy guiding their actions. Accordingly, the mentor may in turn learn 
something about the mentee’s rationale for practice that was not obvious just by 
observation.
Such quality conversations, however, require time. The allocation of time to con-
duct such conversations needs to be supported by the educational setting and built 
into the processes so it is privileged and preserved, not undertaken when there is five 
minutes to spare. In some educational settings, particularly the early childhood sector 
where teachers have day-long responsibility for their students, teachers’ anecdotal 
comments indicate that time for quality mentoring conversations can be hard to find. 
6  Distinguishing Spaces of Mentoring: Mentoring as Praxis
www.ebook3000.com

98
In the vignette of mentoring practice provided in this chapter, the ‘mentoring conver-
sation’ is replaced by a dialogic approach to mentoring that considers meaning mak-
ing in interindividual territory (Voloshinov, 1973).
Making Meaning in Inter-individual Territory
I turn now to a description of the theoretical frame that will be useful in understand-
ing how the vignette presented in this chapter contributes to a more democratic 
enactment of mentoring, of mentoring as ‘praxis’ rather than ‘practice’. It is an 
account of a communicative space for mentoring involving more than just robust 
conversations that draw on evidence and do not avoid the difficult issues. Indeed, I 
argue that transforming practice requires more than good-quality conversation and 
other pedagogical skills for mentoring. It requires a form of sharing that results in 
new meaning being made between those engaged in the dialogue and activities of 
mentoring and is thus dialogic.
The writings of Mikhail Bakhtin and Valentin Voloshinov provide insight into 
what it means to interact dialogically. The essential difference between engaging in 
a dialogue and working dialogically occurs when:
The speaker strives to get a reading on his own word, and on his own conceptual system that 
determines this word, within the alien conceptual system of the understanding receiver; he 
enters into dialogical relationships with certain aspects of this system. (Bakhtin, 1981, 
p. 282)
In order for the mentor and mentee to engage in a shared experience of meaning 
making, as described by Bakhtin, each must be prepared to ‘struggle’ over the word 
and change the direction of their talk to accommodate changes to their ‘inner world’ 
through a shared, ‘structured and stabilized expression on experience’ (Voloshinov, 
1973, p. 91). Working dialogically is not akin to ‘telling’ or ‘instructing’, as may be 
the case in learning through coaching, but rather the existence of ‘(a)ctive agree-
ment/disagreement stimulates and deepens understanding, makes the other’s word 
more resilient and true to itself, and produces mutual dissolution and confusion’ 
(Bakhtin, 1986, p. 142). When mentors and mentees interact in ways that are dia-
logic, the roles of each are not fixed across time, be it instantaneous or extended. 
Dialogic mentoring gives rise to relationships between mentor and mentee that are 
fluid and flexible. Dialogic mentoring provides an opportunity to construct a ‘space’ 
for mentoring in which the word or action of the ‘other’, be it mentor or mentee, is 
engaged with, through disagreement as well as agreement, defended and changed. 
Learning happens as a result of genuine engagement with the word and actions of 
the ‘other’. Such fluid and flexible relationships, based on an understanding that 
agreement and difference in each other’s perspective provides the concrete sub-
stance of the learning, also make traditional power relationships associated with 
notions of ‘expert’ and ‘novice’ more difficult to maintain. This concept of dialogic 
D. Talbot

99
interactions as a powerful tool for mentoring relationships that have the capacity to 
transform practice is illustrated in the following vignette.
A Dialogic Space for Mentoring
The vignette of mentoring practice reported on here comes from one case (Talbot, 
Denney & Henderson, under review), part of a pilot study for a much larger and 
continuing research project. Various components included in the case study condi-
tions had existed historically in a variety of forms, but several have recently been 
reimagined and reconfigured. Over a number of years, the academics responsible 
for professional experience placements at this university had worked to establish 
‘professional partnerships’ with schools for the purpose of enhancing the quality of 
placement experiences for preservice teachers. More recently a focus on profes-
sional learning about mentoring had been introduced not only to further this pur-
pose but also to expand on this university’s growing focus on teacher education 
‘writ large’. The initiative sought to bring all actors involved in teacher education – 
academics, supervising teachers, preservice teachers and tertiary mentors – into a 
learning experience that would assist each actor to better respond to the needs of 
learners and the context in which the learning was situated. The transformative 
learning that occurred for each of the actors in this case was complex and occurred 
as a result of the genuine commitment to, and persistence with, dialogic attempts to 
make new meaning in the inter-individual territory between shifting relationships of 
mentor and mentee.
The space in which the mentoring practice discussed here occurs spans a large 
metropolitan university and a comprehensive high school located some 30 km from 
the university. The three actors in this space and case are Sarah, a preservice teacher 
completing her internship as her final professional experience placement; Jane, an 
experienced teacher and school-based teacher educator also responsible for the 
overall coordination of professional learning in her school; and Debra, a university-
based teacher educator who took on a number of roles in this vignette including 
teaching a mentoring course to in-service teachers at the school, tertiary mentor for 
the preservice teacher interns placed at the school and action research project semi-
nar leader for Sarah back at the university.
Sarah was completing her internship as the final professional experience of her 
two-year Master of Teaching degree. At the same time, she was also required to com-
plete an action research project inquiring into an aspect of her own teaching practice. 
Sarah was dissatisfied with her success at engaging her Year 10 Science class  
in their learning. Both Jane and Debra had been present in the classroom to observe 
Sarah teaching this class and were well aware of the challenges she faced. It should 
be noted here that normally an intern would be teaching independently by this stage 
but Sarah had invited both Jane and Debra into her dilemma with Year 10 Science. 
Often, in the course of a lesson that Sarah was responsible for, Jane and Debra  
would make independent observations of individual student’s work and later discuss 
6  Distinguishing Spaces of Mentoring: Mentoring as Praxis
www.ebook3000.com

100
these observations with Sarah. This three-way dialogic interaction concerning the 
perceived learning needs of individual students was incredibly rich and helpful to 
Sarah in formulating the pedagogical interventions she intended to experiment with 
in her research project. The interactions exemplified a dialogic approach to pedagogy 
not only in Sarah’s responses to the needs of her student learners but also through 
Debra and Jane’s pedagogical responses to Sarah. Debra and Jane were conscious of 
the need to carefully select and negotiate the content and skills to be learned by Sarah 
in order that she might transform her practice.
In consultation with Jane and Debra, Sarah decided to investigate whether dif-
ferentiating classroom activities based on the learning needs of her students would 
improve their engagement in learning. Jane was experienced at making both planned 
and contingent adjustments to her teaching, but how she came up with her good 
ideas remained something of a mystery to Sarah. Debra was able to articulate a 
planning scaffold for differentiation that made planning differentiated learning 
activities more manageable for Sarah. Debra was also providing support to Sarah in 
the formulation of her action research project primarily to ensure that what she was 
planning was achievable in the time frame for the project. Debra also found it neces-
sary to regularly encourage Sarah away from a focus on measuring the success of 
her transformed pedagogy through ‘improved results’ as measured on topic tests 
and the like and towards consideration of how she might ‘measure’ improvements 
in engagement, her original focus.
As mentioned earlier, Jane was an experienced teacher and school-based teacher 
educator. It was Jane who had arranged and supported the school’s component of 
the partnership with the university, and she also encouraged the participation of 
other teachers in the school in the mentoring course that Debra taught on-site. The 
course required teachers to not only attend face-to-face seminars but also to collect 
evidence of the mentoring practices that they then annotated and critiqued in light 
of assigned readings of research literature. Each seminar involved a high level of 
participant discussion in relation to theoretical perspectives and its relationship to 
their evidence of their mentoring practices. Jane was particularly interested in the 
notion of mentoring ‘in the action’ (Schwille, 2008) in which the preservice teacher 
and supervising teacher have previously arranged how the supervising teacher 
might intervene in the lesson in progress when necessary, to assist the preservice 
teacher to learn and make accommodations to their practice.
When Jane stepped into the action of the lesson that Sarah was teaching, it was 
with the intent of making shared meaning with Sarah about the action and the range 
of possibilities arising from the action. Jane’s stepping in was often initiated by ‘I 
wonder if…’ statements directed towards what the students were doing. In directing 
her comments towards the students’ actions, Jane took great care that her stepping 
in did not signal to the students or to Sarah that there was something not going right 
but rather that she had noticed potential for further exploration, comment or depth 
of response from the students. As Debra observed these classroom interactions, she 
felt that she was the one being mentored by both Sarah and Jane as they provided 
the ‘actual doings’ of what mentoring in the action can look like when it is genu-
inely dialogic. The learning through dialogic interaction continued ‘outside the 
D. Talbot

101
action’ between all three actors as they deconstructed and reflected on these 
moments of mentoring in the action. The ‘struggle’ over a shared meaning of events 
that had occurred during lessons and responses that might be made in future lessons 
encompassed consideration of each other’s philosophy of teaching and learning. It 
required genuine engagement with the notion that there was no one right answer.
There is no doubt that the combination of actors in the mentoring space described 
above was somewhat serendipitous. From the university’s point of view, it is not 
easy to organise that the same academic teaches the mentoring course in schools 
and the action research project at university is also the tertiary mentor who visits 
students on their internship professional experience. Not to mention the difficulties 
associated with making this combination work, as in Sarah’s case, for more than one 
student at a time. The research project arising from this case’s combination of 
unlikely events seeks to investigate ways in which elements of the dialogic interac-
tions that so clearly supported transformative learning for those involved can be 
offered by additional actors working across the school-university space in the inter-
est of ongoing teacher education.
Mentoring as Praxis
The ‘space’ of mentoring, then, is very much a communicative space in which men-
tor and mentee might learn together in ways that incorporate considerations of 
praxis rather than practice. Stephen Kemmis has written extensively on how a praxis 
view of learning about teaching, and teaching for learning, involves consideration of 
a philosophical aim of living well (2009, 2010). Kemmis defines praxis as ‘morally 
committed action oriented and informed by traditions of thought’ and draws on 
Dunne (1993) to comment that ‘praxis is always as much a process of self-­formation 
as it is a matter of achieving an external goal or satisfaction’ (2009, p. 465). In the 
vignette described above, Debra, Jane and Sarah were each engaged in a process of 
self-formation as they supported both their own and each other’s learning. This self-­
formation through learning went well beyond the pragmatic goal of Sarah passing 
her internship, Jane working towards accreditation against professional teaching 
standards and Debra fulfilling the requirements of her varied roles in this space. 
Kemmis explains that engaging in praxis is not only a way of conducting education 
work, consistent with an Aristotelian interpretation, but also a means of guiding 
‘history-making’ changes to educational work, in a post-Marxist sense (2010, 
pp. 9–10). The description of the dialogic space for mentoring is offered in the spirit 
of supporting a vision of mentoring as mutually educative (Feiman-Nemser, 2001) 
and democratic (Kemmis et al., 2014). I hope that it may contribute to changing 
mentoring practice in ways that see such practice actively engage with the knowl-
edge, understanding and values of all actors in the space, thus contributing to the 
development of mentoring as praxis.
6  Distinguishing Spaces of Mentoring: Mentoring as Praxis
www.ebook3000.com

102
References
Ambrosetti, A. (2010). Mentoring and learning to teach: What do pre-service teachers expect to 
learn from their mentor teachers? International Journal of Learning, 17, 117–132.
Ambrosetti, A., Knight, B., & Dekkers, J. (2014). Maximizing the potential of mentoring: A frame-
work for pre-service teacher education, mentoring & tutoring. Partnership in Learning, 22(2), 
224–239.
Anderson, E., & Shannon, A. (1988). Toward a conceptualisation of mentoring. Journal of Teacher 
Education, 39(38), 38–42.
Aspfors, J., & Fransson, G. (2015). Research on mentor education for mentors of newly qualified 
teachers: A qualitative meta-synthesis. Teaching and Teacher Education, 48, 75–86.
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL). (2012). Australian 
professional 
standards 
for 
teachers. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.aitsl.edu.au/
australian-professional-standards-for-teachers/standards/list
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: four essays by M. M. Bakhtin (C. Emerson & 
M. Holquist, Trans.). Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays (V. McGee, Trans.). Austin, TX: 
University of Texas Press.
Bloomfield, D., & Nguyen, H. T. (2015). Creating and sustaining professional learning partner-
ships: Activity theory as an analytic tool. Australian Journal of Teacher education, 40, 11. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.14221/ajte.2015v40n11.2.
Comber, B. (2006). Pedagogy as work: Educating the next generation of literacy teachers. 
Pedagogies: An International Journal, 1(1), 59–67.
Coombs, D., & Goodwin, K. (2013). Give them something to talk about: The role of dialogue in 
mentoring relationships. English Journal, 102, 58–64.
Devos, A. (2010). New teachers, mentoring and the discursive formation of professional identity. 
Teaching and Teacher Education, 26, 1219–1223.
Dunne, J. (1993). Back to the rough ground: ‘phronesis’ and ‘techne’ in modern philosophy and in 
‘Aristotle’. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Feiman-Nemser, S. (2001). Helping novices learn to teach: Lessons from an experienced support 
teacher. Journal of Teacher Education, 52(1), 17–30.
Hobson, A., Ashby, P., Malderez, A., & Tomlinson, P. (2009). Mentoring beginning teachers: What 
we know and what we don’t. Teaching and Teacher Education, 25, 2017–2216.
Hord, S.  M., & Sommers, W.  A. (2008). Leading professional learning communities. Voices 
from research and practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press and National Association of 
Secondary School Principals.
Hudson, P. (2007). Examining mentors’ practices for enhancing preservice teachers’ pedagogical 
development in mathematics and science. Mentoring and Tutoring: Partnership in Learning, 
15, 201–217.
Hudson, P. (2013). Strategies for mentoring pedagogical knowledge. Teachers and Teaching: 
Theory and Practice, 19(4), 363–381.
Kemmis, S. (2009). Action research as a practice based practice. Educational Action Research, 
17(3), 463–474.
Kemmis, S. (2010). Research for praxis: Knowing doing. Pedagogy, Culture and Society, 18(1), 
9–27.
Kemmis, S., Heikkinen, H., Fransson, G., & Aspfors, J. (2014). Mentoring of new teachers as 
a contested practice: Supervision, support and collaborative self-development. Teaching and 
Teacher Education, 43, 154–164.
Kemmis, S., & Smith, T. (Eds.). (2008). Enabling praxis: Challenges for education. Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands: Sense.
Kennedy, A. (2005). Models of continuing professional development: A framework for analysis. 
Journal of In-service Education, 31(2), 235–250.
D. Talbot

103
Kline, J., White, S., & Lock, G. (2013). The rural practicum: Preparing a quality teacher workforce 
for rural and regional Australia. Journal of Research in Rural Education, 28(3), 1–13.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Le Cornu, R. (2015). Key components of effective professional experience in initial teacher 
education in Australia. Melbourne, Australia: Australian Institute for Teaching and School 
Leadership.
Orland-Barak, L. (2014). Mediation in mentoring: A synthesis of studies in teaching and teacher 
education. Teaching and Teacher Education, 44, 180–188.
Rajuan, M., Beijaard, D., & Verloop, N. (2008). What do student teachers learn? Perceptions of 
learning in mentoring relationships. New Educator, 4, 133–151.
Schwille, S. (2008). The professional practice of mentoring. American Journal of Education, 
115(1), 139–167.
Smith, D. E. (2005). Institutional ethnography: A sociology for the people. Oxford, UK: AltaMira 
Press.
Smith, D.  E. (Ed.). (2006). Institutional ethnography as practice. Lanham, MD: Rowman & 
Littlefield Publishers.
Talbot, D. (2015). Tracing complexities of teacher professional learning to evidence of trans-
formed practice. (PhD). Sydney, Australia: University of Sydney.
Talbot, D. (2016). Evidence for no-one: Standards, accreditation and transformed teaching work. 
Teaching and Teacher Education, 58, 80–89.
Talbot, D., Denney, J., & Henderson, S. (2017). ‘Trying to decide … what sort of teacher I wanted 
to be’: Mentoring as a dialogic practice. Teaching Education. https://doi.org/10.1080/104762
10.2017.1347919.
Timperley, H. (2001). Mentoring conversations designed to promote student teacher learning. 
Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 29(2), 111–123.
Voloshinov, V.  N. (1973). Marxism and the philosophy of language (L.  Matejka, Trans.). 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
6  Distinguishing Spaces of Mentoring: Mentoring as Praxis
www.ebook3000.com

105
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_7
Chapter 7
Reconsidering the Communicative Space: 
Learning to Be
Mia O’Brien, Bronwen Wade-Leeuwen, Fay Hadley, Rebecca Andrews, 
Nick Kelly, and Steven Kickbusch
Abstract  In this chapter, we ask the reader to set aside existing perceptions of 
mentoring, supervision and their relatedness to professional experience and instead 
join us in a sharply reconsidered analysis of the communicative space in which 
teachers and preservice teachers negotiate the phenomenon of ‘learning to be’. We 
take the Habermasian concept of communicative space (Habermas J, Theory of 
communicative action, vol 2: Lifeworld and system: a critique of functionalist rea-
son (trans: McCarthy T). Beacon, Boston, 1987) and earlier notions of lifeworld 
(Heidegger M, Being and time (trans: Macquarrie J, Robinson E). SCM Press, 
New  York, 1962/1927; Merleau-Ponty M, Phenomenology of perception (trans: 
Smith C). Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1962/1945; Sandberg J, Dall’Alba G, 
Organ Stud 30:1349–1368, 2009) as a theoretical frame to foreground learning and 
practice as ‘ways of being in the world’. A series of three vignettes are presented to 
illustrate how mentoring is both epistemological (what we know or can do) and 
ontological (how we are learning to be). It is this learning to be, in the teaching and 
learning to teach relationship, that we aim to identify, illustrate and elaborate in this 
chapter.
M. O’Brien (*) 
Griffith University, Mt Gravatt, QLD, Australia
e-mail: mia.obrien@griffith.edu.au 
B. Wade-Leeuwen • F. Hadley • R. Andrews 
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia
e-mail: bronwen.wadeleeuwen@mq.edu.au; fay.hadley@mq.edu.au;  
rebecca.andrews@mq.edu.au 
N. Kelly • S. Kickbusch 
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
e-mail: nick.kelly@qut.edu.au; steven.kickbusch@qut.edu.au

106
Introduction
This chapter seeks to open up existing conceptions of mentoring, supervision and 
the professional experience. The constructs of communicative space (Habermas, 
1987), communicative action (Habermas, 1984) and an Integrative Pedagogy Model 
(Tynjälä, 2008) are used as theoretical frames to ‘see’ professional experience in 
learning and teaching differently. To bring life to these discussions, a series of 
vignettes illustrate how mentoring and being mentored is at once an epistemological 
(what we know or can do) and ontological (how we are learning to be) experience.
This analysis highlights the characteristics and complexities inherent within pro-
fessional experience, which can be seen to entail a particular kind of learning (drawn 
from the Habermasian notion of lifeworlds) known as learning to be (Dall’Alba, 
2009). That is, in the professional experience setting, mentor teachers, teacher edu-
cators and preservice teachers are engaged in ongoing negotiations of identities in 
practice or ‘learning to be’ teachers and mentor teachers. Mentoring and being men-
tored is thus an experience that requires complex and recursive negotiation of social 
and intrapersonal worlds concurrently. This view of the professional experience 
highlights new ways of understanding the pedagogical challenges faced by both 
mentors and mentees. We propose that an integrative pedagogical approach can 
strengthen practices for mentors and enhance the learning experience of mentees as 
they work together to navigate the professional experience space (Tynjälä, 2008).
Mentoring in the Changing Landscape of Teaching 
and Learning
Teaching and learning to teach occur in a complex, changing landscape (Clandinin, 
Downey, & Huber, 2009). The rich and multifaceted research base that now shapes 
professional experience practices in Australia and beyond, includes strategies for 
generative partnerships (Kruger, Davies, Eckersley, Newell, &  Cherednichenko, 
2009) and strengthens reciprocal learning relationships (Le Cornu & Ewing, 2008). 
Additionally professional experience supports learning communities (Le Cornu, 
2009) and communities of practice (Sim, 2006) with the importance of ongoing 
academic commitment (Zeichner, 2005) and increased scholarship (White, 
Bloomfield & Le Cornu, 2010).
In this chapter, we look closely at the personal and relational complexities spe-
cific to professional experience and in particular give our attention to what some 
have described as the significant epistemological, ontological and personal-­
psychological shifts that preservice teachers must undergo (Bahr & Mellor, 2016; 
Cochran-Smith & Lytle, 2009; Le Cornu, 2009). These shifts are transformative and 
so demand particular kinds of awareness and dispositions on the part of both the 
mentor and the mentee, if the experience is to be positive and transformative. These 
are addressed in the discussion section of this chapter.
M. O’Brien et al.
www.ebook3000.com

107
Our focus is on the lived experience and day-to-day realities of praxis, as it plays 
out for preservice teachers, teachers and teacher educators, within our framing of 
mentoring as ‘learning to be’. In the series of vignettes presented here, we illustrate 
how ‘mentoring’ might be usefully explained by an analysis of the professional 
experience setting as a communicative space and through a discussion of the men-
tor/mentee relationship as communicative action.
Professional Experience and Learning to Be: Pedagogical 
Nuances
Learning to teach is a social practice (Cochran-Smith & Lytle, 2009; Kemmis et al., 
2014). It is demanding in terms of personal learning (Bahr & Mellor, 2016; Le 
Cornu, 2009). Habermas (in Kemmis & Wilkinson, 1998 p. 29) notes there is ‘no 
individuation without socialisation, and no socialisation without individuation’. 
Professional experience entails the concurrent interrelatedness of individual or 
‘inner’ learning in the context of ‘learning to be’ in a specific social setting. Learning 
is both social and individual, it is system and lifeworld, and it draws on what we 
know and come to know (epistemology) as well as who we are and are ‘learning to 
be’ (ontology) (Dall’Alba, 2009). In this way, learning, particularly professional 
learning, is about knowing, acting and being (Dall’Alba, 2009).
In the context of the professional experience setting, preservice teachers are 
expected to demonstrate professional knowledge and practice-based competencies, 
as well as positive personal attributes considered important to teaching, such as 
kindness, fairness, humour and open-mindedness (Bahr & Mellor, 2016). A praxis 
perspective highlights how this process of learning requires significant situated and 
intrapersonal work on the part of the preservice teacher (mentee). That is to say, 
praxis is considered a process of becoming, which involves consideration of ‘char-
acter, conduct and consequences’ of action for self and others (Kemmis et al., 2014). 
It also assumes informed and willing pedagogical empathy on the part of the super-
vising teacher (mentor) and teacher educators. From the practice theory perspective, 
the professional experience can be framed as a recursive, socially mediated learning 
experience that is iteratively personal and professional. That is, the professional 
experience requires the preservice teacher to concurrently demonstrate emergent 
professional practice and knowledge as a focus for analysis and critique. A praxis 
perspective assumes that the mentor teacher/teacher educator role is to facilitate a 
collegial, collaborative analysis of the preservice teacher’s actions and then scaffold 
the reformulation of pedagogical thinking in relation to future actions. As Dall’Alba 
(2009) reminds us, this facilitation should take account of the ontological as well as 
the epistemological and therefore include consideration of the personal, individual 
dimensions of mentees.
In this way, learning in the professional experience can be likened to critical, 
participatory action research that has its theoretical roots in communicative action 
7  Reconsidering the Communicative Space: Learning to Be

108
(Kemmis & McTaggart, 2005). Action research directs the researcher’s attention to 
an analysis of social practices in consideration of explicitly held values and beliefs 
about what is good and of benefit (Kemmis, McTaggart & Nixon, 2014). Critical, 
evidence-based discussions about what is being achieved in practice and what may 
need to change for future practice are central to action research, and that in turn 
relies on communicative action. Similarly, in the professional experience, the pre-
service teacher considers the social practices of the placement setting and enacts 
his/her emerging ways of knowing, understanding and being as ‘teacher’. Their 
practice, knowledge and ‘being’ are at the same time subject to critique.
As with action research participants, preservice teachers must be deliberate, 
intentional and participatory about the ways in which they critique and interpret 
their actions in the social and material world. In turn, this recursive process assumes 
that individual preservice teachers are aware of the way in which knowledge, iden-
tity and agency are reflexive and, indeed, the way in which their existing views of 
self may be shaping (and possibly constraining) current interpretations of what is 
valuable for practice in action. A critical disposition and willingness to reformulate 
not just ways of knowing and ways of being becomes important. In this way, navi-
gating the professional experience space effectively relies on having the personal 
and psychological infrastructure to support this challenging space.
For preservice teachers, as with many professional learning settings, the realisa-
tion that there is a genuine need for reconstruction and deepening personal knowl-
edge base and identity can be unsettling. Moreover teacher education is replete with 
forms of practice and ways of working that can challenge existing perceptions of the 
profession (Lingard, Nixon & Ranson, 2011). Integrating these professional ways 
of being, which includes the process of becoming in the context of transitioning 
from one way of being to another (Dall’Alba, 2009), can be intimidating. When we 
acknowledge that professional experience is thus a process of becoming, a distinc-
tive shift in learning to be, we will be in a better position to more effectively facili-
tate learning (and the mentoring of learning) in the professional experience.
The Professional Experience as Communicative Space 
and Action
The Habermasian notion of communicative space and communicative action (1984) 
has specific theoretical and conceptual potential for moving our thinking within 
professional experience, and our practices as mentors and mentees, forward. As a 
heuristic, communicative action highlights three key features of a morally just, fair 
and equitable approach to communication (Kemmis & McTaggart, 2005), in those 
participants who would consciously and deliberately aim to:
	1.	 Reach intersubjectivity agreement, as a basis for
	2.	 Mutual understanding, so as to
M. O’Brien et al.
www.ebook3000.com

109
	3.	 Reach an unforced consensus about what to do in the particular situation in 
which they find themselves (p. 293).
In his later work, Habermas (1996) identified the ways in which communicative 
action opened a particular kind of space. It was a space that built solidarity between 
participants, enabled their understandings and decisions to be legitimated and in 
turn facilitated a sense of agency in that people could identify what was true and 
authentic in relation to the circumstances in which they found themselves. As such, 
in situations where we are genuinely acting collaboratively with others in the con-
text of practical and collectively shared reason, communicative action is an invalu-
able social resource for navigating the process of learning and reformulating what 
is of value and what is or is not to be valued.
Current research (Hudson, 2013) indicates Australian universities are often lim-
ited in the necessary resources for effective mentoring of preservice teachers during 
their professional experience in tertiary education. Concurrently, Australia’s pri-
mary teachers are generalists, teaching from Foundation/Reception to Year 6/7. The 
Australian curriculum supports eight key learning areas including English, 
Mathematics, Science, Health and Physical Education (HPE), Humanities and 
Social Sciences (HASS), The Arts, Technologies and Languages. These key learn-
ing areas interconnect to seven general capabilities: Literacy, Numeracy, Information 
and Communication Technology Capability, Critical and Creative Thinking, 
Personal and Social Capability, Ethical Understanding and Intercultural 
Understandings towards developing lifelong learners. The Australian Curriculum 
also embeds into the curriculum three cross-curriculum priorities that are to be 
developed: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Histories and Cultures, Asia and 
Australia’s Engagement with Asia and Sustainability (ACARA, 2017, v8.3). As 
such, primary generalist teachers are expected to integrate learning across the cur-
riculum by embedding at least one of the three cross-curriculum priorities into their 
programs in order to equip young Australians with twenty-first century skills 
(ACARA, 2017; Chapman, 2015).
A concern, highlighted by Kampylis (2010) and expanded on by Wade-Leeuwen 
(2015), was uncovered through an investigation into the implicit theories of preser-
vice teachers on creativity and how their implicit theories could influence their 
everyday practices in the classroom. Questions arose as to whether they were being 
supported in their role of fostering creativity in children. In this chapter, we argue 
that effective mentoring relationship strategies, established within tertiary teacher 
education programs, not only enhance preservice teachers’ confidence but also con-
tribute towards their professional knowledge and capacities.
The literature shows the characteristics of an effective mentoring relationship 
that involve an emphasis on high-quality relationships that build on trust, mutual 
respect and non-judging ways of being and are affirming and empowering (Meyer 
& Wood, 2017). According to Wenger (2000), a mentoring relationship is a dynamic 
intentional relationship in which one person enables another to grow and learn in 
the role. The effectiveness of the relationship is dependent on the resources, includ-
ing time and space, allowed for this relationship to grow. A growing body of research 
7  Reconsidering the Communicative Space: Learning to Be

110
(Cochran-Smith et  al., 2016; Gay, 2010) demonstrates a reciprocal relationship 
between teacher educators and preservice teachers could put equity at the centre and 
have a lasting effect on improving their vocational, academic and behavioural 
outcomes.
Mentoring and Innovation: Applying an Integrative 
Pedagogical Model
Several scholars assert teachers’ professional experience should emphasise the 
interplay of theory and practice advocating for the use of ‘praxis’. A central part of 
Carr and Kemmis (2009) and Mattsson, Eilertsen and Rorrison (2011) claim is that 
‘praxis refers to the sayings, doings and relatings that people enact when they take 
into account the universal values embedded in history and when they try to improve 
the world’ (p. 3). Kemmis and Smith (2008) state:
Praxis is a kind of action. It is action that is morally committed, and oriented and informed 
by traditions in a field. It is the kind of action people are engaged in…when they consider 
all the circumstances and exigencies that confront them at a particular moment and then, 
taking the broadest view they can do what it is best to do, they act. (p. 4)
Working with the notion that praxis is a theoretically informed action, Tynjälä, 
Slotte, Nieminen, Lonka and Olkinuora (2006), Tynjälä (2008) and the revised 
Integrative Pedagogy Model (Heikkinen, Tynjälä & Kiviniemi, 2011, p. 97) support 
the unification of theoretical and practical ‘praxis’ by engaging learners in four 
highly integrated elements that they call ‘(1) theoretical and conceptual knowledge, 
(2) practical and experiential knowledge, (3) regulative knowledge and (4) sociocul-
tural knowledge’ (Heikkinen et al., 2011, p. 107, italics from original).
Heikkinen et al. (2011) argue that theoretical knowledge is universal, formal in 
quality and often referred to as declarative knowledge. It could be more clearly 
explained by considering theoretical knowledge as contrasting and yet complimen-
tary to practice knowledge. Practical knowledge tends to emerge from practical 
experiences, procedural knowledge and when developing diverse skill sets. Whereas 
the third form of knowledge in the Integrative Pedagogy Model is self-regulative 
knowledge, this is where the learner allows space for reflection on their metacogni-
tively informed actions. Mediating tools such as informal discussions with mentors 
are needed to make tacit knowledge more explicit. The fourth component of the 
Integrative Pedagogy Model is the sociocultural knowledge, where cultural tools 
and artefacts become embedded in social practices. This supports Wenger’s (2010) 
and Lave and Wenger’s (1991) notion that sociocultural knowledge can be stimu-
lated by one’s participation in a community of practice. Together, these four differ-
ent forms of knowledge expertise form the foundations of an integrated pedagogical 
process.
At one university, the Integrative Pedagogy Model (Heikkinen et  al., 2011) 
assisted the preservice teachers in gaining a deeper understanding of their ­conceptual, 
M. O’Brien et al.
www.ebook3000.com

111
practical, metacognitive and social knowledge by learning how to communicate 
through effective problem-solving processes and using inquiry-based learning dur-
ing their tertiary education program. The Integrative Pedagogy Model is explored 
further in the following vignette.
Vignette 1: Preservice Teachers’ Learning Through a ‘Spirit 
of Play’
In this vignette, the second author, Wade-Leeuwen, examines the relationship 
between preservice teachers’ reflective practices using arts-based research method-
ologies during studio-based workshop in teacher education programs. The study 
(Wade-Leeuwen, 2015), held at an Australian metropolitan university, shows how 
inquiry-based learning can be used to engage the learner’s sensory experience and 
enhance participant’s imagination through a ‘spirit of play’, supporting the notion 
that a strong mentoring relationship established prior to and during preservice 
teachers’ professional experience builds twenty-first century capacities (Cutcher, 
2014; UNESCO, 2006; Wade-Leeuwen, 2016). This vignette discusses an interdis-
ciplinary research project, drawing on theories in arts-based inquiry, psychology, 
early childhood and primary education. The literature acknowledges twenty-first 
century pedagogical goals need to focus more on developing critical and creative 
skills in children (ACARA, 2011, 2014; World Economic Forum, 2016). However, 
limited research has been conducted in preparing preservice teachers in early child-
hood or primary education to foster creativity (Kampylis, 2010; Prentice, 2000; 
Sternberg, 2012) in themselves and the children they teach. Moreover, Australian 
universities are generally limited in the resources needed to build intercultural 
capacities of preservice teachers for active global learning communities.
The initial teacher survey (Wade-Leeuwen, 2015) indicated that 80% of the 350 
third-year and final fourth-year preservice teachers in the Bachelor of Education 
program did not feel competent in building twenty-first century capacities of critical 
and creative thinking skills. The research found that half the cohort (50%) of these 
preservice teachers felt limited in their creative and artistic arts knowledge prior to 
commencing the teacher education undergraduate degree program. Another finding 
from the research (Wade-Leeuwen, 2015) was that all the preservice teachers inter-
viewed indicated inadequate knowledge and understanding of the multifaceted 
aspects of creativity (Edwards, Gandini, & Forman, 2011) and voiced that they were 
unprepared to foster critical and creative thinking skills in the classroom.
The mentoring program adapted elements from the Integrative Pedagogy Model 
(Tynjälä, 2008) as an effective strategy in developing preservice teachers’ reflective 
practice and creativity. This was conducted in a systematic way by providing preser-
vice teachers with opportunities during their teacher education programs and pro-
fessional experience to discover artistic material explorations through a ‘spirit of 
7  Reconsidering the Communicative Space: Learning to Be

112
play’ (Wade-Leeuwen, 2011) using the creative arts. In this way, participants 
­developed deeper understanding of the different elements in the Integrative 
Pedagogy Model. For example, in the studio-based workshop, the preservice teach-
ers used long bamboo sticks with Chinese brushes attached and dipped them in 
Chinese black ink before collaboratively exploring a variety of different mark-mak-
ing strokes during the creative process, which meant they were focusing more on 
the process than the product (Fig. 7.1). The studio workshop experiences were later 
discussed during the postworkshop interviews. Twelve preservice teachers reflected 
on the value of using arts-based research within the framework of the Integrative 
Pedagogy Model (Heikkinen et al., 2011). Most voiced views that the model pro-
vided a tangible structure for them to reflect on the integration of theory, practice, 
self-regulation and the sociocultural experiences during the creative process, which 
they felt enhanced their overall self-efficacy and confidence to teach the creative and 
visual arts.
This research study (Wade-Leeuwen’s, 2015) provided three significant insights. 
The first emerged from notions of communicative space in which these preservice 
teachers negotiated the phenomenon of ‘learning to be’, that is, allowing time for 
discovery of their physical and emotional space within the studio-based workshops 
where they could notice and reflect on how they interacted, reacted and worked col-
laboratively together. Collaborative creativity was something they had not consid-
ered before the workshops and they had sufficiently improved on their communication 
and collaboration skills during this process. The second was that the preservice 
teachers experienced what it is like to be in an artistic classroom setting. This 
Fig. 7.1  Preservice teachers using bamboo sticks with brushes attached in the studio-based 
workshop
M. O’Brien et al.
www.ebook3000.com

113
­generated creativity dispositions such as risk-taking attitudes, resilience, flexibility, 
­fluidity and avoidance of premature closure in their material exploration practice. 
The final insight related to establishing trusting relationships and the potential for 
lifelong learning practices (Wade-Leeuwen, 2016, 2011) to develop between the 
mentor and mentees, as well as between each other.
Findings from this research show what appear to be new synergies emerging 
when intentionally allowing time and space for preservice teachers to think, experi-
ence together and reflect more deeply on their professional practice. In other words, 
they discover new ways of being together during their professional experience. As 
an outcome of the study, all preservice teachers voiced an awareness of the com-
municative space as one where the mentor teachers, teacher educators and preser-
vice teachers engage and negotiate the phenomenon of learning to be an effective 
teacher.
Vignette 2: Learning to Be (Managing Diversity 
in Perspectives During Professional Experience)
Nurturing the mentoring space requires both the university-based teacher educators 
and the preservice teachers being available to ‘be’ and to ‘learn’ from each other. 
Approaching mentoring from this pedagogical frame refocuses everyone’s role in 
the mentoring space. Co-authors of this chapter Hadley and Andrews refer to 
research conducted since 2012 with Diploma students entering their first university 
professional experience at a metropolitan university. This research focused on these 
students ‘learning to be’ in the university system and their understanding of profes-
sional experience. This research enabled a space for the university teacher-based 
educators and the preservice teachers to navigate the process of ‘learning to be’.
When university teacher educators prioritise the development of knowledge and 
practice, other important areas such as nurturing quality mentoring relationships 
and the facilitation of communicative spaces that enable genuine opportunities for 
‘learning to be’ can be neglected. By being involved in this research and running the 
workshops, we found that our, and the preservice teachers’, beliefs and practices 
shifted as we developed skills in ‘learning to be’. This required rethinking what we 
‘thought’ we knew about these students and opening up communicative spaces to 
hear their ways of being (Hadley & Andrews, 2012). Since this research began, the 
strategies for opening up this communicative space have included additional work-
shops, online discussion forums and, since 2016, an online module that was avail-
able to all Diploma students 1 week before the semester began.
The original workshops in 2012, and subsequent adaptions, gave us insights into 
the preservice teachers’ knowledge, skills and fears. These spaces for additional 
communication also provided opportunities for them to get to know us and to feel 
more comfortable with us. By expanding our approach, we found these interactions 
(that offered experiences above and beyond normal tutorial classes) made us appear 
7  Reconsidering the Communicative Space: Learning to Be

114
more approachable in the eyes of the preservice teachers. When interviewed after 
the workshops, students noted:
Having the extra support there, just knowing that the teachers understand where we’re com-
ing from. I found this very beneficial (Student A).
Actually the workshop helped me more than the lectures and on campus days. It was … 
because it was like small group. I felt like I was able to discuss my concerns and get feed-
back and … it was very good … I felt very strong after that (Student Y).
We had to again rethink the language we used in the 2016 online module. We had 
thought we were being supportive of the diversity of pathways to university, but one 
of the Diploma preservice teachers interpreted this as being condescending. The 
student noted:
Don’t assume that all Diploma students are going to struggle in the unit. Please help them 
to celebrate and use their experience during their university placements … Just because 
someone has a Diploma does not mean they will not have the academic language to com-
plete the unit – e.g. I didn’t finish year 12 due to health reasons, not because I was incom-
petent, and completed my Diploma to gain entry to university (Student X).
The research findings have also been disseminated to the university-based educa-
tors through various forums. The following reflection from one very experienced 
tertiary supervisor (who visits students when they are on placement) captures the 
diversity of the preservice teachers, particularly when compared to the past, and 
how this diversity has impacted on her role as a mentor:
The background of the students has changed during the time that I have been a tertiary 
supervisor – nearly 20 years. The students are entering this degree with so much diversity 
themselves. There are students who have Recognised Prior Learning (RPL), who are inter-
national students, students who are not from this country, some may have a degree in a very 
different field and some may have a degree from their country of origin which may not be 
recognised here, so need to upgrade their skills. I have also found that the diversity in terms 
of the student’s own lifestyle has changed incredibly over the 20 years. When I first started 
the majority of students were studying internally but now there is a combination of internal 
and external students as they are often combining part-time work with their university com-
mitments. There is so much more diversity today in my role as a tertiary supervisor com-
pared to when I began this role in the late 1990s (personal communication, 18 August 
2016).
Being involved in rethinking how we support the Diploma students’ transitioning 
into their first professional experience placement has made us stop and think about 
our own beliefs and about our approachability and helped us to adapt the way we 
conducted ourselves not just with this group but the whole preservice teacher cohort. 
We now actively encourage preservice teachers to meet with us. We do this by invit-
ing them in different ways, including verbally, through our discussion forums and 
most recently through the online module we have developed. We also meet indi-
vidually with students early in the semester to ensure they are feeling supported and 
to open up these communicative spaces. By opening up and being available to the 
preservice teachers, we are conveying that we want to know each and every one of 
M. O’Brien et al.
www.ebook3000.com

115
them as individuals, not just as the second-year Professional Experience or Diploma 
cohort.
Since this study, we have changed many aspects of our unit and have formally 
evaluated our strategies, including obtaining direct feedback from the students com-
pleting the unit. We will continue to collaborate with our preservice teachers, to 
adapt, to listen, to think, to ask and to invite them into our space so that we can 
continue learning to be, together.
Vignette 3: When ‘Learning to Be’ Gets Personal 
and Personally Difficult
This final vignette is drawn from current research into preservice teachers nomi-
nated ‘at risk’ during their professional experience placement. It is not uncommon 
for preservice teachers to be labelled ‘at risk’ during a placement on the basis of 
specific areas of professional knowledge and practice that are identified by mentor 
teachers as in ‘urgent’ need of strengthening (such as classroom management, cur-
riculum planning and/or specific pedagogical practices). However the examples in 
this vignette are distinctive in that they reflect areas of professional learning that can 
be difficult to qualify and describe but that are nonetheless present and influential. 
These are areas that teacher educators might describe as the preservice teacher’s 
attitude, disposition or demeanour. These areas can overshadow or interfere with the 
professional learning process. As examples of ‘learning to be’, these experiences 
reflect quite challenging yet not unusual situations. Nevertheless they reflect authen-
tic ways of being, from both the mentor and mentee perspectives, and are real, 
relational, personal and difficult. This vignette offers two ‘case stories’ for consid-
eration. All names are pseudonyms.
Zandra’s Story
Zandra is a preservice teacher in her second year of study. Zandra’s mentor teacher 
(Ms. McManen) described her general demeanour as ‘bullish and slightly aggres-
sive’; she noted that her presence in the classroom was ‘unsettling’ and that their 
professional learning conversations became ‘highly strained’ after the first few days 
of the placement. Zandra was eventually asked by the school coordinator to leave 
the setting well before the placement should have concluded. In the debriefing inter-
view with the first author (O’Brien) and the teacher educator (course convenor) that 
followed, Zandra arrived wearing a black heavy-metal t-shirt, baggy shorts and 
black, chunky-soled lace-up boots. She sat well back in a chair with her arms folded 
tightly across her body and kept the ankle of one leg resting on the knee of another. 
She shrugged and mumbled inaudibly when she was greeted by the course convenor 
7  Reconsidering the Communicative Space: Learning to Be

116
and rolled her eyes regularly as the conversation about how the placement had pro-
gressed. Eventually O’Brien asked Zandra directly how she thought the placement 
had gone and why Ms. McManen requested that it be terminated.
Zandra replied:
That teacher was an absolute bully, I wouldn’t treat my worst enemy that way and I’d never 
be that kind of teacher in a million years! She just got cut ‘cause I was nice to the kids and 
they liked me and started hating her. She’s got no business teaching other people how to 
teach when she shouldn’t be teaching herself!
O’Brien and the course convenor continued to facilitate what was a stilted and 
difficult conversation and inevitably turned towards some critical discussion of what 
Zandra could have done to approach the situation differently. At that point, Zandra 
showed signs of visible distress. She was angry, frustrated and upset at the same 
time. When it was pointed out that she was in fact acting very defensively, and that 
such an approach in the placement could have been challenging for the teacher and 
other staff to respond effectively to, Zandra broke down into tears. After some 
silence and supportive encouragement, Zandra disclosed that she had recently left 
an abusive relationship, and whilst she had felt confident enough starting her studies 
after resettling in another state, there were characteristics that her teacher mentor 
regularly demonstrated that (to her mind) reminded her of that relationship. This 
‘pushed buttons’ she’d thought were long extinguished. She responded to the firm 
(possibly stern) approach of her mentor teacher by being, in her words, ‘tough and 
uncompromising back’ during their time together. In her words, ‘I can give as good 
as I get’. In appeared that where Zandra perceived a ‘bully’ teacher mentor, her 
defensive, somewhat automated response was perceived (by Ms. McManen) as 
being ‘bullish’ in return.
Sebastian’s Story
Sebastian was well known to most of the teacher educators in his program because 
he went out of his way to be charming, conversational and affable to staff and his 
peers. He was a keen student, who regularly espoused his commitment to changing 
the lives of young people, whom he hoped would eventually share his passion for 
learning, especially science and great novels. He presented well and was enthusias-
tically welcomed by his mentor teacher (Mr. Rashna) and the school staff who 
eagerly included him in their lunchtime conversations and after-school planning 
sessions. However the placement took a difficult turn by the midpoint, where a 
meeting between the teacher mentor, teacher educator and Sebastian was called. In 
the preparation notes and mid-placement report, the mentor teacher affirmed 
Sebastian’s pleasant nature and apparent willingness to learn but questioned his 
commitment to teaching children in a primary school setting. Sebastian prepared for 
the meeting by sending the teacher educator his notes reflecting on his progress to 
M. O’Brien et al.
www.ebook3000.com

117
date. The concerns of his mentor teacher had not gone unnoticed, but he was con-
fused about why he felt he was ‘unsuitable’ for primary school teaching.
In the meeting, it became clear that at the heart of the matter was the mentor 
teacher’s concern that Sebastian demonstrates his ability to scope and sequence a 
lesson or series of lessons appropriate for his Grade 4 class and, more generally, to 
communicate with them ‘at their level’. In contrast, Sebastian talked mostly of his 
love of science and learning and his keenness to ‘reproduce’ what he felt were some 
of his own most inspiring experiences as a student. It was difficult to get Sebastian 
to pay close attention to what his mentor teacher was saying about the need to ‘reca-
librate’ pedagogical designs. He would close down and display feelings of being 
hurt, despairing and defeated. The placement progressed but required regular medi-
ation from the university-based teacher educator, not to deflect a defensive or dete-
riorating relationship but rather to scaffold the focus of both mentor and mentee on 
the renegotiation of Sebastian’s existing view of self as teacher and its interrelation-
ship with Sebastian’s practice as a teacher within that setting. Sebastian was suc-
cessful in passing his placement. However his mentor teacher felt his impact on 
Sebastian’s progress was minimal; and Sebastian himself reflects on the placement 
as a ‘personally and professionally confusing experience, since I felt Mr. Rashna 
never really understood who I was as a teacher’.
This final vignette serves to illustrate how the professional experience placement 
when seen as an experience of ‘learning to be’ can be a challenging pedagogical 
space, particularly where there is inner personal conflict. In general, when mentor 
teachers and preservice mentees focus only on the ‘knowledge and practice’ aspects 
of the placement, at the expense of managing the communicative space with delib-
eration and intentional communicative action, then important areas of learning to 
teach (being) can be overlooked or become the cause of confusion and concern. 
These case stories illustrate how the learning that needed to be addressed explicitly 
in the professional experience was in relation to how each respective preservice 
teacher was learning to be, as a teacher. Addressing these shifts relied upon a change 
in ways of ‘being’ on the part of the preservice teacher mentees but also presented 
challenges to the mentor teachers in relation to ‘being mentor’ that communicative 
action may have effectively addressed.
In Zandra’s case, her immediately negative perceptions of the mentor teacher, 
and the deeply personal experiences that shaped her emotional reactions to that 
teacher, governed the way she chose to act and be in that classroom. In turn Zandra’s 
mentor teacher found it difficult to interpret Zandra’s actions and overall demean-
our. The challenge for the mentor teacher was to find ways to address Zandra’s 
actions, to carefully point out the limitations of ‘being’ a certain way and to promote 
and encourage the potential advantages of being and acting in different ways in that 
setting whilst working within the bounds of ‘mentor’ (and avoiding the territory 
best left to counsellors and related experts). The challenge for Zandra was to be 
willing to look carefully and critically at her perceptions and to gain some insights 
into the ways in which her emotional experiences were negatively impacting on her 
approach to ‘being’ a teacher. Unfortunately the confusion and mutual defensive-
ness quickly led to an unworkable professional relationship.
7  Reconsidering the Communicative Space: Learning to Be

118
Similarly for Sebastian, his fixed view of ‘himself as a teacher’ limited his capac-
ity to be flexible in the teaching environment and got in the way of his ability to see 
himself doing teaching differently. His mentor teacher struggled to understand what 
was a potential disconnect between Sebastian’s commitment to his teaching identity 
and his enacted practice as teacher. Instead, he ‘read’ Sebastian’s dogged commit-
ment to one line of pedagogical thinking as an unwillingness to teach at a level 
appropriate for his primary school students.
What this vignette also illustrates is the complex and recursive process of socially 
mediated learning that can comprise the professional experience. For teacher men-
tors and preservice teacher mentees, this is an experience they must work delibera-
tively together on, with the principles of communicative action in mind, if they are 
to navigate the experience effectively. Moreover, since the professional experience 
traverses the social, interpersonal and intrapersonal concurrently, mentoring prac-
tices and perspectives must find ways to take account of the inherently challenging 
task that learning to teach entails.
Earlier we proposed that effective teaching demands an ability to connect with 
one’s sense of self-worth and self-esteem, as well as the capacity to develop a strong 
connection to the situation and its cultural context. When we see professional expe-
rience as the development of pedagogical knowing, acting and being (Dall’Alba, 
2009), we can better articulate and make possible the kinds of mentoring relation-
ships that will support preservice teachers and their mentors through an otherwise 
difficult process of ‘learning to be’.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have proposed that in the professional experience setting, teacher 
educators and preservice teachers are engaged in ongoing negotiations of identities 
in practice or ‘learning to be’ teachers and mentor teachers. In this way, mentoring 
and being mentored can be seen as an iterative negotiation and renegotiation of 
social, relational and intrapersonal worlds concurrently. This view of the profes-
sional experience highlights new ways of understanding the pedagogical challenges 
faced by both teacher mentors and their preservice teacher mentees. Doing so 
acknowledges the identity work that mentoring in learning to teach entails, which is 
distinctively different to the domains of professional knowledge and practice that 
professional experiences are required to formally report on. Bahr and Mellor (2016) 
go some way to addressing this gap by noting the ‘positive personal qualities’ that 
denote ‘quality’ in teaching yet remain unacknowledged by regulatory bodies. 
Similarly the vignettes presented here attempt to offer new insights into the kinds of 
challenges that ‘learning to be’ can entail. These include the importance of scaffold-
ing risk-taking, creativity and a ‘spirit of play’ with preservice teachers as outlined 
in vignette 1; the benefits of fluid and reciprocal reformulation of ‘knowledge, skills 
and fears’ in collaboration with preservice teachers as outlined in vignette 2; and the 
M. O’Brien et al.
www.ebook3000.com

119
significance of understanding the influence of identity and identity work in profes-
sional experience learning as outlined in vignette 3.
In each vignette, the principles of communicative space and communicative 
action reframe our views of mentors and mentees within the professional experi-
ence. Mentoring conversations and processes can be viewed in terms of intersubjec-
tivity, mutuality and solidarity within an overarching commitment to an educative 
moral purpose (Kemmis & McTaggart, 2005). Together with the notion of mentor-
ing as ‘learning to be’, these principles can also serve as a blueprint for enacting 
mentoring as intentionally communicative action within a deliberately communica-
tive space.
References
ACARA. (2011). The shape of the Australian Curriculum: The arts. Australian Arts Curriculum 
from Foundation to Year 12. Retrieved on July 12, 2016, from www.acara.edu.au/_resources/
Australian_Curriculum_The_Arts_2_July_2013.pdf
ACARA. (2014). Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority. Critical and 
creative thinking. Accessed 3 Jan 2017 from: http://www.australiancurriculum.edu.au/
generalcapabilities/critical-and-creative-thinking/introduction/introduction
ACARA. (2017). Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority. V8,3 F-10 
Curriculum. Accessed 25 Feb 2017 from: http://www.australiancurriculum.edu.au/curriculum/
overview
Bahr, N., & Mellor, S. (2016). Building quality in teacher education. Australian Education Review, 
61. Australian Council for Educational Research. http://research.acer.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=1025&context=aer
Carr, W., & Kemmis, S. (2009). Educational action research: A critical approach. The SAGE hand-
book of educational action research, 74–84.
Chapman, S. N. (2015). Arts immersion: Using the arts as a language across the primary school 
curriculum. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 40(9), 86–101.
Clandinin, D. J., Downey, C. A., & Huber, J. (2009). Attending to changing landscapes: Shaping 
the interwoven identities of teachers and teacher educators. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher 
Education, 37(2), 141–154.
Cochran-Smith, M., Ell, F., Grudnoff, L., Haigh, M., Hill, M., & Ludlow, L. (2016). Initial teacher 
education: What does it take to put equity at the center? Teaching and Teacher Education, 57, 
67–78.
Cochran-Smith, M., & Lytle, S. L. (2009). Inquiry as stance: Practitioner research for the next 
generation. New York: Teachers College Press. Columbia University.
Cutcher, A. (2014). Drawing on experience: The challenges that generalist teachers face in deliver-
ing visual arts effectively in primary school. Australian Art Education, 36(1), 65–83.
Dall’Alba, G. (2009). Learning professional ways of being: Ambiguities of becoming. Educational 
Philosophy and Theory, 41(1), 34–45.
Edwards, C., Gandini, L., & Forman, G. (2011). The hundred languages of children: The Reggio 
Emilia experience in transformation. Santa Barbra, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Gay, G. (2010). Culturally responsive teaching: Theory, research, and practice. New  York: 
Teachers College Press. Columbia University.
Habermas, J. (1984). Theory of communicative action, Volume 1: Reason and the rationalisation 
of society (T. McCarthy, Trans.). Boston: Beacon Press.
Habermas, J. (1987). Theory of communicative action, Volume 2: Lifeworld and system: A critique 
of functionalist reason. (T. McCarthy, Trans.). Boston: Beacon.
7  Reconsidering the Communicative Space: Learning to Be

120
Habermas, J. (1996). Between facts and norms (William Rehg, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Hadley, F., & Andrews, R. (2012). Investigating a theory of practice: Diploma students traversing 
their first professional experience placement at university. Preliminary findings. Paper pre-
sented at the proceedings of the Australian Association for Research in Education Conference, 
Sydney, University of Sydney. http://www1.aare.edu.au/pages/static/conference.aspx?y=2012
Heidegger, M. (1962/1927). Being and time (J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, Trans.). New York: 
SCM Press.
Heikkinen, H.  L. T., Tynjälä, P., & Kiviniemi, U. (2011). Integrative Pedagogy in Practicum: 
Meeting the second order paradox of teacher education. In M. Mattsson, T. V. Eilertsen, & 
D.  Rorrison (Eds.), A practicum turn in teacher education (pp.  91–112). Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Hudson, P. (2013). Strategies for mentoring pedagogical knowledge. Teachers and Teaching, 
19(4), 363–381.
Kampylis, P. (2010). Fostering creative thinking: The role of primary teachers. Jyväskylä, Finland: 
University of Jyväskylä.
Kemmis, S., & McTaggart, R. (2005). Communicative action and the public sphere. The Sage 
handbook of qualitative research, 3, 559–603.
Kemmis, S., McTaggart, R., & Nixon, R. (2014). The action research planner. Singapore, 
Singapore: Science & Business Media. Springer.
Kemmis, S., & Smith, T. (2008). In S. Kemmis & T. Smith (Eds.), Praxis and praxis development. 
Enabling praxis: Challenges for education. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense.
Kemmis, S., Wilkinson, J., Edwards-Groves, C., Hardy, I., Grootenboer, P., & Bristol, L. (2014). 
Changing practices, changing education. Singapore, Singapore: Science & Business Media. 
Springer.
Kemmis, S., & Wilkinson, M. (1998). Participatory action research and the study of practice. 
Action research in practice: Partnerships for social justice in education, 1, 21–36.
Kruger, T., Davies, A., Eckersley, B., Newell, F., & Cherednichenko, B. (2009). Effective and 
sustainable university–school partnerships: Beyond determined efforts by inspired individuals. 
Canberra, Australia: Teaching Australia.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Le Cornu, R. (2009). Building resilience in pre-service teachers. Teaching and Teacher Education, 
25(5), 717–723.
Le Cornu, R., & Ewing, R. (2008). Reconceptualising professional experiences in pre-service 
teacher education: Reconstructing the past to embrace the future. Teaching and Teacher 
Education, 24(7), 1799–1812.
Lingard, B., Nixon, J., & Ranson, S. (2011). Transforming learning in schools and communities: 
The remaking of education for a cosmopolitan society. A&C Black.
Mattsson, M., Eilertsen, T. V., & Rorrison, D. (2011). What is practice in teacher education? In 
M. Mattsson, T. V. Eilertsen, & D. Rorrison (Eds.), A practicum turn in teacher education 
(pp. 1–18). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962/1945). Phenomenology of perception (C.  Smith, Trans.). London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Meyer, M., & Wood, L. (2017). A critical reflection on the multiple roles required to facili-
tate mutual learning during service-learning in creative arts education. Teaching in Higher 
Education, 22(2), 158–177.
Prentice, R. (2000). Creativity: A reaffirmation of its place in early childhood education, creativity: 
A reaffirmation of its place in early childhood education. Institute of Education, University of 
London. Curriculum Journal, 11(2), 145–158.
Sandberg, J., & Dall’Alba, G. (2009). Returning to practice anew: A lifeworld perspective. 
Organisation Studies, 30, 1349–1368.
M. O’Brien et al.
www.ebook3000.com

121
Sim, C. (2006). Preparing for professional experiences – Incorporating pre-service teachers as 
‘communities of practice’. Teaching and Teacher Education, 22, 77–83.
Sternberg, R. J. (2012). The Assessment of creativity: An investment-based approach. Creativity 
Research Journal, 24(1), 3–12.
Tynjälä, P. (2008). Perspectives into learning at the workplace. Educational Research Review, 3(2), 
130–154.
Tynjälä, P., Slotte, V., Nieminen, J., Lonka, K., & Olkinuora, E. (2006). From university to 
working life: Graduates’ workplace skills in practice. Higher education and working life: 
Collaborations, confrontations and challenges, 73–88.
UNESCO. (2006). World conference on arts education: “Building creative capacities for 
the 21st century”. The division of arts and cultural enterprise of UNESCO sector for cul-
ture Lisbon. Lisbon, Portugal: UNESCO. www.unesco.org/fileadmin/multimedia/HQ/.../
Arts_Edu_Lisbon_pressrelease_en.pdf
Wade-Leeuwen, B. (2011). Fire, ink and play: Developing ‘creativity’ for lifelong learning. 
International Journal of the Arts in Society, 5(5), 203–215.
Wade-Leeuwen, B. (2015). Out of the shadows: Fostering creativity in pre-service teachers in 
creative arts programs. Sydney, Australia: Australasian Digital Theses Publisher/ Macquarie 
University.
Wade-Leeuwen, B. (2016). Out of the shadows: Fostering creativity in teachers in teacher educa-
tion programs. Champaign, IL: The Learner, Commonground Publishing.
Wenger, E. (2000). Communities of practice and social learning systems. Organization, 7(2), 
225–246.
Wenger, E. (2010). Communities of practice and social learning systems: The career of a concept. 
In Social learning systems and communities of practice (pp. 179–198). London: Springer.
White, S., Bloomfield, D., & Cornu, R. L. (2010). Professional experience in new times: Issues 
and responses to a changing education landscape. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 
38(3), 181–193.
World Economic Forum. (2016). What are the 21st-century skills every student needs? Accessed on 3 Jan 
2017 from: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/03/21st-century-skills-future-jobs-students/
Zeichner, K. (2005). Becoming a teacher educator: A personal perspective. Teaching and Teacher 
Education, 21, 117–124.
7  Reconsidering the Communicative Space: Learning to Be

123
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_8
Chapter 8
Raising the Quality of Praxis in Online 
Mentoring
Nick Kelly, Steven Kickbusch, Fay Hadley, Rebecca Andrews, 
Bronwen Wade-Leeuwen, and Mia O’Brien
Abstract  The decisions made by the designers of mentorship programs impact 
upon the development of the praxis of the teachers involved. The recent develop-
ment of online mentoring provides an opportunity to revisit the question of how to 
design mentoring programs that support the development of a high quality of praxis 
in the participants. This chapter argues for a broad understanding of mentoring as 
formally convened, dialogic communities of teachers that include arrangements 
such as online, peer and group mentoring. It suggests that a high quality of praxis 
occurs in a space where mentors adopt a critical stance for reflecting upon the inten-
tions behind the technical skills of mentoring. The theoretical understanding of the 
praxis of mentoring is explored by describing a design-based research project, 
TeachConnect, that facilitates online mentoring aimed primarily at preservice teach-
ers. The challenges experienced in convening communities within TeachConnect 
are used to highlight some of the key issues in fostering a high quality of praxis of 
mentoring in the online space, including the need to balance a fluid adoption of roles 
within mentorship with the need for well-prepared mentors.
Introduction
Praxis is the union of theory (knowledge about how situations relate to one another) 
with action (knowing how to act in situations to cause effect in the world). The 
praxis of mentoring thus involves bringing an awareness of theory – borne of critical 
reflection – into the acts of mentoring (Ax & Ponte, 2008; Orland-Barak, 2010). In 
N. Kelly (*) • S. Kickbusch 
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
e-mail: nick.kelly@qut.edu.au 
F. Hadley • R. Andrews • B. Wade-Leeuwen 
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia 
M. O’Brien 
Griffith University, Mt Gravatt, QLD, Australia
www.ebook3000.com

124
this chapter, we consider the way that an understanding of mentoring as praxis can 
inform the design and implementation of online mentoring communities in an effort 
to raise the quality of mentoring. Online mentoring is still in its infancy, changing 
as the affordances of connected technology have advanced (Jones, 2015). There is a 
need for inquiry into the praxis of online mentoring; how should an understanding 
of praxis inform the design of online communities that support teachers? This chap-
ter focusses upon the design of an online mentorship community that is particularly 
aimed at supporting preservice teachers during professional experience.
We adopt Habermas’s conception of praxis as a natural condition of human 
beings that is present in all activity (Habermas, 1984). The consequence of this is 
that we speak not of the presence or absence of praxis but rather of the quality of the 
praxis in mentoring. Mentoring is thus conceived of as an activity that can be done 
intentionally to a greater or lesser degree, where the quality of that intention is open 
to critical reflection (Ax & Ponte, 2008). Mentoring occurs within a hierarchy of 
contexts (educational setting, community, system, state, nation, individual world-
view). This questioning of the quality of praxis can be made at the level of individu-
als – a specific mentor teacher may have a higher or lower quality of praxis – or at 
the level of a system, where a system may support a high quality of praxis to a 
greater or lesser extent. Consideration of the praxis of mentoring extends to the 
social, philosophical and moral understanding of the individuals involved in the 
action and to the context in which the action occurs.
The notion that praxis is always present but may be of higher or lower quality 
begs the question who is it that judges this quality of the values that inform practice? 
We do not wish to enter this philosophical debate around the quality of the values 
themselves. Rather, the aim is to suggest that the quality of praxis is improved 
through the presence of mentoring conversations that interrogate theoretical foun-
dations and their relationship to practice. Mentoring, we argue, should be conceived 
of as the dialogical community through which this higher quality of praxis is 
achieved (Bernstein, 2011). Mentors bring to the act of mentoring, in the dialogue 
between mentor and mentee, their conception of how they understand the teaching 
profession. Hargreaves and Fullan (2000) hold that ‘[m]entoring … will never reach 
its potential unless it is guided by a deeper conceptualization that treats it as central 
to the task of transforming the teaching profession itself’ (p. 1). It is a fundamen-
tally Freirean argument (Freire, 1970/2007) that mentoring without considered 
intention may lead a mentor to perpetuate the status quo, whilst with intention men-
toring can become a transformational act at various levels in the hierarchy of teach-
ing contexts. This theoretical lens of critical pedagogy provides a perspective for 
talking about mentoring as having the potential to transform rather than reproduce 
educational systems. The sentiment is summarised by Kemmis (2010) who argues 
that research into praxis has twin goals, ‘(1) to guide the development of educa-
tional praxis and (2) to guide the development of education itself’ (p. 9).
Striving for high-quality praxis in mentoring is thus of great significance to the 
teaching profession. Mentoring of both preservice and early career teachers is a key 
means of sharing knowledge and theory between one generation of teachers and the 
next. The development of high-quality mentoring programs is not an ‘end in itself’ 
N. Kelly et al.

125
but rather a part of the broader aim to support the profession in building better 
teaching and learning (Hargreaves & Fullan, 2000; Hobson, Ashby, Malderez, & 
Tomlinson, 2009). Mentoring in this project is conceived more broadly than involv-
ing a mentor and a mentee; rather it involves the wider teaching community (Kelly, 
Clará, Kehrwald, & Danaher, 2016) and is an ‘integrated part of broader improve-
ment efforts to reculture our schools and school systems’ including early childhood 
(Hargreaves & Fullan, 2000, p. 5). Mentoring often takes place both for preservice 
teachers during professional experience (Mattsson, Eilertsen, & Rorrison, 2011) 
and for beginning teachers in their early years of practice (Hobson et al., 2009).
Quality mentoring leads to improved teacher satisfaction and a greater likelihood 
of retention, based upon self-reported data from beginning teachers as to whether 
they found their mentor helpful (DeAngelis, Wall, & Che, 2013; Ingersoll & Strong, 
2011; Smith & Ingersoll, 2004). Much of the literature on mentoring focusses upon 
the organisational considerations that can hamper the quality of a mentoring pro-
gram, such as poor structuring of the mentoring program, inadequate time alloca-
tion and personal differences (Hobson et al., 2009). However, focussing on these 
technical issues of management and policies can overshadow inquiry into the moral 
and ethical dimensions of the conditions for mentoring programs that support high-­
quality praxis. When considering the design and implementation of mentoring pro-
grams, there is a need to ask questions of praxis: How should mentors be, act and 
behave? How can the education and training of mentors support them in bringing 
their knowledge to the mentoring relationship? This is consistent with Freire and the 
idea that ‘teacher preparation should go beyond the technical preparation of teach-
ers and be rooted in the ethical formation both of selves and of history’ (Freire, 
1970/2007).
Where Praxis Occurs
Mentoring is then conceived as a dialogic community within which praxis can be 
raised through conversations about the intentions behind teaching practice. In order 
to understand the impact that this may have for the design and implementation of 
online mentoring programs, we use the technical dimensions of mentoring as a 
prompt for the type of critical reflections that may occur within these dialogic com-
munities. We argue that a critical stance on the part of the mentor, and the system 
that prepares mentors, forms a basis for amplifying the quality of praxis.
There are a number of frameworks that give voice to the technical skills for men-
toring (Barrera, Braley, & Slate, 2010; Hobson et al., 2009; Orland-Barak, 2010). A 
useful and widely used synthesis of common components of mentorship is the five 
factor model of mentoring (Hudson, 2004; Hudson, Skamp, & Brooks, 2005). The 
five factor model was selected as a way to structure the discussion of the technical 
dimensions of mentoring due to its relevance to the current context in Australia and 
around the world. Programs based on the five factor model have been funded by a 
number of states and territories throughout Australia, such as Queensland through 
8  Raising the Quality of Praxis in Online Mentoring
www.ebook3000.com

126
the Mentoring Beginning Teachers program and others through the Mentoring for 
Effective Teaching program, as well as internationally in Hong Kong, the Philippines 
and the United States. The five traits that are expected of mentors are listed in the 
Hudson model as (a) the ability to introduce mentees to the requirements of the 
educational system, (b) the ability to share pedagogical knowledge with mentees, 
(c) the ability to model teaching practice for the mentee, (d) the ability to provide 
feedback to the mentee and (e) the possession of personal attributes by the mentor. 
These concepts have a firm basis in the literature as types of knowledge important 
to preservice and beginning teachers (Barrera et al., 2010; Clark & Byrnes, 2012; 
Hobson et al., 2009). Each of the activities involved in the five factors will be briefly 
described as both a technical ability and a basis for critical dialogue that brings into 
question the underpinning values and beliefs of the mentee.
It is expected that mentors can teach system requirements to mentees. A teacher 
is embedded within many systems and must learn to navigate the rules and social 
norms of many of these systems simultaneously. A preservice or beginning teacher 
discovers that there are expectations of them that exist at the level of the classroom, 
the educational setting, the broader community of teachers, the state or independent 
teaching system that they are a part of, the national teaching system and the profes-
sion. All this is filtered by the individual understanding that the teacher has of those 
systems (Jakobsdóttir, McKeown, & Hoven, 2009). Each has its own obligations, be 
they enforced, encouraged, assumed, cultural or moral. A preservice or beginning 
teacher needs to learn how to function within these different systems and that a 
mentor can support the mentee to negotiate them, for example, working with the 
preservice or beginning teacher to develop teaching outcomes that are coherent with 
the learning frameworks, national quality standards or curriculum documents, 
developing an understanding of policy and codes of conduct and taking part in the 
curriculum planning with other teachers (P. Hudson & Millwater, 2008). A praxis-­
based understanding of these activities is that the mentee has a role to play in shap-
ing these systems – by moving beyond the essential skills of survival and focussing 
on nurturing the mentee’s critical facility to engage with the systems in which they 
find themselves – helping them to recognise the activity systems of which they are 
a part. For example, it is a frequent refrain within the teaching profession that the 
administrative and bureaucratic obligations of accountability within the various sys-
tems can prevent a teacher from having the time to plan and deliver effective teach-
ing programs (Fenech & Sumsion, 2007; Groundwater-Smith & Mockler, 2009). 
Mentoring is an opportunity for teachers to critically engage with all of these sys-
tems within which they are embedded, asking questions such as why is there often 
a gap between educational theory and the range of pedagogical practices used in the 
school? How do curricula come to be developed? What are the ethics of practising 
as a teacher embedded within so many (potentially conflicting) systems?
We recognise the implicit hierarchy of needs in Hudson’s second element of the 
five factor model and that preservice and beginning teachers must learn to survive if 
they are to be transformational – yet Freire’s critical pedagogy can be used to sug-
gest perhaps these two need not be separated. Just as a teacher can teach a child to 
become literate either with or without teaching them that literacy is a powerful tool 
N. Kelly et al.

127
for their own emancipation, it is possible that so too can a mentor teach navigation 
of system requirements in a way that moves towards emancipation of the mentee 
preservice or beginning teacher. As a way of explanation, let us assume that it is 
expected that mentors can aid the development of a mentee’s pedagogical knowl-
edge. In this activity, a mentor supports the mentee in developing content knowl-
edge, assessment and questioning skills, planning/timetabling/preparation strategies 
and classroom management skills – as well as the integration of these skills with 
problem-solving (Fenech & Sumsion, 2007; Groundwater-Smith & Mockler, 2009). 
In developing a praxis of pedagogical knowledge, the mentor assists the mentee to 
develop the critical faculties to question pedagogical assumptions. For example, 
some preservice or beginning teachers enter a school and are told by the principal 
that the school is a ‘Marzano’ school that teaches using dimensions of learning 
framework (Marzano, Pickering, & McTighe, 1993) or an early childhood setting 
that uses a ‘Reggio Emilia’ philosophy (Gandini, 1993; Tomlinson, 1996). Through 
a praxis-based understanding, mentors can assist mentees to develop the critical 
faculties to understand how a particular educational philosophy may be productive/
unproductive or lead to greater equality/inequality.
The third activity involved in mentorship is the effective modelling of classroom 
practice, in which the mentor provides the mentee with exemplars of what they 
should be aiming for. These include important abilities of enthusiasm, lesson design, 
language, teaching structure, effective teaching, classroom management, rapport 
with students and ‘hands-on’ lessons (Hudson et al., 2005). A praxis-based account 
suggests that mentors will aid mentees in developing the skills to reflect upon their 
own practice and of the practices of others. Rather than simply showing a teacher 
what a successful class looks like, they reveal their own areas of confusion and use 
these as an opportunity to reflect critically with the mentee upon practice.
The fourth activity involved in mentorship is providing critical feedback for the 
mentee. The practice of providing feedback involves the mentor setting expecta-
tions for the mentee, reviewing lesson plans, observing teaching, providing both 
oral and written feedback and guiding self-reflection. These are all activities that 
can have a high or a low quality of praxis brought to them. A typical example is the 
provision of oral feedback to a mentee teacher. A mentor can assume a position of 
authority in telling a mentee teacher what they have done well – or they can help the 
mentee to see multiple perspective upon their own teaching and assist the mentee to 
learn the skills for reflecting upon their own practice by approaching this through 
the lens of allowing the mentee to lead these conversations (Hudson, 2014). This 
question of authority within the mentoring dialogue is an important discussion but 
beyond the aim of this chapter.
The final element required of a mentor is that they have the right personal attri-
butes that contribute to effective mentoring. For this factor, practice and praxis are 
closely aligned. Hudson et  al. (2005) report that being a good mentor teacher 
requires a teacher to have an ability to facilitate reflective practice, be an attentive 
listener, develop positive attitudes, be comfortable and confident talking about 
teaching and be able to instil confidence in a mentee. A high quality of praxis in 
8  Raising the Quality of Praxis in Online Mentoring
www.ebook3000.com

128
these abilities comes from situating them in a critical understanding of the theory of 
the aims of mentoring.
Praxis in Online Mentoring
The idea that mentoring programs can support a high quality of praxis was explored 
through practice, by developing an online mentoring ecosystem between the years 
2014–2017 and ongoing. TeachConnect (www.teachconnect.edu.au) is an online 
platform that supports teachers in the transition from preservice into the profession, 
particularly during professional experience (Kelly et  al., 2016; Kelly, Clará, & 
Kickbusch, 2015; Kelly, Reushle, Chakrabarty, & Kinnane, 2014). At the time of 
writing, TeachConnect involves over a thousand Queensland teachers, with the 
majority of these being preservice and beginning teachers. Despite this uptake, the 
online community is still in its developmental phase, and the program has not been 
formally evaluated. Discussion will focus upon the mentoring program that has 
been put in place.
TeachConnect was developed as a platform that supports dialogic communities 
of mentorship in many different configurations. It was developed as design-based 
research over four phases of consultation, design and testing with participants to 
inquire into the design needs for teachers within online communities (Kelly et al., 
2016, 2014). A brief description of TeachConnect serves to describe the communi-
cation channels that it affords, the communities that were convened within it and the 
understanding of praxis for online mentoring that resulted.
The main channel for mentoring in TeachConnect is through what is termed in 
the platform mentorship circles – private spaces (closed to non-members) that are 
small by online standards whilst being large by the standards of group mentoring 
(<60 people). A second space of mentoring is through one-to-one contact, what is 
termed messaging (similar to email) within the platform. Finally, all members also 
have access to a single community knowledge space. The community knowledge 
area is designed to support conversations around specific themes, responding to the 
questions posed by members of the community. This allowed support for many 
types of mentorship within the platform: group (one to many with preservice and 
experienced teachers in mentorship circles), peer (preservice and beginning teach-
ers helping one another in mentorship circles and community knowledge) and one-­
to-­one mentorship (messaging an experienced teacher).
One way to consider the affordances of these different channels of communica-
tion is by examining the six ways in which teachers can support one another online 
(Kelly & Antonio, 2016): through support in reflecting on practice, providing feed-
back, modelling practice, socialisation in the profession, pragmatic support and 
convening relationships. Figure 8.1 shows which of the six types of support prevail 
within each of the different areas of TeachConnect. Whilst each of these channels 
for communication can support the formal convening of dialogical communities 
N. Kelly et al.

129
around teaching practice, they aim to support the development of different types of 
knowledge.
A question that we came up against in designing TeachConnect is whether the 
ability for a dialogic community to support a high quality of praxis is dependent 
upon the affordances of its channels for communication. An argument made by 
Clarà, Kelly, Mauri and Danaher (2015) is that sharing of teaching practice (i.e. 
modelling practice, supporting reflection and providing feedback) is best supported 
by private, stable and trusted relationships within small groups. From Fig. 8.1, we 
have an expectation that interrogation of teachers’ values and the relationship of 
those values to practice is unlikely to occur within the community knowledge (large, 
unstable membership) but may well occur within messaging and mentorship 
circles.
Within the smaller and more stable mentorship circles and messaging spaces, 
design decisions were made to promote a high quality of praxis in mentoring. 
Firstly, the allocation of members into mentorship circles was designed to have 
approximately 30 members; usually 28 preservice teachers were placed with two 
experienced teachers. Pragmatic concerns led to these numbers ranging from as few 
as 9 members in one circle to as many as 59 in another. The expectation was that 
mentorship circles were the place in which a high quality of praxis could best be 
developed. Conversations that required more privacy could move from these circles 
into the space of one-to-one messaging, whilst realisations that would benefit the 
wider community could be replicated within the community knowledge in what 
Clarà et al. (2015) refer to as fractal design.
Secondly, experienced teachers who were placed within the mentorship circles 
received 2 days of training in facilitating mentorship. These experienced teachers 
were selected through direct invitation and a call for expressions of interest, with 
Fig. 8.1  Types of support within areas of the TeachConnect platform
8  Raising the Quality of Praxis in Online Mentoring
www.ebook3000.com

130
selection based upon the breadth of their curriculum vitae, their experience in super-
vising preservice teachers and whether they had received any teaching awards. 
Twenty such mentors were recruited. Of the selected mentors, 18 attended a two-­
day face-to-face workshop in online mentorship using a variation of the ‘Mentoring 
Exceptional Teachers’ course in which participants learnt about the praxis of men-
toring using the five factor model as a framework (Hudson et al., 2015). The techni-
cal skills of mentoring were taught to mentors by going through each of the five 
factors in turn. Each factor was approached through questions and exercises that 
elicited the experiences of the mentors to be and then built upon these to arrive at 
advice for mentoring. There was also a mentorship circle in which mentors them-
selves could experience peer and group mentoring – a ‘circle of mentors’. This cir-
cle was supported by two teachers with at least 10 years’ experience as supervising 
teachers.
The complex relationships within the TeachConnect ecosystem are shown in 
Fig. 8.2 as a network diagram. Many teachers come together in a mentorship circle, 
in which there is more than one experienced teacher with mentorship training pres-
ent. Many mentors come together in the circle of mentors in the presence of experi-
enced supervising teachers. One-to-one connections occur organically within this 
ecosystem.
The aim of this ecosystem was to support conversations in which a high quality 
of praxis was supported. For example, the hope was that preservice teachers in pro-
fessional experience would commence discussions by relating their day-to-day 
experiences within their schools. Through dialogue within the mentorship commu-
nity, and at the appropriate level, these discussions would lead to critical reflection 
and the linking of theoretical notions to the techne of teaching. Participants in 
TeachConnect would be supported in developing their praxis through both the 
medium and the messaging, where the medium of the social spaces is inherently 
collegial and participatory, relying upon mutually beneficial relationships (Boyd & 
Ellison, 2007). Alternately the messaging (through the design of the site, e.g. quotes 
displayed on each page, and framing of correspondence with participants, e.g. 
emails) attempts to emphasise the need to consider the philosophical underpinnings 
for teaching practice.
However, the outcomes from this phase of the TeachConnect platform as a 
design-based research project suggest that a high quality of praxis was not suffi-
ciently supported by this design. What we observed in the platform is that members 
are often unwilling to discuss their teaching practice until others within the group 
had normalised this kind of sharing. In many mentorship circles, this never occurred, 
and conversations remained stilted or superficial (e.g. focussing on discussion of 
resources).
A further phase of the platform is currently being implemented. The two main 
areas being explored are the use of existing dialogical communities of teachers that 
have relationship in the physical world (to see if the depth of the relationship 
changes the possibilities for online mentoring) and the way in which experienced 
teachers are trained (explicitly discussing the support for a high level of praxis). A 
further consideration is that external policy decisions continually impact upon 
N. Kelly et al.

131
­mentorship communities. For example, the implementation of professional stan-
dards (AITSL, 2011) led to a redesign of aspects of our mentor training. These 
standards have a focus upon the more technical aspects of teaching. Despite this, the 
standards and the regulation around them can be viewed as an opportunity to pro-
vide both structure and motivation for critical engagement and conversations that 
raise the quality of praxis.
Summary and Conclusions
This chapter has described some of the key issues involved in fostering a high qual-
ity of praxis within online mentoring. It has argued for embracing a broad under-
standing of mentorship, one that includes online mentoring as well as group and 
peer mentoring. It has defined mentoring as occurring within formally convened 
dialogic communities of teachers and has identified the design of mentorship pro-
grams as an opportunity to raise the quality of praxis of teachers. Typically, it is 
teacher educators who mentor preservice teachers and either bureaucracies or teach-
ers within schools who design mentorship programs for beginning teachers. We 
have argued that the designers of mentorship programs have an opportunity to raise 
the quality of praxis of the teachers involved. There is an opportunity to support 
praxis when designing online spaces within which the mentorship community inter-
acts when planning the membership of the community and when planning for train-
ing of mentors within the community.
Fig. 8.2  Mentor relationships within TeachConnect: mentorship circles, one-to-one relationships 
and a circle of mentors
8  Raising the Quality of Praxis in Online Mentoring
www.ebook3000.com

132
One way in which we have suggested that a high quality of praxis can be sup-
ported is through adopting a critical stance when teaching the skills of mentoring. 
Mentorship communities can support their membership in questioning the different 
skills involved in being a teacher, whether that be aligning with the requirements of 
an education system or learning the curriculum and how to teach it. Any of these 
skills of teaching can and, we argue, should be subjected to critical (philosophical 
and moral) questioning for the development of a higher quality of praxis. Mentorship 
spaces, as formally convened communities of teachers (one-to-one or group), pro-
vide a promising space within which this questioning can occur.
In this chapter, we have focussed upon the mentoring of preservice teachers 
within the online space. The online space provides even more opportunity to control 
the design of a community: its membership, the space within which it occurs and the 
way that members interact. However, designing for a high quality of praxis in the 
online domain adds further complications. How can a high quality of praxis be sup-
ported within the different types of mentorship that exist? An example of the 
TeachConnect platform has been described where group, peer and one-to-one men-
torship were all present. However, our experiences in designing and building this 
ecosystem for mentorship have uncovered a range of critical questions that we 
struggle to address. For example, the participants in our online space seem to be 
more willing to engage in discussion of specific technical aspects of teaching prac-
tice and less willing to engage in a deep and critical discussion about how these 
aspects of teaching practice relate to the different contexts of the classroom, school, 
community and nation.
The contribution of the chapter is to identify the potential of online mentorship 
as a support mechanism for mentor-mentee discussions that go beyond the technical 
aspects of teaching to the deeper epistemological and critical questions. We begin to 
address questions like what would an online community of teachers that support a 
high quality of praxis look like? What are the preconditions for dialogic communi-
ties of teachers to begin engaging in deep discussions about the values underpinning 
their practice? And finally, how can we reconcile the desire for fluid roles of mentor-­
mentee within a community of equals whilst also supporting groups of teachers by 
preparing them for facilitation of a high quality of praxis? It is our belief that we 
should continue to explore how critical theory can align with online mentoring and 
open up the discussions between teachers and designers about the potential of the 
online space.
References
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership. (2011). Australian pro-
fessional 
standards 
for 
teachers. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.aitsl.edu.au/
australian-professional-standards-for-teachers/standards/list
Ax, J., & Ponte, P. (2008). Praxis: Analysis of theory and practice. In J. Ax & P. Ponte (Eds.), 
Critiquing praxis: Conceptual and empirical trends in the teaching profession (pp. 1–118). 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Sense.
N. Kelly et al.

133
Barrera, A., Braley, R. T., & Slate, J. R. (2010). Beginning teacher success: An investigation into 
the feedback from mentors of formal mentoring programs. Mentoring & Tutoring: Partnership 
in Learning, 18(1), 61–74.
Bernstein, R. J. (2011). Beyond objectivism and relativism: Science, hermeneutics, and praxis. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Boyd, D. M., & Ellison, N. B. (2007). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship. 
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1), 210–230.
Clarà, M., Kelly, N., Mauri, T., & Danaher, P. (2015). Can massive communities of teachers 
facilitate collaborative reflection? Fractal design as a possible answer. Asia-Pacific Journal of 
Teacher Education, 1–13.
Clark, S. K., & Byrnes, D. (2012). Through the eyes of the novice teacher: Perceptions of mentor-
ing support. Teacher Development, 16(1), 43–54.
DeAngelis, K. J., Wall, A. F., & Che, J. (2013). The impact of preservice preparation and early 
career support on novice teachers’ career intentions and decisions. Journal of Teacher 
Education, 64(4), 338–355.
Fenech, M., & Sumsion, J. (2007). Early childhood teachers and regulation: Complicating power 
relations using a Foucauldian lens. Contemporary Issues in Early Childhood, 8(2), 109–122.
Freire, P. (1970/2007). Pedagogy of the oppressed (Vol. 2007). New York: Continuum.
Gandini, L. (1993). History, ideas and basic principles: An interview with Loris Malaguzzi. In 
C. Edwards, L. Gandini, & G. Forman (Eds.), The hundred languages of children: The Reggio 
Emilia approach to early childhood education (pp.  27–72). New  York: Ablex Publishing 
Corporation.
Groundwater-Smith, S., & Mockler, N. (2009). Teacher professional learning in an age of compli-
ance: Mind the gap (Vol. 2). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer Science & Business Media.
Habermas, J. (1984). The theory of communicative action (Vol. I). Boston: Beacon.
Hargreaves, A., & Fullan, M. (2000). Mentoring in the new millennium. Theory Into Practice, 
39(1), 50–56.
Hobson, A. J., Ashby, P., Malderez, A., & Tomlinson, P. D. (2009). Mentoring beginning teachers: 
What we know and what we don’t. Teaching and Teacher Education, 25(1), 207–216.
Hudson, P. (2004). Specific mentoring: A theory and model for developing primary science teach-
ing practices. European Journal of Teacher Education, 27(2), 139–146.
Hudson, P. (2014). Feedback consistencies and inconsistencies: Eight mentors’ observations on 
one preservice teacher’s lesson. European Journal of Teacher Education, 37(1), 63–73.
Hudson, P., & Millwater, J. (2008). Mentors’ views about developing effective English teaching 
practices. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 33(5), 1.
Hudson, P., Skamp, K., & Brooks, L. (2005). Development of an instrument: Mentoring for effec-
tive primary science teaching. Science Education, 89(4), 657–674.
Hudson, S., Hudson, P., Kwan, T., Chan, C., Maclang-Vicencio, E., & Ani, A.-L. (2015, July 
8–10). Making connections within the Asia-Pacific region: case study around the Mentoring 
for Effective Teaching (MET) program. Paper presented at the Strengthening Partnerships in 
Teacher Education: Building Community, Connections and Creativity, Darwin, NT.
Ingersoll, R.  M., & Strong, M. (2011). The impact of induction and mentoring programs for 
beginning teachers: A critical review of the research. Review of Educational Research, 81(2), 
201–233.
Jakobsdóttir, S., McKeown, L., & Hoven, D. (2009). Using the new information and communica-
tion technologies for the continuing professional development of teachers through open and 
distance learning. In A. Umar & P. Danaher (Eds.), Perspectives on teacher education through 
open and distance learning (p. 113). Vancouver, Canada: The Commonwealth of Learning.
Jones, C. (2015). Networked learning: An educational paradigm for the age. Cham, Switzerland: 
Springer International Publishing.
Kelly, N., & Antonio, A. (2016). Teacher peer support in social network sites. Teaching and 
Teacher Education, 56, 138–149. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2016.02.007
8  Raising the Quality of Praxis in Online Mentoring
www.ebook3000.com

134
Kelly, N., Clará, M., Kehrwald, B., & Danaher, P. (2016). Online learning networks for pre-service 
and early career teachers. London: Palgrave Pivot.
Kelly, N., Clará, M., & Kickbusch, S. (2015). How to develop an online community for pre-service 
and early career teachers. Paper presented at the ASCILITE 2015, Perth, Western Australia.
Kelly, N., Reushle, S., Chakrabarty, S., & Kinnane, A. (2014). Beginning teacher support in 
Australia: Towards an online community to augment current support. Australian Journal of 
Teacher Education, 39(4), 65–84.
Kemmis, S. (2010). Research for praxis: Knowing doing. Pedagogy, Culture & Society, 18(1), 
9–27.
Marzano, R. J., Pickering, D., & McTighe, J. (1993). Assessing student outcomes: Performance 
assessment using the dimensions of learning model. Alexandria, VA: Association for 
Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Mattsson, M., Eilertsen, T. V., & Rorrison, D. (2011). What is practice in teacher education? In 
M. Mattsson, T. V. Eilertsen, & D. Rorrison (Eds.), A practicum turn in teacher education 
(pp. 1–15). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Orland-Barak, L. (2010). Learning to mentor-as-praxis: Foundations for a curriculum in teacher 
education: Professional learning and development in schools and higher education v. 4. New 
York: Springer.
Smith, T. M., & Ingersoll, R. M. (2004). What are the effects of induction and mentoring on begin-
ning teacher turnover? American Educational Research Journal, 41(3), 681–714.
Tomlinson, P. (1996). Understanding mentoring: Reflective strategies for school-based teacher 
preparation. Bristol, UK: Open University Press.
N. Kelly et al.

Part III
Enabling Dialogues
www.ebook3000.com

137
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_9
Chapter 9
Using a Developmental Assessment Rubric 
to Revitalise Stakeholder Conversations 
in Professional Experience
Trudy-Ann Sweeney and Barbara Nielsen
Abstract  This chapter reports a study that sought to examine the impact of intro-
ducing a developmental assessment rubric for professional experience for preser-
vice teachers in one South Australian university. The rubric was designed to focus 
the mentoring and formative and summative assessment of professional experience 
to align with the new Australian Professional Standards for Teachers (APST). The 
study engaged with all the stakeholders on multiple dimensions of the mentorship 
and assessment of professional experience. The aspects selected for reporting in this 
chapter focus on the scope, value and changes in the nature and quality of the con-
versations between various stakeholders. The study has produced evidence that as a 
result of introducing the developmental rubric, the conversations changed from gen-
eralities and platitudes to more professional conversations that encompassed the full 
scope of what is expected of a graduate teacher, clarifying their level of perfor-
mance and informing their orderly development. Those engaged in the assessment 
process using the rubric valued the shared language to talk about teaching and its 
developmental properties. The use of the rubric was shown to increase preservice 
teachers’ capacity and willingness to exercise agency in managing their own learn-
ing needs. This chapter argues that such an approach makes professional experience 
a pivotal element that defines, forms and assures the readiness of preservice teachers 
to teach and, more importantly, prepares them to be active agents of their learning 
in their future teaching careers.
Introduction
Schools of education in Australian higher education institutions are being called 
upon to justify their approaches to initial teacher education to assure the government 
and the profession that at the completion of their courses, graduates are competent 
T.-A. Sweeney (*) • B. Nielsen 
Flinders University, Adelaide, SA, Australia
e-mail: trudy.sweeney@flinders.edu.au

138
to teach. This reflects an international trend in which most high-­performing school 
systems work ‘in partnership with schools to train teachers’ (Ingvarson et al., 2014, 
p. 51). This imperative to assure the learning of preservice teacher education gradu-
ates against nationally imposed standards provided a stimulus for the development 
of a unique developmental preservice teaching assessment rubric for our courses. 
The intent was to facilitate a more transparent, focused, consistent and accountable 
assessment of preservice teachers’ development during their professional 
experience.
The Australian Professional Standards for Teachers (APST) articulates the 
knowledge, practice and professional engagement required of preservice teachers at 
the point of graduation, which is the focus of this study, as well as mapping the 
development of professional expectations of teachers across their careers (Australian 
Institute for Teaching and School Leadership [AITSL], 2014). The APST provides 
a framework organised in four career stages: graduate, proficient, highly accom-
plished and lead (AITSL, 2014). The framework provides teachers the opportunity 
to self-assess their performance and leadership capabilities and inform and plan the 
development of their professional learning goals. Yinger and Hendricks-Lee (2000) 
systematically researched the efficacy and impact of a similar process of teacher 
standards in the United States, arguing that they are a powerful tool in the develop-
ment and empowerment of teaching as a profession. More recently Clinton et al. 
(2015) argued that engagement with standards is most effective in professional 
practice in schools as a reference point for efforts to improve professional 
learning.
As a result of the APST at graduate level being the final achievement standard for 
graduation from an initial teacher education program, it is imperative that a pre-­
graduate level framework be developed against which supervising teachers, school 
coordinators and teacher educators can assess and guide the developing capabilities 
of preservice teachers during their studies in terms of their emerging competence to 
teach. In response to this gap, a new multifaceted, developmental assessment rubric 
was created to explicate a developmental learning process, making clear what is 
expected of preservice teachers as they progress through their program of studies at 
our university. Through this rubric, we can also address the critical need to accu-
rately assess preservice teachers’ emerging knowledge and capabilities and assist in 
the formation of more valid and reliable judgements to support and guide their 
learning (Sim et al., 2012).
The developmental assessment rubric (hereafter referred to as ‘the rubric’) 
describes the professional expectations leading up to the APST graduate level, pro-
viding two additional levels (novice level and emerging), which precede the expec-
tations of a graduate teacher. Ure, Gough, and Newton (2009) found that without 
such explicit expectations, preservice teachers received very limited feedback on 
the full scope of professional practice. A potential benefit of the alignment of the 
rubric with the APST was that graduates would be better prepared to confidently 
guide and demonstrate their ongoing professional development throughout their 
teaching careers.
T.-A. Sweeney and B. Nielsen
www.ebook3000.com

139
This chapter discusses the findings from the trial of the rubric in the Bachelor of 
Education (Primary)/Bachelor of Arts double degree in 2015, with 438 third- and 
fourth-year preservice teachers across 172 schools in South Australia. The findings 
suggest that the use of the rubric resulted in a qualitative difference in preservice 
teachers’ conversations with their supervising teachers, school coordinators and 
teacher educators. When using the rubric, conversations about teaching were com-
prehensive and complex and clarified the various roles in the formative assessment 
processes. Furthermore, the focus of conversations shifted from what has previously 
seemed to be intuitive judgements towards evidence-informed practice that was 
appropriate to the context. Whilst there was a mindfulness of the need for a formal 
summative assessment of learning as a judgement of preservice teacher capability, 
the conversations now epitomised the language of assessment for learning. The 
rubric was actively used from the outset of the placement conversations to review, 
shape, plan and enact preservice teachers’ learning goals. Our findings uncovered 
that the rubric encouraged better learning and engagement, strengthened the rela-
tionship between the School of Education and the host schools and encouraged 
preservice teachers to become active agents of their own learning.
The Developmental Assessment Rubric
The backward mapped rubric describes preservice teachers’ emerging capabilities 
in three levels as they develop their professional practice to graduate level across the 
37 focus areas of the APST. The rubric also includes the proficient level as a fourth 
element to accommodate those students who are already achieving this level. 
‘Backward mapping’ is defined as the process that educators use to design learning 
experiences and instructional techniques to achieve specific goals. ‘One starts with 
the end – the desired results (goals or standards) – and then derives the curriculum 
from the evidence of learning (performances) called for by the standard and the 
teaching needed to equip students to perform’ (Wiggins & McTighe, 2000, p. 8).
The novice level outlines an expectation that for most APST focus areas, preser-
vice teachers will already have an awareness and appreciation of the significance of 
specific aspects of classroom teaching. At the novice level, it is understood that 
preservice teachers may possess limited domain-specific knowledge and basic skills 
to complete focused tasks. It is also considered reasonable that at this level, preser-
vice teachers will require considerable guidance in implementing teaching plans. At 
the emerging level, there are increased expectations of preservice teachers to 
research, plan and implement more complex teaching activities with increasing 
independence and to undertake informed critique of their teaching practices and 
students’ learning performances.
The graduate level, as outlined by the APST, expects preservice teachers to have 
developed a sophisticated capacity to plan and carry out complex teaching respon-
sibilities and attend to the diverse needs of students. It is expected that through their 
engagement in the classroom and the school, preservice teachers will generate valid 
9  Using a Developmental Assessment Rubric to Revitalise Stakeholder Conversations…

140
evidence regarding their fitness for teaching and provide a well-reasoned justifica-
tion as to its validity. The APST proficient level is also included after the graduate 
level in the rubric. The rationale for this inclusion was that whilst it is not expected 
that preservice teachers will attain this standard across all focus areas, there are 
some preservice teachers who enter the program with considerable life and employ-
ment experiences and skills, who can demonstrate that they are able to perform, in 
some aspects, as a practiced and effective classroom teacher.
The rubric is introduced to preservice teachers at the start of their studies to 
familiarise them with what is expected of them over time and to engender their 
capacity for self-assessment and self-monitoring of their developing knowledge and 
practice. The deliberate development of preservice teachers’ awareness of their 
emerging capabilities was designed to provide them with a sense of personal agency 
in their own learning (Billett, 2008). The underlying premise is that there is long-­
term value in promoting self-regulation of their learning in school environments 
where learning is more contextual, ongoing and collaborative than academic learn-
ing (Hodkinson & Hodkinson, 2005; Tynjala, 2008). Preservice teachers need to 
learn to deliberately plan their own learning, in addition to learning to manage well-­
designed and structured learning tasks for their students (Niemi, 2002).
A primary intention of the rubric is to prompt preservice teachers to engage in 
professional conversations to reflect on their progress towards becoming ‘classroom 
ready’ (Craven et al., 2014). Its intention is to provoke conversations about how 
their behaviour as a teacher impacts on students’ learning and their own learning 
(Endedijk, Vermunt, Verloop, & Brekelmans, 2012). It is also designed to contribute 
to the formation of their professional identity as they actively form and reform their 
ideas of self and belonging (Ruohotie-Lyhty & Moate, 2016) and meet challenges 
of working in contexts where there are discrepancies between their own beliefs and 
the teaching practices preferred in their placement school (Beauchamp & Thomas, 
2009).
All three professional assessors are required to use the rubric in a moderation 
process to ensure that preservice teachers’ practice is aligned appropriately and con-
sistently with the performance levels, thereby increasing the reliability of the sum-
mative assessment. The goal of using the rubric is that there will be greater 
consistency of focus by multiple, independent assessors (Ingvarson, 2011). Jonsson 
and Mattsson (2011) make the point that ‘assessors need to be well acquainted with 
the criteria and concepts used in the rubric so that they interpret the criteria in a 
similar way’ (p. 174). The teacher educator assessor is an employee of the univer-
sity as well as an experienced classroom teacher, whilst the supervising teacher’s 
role is to provide incremental feedback and guidance on all aspects of a preservice 
teacher’s performance as he/she gradually assumes the role of the teacher. Because 
supervising teachers often invest significantly in the development of the preservice 
teacher and develop a strong personal connection, there is a perception that there is 
a risk that supervising teachers ‘are unlikely to recommend failing a preservice 
teacher’ (Parsell, 2013, p. 15) where it is warranted. As such, a supervising teacher’s 
assessment is often regarded as ‘highly subjective’ reflecting their ‘personal prin-
ciples and prejudices’ (Parsell, 2013, p. 15). The rubric aims to assist supervising 
T.-A. Sweeney and B. Nielsen
www.ebook3000.com

141
teachers to provide explicit statements of their assessment regarding how well the 
preservice teacher has performed and progressed.
The third professional assessor is the school coordinator of preservice teacher 
professional experience, who provides a broader perspective to the assessment pro-
cess related to the complex and multidimensional realities of a school’s internal and 
external environment (Cohen, Hoz, & Kaplan 2013). These coordinators are 
employees of the school and are well placed to support preservice teachers to engage 
professionally with colleagues, parents/carers and the community beyond the scope 
of a specific classroom. In addition, in comparison to most supervising teachers, 
school coordinators are exposed to many preservice teachers over time; thus, their 
judgements are informed by their capacity to make more moderated comparisons 
regarding the stage of development of preservice teachers’ performances. Similarly, 
the teacher educators from the university often have many years of experience in 
supporting a number of preservice teachers, frequently across multiple schools, 
states and even countries, thus having the capacity to moderate summative 
judgements.
Formative and summative assessment conversations are informed by the rubric. 
Preservice teachers are expected to engage with the rubric at the start of the profes-
sional experience to identify what is important to learn and to do in practice, to 
self-assess their areas of strength and development and to verify their assessment 
with their supervising teacher, school coordinator and teacher educator. They then 
use it to plan and track the progress in their learning during the initial period of 
classroom experience, after which they independently complete an interim review. 
The review is shared with their supervising teacher who prepares a formal interim 
report that is discussed with the teacher educator. This process enables a timely 
identification of preservice teachers at risk of not satisfactorily completing the for-
mal teaching practice and ensures appropriate support for risk mitigation and 
improved classroom performance (AITSL, 2015). Similarly, at the end of the pro-
fessional experience, the supervising teacher reviews the achievements of the pre-
service teacher against the expected stage of development and prepares a final report 
including comments from the school coordinator and teacher educator. The preser-
vice teacher also submits a reflection on their school experience and a professional 
learning plan. Both reports form the basis of a concluding discussion between the 
supervising teacher, school coordinator and teacher educator. If there is disagree-
ment, the latter makes the final judgement on the assessment, informed by the three-­
way conversation.
The Study
Considerable research and time were employed to develop both the rubric and the 
supporting self-assessment and goal-setting processes. The final shape of the rubric 
and processes was derived from rigorous discussion and critique within the School 
of Education Professional Experience Team and in consultation with school 
9  Using a Developmental Assessment Rubric to Revitalise Stakeholder Conversations…

142
coordinators in 2014. Ethics approval was granted and a pilot study was conducted 
in the third- and fourth-year primary program in 2015 to investigate the research 
questions: to what extent does the rubric and the self-assessment and goal-setting 
process facilitate conversations (a) to achieve greater clarity and shared understand-
ing regarding the expectations of preservice teachers’ performance during profes-
sional experience, (b) to encourage preservice teachers to be self-regulating agents 
of their own learning and (c) to guide formative feedback and summative judge-
ments about preservice teachers’ teaching capabilities aligned with the APST?
Participants
Four main participant groups were involved in the evaluation: teacher educators, 
school coordinators, supervising teachers and preservice teachers from the third 
year and fourth year. The same rubric and assessment process was used for both 
placements. Table 9.1 provides a summary of the demographic details of the teacher 
educators, school coordinators and supervising teachers. This shows that the major-
ity of stakeholders supervising preservice teachers had between 11 and 20 years of 
teaching experience, and their supervisory role experience was between 3 and 
5  years. This suggests that the assessor participants were experienced teachers 
familiar with the roles and responsibilities related to the supervision of preservice 
teachers ensuring their responses are less likely to be connected to issues associated 
with early career teachers or inexperienced supervisors in professional experience 
contexts.
Table 9.1  Demographic details of the teacher educators, school coordinators and supervising 
teachers
Participants
Years of experience 
(equivalent full-time 
teaching)
Years of experience in this role
Teacher educators
100% (n = 12)  
had >11 years
80% (n = 12) had >2 years
60% (n = 9) had 3–5 years
20% (n = 3) were new to role
School coordinators
69.6% (n = 16)  
had >20 years
95.7% (n = 22) had >3 years
30.4% (n = 5) had 2 years
26.1% (n = 6) had 5+ years
Supervising teachers
56% (n = 52) 
had >15 years
62.6% (n = 57) supervised 1–3 preservice 
teachers in the last 5 years
37% (n = 34) had 4+ preservice teachers in 
the last 5 years
T.-A. Sweeney and B. Nielsen
www.ebook3000.com

143
Data Collection and Analysis
SurveyMonkey™ was used as a platform to create five comparable surveys. The 
survey questions sought to collect data from participants related to their:
•	 Demographic details
•	 Evaluation of the new developmental assessment rubric, self-assessment and 
goal-setting processes using a five-point Likert scale
•	 Perceptions about the use of the developmental assessment rubric, self-­
assessment and goal-setting processes using open-ended questions
•	 Perceptions of the most significant changes that occurred as a result of the 
innovation
Section 4 of the survey was restricted to teacher educators, school coordinators 
and supervising teachers and was to be completed if these participants had experi-
ence with the university’s professional experience supervision prior to the introduc-
tion of the rubric and new process. The surveys were distributed via a link identified 
in an email. Participants were encouraged to complete the survey within 1 month. 
When the surveys were closed, the data was cleaned to remove incomplete and/or 
duplicate entries. This resulted in a small number of surveys being removed from 
the dataset. In the reporting of the findings, qualitative statements made in anony-
mous surveys and focus groups were included. No identifiers were given in order to 
preserve the anonymity of participants.
Elaboration of the survey responses was sought through conversations in two 
focus groups of 12 teacher educators. Teacher educators were chosen for the focus 
groups as their perspective of the process as a whole was of particular interest in this 
study. These participants had long-term prior roles as classroom teachers and school 
leaders and were experienced teacher educators. Some were also employed as 
casual academic tutors within the teacher education program.
Table 9.2 identifies the five participant groups and the survey completion statis-
tics. A limitation of the study was the small percentage of preservice teachers’ 
responses, especially from those in the fourth year.
Table 9.2  Survey participants and number of completed surveys
Target group
Total number of 
target group
No. of completed 
surveys
Percentage of surveys 
completed
Fourth-year teacher 
educators
40
15
37.5%
Fourth-year school 
coordinators
105
23
21.9%
Fourth-year supervising 
teachers
206
89
43.2%
Fourth-year preservice 
teachers
206
13
6.3%
Third-year preservice 
teachers
105
20
19.0%
9  Using a Developmental Assessment Rubric to Revitalise Stakeholder Conversations…

144
Findings
The findings of the survey and focus groups identified the impact of the implemen-
tation of the new rubric. This section is presented in three parts aligned with the 
research questions.
Conversations Clarifying the Expectations of Preservice 
Teachers
A major intention of the APST and the development of the rubric was that preser-
vice teachers be assessed against a comprehensive conception of teachers’ work. 
The study sought to investigate if the rubric and the self-assessment and goal-setting 
processes expanded the scope of conversations between preservice teachers, super-
vising teachers, school coordinators and teacher educators. The findings suggest 
that all stakeholders either strongly agreed or agreed that the use of the rubric and 
assessment processes had a positive impact on the scope of the conversations about 
teaching in professional experience contexts (see Table 9.3).
The strong stakeholder agreement indicated by the survey results was also sup-
ported by their qualitative comments. School coordinators noted that they used the 
rubric to ensure the school provided the required experiences for preservice teach-
ers, and it directed their attention to monitoring preservice teachers’ developmental 
needs. Supervising teachers described how they used the rubric to classify, monitor 
and plan the development of preservice teachers’ understanding and skills that 
aligned with expectations and developmental needs, rather than simply discussing 
only things noticed during the lessons observed. Several supervising teachers noted 
that the rubric prompted them to provide more comprehensive feedback to address 
a number of APST focus areas that would otherwise have been overlooked. 
Table 9.3  The rubric and self-assessment and goal-setting processes were useful to understand 
the full scope of capabilities preservice teachers were expected to develop
Group
Strongly 
disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly 
agree
Total
Teacher educators
0%
0%
0%
66.67%
33.33%
15
(0)
(0)
(0)
(10)
(5)
Supervising teachers
0%
0%
5.43%
58.70%
35.87
92
(0)
(0)
(5)
(54)
(33)
School coordinators
0%
0%
0%
45.45%
54.55%
22
(0)
(0)
(0)
(10)
(12)
Fourth-year preservice 
teachers
0%
10.00%
10.00%
60.00%
20.00%
20
(0)
(2)
(2)
(12)
(4)
Third-year preservice 
teachers
0%
7.69%
7.69%
61.54%
23.08%
13
(0)
(1)
(1)
(8)
(3)
T.-A. Sweeney and B. Nielsen
www.ebook3000.com

145
Preservice teachers reported using the rubric as a checkpoint to ensure they 
addressed all of the requirements and confirm their self-assessment of their practice 
with their supervisors.
Compared to previous years, and as a result of using the rubric, school coordina-
tors reported that they observed a decrease in the frequency of platitudinous com-
ments made by supervising teachers related to preservice teachers’ performance in 
the interim and final reports. They also reported they were able to identify the devel-
opmental needs of preservice teachers earlier in the professional experience place-
ment and direct the preservice teachers to appropriate resources. Additionally, both 
supervising teachers and school coordinators reported that as a result of using the 
rubric, preservice teachers were able to engage in professional conversations about 
their strengths and areas of focus for their development.
Fourth-year preservice teachers reported they felt their supervising teachers and 
teacher educators were able to engage in more informative and concise conversa-
tions because they were focused on the same focus area descriptors. Some third- and 
fourth-year preservice teachers noted that some supervising teachers were reluctant 
to refer to the rubric as they were unfamiliar with the APST. A similar problem was 
described by Jonsson and Mattsson (2011) where preservice teacher competency 
was not recognised in the rubric resulting in its nonuse. This points to a need to 
improve the validity and reliability of the rubric by providing more implementation 
support focused on establishing common understandings about the concepts related 
to the generic descriptors, as well as strategies for how to use the rubric to assist 
preservice teachers set professional development goals and track their development 
through the provision of nuanced feedback.
Conversations of Self-Regulation and Agentic Learning
An important goal underpinning the rubric was that preservice teachers would 
become agents of their own learning whilst in the school environment, in other 
words, self-regulated learners. Characteristics of these learners include self-­
assessment and goal setting. The majority of teacher educators, supervising teach-
ers, school coordinators and preservice teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the 
rubric and self-assessment and goal-setting processes assisted preservice teachers to 
confront challenges, set themselves new learning goals as well as self-assess their 
progress towards the graduate level of the APST (see Tables 9.4 and 9.5).
Goal Setting
A noteworthy 30.7% (n = 7) of fourth-year preservice teachers indicated they did 
not believe that the rubric would assist them in goal setting. This less than affirming 
outcome could be attributed to the fact that these participants were the first to use 
the new rubric and assessment processes and had less preparation for its use than 
9  Using a Developmental Assessment Rubric to Revitalise Stakeholder Conversations…

146
subsequent cohorts. This was due to the final professional experience placement 
being conducted in semester one. By contrast, the third-year students who had 
greater induction and preparation for using the rubric as their professional experi-
ence placement that was conducted in semester two were more affirming of its value 
in their learning and goal setting.
Self-Assessment
A key principle of a quality assessment system is that it ‘enhances the capacity of 
preservice teachers for self-assessment and reflection on their developing knowl-
edge and practice’ (Queensland College of Teachers [QCT], 2012, p. 72). Well-­
designed assessment protocols can equip students to become reflective practitioners, 
sensitive to their own ongoing professional developmental needs (Parsell, 2013). 
Table 9.4  The rubric and self-assessment and goal-setting processes helped preservice teachers 
set specific goals to progress towards the achievement of the graduate level of the APST
Group
Strongly 
disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly 
agree
Total
Teacher educators
0%
0%
0%
73.33%
26.67%
15
(0)
(0)
(0)
(11)
(4)
Supervising teachers
0%
1.10%
6.59%
57.14%
35.16%
91
(0)
(1)
(6)
(52)
(32)
School coordinators
0%
0%
4.55%
50.00%
45.45%
22
(0)
(0)
(1)
(11)
(10)
Fourth-year preservice 
teachers
0%
30.77%
7.69%
38.46%
23.08%
13
(0)
(4)
(1)
(5)
(3)
Third-year preservice 
teachers
5.00%
5.00%
25.00%
30.00%
35.00%
20
(1)
(1)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Table 9.5  The new rubric and assessment processes assisted the preservice teacher to self-assess 
their progress towards the achievement of the graduate level of the APST
Group
Strongly 
disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly 
agree
Total
Teacher educators
0%
0%
0%
60.00%
40.00%
15
(0)
(0)
(0)
(9)
(6)
Supervising teachers
0%
0%
2.17%
64.13%
33.70%
92
(0)
(0)
(0)
(59)
(31)
School coordinators
0%
0%
0%
59.07%
40.91%
22
(0)
(0)
(0)
(13)
(9)
Fourth-year preservice 
teachers
0%
15.38%
0%
61.54%
23.08%
13
(0)
(2)
(0)
(8)
(3)
Third-year preservice 
teachers
0%
5.00%
15.00%
40.00%
40.00%
20
(0)
(1)
(3)
(8)
(8)
T.-A. Sweeney and B. Nielsen
www.ebook3000.com

147
The findings suggest that the use of the rubric, self-assessment and goal-setting 
processes had a positive impact on these aspects of professional experience.
Tables 9.4 and 9.5 indicate that participants largely agreed or strongly agreed that 
the rubric assisted the preservice teacher to self-assess their progress towards the 
achievement of the graduate level of the APST and set specific goals. This view was 
supported by the open-ended survey comments related to the most significant 
changes that occurred as a result of the innovation. A summary of the range of com-
ments is provided below. This indicates that compared to previous years, and as a 
result of using the rubric, preservice teachers:
•	 Demonstrated a greater awareness of performance expectations
•	 Took greater ownership of the assessment and reporting process
•	 Spent more time self-reflecting and monitoring their professional growth
•	 Improved the quality of their self-reflections and goal setting
•	 Were more motivated to meet expectations and respond to feedback
•	 Were proactive in asking questions, seeking feedback and engaging in 
conversations
•	 Were more open and honest discussing the assessment of their performance
The proactivity of preservice teachers was reported to be particularly evident by 
the school coordinators and teacher educators in two key aspects. Firstly, they 
reported that preservice teachers were more likely to notice, research and adopt 
focused strategies to attend to students with particular needs. Secondly, they reported 
that preservice teachers actively sought and utilised feedback to inform and modify 
their behaviour. Supervising teachers reported finding it helpful when preservice 
teachers initiated research regarding effective teaching strategies to employ in the 
classroom. One school coordinator remarked that the feedback-seeking behaviour 
of preservice teachers was a contrast to that of previous years (prior to the introduc-
tion of the rubric), when supervisors had felt their advice was not listened to, valued 
or heeded. Fourth-year preservice teachers’ comments described how they used the 
rubric with their supervising teacher for formative assessment, to evaluate existing 
knowledge, understanding and skills and monitor the development of these through-
out the professional experience. One preservice teacher commented:
I found the guide especially valuable as the common language of the AITSL standards was 
familiar to my supervising teacher and Principal, and it was easy to see how my placement 
experiences were helping me to attain the graduate level. I used the guide to identify which 
areas I had the least experience with so far and used these to ensure I had a chance to experi-
ence these areas. I feel using the guide has given me more confidence in self-assessing 
against the standards, and I can see the value of this in creating my teaching portfolio.
Another wrote:
I found it extremely valuable to have the standards set out in terms of Novice, Emerging, 
Graduate and Proficient. It showed clear difference in terms of the language used to describe 
achievement for each standard e. g. Emerging teachers are expected to ‘discuss’ whereas 
Graduate teachers may be expected to ‘create and implement’.
9  Using a Developmental Assessment Rubric to Revitalise Stakeholder Conversations…

148
Conversations Focused on Teaching Capability Aligned 
with the Standards
This study also sought to investigate to what extent the rubric impacted on profes-
sional conversations associated with formative feedback and summative judgements 
about preservice teachers’ teaching capabilities aligned with the APST. The inten-
tion was to identify whether these conversations between preservice teachers and 
their supervisors were transformed from being largely based on personal opinion 
towards using evidence to demonstrate achievement of specific focus areas. The 
rubric was designed to evaluate and guide conversations that were integral to the 
formative, as well as the summative, assessment processes in the professional expe-
rience program. Table 9.6 shows that the majority of teacher educators, school coor-
dinators and supervising teachers agreed that they used the rubric to assist evaluating 
preservice teachers’ teaching and learning.
During the focus groups, some teacher educators reported that preservice teach-
ers ensured they were very familiar with all aspects of the rubric in preparation for 
their professional experience placements and were worried if they felt that a particu-
lar school might not give them the opportunity to gain feedback on some aspect of 
teaching. Consequently, they described how some preservice teachers were proac-
tive in securing professional experience placements in schools they were confident 
would support their learning. In particular, some preservice teachers had elected to 
undertake an extended internship professional experience placement in schools 
which provided a high level of support for a group of preservice teachers over a 
60-day placement (as opposed to the standard 40-day placement with few preser-
vice teachers). The extended option was attractive as it often led to employment 
after graduation; however, this frequently resulted in reduced income from part-­
time employment.
Throughout the open-ended survey comments and focus group interviews with 
the teacher educators, there was frequent mention that the rubric was well received 
by supervising teachers, school coordinators, teacher educators and preservice 
teachers as it used a common language to discuss teaching. In contrast to this view, 
a final-year preservice teacher questioned the utility of the rubric and the interim 
and final reporting process. She commented:
Table 9.6  The rubric was used to assist the evaluation of preservice teachers’ teaching and 
learning
Group
Strongly 
disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly 
agree
Total
Teacher educators
0%
0%
0%
73.33%
26.67%
15
(0)
(0)
(0)
(11)
(4)
Supervising teachers
0%
2.20%
6.59%
52.75%
38.46
91
(0)
(2)
(6)
(48)
(35)
School coordinators
0%
4.55%
18.18
50.00
27.27%
22
(0)
(1)
(4)
(11)
(6)
T.-A. Sweeney and B. Nielsen
www.ebook3000.com

149
Honestly, I am not sure any of it was valuable. I saw it only as a necessity. The verbal feed-
back I received was most valuable. I reflected on my lessons and practice as I went along 
each day and had discussions with my supervising teachers, the TRTs [temporary relief 
teachers] and the teacher educator.
This comment raises the problematic issue of preservice teachers’ professional 
experience subject to chance rather than ‘subject to proper and systematic assess-
ment’ (Jonsson & Mattsson, 2011, p. 185). In the case of this preservice teacher, she 
reported a successful professional experience. However, her comment raises doubt 
about the systematic assessment of her capabilities against the graduate level stan-
dards and the inequalities that may occur between supervising teachers when they 
are reluctant to adopt required formative and assessment processes. As previously 
mentioned, the reluctance by some supervising teachers to refer to the rubric was a 
problem similarly described by Jonsson and Mattsson (2011) based on supervising 
teachers’ lack of familiarity with the APST and preservice teacher competency not 
being recognised in the rubric. Continuing the theme of resistance to the innovation, 
a few supervising teachers noted that they preferred to evaluate preservice teachers’ 
achievement using the AITSL website to access the standards and view the 
Illustrations of Practice as they were familiar with this resource. This may be help-
ful for final-year preservice teachers who are expected to meet the graduate level 
standard. However, the rubric aims to support preservice teachers to distinguish the 
increasing levels of complexity required leading up to this level.
A preservice teacher and a supervising teacher both commented that the interim 
review based on the rubric was valuable for evaluating preservice teachers’ progress 
and providing feedback, enabling preservice teachers to improve to meet the gradu-
ate standard before the end of the professional experience. Teacher educators in the 
focus groups also pointed to the value of the interim report recognising this as an 
opportunity to ensure that all parties were interpreting the standards in a similar 
way. It was a time to discuss interpretations, gaps and plans for further learning in 
very precise ways (‘nothing airy fairy’ was one remark).
The majority of teacher educators, school coordinators and supervising teachers 
agreed that they used the rubric to guide conversations with preservice teachers 
about generating evidence about their teaching capability (see Table 9.7). A third-­
year preservice teacher wrote that she used the rubric ‘to identify the areas that 
hadn’t been covered and discuss ways to gather this evidence’. A school coordinator 
commented that conversations about what and how to collect evidence to demon-
strate achievement were integral to exploring with preservice teachers what each 
focus area descriptor meant and could look like in the specific context.
A final-year preservice teacher suggested that the professional experience assess-
ment guide could be improved by including a section that requires us to obtain evi-
dence about each of the focus areas. He commented:
I found that I knew and my supervising teacher knew that I could fulfil all the requirements 
but when it came to providing evidence I became stuck. A reminder that evidence needs to 
be collected would be very valuable.
9  Using a Developmental Assessment Rubric to Revitalise Stakeholder Conversations…

150
This comment is consistent with another final-year preservice teacher who wrote: 
‘I wasn’t really aware that I was supposed to be discussing evidence showing reach-
ing the standards with my teacher’.
The majority of teacher educators, supervising teachers, school coordinators and 
preservice teachers agreed, or strongly agreed, that the rubric was used as a refer-
ence to identify and communicate specific feedback needed by the preservice 
teacher as part of post-lesson evaluations (see Table 9.8).
It is noteworthy that 46.2  % of fourth-year preservice teachers disagreed, or 
strongly disagreed, that the rubric was used as a reference to identify and communi-
cate specific feedback the preservice teacher needed as part of post-lesson evaluations. 
One third-year preservice teacher expressed frustration because her supervising 
teacher did not use the rubric, and this meant that she was unable to connect the 
­general feedback she received on lessons to her development for specific focus  
areas. Thus, using the rubric to provide feedback increased its utility relevance. 
Table 9.7  The rubric was useful to guide conversations with preservice teachers and their 
supervising teacher to discuss and plan how they could produce evidence aligned with specific 
focus areas
Group
Strongly 
disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly 
agree
Total
Teacher educators
0%
0%
6.67%
46.67%
46.67%
15
(0)
(0)
(1)
(7)
(7)
Supervising teachers
0%
1.09%
15.22%
58.70%
25.00%
92
(0)
(1)
(14)
(54)
(23)
School coordinators
0%
0%
0%
52.38%
47.62%
21
(0)
(0)
(0)
(11)
(10)
Fourth-year preservice 
teachers
7.69%
23.98%
15.38%
30.77%
23.08%
13
(1)
(3)
(2)
(4)
(3)
Third-year preservice 
teachers
0%
20.00%
35.00%
40.00%
5.00%
20
(0)
(4)
(7)
(8)
(1)
Table 9.8  The rubric was used as a reference to identify and communicate specific feedback the 
preservice teacher needed as part of post-lesson evaluations
Group
Strongly 
disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly 
agree
Total
Teacher educators
0%
0%
6.67%
66.67%
26.67%
15
(0)
(0)
(1)
(10)
(4)
Supervising teachers
0%
8.70%
9.78%
58.7%
22.83%
92
(0)
(8)
(9)
(54)
(21)
School coordinators
0%
4.76%
9.52%
57.14%
28.57%
21
(0)
(1)
(2)
(12)
(6)
Fourth-year preservice 
teachers
23.08%
23.08%
0%
38.46%
15.38%
13
(3)
(3)
(0)
(5)
(2)
Third-year preservice 
teachers
15.79%
10.53%
21.05%
52.63%
0%
19
(3)
(2)
(4)
(10)
(0)
T.-A. Sweeney and B. Nielsen
www.ebook3000.com

151
In contrast, school coordinators reported that as a result of the implementation of the 
rubric and self-assessment and reporting processes, there was a significant improve-
ment in the provision of feedback provided by supervising teachers which now had a 
clear focus and direction.
Discussion
Assessing preservice teachers’ developing capabilities is a complex undertaking. It 
is important to assess, track and support preservice teachers throughout their devel-
opment, as well as be able to certify that they have achieved acceptable standards 
when they graduate (Jonsson & Mattsson, 2011). The aim of this study was to 
examine the impact of introducing a new developmental assessment rubric, self-­
assessment and goal-setting processes on preservice teachers’ learning in profes-
sional experience. Six key features of a high-quality assessment system underpin 
this innovation as it (1) is based on principles of authentic assessment, (2) enhances 
the capacity of preservice teachers for self-assessment and reflection on their levels 
of developing knowledge and practice, (3) captures the complexity of teaching, (4) 
captures the multifaceted nature of teaching in a comprehensive manner, (5) aligns 
with current national professional teaching standards and (6) ‘has support from key 
stakeholders’ (QCT, 2012, p. 4). The findings in relation to the three research ques-
tions provide evidence as to the extent the innovations facilitated conversations:
	1.	 To achieve greater clarity and shared understanding regarding the expectations 
of preservice teachers during professional experience
	2.	 To encourage preservice teachers to be self-regulating agents of their own 
learning
	3.	 To support formative feedback and summative judgements about preservice 
teachers’ teaching capabilities aligned with the APST
The development of the ‘backward mapped’ rubric implemented during this trial 
study based on the APST was designed to address the problem of an emphasis on 
summative assessment at the end of teacher education programs. Research suggests 
that the formative use of rubrics can mediate improved student performance by 
increasing transparency of what is expected (Good, 1987) aiding the feedback pro-
cess, improving student self-efficacy and/or supporting student self-regulation 
(Panadero & Jonsson, 2013). The rubric and self-assessment and goal-setting pro-
cesses were welcomed and endorsed by all stakeholders involved in this study. As a 
result of the use of the rubric, school coordinators reported being better prepared to 
plan and manage the full scope of capabilities that preservice teachers are expected 
to develop. Preservice teachers and supervising teachers also reported they engaged 
with focus areas they would otherwise have overlooked. School coordinators noted 
that the innovation encouraged conversations with supervising teachers about the 
knowledge, practice and professional engagement required of preservice teachers 
leading up to the point of graduation, as well as the expectations of teachers ­engaging 
9  Using a Developmental Assessment Rubric to Revitalise Stakeholder Conversations…

152
in continuous professional development throughout their careers (AITSL, 2014). It 
is noteworthy that two supervising teachers raised concerns that the expectations at 
the graduate level identified in the Australian Professional Standards for Teachers 
were ‘very high’ and ‘unrealistic for the amount of teaching experience of the stu-
dents’. In contrast, other supervising teachers commented on the clarity of expecta-
tions between their work as experienced teachers and the evaluation of preservice 
teachers’ capabilities. Multiple supervising teachers commented on the value of the 
rubric and assessment processes for inducting preservice teachers into the language 
they are expected to understand and confidently use.
The commitment to the key feature of authentic assessment of preservice teach-
ers’ developing capability for this innovation necessitated making a ‘trade-off’ 
between the formative and summative purposes of the rubric (Jonsson & Mattsson, 
2011, p. 180). Reliable assessment rubrics should preferably be analytical (rather 
than holistic) and task specific (as opposed to generic) and have few quality levels 
(Jonsson & Svingby, 2007). However, these attributes must be balanced against 
other needs and purposes. The rubric used in this study was analytical but not task 
specific and had four quality levels (novice, emerging, graduate and proficient). 
Therefore, it was not designed for maximum reliability but to support preservice 
teacher learning through nuanced feedback and the tracking of progress over time 
to help them ‘perform better next time they encounter a similar (but not identical 
task)’ (Jonsson & Mattsson, 2011, p. 173). The provision of developmental feed-
back at several levels appears to improve preservice teacher learning and agency 
which was an important finding to emerge from this study. However, the impact of 
the design decision to use multiple levels appeared to reduce inter-rater reliability of 
the rubric, as not all assessors used the rubric as intended due to being based on the 
language of the national standards which some participants found unfamiliar requir-
ing them to operationalise each descriptor before it could be assessed. Despite this 
difficulty, the findings indicated that the rubric prompted supervising teachers to 
adopt a more deductive approach which directed their attention to the full scope of 
capabilities preservice teachers were expected to develop. This resulted in preser-
vice teachers focusing more attention on addressing equity goals of specific sub-
groups of students and ensuring excellence in educational outcomes for all students 
(QCT, 2012).
The findings indicate that further actions are needed to ensure that all assessors 
are able to interpret the assessment criteria and quality levels of the rubric in a con-
sistent and reliable manner. This is important so that preservice teacher assessment 
is not dependent on which assessor is assigned to the preservice teacher (Jonsson & 
Mattsson, 2011). The problematic issue which arises from attempting to capture the 
complexity of teaching in a generic multilevel rubric can be addressed through the 
distribution of examples relevant to different contexts and student needs to exem-
plify the concepts and observable performance features aligned with each standard 
and level. Given the new national requirement for partnership agreements between 
all teacher education providers and schools, there is also an opportunity to strengthen 
the mentoring of all preservice teachers through professional development activities 
which use these examples as part of practice moderation processes.
T.-A. Sweeney and B. Nielsen
www.ebook3000.com

153
There is long-term value in promoting preservice teachers’ self-regulation of 
their learning (Hodkinson & Hodkinson, 2005; Tynjala, 2008). The use of rubrics 
combined with self-assessment, goal setting and self-reflection can provide students 
the opportunity to perceive learning progress which can lead to a powerful ‘mastery 
experience’ (van Dinther, Dochy, & Segers, 2011, p. 105). This can create a strong 
sense of self-efficacy that plays a key role in human agency (van Dinther et al., 
2011). The findings of this study suggest that the rubric and self-assessment and 
goal-setting processes provide preservice teachers with an awareness of their emerg-
ing capabilities and sense of personal agency in their own learning (Billet, 2008). 
The qualitative statements emerging from the survey and the focus groups indicated 
that there had been a significant change in preservice teachers’ personal agency in 
regard to their management of their learning in contrast to their counterparts of 
previous years. Preservice teachers were prompted to adopt a proactive role in plan-
ning and managing their learning whilst undertaking professional experience. This 
may support the formation of their professional identity as they critically ponder 
what they are doing and why (Ruohotie-Lyhty & Moate, 2016).
A question arising from this study is what evidence supervising teachers, school 
coordinators, teacher educators and preservice teachers have when making assess-
ment judgements using the rubric. The findings suggest that whilst the introduction 
of the rubric had a positive impact on conversations about the different types of 
evidence relevant to demonstrating preservice teachers’ developing capabilities, 
this did not occur consistently or in a systematic way. This is problematic as the 
intent of the rubric was to facilitate a more transparent, focused, consistent and 
accountable assessment of preservice teachers’ development during their profes-
sional experience. This necessitates making judgements about, and reporting on, 
preservice teachers’ development based on evidence rather than intuition. Jonsson 
and Mattsson (2011) described a similar challenge in their study where they found 
that very little data was documented or could be used to re-evaluate preservice 
teachers’ performance.
With the introduction of new national teacher education requirements related to 
a teaching performance assessment for final-year preservice teachers, and creation 
of a portfolio of evidence of their achievement of the graduate level standards, there 
is an opportunity to support preservice teachers’ collection of evidence which cap-
tures the multifaceted nature of teaching in a comprehensive manner by focusing on 
the four interconnected stages of teaching: ‘(i) Planning and preparation; (ii) 
Classroom instruction and implementation; (iii) Assessment and feedback; (iv) 
Reflection and professional dialogue’ (QCT, 2012, p. 28).
This study has provided coherent evidence that the new developmental assess-
ment rubric, self-assessment and goal-setting processes have made a positive impact 
on the approaches of all stakeholders to the assessment of third- and fourth-year 
preservice teachers’ professional knowledge, practice and engagement. The find-
ings of this study confirm those reported by Panadero and Jonsson (2013), showing 
that rubrics can assist students to engage with feedback and develop a realistic opin-
ion about their developing capabilities. These findings are also confirmed by Sim 
et al. in their 2012 report. The findings indicated that compared to previous years, 
9  Using a Developmental Assessment Rubric to Revitalise Stakeholder Conversations…

154
all stakeholders played a more active role in the learning, reviewing and assessment 
process. Specifically, school coordinators and supervising teachers more accurately 
targeted the developmental needs of preservice teachers earlier in the professional 
experience placement and were more accountable for the provision of formal feed-
back related to monitoring preservice teachers’ progress aligned with developmen-
tal expectations. Additionally, the use of the rubric for self-assessment and goal 
setting shared the responsibility for assessment between the supervising teacher and 
the preservice teacher and placed a much stronger emphasis on formative feedback 
and evidence-informed practice (QCT, 2012).
Conclusion
Assessment is never simply a technical exercise of measurement. It always involves speci-
fying a set of learning outcomes based on a vision of what is worthwhile learning in the first 
place. (Parsell, 2013, p. 10)
The findings here suggest that the use of the new developmental assessment 
rubric and self-assessment and goal-setting processes had a substantial, positive 
impact on the assessment of teaching capability. Assessment of professional experi-
ence in teacher education in Australia has taken on a significant level of attention 
and importance with the introduction of the APST. Many teacher education provid-
ers are seeking their own way to assure that their graduates have attained the required 
level of performance. This study describes one possible approach and its qualitative 
impact on preservice teachers’ engagement in their professional experience and 
those who guide and assess their performance.
The introduction of the rubric resulted in a qualitative difference in preservice 
teachers’ conversations with and between their three assessors (a supervising 
teacher, school coordinator and teacher educator). As a result of using the rubric, 
conversations were transformed to become more comprehensively based on evi-
dence appropriate to the context and focused on the developmental needs of preser-
vice teachers. Additionally, there was a notable shift in shared ownership and 
accountability of the assessment process with preservice teachers playing a more 
proactive role in their professional development and supervisors reporting increased 
levels of confidence in their ability to make judgements about the performance of 
preservice teachers. Conversations between stakeholders were deepened, expanded 
and more focused. These changes have strengthened the relationship between the 
university’s School of Education and the schools that host preservice teachers, 
based on trust and confidence in the new assessment and goal-setting processes. 
Following the 2 years of consistent positive responses that the innovation has had on 
preservice teachers’ engagement with their professional experience, the approach 
has now been implemented across all initial teacher education programs offered in 
the School of Education. In addition, an evaluation infrastructure has been designed 
and established to enable ongoing scrutiny of the efficacy of the tools, the process 
and its continued enhancement and development.
T.-A. Sweeney and B. Nielsen
www.ebook3000.com

155
References
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL). (2014). Purpose of the stan-
dards. http://www.aitsl.edu.au/australian-professional-standards-for-teachers/standards/devel-
opment/purpose-of-the-standards. Accessed 6 Aug 2015.
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL). (2015). Accreditation of initial 
teacher education programs in Australia: Standards and procedures. http://www.aitsl.edu.au/
docs/default-source/initial-teacher-education-resources/accreditation-of-ite-programs-inaus-
tralia. pdf. Accessed 6 Dec 2016.
Beauchamp, C., & Thomas, L. (2009). Understanding teacher identity: An overview of issues in 
the literature and implications for teacher education. Cambridge Journal of Education, 39(2), 
175–189. doi:10.1080/03057640902902252.
Billett, S. (2008). Learning throughout working life: A relational interdependence between social 
and individual agency. British Journal of Educational Studies, 55(1), 39–58.
Clinton, J., Dinham, S., Savage, G., Dabrowski, A., Aston, R., Gullickson, A., … Calnin, G. 
(2015). Evaluation of the Australian professional standards for teachers: Final report, data 
supplement II. November 2015. Centre for Program Evaluation, The University of Melbourne.
Cohen, E., Hoz, R., & Kaplan, H. (2013). The practicum in preservice teacher education: A review 
of empirical studies. Teaching Education, 24(4), 345–380. doi:10.1080/10476210.2012.711815.
Craven, G., Beswick, K., Fleming, J., Fletcher, T., Green, M., Jensen, B., … Rickards, F. (2014). 
Action now: Classroom ready teachers. Teacher Education Ministerial Advisory Group. 
Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia.
Endedijk, M., Vermunt, J., Verloop, N., & Brekelmans, M. (2012). The nature of student teachers’ 
regulation of learning in teacher education. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 82, 
469–491. doi:10.1111/j.2044-8279.2011.02040.x.
Good, T. L. (1987). Two decades of research on teacher expectations: Findings and future direc-
tions. Journal of Teacher Education, 38(4), 32–47. doi:10.1177/002248718703800406.
Hodkinson, H., & Hodkinson, P. (2005). Improving schoolteachers’ workplace learning. Research 
Papers in Education, 20(2), 109–131.
Ingvarson, L. (2011). Assessing teachers for professional certification: Achieving national consis-
tency. Professional Educator, 10(2), 10–15.
Ingvarson, L., Reid, K., Buckley, S., Kleinhenz, E., Masters, G., & Rowley, G. (2014). Best practice 
teacher education programs and Australia’s own programs. Canberra, Australia: Department 
of Education.
Jonsson, A., & Mattsson, M. (2011). Assessing teacher competency during practicum. In 
M. Mattsson, T. V. Eilertsen, & D. Rorrison (Eds.), A practicum turn in teacher education 
(pp. 169–187). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Jonsson, A., & Svingby, G. (2007). The use of scoring rubrics: Reliability, validity and educational 
consequences. Educational Research Review, 2, 130–144. doi:10.1016/j.edurev.2007.05.002.
Niemi, H. (2002). Active learning – a cultural change needed in teacher education and schools. 
Teaching and Teacher Education, 18(7), 763–780. doi:10.1016/S0742-051X(02)00042-2.
Panadero, E., & Jonsson, A. (2013). The use of scoring rubrics for formative assessment pur-
poses revisited: A review. Educational Research Review, 9, 129–144. doi:10.1016/j.
edurev.2013.01.002.
Parsell, M. (2013). Assessing professional experience: Lessons from other professions. Report for 
New South Wales Institute of Teachers. Macquarie University. www.nswteachers.nsw.edu.au/
DownloadDocument.ashx?DocumentID=1185. Accessed 15 May 2016.
Queensland College of Teachers (QCT) Report. (2012). An investigation of best practice in 
evidence-­based assessment within preservice teacher education programs and other profes-
sions. Queensland College of Teachers. http://qct.edu.au/about/research-reports. Accessed 2 
Apr 2015.
Ruohotie-Lyhty, M., & Moate, J. (2016). Who and how? Preservice teachers as active agents devel-
oping professional identities. Teaching and Teacher Education, 55, 318–327.
9  Using a Developmental Assessment Rubric to Revitalise Stakeholder Conversations…

156
Sim, C., Freiberg, J., White, S., Allard, A., Le Cornu, R., & Carter, B. (2012). Using professional 
standards: Assessing work integrated learning in initial teacher education. Australian Teaching 
and Learning Council. http://www.teacherevidence.net. Accessed 15 June 2015.
Tynjälä, P. (2008). Perspectives into learning at the workplace. Educational Research Review, 3, 
130–154.
Ure, C., Gough, A., & Newton, R. (2009). Practicum partnerships: Standards-based profession. 
Exploring models of practicum organisation in teacher education for a standards-based pro-
fession. Australian Government Office for Learning and Teaching. http://www.olt.gov.au/
resource-library. Accessed 15 June 2013.
van Dinther, M., Dochy, F., & Segers, M. (2011). Factors affecting students’ self-efficacy in higher 
education. Educational Research Review, 6(2), 95–108. doi:10.1016/j.edurev.2010.10.003.
Wiggins, G., & McTighe, J. (2000). Understanding by design. New York: Prentice Hall.
Yinger, R., & Hendricks-Lee, M. S. (2000). The language of standards and teacher education 
reform. Educational Policy, 14(1), 94–106. doi:10.1177/0895904800014001008.
T.-A. Sweeney and B. Nielsen
www.ebook3000.com

157
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_10
Chapter 10
Fostering Professional Learning Through 
Evidence-Informed Mentoring Dialogues 
in School Settings
Jeana Kriewaldt, Melanie Nash, Sally Windsor, Jane Thornton, 
and Catherine Reid
Abstract  This chapter examines how the use of a descriptive observation tool 
mediates post-lesson conversations that teacher educators and mentor teachers have 
with preservice teachers. Our principal focus was to investigate the effects of the use 
of evidence-informed lesson observations in combination with a dialogic approach, 
as the basis for feedback on teaching practice and student learning. An interpretive 
case study approach was designed to investigate how mentor teachers and teacher 
educators used the observation tool. The findings provided data about the effects the 
tool had on the dispositions of the participants towards collecting and interrogating 
classroom evidence and how these impacted on their post-lesson conversations with 
preservice teachers.
Preliminary findings suggested that some mentor teachers found it difficult to 
use description rather than judgement when discussing teaching and learning. This 
diminished opportunities for the construction and interrogation of professional rea-
soning in post-lesson discussions. Later findings, however, indicated that the use of 
the descriptive observation tool for the recording of evidence-informed observa-
tions fostered an inquiring and collaborative stance in post-lesson reviews. 
Collaborations of this nature, between mentor teachers and preservice teachers, pro-
vided the preservice teachers with greater agency during the professional dialogue 
and enhanced their capacity to reflect on their teaching.
J. Kriewaldt (*) • M. Nash • C. Reid 
Melbourne Graduate School of Education, The University of Melbourne,  
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
e-mail: jeana@unimelb.edu.au 
S. Windsor 
Department of Pedagogical, Curricular and Professional Studies, Gothenburg University, 
Gothenburg, Sweden 
Melbourne Graduate School of Education, The University of Melbourne,  
Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
J. Thornton 
Koonung Secondary College, Mont Albert North, VIC, Australia

158
Introduction
This chapter outlines a study that investigated how a descriptive observation tool 
used by mentor teachers, other school-based teacher educators, university-based 
teacher educators and preservice teachers enables and guides professional conversa-
tions during the placement experience. The tool, a clinical observation protocol, 
guides an observer to log teacher and student activities and interactions during a 
lesson. The conversations that are based on the clinical observation tool provided 
multiple loops of evidence-informed feedback on teaching practice. In this respect, 
the provision of evidence plays an essential role in a clinical model of teaching 
(Burn & Mutton, 2013; Kriewaldt & Turnidge, 2013; Kriewaldt, McLean Davies, 
Rice, Rickards, & Acquaro, 2017). Used as the foundation for discussion, this tool 
encourages the preservice teacher to develop as a reflective professional during 
placement experiences. This chapter draws on Timperley’s (2001) research that 
identified the importance of structured mentoring conversations and draws on 
Edwards’ work (2010) in theorising ‘relational agency’ in collegial conversations. 
By providing preservice teachers with a variety of evidence from their practice, it 
enables them to examine pathways to improvement from multiple perspectives, thus 
creating an environment to help them develop as expert practitioners.
This research project is situated in the Master of Teaching (MTeach) program in 
the Melbourne Graduate School of Education (MGSE) at the University of 
Melbourne. The MTeach is a 2-year postgraduate initial teacher education program 
that is structured around the nexus of theory and practice together with the concept 
of clinical teaching informed by evidence. Each preservice teacher is supported by 
a mentor teacher in the preparation and teaching of classes. At a group level, preser-
vice teachers are organised into groups of about 25 across three to five schools. 
Each of these groups is monitored by a school-based teaching expert known as a 
teaching fellow and a university-based expert known as a clinical specialist, who 
draw connections between school placement experiences and academic course-
work. The preservice teachers are placed in a school for 2 days a week from early in 
the MTeach program and, in addition, complete an intensive 4-week block place-
ment of 20 consecutive school days in that school. This program structure enables 
the preservice teachers to implement strategies and theoretical approaches discussed 
at a university, on a weekly basis. In addition, theory-practice integration is sup-
ported by designing course assessment tasks that are founded on the collection and 
analysis of school-based evidence.
J. Kriewaldt et al.
www.ebook3000.com

159
Background Literature
Professional Conversations
Preservice teacher programs, research and policy, situate school-based learning as 
essential to the development of classroom-ready teachers (Darling-Hammond & 
Bransford, 2005). As preservice teachers spend significant time in schools, the rela-
tionships between them and their mentor teachers are crucial. Mentor teachers can 
fulfil many roles including that of supporter, role model, collaborator, coach and 
assessor (Ambrosetti & Dekkers, 2010). Commonly, mentor teachers’ practices 
include guiding preservice teachers’ planning, observing them teach and providing 
feedback. The nature of this feedback and preservice teachers’ engagement in pro-
fessional conversations, and how this might encourage critical reflection, varies. 
Developing teacher expertise is enhanced when teachers have opportunities to dis-
cuss their practice (Timperley & Alton-Lee, 2008; van Kruiningen, 2013) and this 
correspondingly applies to preservice teachers. Quality conversations are vital and 
are characterised by a focus on student learning, attending to evidence and making 
reasoning transparent (Kim & Silver, 2016; Timperley, 2015).
In this study, one of these characteristics – classroom evidence – forms the basis 
for the professional conversations between preservice teachers and their mentor 
teachers. Access to a range of evidence provides preservice teachers with opportuni-
ties to rethink their beliefs and to adjust their practice in new and different ways 
(Clarke, 1995; Cochran-Smith & Lytle, 2009; Earl & Timperley, 2009; Kriewaldt & 
Turnidge, 2013; McLean Davies et al., 2013; Timperley, 2001). When fostering 
reflective practice in preservice teachers, the role of mentor teachers is ‘not so much 
in providing a list of issues for the students to reflect upon but rather in providing a 
variety of perspectives from which students might examine their practice’ (Clarke, 
1995, p. 258) through dialogue. This notion of mentoring dialogues is aligned with 
principles of ‘educative mentoring’ in which preservice teachers learn from their 
practice supported by their mentor who guides learning opportunities and is a co-­
inquirer (Feiman-Nemser, 1998, 2001; Schwille, 2008). Educative mentoring is 
used to distinguish mentoring that is founded on reciprocal and trusting relation-
ships (Trevethan, 2017) and underpins the conversations reported in this study.
Research advocates the benefits of joint observation and tripartite dialogue in 
developing ‘horizontal expertise in and for teacher education’ (Mtika, Robson, & 
Fitzpatrick, 2014, p. 67), with professional conversations involving multiple actors 
playing important roles in the development of professional identities and positions 
(van Kruiningen, 2013). Such ‘educational meetings’ assist preservice teachers to 
‘navigate between the hierarchical relationships of course-owner/non-owner, 
advice-giver/advice-receiver, expert/lay person and those of equal colleagues within 
a team’ (van Kruiningen, 2013, p. 119). The positioning of preservice teachers as 
equals who collaborate with mentors from both school and university contexts in 
the process of giving and receiving feedback is critical to this project. Dialogue or 
professional conversations between preservice teachers and more experienced 
10  Fostering Professional Learning Through Evidence-Informed Mentoring Dialogues…

160
teachers ‘are central to developing student teachers’ cognitions that underlie their 
professional knowledge and performance’ (Timperley, 2001, pp. 111–112). While it 
is often stated that within the practicum experience much learning ‘is accomplished 
through talk’ (Strong & Baron, 2004, p. 49), there are relatively few studies that 
offer ‘detailed accounts of what that work specifically entails’ (Harris, Keogh, & 
Jervis-Tracey, 2013, p. 34). Furthermore, little research has been reported that anal-
yses these professional conversations and the tools and evidence that are used to 
enable them.
Professional Conversations and Feedback
Research that has been undertaken into the conversations between mentor teachers 
and preservice teachers has found that while these conversations are valued by par-
ticipants, the dialogue is variable in both quality and frequency (Soslau, 2015; 
Timperley, 2001). Mentor teachers may be apprehensive about providing preservice 
teachers with feedback that demonstrates concern or queries about teaching prac-
tice. A study of the simulated oral feedback given by eight mentor teachers to a 
single preservice teacher on the same video-recorded lesson revealed vast differ-
ences in both style and content (Hudson, 2014), with significant ‘variability in both 
[mentor teachers’] positive feedback and constructive criticism, and in some cases 
contrasting perspectives’ (p. 71). These findings suggest that ‘universities need to 
design feedback tools through research so that mentors can provide feedback in 
more informed and objective ways’ (Hudson, 2014, p. 72). When successful, these 
post-observation discussions between preservice teachers, mentor teachers and uni-
versity supervisors are ‘one of the more robust tools for supporting, reinforcing and 
reflecting shared ideas and beliefs … [and] a key component of program coherence’ 
(Newell & Connors, 2011, p. 229). They call for the development of structures to 
guide mentoring conversations. It is important to consider that if we are to develop 
purposeful practice and strengthen mutual competence by developing a way to 
guide mentoring conversations, we will also require a shared understanding of how 
to use tools designed to facilitate these conversations.
We contend that specific structures and tools are required to facilitate valuable 
professional conversations between mentor teachers and preservice teachers. It is 
through shared understandings of how to use these resources that quality conversa-
tions are enabled (Hakkarainen, Palonen, Paavola, & Lehtinen, 2004; Helgevold, 
Naesheim-Bjorkvik, & Ostrem, 2015). The development of a descriptive observa-
tion model and the descriptive observation tool are examples of resources that can 
assist in the structuring and implementation of these conversations and are based on 
the collection and analysis of classroom evidence.
J. Kriewaldt et al.
www.ebook3000.com

161
Framing Post-lesson Conversations Using Relational Agency
Relational agency as theorised by Edwards (2010) is the ‘capacity to align one’s 
thoughts and actions with those of others in order to interpret problems of practice 
and to respond to those interpretations’ (p. 169). The theory, as initially developed, 
was a way to describe how strong forms of agency might arise for and in collabora-
tions that involve working across boundaries between practices. However, in our 
research we are using it as a conceptual framework to inform our understandings of 
the relationships between people who are positioned differently in the same prac-
tices, i.e. the preservice teachers, their mentors and other teacher educators.
Relational agency involves the ability to work with others to achieve common 
outcomes and is a two-stage process which consists of:
	1.	 Working with others to expand the ‘object of activity’ or task being worked on 
[for instance, a lesson or pedagogical problem] by recognising the motives and 
the resources that others bring to bear as they, too, interpret it
	2.	 Aligning one’s own responses to the newly enhanced interpretations with the 
responses being made by the other professionals while acting on the expanded 
object (Edwards, 2010, p. 14)
In this research project, a descriptive observation tool (named the Teaching 
Tracker Tool, or T3, and outlined in the following section) functions as a tangible 
object that enables mentor teachers, preservice teachers and university supervisors 
to participate jointly in the discussion of a pedagogic episode, in order to expand 
their interpretation of that episode. This is achieved as participants bring their own 
conceptual tools and subjectivities to the post-lesson discussion that is based on the 
evidence presented in the Teaching Tracker Tool. We investigate how relational 
agency was afforded by the utilisation of a descriptive observation tool that pro-
vided clinical evidence of the object of activity (i.e. teaching practice) and the basis 
with which to offer feedback and opportunities for reflection.
An Overview of the Teaching Tracker Tool Innovation
The Teaching Tracker Tool (T3) is a descriptive observation tool that has been 
developed by the research team to enable the collection of evidence during class-
room observations. It has its antecedent in the instructional rounds approach advo-
cated by City, Elmore, Fiarman and Teitel (2009).
This classroom observation tool is used to make records during a period of class-
room observation and is designed to deepen the talk between preservice teachers 
and observers after a lesson. This tool comprises five elements from which the 
observer selects their focus in consultation with the preservice teacher being 
observed. The observer can write accounts of what the teacher is saying, doing, 
making and writing and what the students are saying, doing, making and writing 
10  Fostering Professional Learning Through Evidence-Informed Mentoring Dialogues…

162
(Griffin, 2014). There is also a checklist of classroom activities that can be com-
pleted, and the movement of the teacher in the classroom can be shown using a 
proximity chart. Classroom dialogue can also be recorded using a verbal flow dia-
gram in which the observer graphically represents the flow of oral language interac-
tions. The Teaching Tracker Tool is designed as an enabled PDF to be used 
electronically on an iPad, tablet, laptop or phone. Images from the lesson (e.g. stu-
dent work samples), audio and film of the lesson can be recorded and embedded in 
the electronic tool, establishing a comprehensive record of a teaching and learning 
episode. The T3 can also be printed and completed in paper form, although the rich-
ness of the data is best captured electronically. The charts and diagrams in the tool 
are adapted from those published by Pitton (2006) who, like us, advocates that these 
tools are used within a dialogic approach to mentoring.
Using the tool, the observer can apply a descriptive approach, richly capturing 
important aspects of the lesson without judging. For example, rather than recording 
that ‘positive classroom dynamics were established and maintained during this les-
son’, a descriptive observation using the tool might be “as students enter room, they 
respond to informal conversation by the teacher who asks ‘How was the band at 
lunchtime?’”. Through merely recording what, when and how the classroom prac-
tice plays out, the observers suspend judgement (apart from the choice they make to 
focus on different aspects of the classroom practice).
Users are guided in their post-lesson conversation through the inclusion of a 
discussion section embedded in the tool that comprises six post-observation ques-
tions. This section is designed to support participants to examine the evidence col-
lected during the lesson and to posit judgements based on their interpretations of 
this evidence (Cochran-Smith & the Boston College Evidence Team, 2009). The 
tool encourages and guides the collection of rich and descriptive lesson artefacts so 
that they can be examined in post-lesson conversations to ground the discussion in 
evidence that can be seen, listened to and analysed in concrete ways. What the 
teacher is saying, doing, making and writing (Griffin, 2014) are captured and can be 
discussed as authentic experience.
However, the actors in the dialogue (the preservice teachers and their mentors, 
clinical specialists and teaching fellows) are positioned differently. Caughlan and 
Jiang (2014) remind us that observation instruments differ in the extent to which 
they grant agency to participants. This caution was important during the implemen-
tation of the Teaching Tracker Tool, as it was our intention that it would be a way to 
provide agency for both the preservice teacher and the observers during the post-­
lesson conversation.
Methodology
In order to investigate the value of the Teaching Tracker Tool in fostering evidence-­
based professional dialogue, a 2-year research project was undertaken by a 
­metropolitan university in Victoria, Australia, in partnership with eight schools. 
J. Kriewaldt et al.
www.ebook3000.com

163
The project is based on an interpretivist case study approach in which ‘researchers 
do not seek to find universals in their case studies. They seek, instead, a full, rich 
understanding (verstehen) of the context they are studying’ (Willis, 2007, p. 240). 
The case study approach enables the boundaries of the research to be demarcated, 
and case studies are a means of developing richness and detail – in short, depth 
(Denzin & Lincoln, 2011). This research builds from three key features of case 
study research:
	1.	 It enables researchers to gather in-depth data in authentic sites.
	2.	 It is a holistic approach that is aligned to the belief that social practices are best 
understood in their specific context
	3.	 Research can be framed inductively, that is, by building findings rather than by 
deciding hypotheses in advance (Willis, 2007).
Employing a case study approach enables us to focus on the impact of the T3 on 
the learning culture, the beliefs and the attitudes of the participants involved in the 
school placement experience (preservice teacher, mentor teacher, clinical specialist 
and teaching fellow). Using rich data enables us to build new theories around guid-
ing and supporting preservice teachers during their professional placement.
Data Collection Methods
Our research used a multiple-method approach of data collection. Fossey, Harvey, 
McDermott and Davidson (2002) argue that the use of multiple methods of data 
collection adds strength to the quality of the research, as it is consequently informed 
with a greater breadth of knowledge and depth of understandings. Two methods of 
data collection were used to draw on the perspectives of participants. These were 
surveys completed by mentor teachers and preservice teachers and interviews with 
a focus group comprising teaching fellows and clinical specialists.
Prior to the collection of data, participating mentor teachers, clinical specialists, 
teaching fellows and preservice teachers attended a professional development ses-
sion to learn how to use the Teaching Tracker Tool during school placement. Eighty-­
nine teacher educators (mentor teachers, clinical specialists, teaching fellows) and 
45 preservice teachers attended. Subsequently in schools, the mentor teachers, clini-
cal specialists, teaching fellows and researchers observed lessons taught by the pre-
service teachers using the T3 to record observations. After using the tool during 
placement, mentor teachers and preservice teachers were surveyed to gather their 
perceptions of its usefulness through open-ended questions. The survey also asked 
the participants’ views on whether the T3 provided a way to foster collaborative 
discussion and learning around a pedagogical problem or issue. In total, 34 mentor 
teachers and 21 preservice teachers responded to the survey. Preservice teachers and 
mentor teachers were surveyed at the conclusion of the 30-day placement period in 
semester 2, 2015, and semesters 1 and 2, 2016.
10  Fostering Professional Learning Through Evidence-Informed Mentoring Dialogues…

164
To garner further in-depth responses, a focus group was convened, which com-
prised eight participants who had used the Teaching Tracker Tool to observe lessons 
and to inform their post-lesson conversations with preservice teachers (four teach-
ing fellows and four clinical specialists). The focus group participated in a semi-­
structured interview that was audio-recorded, transcribed and analysed thematically. 
Participants were asked to respond to questions related to the extent to which they 
used components of the T3 and the effect this use had on them.
Analysis and Discussion
In this section, to advance our argument that the Teaching Tracker Tool is a valuable 
addition to teacher education, we draw on selected excerpts from the semi-­structured 
focus group with teaching fellows and clinical specialists and from the open 
responses to the surveys completed by mentor teachers and preservice teachers. The 
excerpts are chosen because they are representative of the accounts that were made 
by others in each group. Through thematic analysis, three key findings that emerged 
from the data were:
	1.	 That descriptive observation is important to collect evidence, but suspending 
judgement can be difficult
	2.	 That the descriptive approach embedded in the T3 fosters an inquiring and col-
laborative stance when reviewing the lesson
	3.	 That the processes of gathering evidence, and the opportunity for professional 
dialogue that focuses on evidence, provide the preservice teacher with opportu-
nities to enhance their capacity to reflect on their teaching. We discuss each 
theme in sequence and then synthesise them to demonstrate how relational 
agency was changed through using the Teaching Tracker Tool and what this 
means for fostering learning through observation and dialogic cycles.
Descriptive Observation Is Important to Collect Evidence, 
but Suspending Judgement Can Be Difficult
Overall, focus group participants had a positive view of the descriptive observation 
process. They articulated how the collection and analysis of evidence from the les-
sons that they observed enabled them to give feedback to preservice teachers that 
was specific and less judgemental. Participants could also see the links between this 
evidence-based approach to mentoring and the clinical approach to teaching that is 
based on the collection and analysis of evidence to inform teaching. One of the 
school-based teacher educators, Andre, describes the importance of this clinical 
approach by attending to data to provide realistic and useful feedback. Andre also 
J. Kriewaldt et al.
www.ebook3000.com

165
recalls his frustration in receiving generalised feedback that his lesson was ‘good’ 
or ‘bad’ when he was a preservice teacher:
[What using the T3] does, which is really powerful, is that we walk the walk and talk the 
talk, we talk about the clinical approach to teaching, and we’re asking them [preservice 
teachers] to look at data, and that’s exactly what we should be doing and modelling. If we 
don’t do it, if we say it’s a good lesson, as a student teacher myself, it used to drive me up 
the wall when I was told, yeah it was a good lesson, well, what does that mean?… or a bad 
lesson? (Andre, Teaching Fellow)
Numerous participants recognised the importance of gathering evidence during 
the lesson and collaborating with the preservice teacher to analyse the observation 
records, discussing the evidence together while suspending judgement. Gabriel 
found that the approach can drive a less emotionally charged response to a teaching 
episode:
I really like it I have to say, but I have to keep reminding myself of the difference between 
a judgemental value-laden observation and one that is just evidence, and I like it because I 
can go back in the debriefing session with the student teacher and it allows me to distance 
myself, and what I feel about what was going on, by putting the data in front of the student, 
and we can then discuss it dispassionately and take emotion out of it, and I find that really 
useful. It is not easy, and I need to keep reminding myself of what it is I’m doing and why 
I’m doing it and what’s my personal opinion. (Gabriel, Teaching Fellow)
The majority of school-based and university-based teacher educators agreed 
with Gabriel. They reported that initially they found it difficult to move to a descrip-
tive observation approach because it is demanding to record detailed observations 
and that it could therefore be easier to revert to making judgements. Two illustrative 
comments were:
Because you’re trying to watch them [the preservice teacher] and you’re trying to write, and 
you’re trying to write this non-judgemental stuff …, so it’s just a lot to do. (Kai, Teaching 
Fellow)
I find it difficult to keep up with the pace [of recording] and then I revert to some of the 
old judgemental stuff. (Bree, Clinical Specialist)
Echoing Bree, several teacher educators voiced the challenge in recording or 
capturing what they ‘see’ in a classroom, while others questioned whether an 
observer has the capacity to suspend judgement. Estelle explained:
I think people exercise prejudice and judgement in every perception, in every observation 
they make. What they see in the first instance, what their attention is turned to, is prejudiced 
by all sorts of things. I don’t think you can observe without judging. (Estelle, Teaching 
Fellow)
This was a common reservation, as Frances explains:
I’m actually quite conscious of the fact that I only observe what I choose to pay attention 
to. That’s something I often point out to the preservice teacher too, that they notice what 
they pay attention to in the classroom. So it’s always partial and it’s always incomplete, and 
so there is…. You are making some sort of judgement there. It’s very hard to be neutral. 
(Frances, Clinical Specialist)
10  Fostering Professional Learning Through Evidence-Informed Mentoring Dialogues…

166
These comments are discerning as they acknowledge the impossibility of objec-
tive observation. No one expects the observer to be able to ‘see’ and ‘observe’ 
everything in complex, dynamic and busy classrooms. The observers’ perspectives, 
interests and positions in the room will all impact on what they ‘see’ and what their 
attention is drawn to. Yet the process calls for the suspension of judgement and 
necessarily asks the observer to try to take a step back from, or suspend, their own 
preconceptions and biases.
Despite the practical difficulties of suspending judgement, several participants 
reported that when they provide descriptive observations, there are times when the 
preservice teacher seeks judgements:
… if you’re talking in terms of that descriptive observation, [after] ten minutes, they will 
often say something like, oh, so did you think it was good? And ask a question that… invites 
a judgement. (Bree, Clinical Specialist)
By using this moment to draw the discussion back to the evidence that has been 
gathered, conversation remains open. Bree also recognised the importance of pre-
service teachers themselves being adept in the descriptive observation approach. 
She later reported significant success in enabling the preservice teachers to use the 
approach when observing each other.
The Descriptive Approach Embedded in the Teaching Tracker 
Tool Fosters an Inquiring and Collaborative Stance When 
Reviewing the Lesson
Focus group participants noted that focusing on evidence shifted the object of dis-
cussion from preconceived notions of what constitutes good teaching and directed 
attention towards the kinds of learning taking place in the lessons:
It made the feedback focus on only what was observed rather than on preconceived notions 
of how a class should be run. (Rachel, Mentor Teacher)
Participants reported that evidence that was collected was a useful platform to 
begin discussion. The variety of options within the T3 enabled observers to choose 
the means of recording observations that best suited the lesson:
Great to have a visual on proximity and flow [diagram]. Good to start the conversation. 
(Zach, Mentor Teacher)
Andre affirms the importance of the descriptive observation process in develop-
ing an open dialogue with the preservice teacher:
I think it’s really important to what I do with my relationship with the student teacher – by 
focusing very much on what I saw, as opposed to what I think about it, it gives me the 
instrument then to be able to talk about why the activities may not have been appropriate at 
that stage in the lesson, or why more time should be spent or more preparation time for the 
student on a particular thing could have been spent to improve the outcome in relationship, 
to what it is that the teacher wanted to achieve. So I’m able to take myself out of that discus-
sion. (Andre, Teaching Fellow)
J. Kriewaldt et al.
www.ebook3000.com

167
In his statement, Andre notices that reorienting the discussion to become learn-
ing focused had changed the relationship between the preservice teacher and more 
experienced observers. This change of focus opened up spaces to probe reasoning 
that underlies judgements that are commonly quickly made. When preservice teach-
ers are told their teaching is either proficient or lacking in some way, this can serve 
to curtail interrogation of evidence of teaching and learning, and consequently their 
opportunity to reflect is diminished. Instead, in this project, preservice teacher and 
observer refer to the data together and ask ‘why do you think that happened, and 
what were your options?’ (Hugo, Clinical Specialist). The effect of descriptive 
observation was aptly described as assisting preservice teachers who use the evi-
dence and ‘dig deep [into the evidence] and make the judgement’ (Julia, Clinical 
Specialist). This comment illuminates that ‘mining’ evidence, to continue Julia’s 
metaphor, is crucial to further preservice teacher understanding of teaching and 
their own development of practice.
Ideally, this process hones the preservice teacher’s capacity to draw conclusions 
based on their own analysis of the observation records and evidence. An instance of 
this occurring was described by Stephanie:
The discussion I had with my teaching fellow after using the Teaching Tracker was very 
insightful. We had a brainstorming discussion about how I could improve the class, without 
giving me their opinions. I was encouraged to come to the conclusion by myself, with some 
limited input from my teaching fellow. (Stephanie, Preservice Teacher)
Using the T3 when reviewing the lesson can foster a more inquiring and collab-
orative stance. The relational agency granted to the preservice teachers scaffolds 
their transition to independent teaching. These collaborative dialogues or conversa-
tions help build preservice teachers’ fledgling careers by promoting a stance in 
which they continue to seek evidence of how their actions are resulting in learning 
when there is no recourse to another teacher in the room. This builds the conditions 
for reflective practice.
The Processes of Gathering Evidence, and the Opportunity 
for Professional Dialogue that Focuses on Evidence, Provides 
the Preservice Teacher with Opportunities to Enhance Their 
Capacity to Reflect on Their Teaching
Evidence provided by mentor teachers, clinical specialists and teaching fellows on 
teaching practice is non-judgemental by design to encourage preservice teachers to 
become reflective practitioners. Similar to Stephanie’s comment in the previous 
quotation, Frances describes how descriptive observation makes space for substan-
tive dialogue and provides opportunities for preservice teachers to reflect on their 
practice:
I think by just observing and just making comments, it leaves lots of room for deep discus-
sion with the preservice teacher after the observation. So by leaving out judgements, it 
allows room for questions and for them to really reflect on what they’ve done and why, as 
well. (Frances, Clinical Specialist)
10  Fostering Professional Learning Through Evidence-Informed Mentoring Dialogues…

168
Substantive dialogue using evidence of practice evokes reflection, and as Frances 
explains, the preservice teacher considers what they have taught and importantly 
why they made those decisions. She recognised the effects of bringing forth the 
often hidden thoughts of why the preservice teacher planned and taught in the way 
that they did through suspending judgement to open up spaces for discussion.
Akin to the comments from teaching fellows and clinical specialists, mentor 
teachers acknowledged that particular aspects of the Teaching Tracker Tool 
increased the preservice teacher’s reflective capacity. For Mikaela, elements of the 
tool including the ‘proximity and verbal flow data was an excellent way to give 
objective feedback so student teachers reflect on their own without you having to 
say a criticism as such’ (Mikaela, Mentor Teacher). As Mikaela suggests, the role of 
the mentor teacher is no longer that of critic – instead space is opened up for reflec-
tion. William, a preservice teacher, pronounced the post-lesson discussion using the 
tool as ‘very useful. It allowed me to reflect’. This was echoed by preservice teacher 
Kim who explained that ‘[I]t made it easier to reflect on my own teaching practice 
[and as well, we were] able to give feedback to other preservice teachers easier’. 
Similarly, Milo explained that the T3:
helped me to reflect on my lesson and work out for myself which things I should improve. 
It gave me some immediate feedback straight after class, but I could also look at it at a later 
time. It wasn’t just things like ‘you did this really well’, because I usually know what I’ve 
done well. It was more than that. (Milo, Preservice Teacher)
In his senior mathematics classes, Jay identified data from the T3 that indicated 
that students in the back of the class were not following class instruction, and this 
generated a process of reflection leading to change:
The T3 was great for pinpointing particular aspects of my practice where, in this case, it 
highlighted the difficulties students were having with regard to their seating location, which 
affected the audible and visible components of the lesson. Without the aid of an observing 
teacher and the T3, this issue may have been left unattended. Having a debriefing after-
wards also proved helpful in brainstorming ways to improve practice in specific areas. (Jay, 
Preservice Teacher)
Jay decided to podcast key mathematics concepts as it:
Allowed students to view teacher instruction regardless of location and pace. It also benefit-
ted me… in rehearsing how the content could be delivered in-class. (Jay, Preservice 
Teacher)
In this data, the relationship between the preservice teachers and their teacher 
educators has shifted as the participants now focus on making sense of evidence 
together. The provision of descriptive observation evidence provided greater agency 
to the preservice teachers and allowed for deeper reflective dialogue. This led to 
conversations during placement that tended to be a more collaborative sharing of 
ideas and was altogether more collegial. By coming together around the task, the 
object of activity was expanded, and this led to improvements in the quality of 
teaching practice for the preservice teacher. Participants also incidentally reported 
that this approach led to growth for the observers.
J. Kriewaldt et al.
www.ebook3000.com

169
Conclusion
This project designed an interactive tool that aimed to collate descriptive observa-
tion evidence that can create space for participants to collaboratively engage in dia-
logue about pedagogical practice. The intensive focus on evidence-informed 
dialogue with preservice teachers during teaching placements is innovative through 
the amount and type of records provided as well as the way that evidence is used in 
order to improve field experience and teaching practices. Evidence of teaching prac-
tice in this model comes from a range of people, all having different relationships 
with the preservice teacher. The preservice teachers engage in discussions not only 
with their in-school mentor but also a clinical specialist who is a university lecturer, 
a teaching fellow (an expert school teacher who oversees preservice teachers in a 
partnership group) and, increasingly, their peers. Evidence of practice collected 
focuses on both teaching and learning, what the teacher is saying, doing, making 
and writing and what the students in the class are saying, doing, making and writing. 
This evidence is highly beneficial to the development of these beginning teachers as 
it asks them to focus on processes of teaching and equally on student learning. 
Preservice teachers learn to routinely turn their attention to a range of evidence to 
gauge the effectiveness of their teaching practices. During school placement experi-
ences when collection of evidence is used to inform future practice, the instructional 
impact is strengthened. Importantly, these professional conversations using evi-
dence have strengthened preservice teachers’ reflective practice.
Unquestionably initial teacher education aims to develop teachers who use evi-
dence to inform their teaching and who think critically about their practice (Earl & 
Timperley, 2009; Kriewaldt et al., 2017). Drilling into the power of description, this 
observation tool guides the descriptive work which then requires the preservice 
teacher to engage in conversations in which they have agency to suggest improve-
ments rather than accept – or resist – advice. Description builds the foundation of a 
conversation that is based on fine-grained evidence that can be gathered in a lesson 
observation. By making sense of teaching through these processes, preservice 
teachers are schooled to continue to interrogate their practice and to feedforward 
their learning to refine their teaching as a result of dialogues with observers.
Using the concept of relational agency as an analytical aid to think again about 
mentoring practices led us to understand that teacher educators and preservice 
teachers coming together on this task and working with evidence on the problem of 
improving student learning expanded the object of activity. This advanced the 
­preservice teachers’ growth in improving their teaching practice by developing their 
capacity to reflect using classroom evidence. The concept of relational agency has 
led us to reframe our thinking about mentoring practice and to more highly value 
working in concert during post-lesson conversations to expand our mutual under-
standing of student learning.
Key to this reframing of the post-lesson conversation has been the focus on 
evidence-­based reflection, enabled by the reification of the teaching episode using 
the descriptive observation tool. The T3 has reified the teaching episode as an object 
10  Fostering Professional Learning Through Evidence-Informed Mentoring Dialogues…

170
of activity, through the production of tangible evidence, and so has provided a focus 
for mutual sense-making between preservice and experienced teachers. In several 
cases, this mutual sense-making led to mutual learning as each party engaged in 
evidence-informed collaborative reflection during post-lesson conversations. We 
suggest that this benefits the development of quality teaching practice for the preser-
vice teacher through growth in reflective practice.
Implications
This chapter has described how evidence-informed dialogues were especially pro-
ductive for preservice teachers and signal an innovation for initial teacher educa-
tion. Our findings suggest that we should build on the non-judgemental innovation 
we have designed to implement further enrichment of preservice teachers’ reflective 
practice using three-way observations and dialogues. This will allow the preservice 
teacher to probe evidence from a range of perspectives.
Acknowledgement  This project was supported by the Department of Education and Training, 
Victoria, Australia, as one of the 12 projects supported by the Teaching Academies for Professional 
Practice (TAPP) in 2015–2017. This Victorian state-funded initiative aims to improve initial 
teacher education across a broad geographical cluster. The authors wish to acknowledge the fund-
ing provided through the TAPP (North-East Melbourne cluster).
Ethics  In accordance with the University of Melbourne’s guidelines for human ethics, all partici-
pants were informed that their participation in the research was voluntary and that they could 
withdraw without penalty at any time. Participants were also assured that their private data would 
be guarded securely and that their identity would remain anonymous. Participants were made 
aware of the research aims through plain language statements and gave their signed consent to have 
their data contribute to the study.
References
Ambrosetti, A., & Dekkers, J. (2010). The interconnectedness of the roles of mentors and men-
tees in pre-service teacher education mentoring relationships. Australian Journal of Teacher 
Education, 35(6). http://dx.doi.org/10.14221/ajte.2010v35n6.3
Burn, K., & Mutton, T. (2013). Review of ‘research informed clinical practice’ in initial teacher 
education. British Education Research Association (BERA). Retrieved from http://www.bera.
ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/BERA-Paper-4-Research-informed-clinical-practice.pdf
Caughlan, S., & Jiang, H. (2014). Observation and teacher quality: Critical analysis of obser-
vational instruments in preservice teacher performance assessment. Journal of Teacher 
Education, 65, 375–388. doi:10.1177/0022487114541546.
City, E. A., Elmore, R., Fiarman, S., & Teitel, L. (2009). Instructional rounds in education: A 
network approach to improving teaching and learning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education 
Press.
Clarke, A. (1995). Professional development in practicum settings: Reflective practice under scru-
tiny. Teaching and Teacher Education, 11, 243–261. doi:10.1016/0742-051X(94)00028-5.
J. Kriewaldt et al.
www.ebook3000.com

171
Cochran-Smith, M., & Lytle, S. L. (2009). Inquiry as stance: Practitioner research for the next 
generation. New York: Teachers College Press.
Cochran-Smith, M., & The Boston College Evidence Team. (2009). “Re-culturing” teacher 
education: Inquiry, evidence, and action. Journal of Teacher Education, 60(5), 458–468. 
doi:10.1177/0022487109347206.
Darling-Hammond, L., & Bransford, J. (2005). Preparing teachers for a changing world: What 
teachers should learn and be able to do (1st ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (Eds.). (2011). The Sage handbook of qualitative research (4th 
ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Earl, L., & Timperley, H. (2009). Professional learning conversations: Challenges in using evi-
dence for improvement (p. c2009). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.
Edwards, A. (2010). Being an expert professional practitioner: A relational turn. London: Springer.
Feiman-Nemser, S. (1998). Teachers as teacher educators. European Journal of Teacher Education, 
21(1), 63–74.
Feiman-Nemser, S. (2001). Helping novices learn to teach: Lessons from an exemplary support 
teacher. Journal of Teacher Education, 52(1), 17–30.
Fossey, E., Harvey, C., McDermott, F., & Davidson, L. (2002). Understanding and evaluating 
qualitative research. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 36(6), 717–732.
Griffin, P. (2014). Assessment for teaching. Melbourne, Australia: Cambridge University Press.
Hakkarainen, K., Palonen, T., Paavola, S., & Lehtinen, E. (2004). Communities of networked 
expertise: Professional and educational perspectives. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Harris, J., Keogh, J., & Jervis-Tracey, P. (2013). Doing collaborative reflection in the professional 
experience. Australian Journal of Communication, 40, 33–46.
Helgevold, N., Naesheim-Bjorkvik, G., & Ostrem, S. (2015). Key focus areas and use of tools in 
mentoring conversations during internship in initial teacher education. Teaching and Teacher 
Education, 49, 128–137. doi:10.1016/j.tate.2015.03.005.
Hudson, P. (2014). Feedback consistencies and inconsistencies: Eight mentors’ observations on 
one preservice teacher’s lesson. European Journal of Teacher Education, 37, 63–73. doi:10.1
080/02619768.2013.801075.
Kim, Y., & Silver, R. E. (2016). Provoking reflective thinking in post observation conversations. 
Journal of Teacher Education, 67(3), 203–219. doi:10.1177/0022487116637120.
Kriewaldt, J., McLean Davies, L., Rice, S., Rickards, F., & Acquaro, D. (2017). Clinical practice 
in education: Towards a conceptual framework. In M. Peters, B. Cowie, & I. Menter (Eds.), A 
companion to research in teacher education. Singapore: Springer Academic Publishers.
Kriewaldt, J., & Turnidge, D. (2013). Conceptualising an approach to clinical reasoning in the 
education profession. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 38, 102–115. ­doi:10.14221/
ajte.2013v38n6.9.
McLean Davies, L., Anderson, M., Deans, J., Dinham, S., Griffin, P., Kameniar, B., Page, J., Reid, 
C., Rickards, F., Tayler, C., & Tyler, D. (2013). Masterly preparation: Embedding clinical prac-
tice in a graduate pre-service teacher education program. Journal of Education for Teaching: 
International Research and Pedagogy, 39(1), 93–106.
Mtika, P., Robson, D., & Fitzpatrick, R. (2014). Joint observation of student teaching and related 
tripartite dialogue during field experience: Partner perspectives. Teaching and Teacher 
Education, 39, 66–76.
Newell, G., & Connors, S. (2011). ‘Why do you think that?’ A supervisor’s mediation of pre-­service 
English teacher’s understanding of instructional scaffolding. English Education, 225–261.
Pitton, D. E. (2006). Mentoring novice teachers: Fostering a dialogue process (2nd ed.). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Schwille, S. (2008). The professional practice of mentoring. American Journal of Education, 
115(1), 139–167.
Soslau, E. (2015). Development of a post-lesson observation conferencing protocol: Situated in 
theory, research, and practice. Teaching and Teacher Education, 49, 22–35. doi:10.1016/j.
tate.2015.02.01.
10  Fostering Professional Learning Through Evidence-Informed Mentoring Dialogues…

172
Strong, M., & Baron, W. (2004). An analysis of mentoring conversations with beginning teachers: 
Suggestions and responses. Teaching and Teacher Education, 20, 47–57.
Timperley, H. (2001). Mentoring conversations designed to promote teacher learning. Asia-Pacific 
Journal of Teacher Education, 29, 111–123.
Timperley, H. (2015). Professional conversations and improvement-focused feedback: A review 
of the research literature and the impact on practice and student outcomes, prepared for the 
Australian Institute of Teaching and School Leadership, AITSL, Melbourne, Australia.
Timperley, H., & Alton-Lee, A. (2008). Reframing teacher professional learning: An alternative 
policy approach to strengthening valued outcomes for diverse learners. Review of Research in 
Education, 32(1), 328–369.
Trevethan, H. (2017). Educative mentors? The role of classroom teachers in initial teacher educa-
tion. A New Zealand study. Journal of Education for Teaching, 43(2), 219–231. doi:10.1080/
02607476.2017.1286784.
van Kruiningen, J. F. (2013). Educational design as conversation: A conversation analytical per-
spective on teacher dialogue. Teaching and Teacher Education, 29, 110–121.
Willis, J. W. (2007). Foundations of qualitative research: Interpretive and critical approaches. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
J. Kriewaldt et al.
www.ebook3000.com

Part IV
Reframing Professional Practice

175
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_11
Chapter 11
Professional Experience and Project-Based 
Learning as Service Learning
Bill Eckersley, Kellie Tobin, and Sally Windsor
Abstract  Professional experience is an essential component of initial teacher edu-
cation. It provides preservice teachers with opportunities to develop their knowl-
edge and skills in learning and teaching in school and early childhood settings. It 
engages preservice teachers in real situations that facilitate authentic learning typi-
cally supported by mentor teachers. These situated learning experiences enable 
undergraduate and postgraduate preservice teachers to develop skills and practices 
that meet national standards. In addition to more traditional professional experi-
ences, some universities have developed school-university partnerships that engage 
their preservice teachers in professional experiences based on project-based learn-
ing. Three university partnership collaborations with schools (mostly located in low 
socio-economic status (SES) communities) are discussed in this paper in which 
curriculum-based ‘learning by doing’ (Dewey, 1897) projects are a priority. Projects 
typically identified by school partners and linked to school strategic plans and pri-
orities involve preservice teachers forming small professional learning teams (that 
include university and school-based educators and teachers as researchers) who 
facilitate the planning, management and reporting of a project. These project-based 
learning tasks are facilitated and aligned to the traditional professional experience 
and often involves work-integrated learning and development of twenty-first-­
century project management skills: teamwork, leadership, negotiation, evaluation, 
collaboration, entrepreneurship and project management and research skills. In the 
three cases reported here, there is a focus on addressing social and educational 
inequality through the programs.
B. Eckersley (*) 
Victoria University, Footscray, VIC, Australia
e-mail: bill.eckersley@vu.edu.au 
K. Tobin 
Deakin University, Geelong, VIC, Australia
e-mail: k.tobin@deakin.edu.au 
S. Windsor 
Department of Pedagogical, Curricular and Professional Studies, Gothenburg University, 
Gothenburg, Sweden 
Melbourne Graduate School of Education, The University of Melbourne,  
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
e-mail: sally.windsor@gu.se
www.ebook3000.com

176
Introduction
In February 2015 the Teacher Education Ministerial Advisory Group (TEMAG) 
reported to the then Australian Education Minister Christopher Pyne that universi-
ties and schools are not efficiently working together in initial teacher education 
programs or in the development of preservice teachers. The TEMAG (2015) report 
outlines that a series of fundamental principles significant to the reform of teacher 
education are required which include:
•	 Effective initial teacher education programs provide preservice teachers with 
immersion in theory about learning, development and subject matter in contexts 
where these can be applied and ensure a strong link between theory and 
practice.
•	 Initial teacher education providers, teacher employers and schools must share a 
commitment to improve initial teacher education and work in partnership to 
achieve strong graduate and student outcomes. All academic components of 
teacher education should be integrated with practice in schools so that initial 
teacher education becomes a fused and mutually reinforcing experience of higher 
education and professional learning.
Professional experience is a fundamental component of initial teacher education 
as its nature and type has a major influence on the learning of preservice teachers. 
Professional experience has been variously known as the practicum, field experi-
ence and teaching rounds. It is the linking of theory and practice that enables the 
preservice teachers to develop capacities to be able to act like a teacher and to more 
deliberatively think like a teacher (Wilson & Demetriou, 2007) and to develop the 
feeling of being a teacher and identify with the role (Akkerman & Meijer, 2011). 
However, as Fox and Wilson (2015) acknowledge in their recent study on beginning 
teachers, ‘becoming a teacher is not merely to acquire necessary knowledge and 
skills to teach in classrooms’ (p. 94). Initial teacher education programs need to 
ensure that the professional experience component in particular stimulates preser-
vice teachers’ personal responsibilities for leading learning.
Increasingly professional experiences for preservice teachers are taking different 
forms, especially where school communities are actively seeking input and assis-
tance from teacher education providers to assist them in achieving their strategic 
goals. Professional experiences outside the traditional professional experience can 
emerge from school-university partnerships where learning communities/communi-
ties of practice are created and fostered and where service learning is emphasized 
and created with a view to aligning missions and strategic directions. Indeed as 
Rossner and Commins (2012) identify, genuine school-university partnerships are 
collaborations of professional conversations, collegial learning and aligned 
processes.
Teacher educators are responsible for coordinating and negotiating connections 
between professional knowledge and working knowledge, as well as between the 
workforces and workspaces of universities and schools. New times challenge our 
B. Eckersley et al.

177
existing programs of professional learning and curriculum and imply the need for 
new pedagogies in teacher education where the workspace of the school and the 
concerns and needs of its various stakeholders (preservice teachers, students, school 
community and the teaching profession) are actively taken into account.
While the work of supporting an individual to become a teacher has traditionally 
belonged to both the university and the schools, ownership has been clearly divided. 
The university has been responsible for the theoretical and pedagogical preparation 
and the schools responsible for the practice of those methods, strategies and the 
enactment of theory (Cochran-Smith & Lytle, 2009). All learning is situated within 
boundaries, and the challenge in education is to create constructive collaborations 
across and between learning sites. As such, it is becoming increasingly evident that 
preservice teachers are required to develop knowledge and expertise across and 
often in-between the school and university sites. Preservice teachers in this context 
are positioned as boundary-crossers who at times find themselves in new learning 
spaces and unfamiliar territories. Tsui and Law (2007) observe that crossing bound-
aries forces participants to take a fresh look at their long-standing practices and 
assumptions and can be a source of deep learning.
The professional experience initiatives discussed in this chapter each situate pre-
service teachers within a boundary zone (i.e. a classroom, a cohort of students, a 
curriculum discipline area). Preservice teachers as boundary-crossers are encour-
aged to engage with members of other communities of practice whereby they 
encounter tensions, contradictions and rich learning opportunities that often result 
in a transformed activity system of learning for all participants (Engestrom, 2011). 
Taylor, Klein, and Abrams (2014) also observe that teacher education must exist 
across multiple spaces. They argue that the role of teacher education is simply too 
complex to reside solely in the university, isolated from the realities of schools. In 
this chapter, we discuss and demonstrate this overlap of systems that seeks to 
address the often discussed alignment of theory and practice in initial teacher 
education.
By focusing on a professional experience-related initiative that has been inte-
grated into the initial teacher education programs in three Victorian universities, we 
highlight the learning potential of engaging preservice teachers in the following 
site-based projects in schools and communities:
	1.	 Victoria University and the Applied Curriculum Project
	2.	 Deakin University and the Aspire Program
	3.	 University of Melbourne and the Yirrkala Indigenous Schools’ Program
Despite exhibiting distinctive features, these innovative projects share important 
characteristics:
•	 The projects/programs were preservice teacher led in collaboration with school/
community personnel.
•	 They were all site-based and located in, and focused on, schools/community 
priorities/strategic improvement initiatives.
11  Professional Experience and Project-Based Learning as Service Learning
www.ebook3000.com

178
•	 The projects/programs were focused in schools in low socio-economic areas of 
metropolitan, regional and remote parts of Australia.
•	 The preservice teachers were ‘immersed’ in the school/community while under-
taking the project/program.
•	 The projects would lead explicitly to enhanced school student learning.
•	 The preservice teachers were required to negotiate the specific foci and expected 
learning outcomes with school/community personnel.
•	 The preservice teachers were required to make connections between their learn-
ing and competence as related to the Australian Professional Standards for 
Teachers at the graduate level and between practice and theory and relevant 
national and/or state curriculum.
•	 There was an expectation that the preservice teachers would document their proj-
ect activity and outcomes would be made available to the school, community and 
the university.
•	 It was expected that the preservice teachers would continue to develop an under-
standing of what social justice, inclusion, equity, poverty, aspirations, multicul-
turalism, diversity, access and success mean for these schools, the students and 
their local communities.
•	 There was an expectation that preservice teachers would develop a set of ‘profes-
sional skills’ as a result of working in these projects/programs (e.g. project and 
time management, negotiation, leadership, research, evaluation, teamwork, com-
munication, planning, capacity building and reporting).
These unique initiatives are all supported by the university as a collaborative 
partnership. There are a range of other similarly targeted projects in the extant lit-
erature. Some involve a third-party organization: e.g. the Smith Family, the Western 
Bulldogs Football Club, Scouts Victoria, Northern Territory Government and 
Netball Australia. Community partnerships of this type are complex and multidi-
mensional with the partnership values of trust, mutuality and reciprocity underpin-
ning the innovations. A previous study by Kruger, Davies, Eckersley, Newell and 
Cherednichenko (2009) of effective and sustainable university-school partnerships 
confirmed that effective and sustainable partnerships are based on:
•	 Trust: the commitment and expertise that each of the main stakeholders – preser-
vice teachers, teachers, teacher educators  – brings to the partnership in the 
expectation that it will provide them with the benefits each seek.
•	 Mutuality: the extent to which the stakeholders recognize that working together 
does lead to the benefits each esteems.
•	 Reciprocity: each stakeholder recognizes and values what the others bring to the 
partnership (p. 10).
B. Eckersley et al.

179
Practice, Praxis and Practice Architecture
Much of the activity and action within the three projects discussed in this chapter 
involve ‘doings’, ‘sayings’ and ‘relatings’ which are key components of what 
Kemmis et al. (2013) refer to as practice.
A practice is a form of socially established cooperative human activity in which character-
istic arrangements of actions and activities (doings) are comprehensible in terms of arrange-
ments of relevant ideas in characteristic discourses (sayings), and the people and objects 
involved are distributed in characteristic arrangements of relationships (relatings), and 
when this complex of sayings, doings and relatings ‘hangs together’ in a distinctive project. 
(p. 30).
Kemmis et al. (2013) describe how practice impacts upon those involved and 
posit a theory of practice architecture whereby these doings, sayings and relatings 
(i.e., the practices) are enabled by and/or constrained by a set of preconditioned 
arrangements. These can be in the following forms:
•	 …cultural-discursive arrangements… that are the resources that make possible 
the language and discourses used in and about this practice…
•	 Material-economic arrangements (in the medium of activity and work, in the 
dimension of physical space-time) that are the resources that make possible the 
activities undertaken in the course of the practice…
•	 Social-political arrangements (in the medium of power and solidarity and in the 
dimension of social space) that are the resources that make possible the relation-
ships between people and non-human objects that occur in the practice… (p. 31)
With these arrangements, practices ‘come into being’ because people collec-
tively bring them into being or rather that ‘practices, individual will, individual 
understanding and individual action are orchestrated in collective social-relational 
projects’ (Kemmis et al., 2013, p. 31). The authors of this chapter argue that the 
three educational projects are products of these educational practices and practice 
architectures.
We also argue that these projects embrace the notion of praxis (Kemmis and 
Smith, 2008), with an inquiry approach to action and learning. The projects draw on 
the Aristotelian definition of praxis that involves the combination of practice and 
theory to support change for various groups in society. We then look towards Paulo 
Friere’s (1996) understanding of praxis as the:
bringing together of social practice and theorising of the world in order to transform the 
world into something better…This unified concept of praxis as action, reflection, theorising 
and change in cycles of constant social practice therefore conceptualises knowledge as aris-
ing from community necessity in relation to the purposes, viewpoints and constraints of 
others. (Eckersley et al., 2011, p. 12)
11  Professional Experience and Project-Based Learning as Service Learning
www.ebook3000.com

180
Low Socio-economic Schools and Diverse Communities
Concerns about how best to prepare teachers for working in diverse and low socio-­
economic communities continue to challenge traditional teacher education pro-
grams (Sleeter, 2008). Schools in lower socio-economic status (SES) communities 
are often under-resourced, are harder to staff and have difficulty retaining high-­
quality teachers (Aikens & Barbarin, 2008). Muijs, Harris, Chapman, Stoll, and 
Russ (2009) argue that an emphasis on improving teaching and learning, creating 
information-rich learning environments and having a focus on learning communi-
ties and professional development opportunities contributes to improved quality and 
student learning outcomes in low SES schools.
Although not all low SES schools are in ethnically and culturally diverse com-
munities (and vice versa  – diverse communities do not only contain low SES 
schools), the descriptive terms diverse and low SES are often used interchangeably 
when describing the schools we refer to. There are a range of factors that impact 
these schools and the young people within them, such as high levels of cultural and 
linguistic diversity, low social and educational capital and higher than average lev-
els of poverty. So building an understanding and appreciation of the cultures of 
diverse communities is essential learning for preservice teachers. Sleeter (2008) 
suggested that multiple placements in low SES schools have a ‘reasonable track 
record for disrupting stereotypes, helping [preservice teachers] learn about stu-
dents’ cultural backgrounds and helping them to connect student behaviours and 
learning with what teachers do’ (p. 1993). This research highlighted the critical 
nature and importance of developing school-university partnerships that provide 
preservice teachers with access and engagement in schools located in low SES com-
munities. Sleeter indicated that teacher education for equity and democracy rests on 
three pillars:
•	 Preparation for everyday realities and complexities of schools and classrooms
•	 Content knowledge and professional theoretical knowledge that universities can 
provide
•	 Dialog[sic] with communities in which schools are situated, a crucial pillar that 
is often ignored (p. 1948)
Preservice teachers working with diverse students who are culturally different 
from themselves and/or experiencing poverty, and who are supported and mentored 
through this experience, are often more likely to go on to teach these students. The 
three universities in this chapter have embraced research such as this to support the 
placement of preservice teachers in schools with diverse and low SES student popu-
lations. The vignettes later in this chapter provide some important insights into the 
potential learning that can and do occur for key participants: students, preservice 
teachers, teachers and university educators.
B. Eckersley et al.

181
Communities of Practice and Learning Communities
Communities of practice arise from the work of Lave and Wenger (1998) and 
Wenger (1998), who conceptualized ‘communities of practice’ as particular kinds 
of networks of people who were engaging in situated learning processes. In com-
munities of practice, members depend on each other for learning, mutual help, con-
structive critiques and collective thinking. Lave and Wenger refer to an individual’s 
transition to becoming a practitioner is related to ‘that person’s legitimate peripheral 
participation in a community of practice and is negotiated with members of the 
community through the person’s participation’ (p. 122). Thus participating in and 
contributing to communities of practice as they are described are invaluable learn-
ing opportunities for preservice teachers.
This experience of participation in a community of practice is an important fea-
ture of the three projects discussed in this chapter. Preservice teachers are immersed 
in schools and communities where they work in collaborative teams to address spe-
cific needs. Importantly, they are concurrently developing knowledge and under-
standing about their students and how they learn. Le Cornu and Ewing (2008) refer 
to reciprocal learning relationships that focus on learning for all participants. There 
is the additional expectation that these participants will contribute not only to their 
own learning and well-being but also to those other members of the community. Le 
Cornu (2015) states that ‘a learning community program of professional experience 
is easier to implement in schools that are themselves operating as professional 
learning communities’ (p. 89). Working in professional learning communities has 
been found to increase teachers’ sense of personal and shared commitment, resil-
ience and feelings of success and investment in the school (Day & Gu, 2010). In a 
related study, early career teachers were also found to be best supported in school 
cultures that operated as professional learning communities (Johnson et al., 2015). 
This finding again supports the focus of the three projects in enculturating the pre-
service teachers to become valued participants and contributors to the professional 
learning in their schools and communities.
Service Learning
In exploring the research for this chapter, the authors drew on the concept of service 
learning and connected this premise with each of the programs. Nitschke-Shaw 
et al. (1997) argue that there are three essential components of service learning: ‘an 
identified community need, a delineated set of learning outcomes to be mastered 
and planned opportunity for reflection’ (p. 10). In respect to teacher education, they 
stated that service learning:
… requires effective collaboration among teacher educators in higher education, preservice 
teachers, professional educators and community members … Through service learning, 
partnerships are formed between students, community members and organizations. It is 
11  Professional Experience and Project-Based Learning as Service Learning
www.ebook3000.com

182
through these partnerships that community needs are identified and plans for meeting the 
needs are formulated. Students utilize and expand on knowledge they have gained in the 
classroom and apply the knowledge to help solve community issues and/or provide service 
to a community. (Nitschke-Shaw et al., 1997, p. 8)
Service learning combines rigorous academic learning with authentic commu-
nity service. Jagla, Erickson and Tinkler (2013) suggest that ‘service learning takes 
students [preservice teachers] out of the four walls of the classroom and into the 
community seeking to understand the world as it is – messy, complicated and real’ 
(p. xv). Pessate-Schubert, Thomas, and Lehman (2006) highlight the relevance of 
service learning in higher education particularly as a ‘means of delivering course 
content while addressing social justice issues pertinent to today’s social and educa-
tional climate’ (p. 68). Abel (2004) states that service learning is both external and 
interpersonal and that it ‘enhances a student’s educational experience, sustains dem-
ocratic culture, strengthens democratic institutions and advances social justice’ 
(p. 46). In contrast, it has been noted that service learning ‘… is limited to internal 
philanthropic justifications that do not seek to transform societal or educational 
institutions’ (Lukenchuk, Jagla, & Price, 2013, p. 56).
Research into service learning for preservice teachers has confirmed that preser-
vice teachers needed to have a clear understanding of the project aim. It is essential 
that effective communication is maintained between all stakeholders and that clear 
explicit goals and rationale drive the experience. Collaborative planning based on 
these clearly defined foci should support project implementation and completion 
(Bates & Lin, 2015; Jagla et al., 2013; Nitschke-Shaw et al., 1997; Pessate-Schubert 
et al., 2006). In their research on community action with teacher preparation, Pessate 
Schubert et al. discussed both the importance of facilitating preservice teachers’ 
involvement in service learning and its impact on schools and their students:
Preservice teachers are paired with students in K-12 settings to provide intensive remedia-
tion and enrichment through which both benefit: the preservice teacher learns his/her craft, 
and the student gains additional support, enhancing his/her academic skills. In addition to 
providing preservice teachers with a real-world vehicle for learning instructional practice, 
service learning has also been found to be an effective tool for helping them become aware 
of and active in social justice issues. (p. 2).
Research also shows numerous personal development impacts of service learn-
ing opportunities in teacher preparation courses for preservice teachers. These 
impacts include increases in self-confidence, self-esteem, leadership skills and per-
sonal decision-making skills (Aquila & Dodd, 2003; McMurtrie, Coleman, Ruppert, 
& Senn, 2014), career benefits and spiritual growth (Eyler & Giles Jr, 2002), and 
increased feelings of social and civic responsibility and heightened volunteerism 
(Carrington & Saggers, 2008; Scales, Blyth, Berkas, & Kielsmeier, 2000). 
Interpersonally, teachers and administrators note an improvement in preservice 
teachers’ abilities to work with others and in particular consider diversity and inclu-
sion in classrooms (Carrington, Mercer, Iyer, & Selva, 2015; Eyler & Giles Jr, 
2002). Finally, service learning opportunities such as those described in this chapter 
provide preservice teachers ‘access to expanded arenas of professional discourse 
B. Eckersley et al.

183
and exchange’ (Eilersten, Moksnes Furu, & Rørne, 2011, p. 86), which impacts 
preservice teachers’ achievements favourably.
Examples of Alternative Professional Experiences
As noted earlier, Australian universities are under increased pressure to develop 
‘classroom ready teachers’ (TEMAG, 2015) who can enter any classroom, in any 
school, and ensure learning for students occurs. To this end, universities are facili-
tating multiple strategies and initiatives in partnership with schools that aim to 
engage and immerse preservice teachers in a range of learning experiences that 
expose preservice teachers to working with students from backgrounds that may be 
in sharp contrast to their own. Three such learning experiences are outlined below.
Applied Curriculum Projects: Victoria University
As part of their Project Partnership experience, all preservice teachers enrolled at 
Victoria University participate in a school-identified project known as an Applied 
Curriculum Project, which involves preservice teachers forming professional learn-
ing teams with one or more teachers in a school. These Applied Curriculum Project 
teams negotiate, design, facilitate and evaluate a student-focused project (e.g. after-­
school homework clubs, lunchtime sporting activities, literacy support programs, 
gifted and talented extension groups and garden clubs). Usually school personnel 
identify the Applied Curriculum Project foci based on their school’s strategic plans 
and priorities.
The intent of the Applied Curriculum Project is to involve all participants more 
deeply in the curriculum and learning of the school and to establish more authentic 
relationships between preservice teachers, teachers and school students. Listed 
below are five Applied Curriculum Projects that were the focus of a large secondary 
school in the western suburbs of Melbourne:
	1.	 Victorian Certificate of Education (VCE) strategies for improvement: Student 
engagement/motivation, planning for success and striving for excellence.
	2.	 Year 9 City Experience: A comprehensive city experience that scaffolds students 
through engaging with and working in the city.
	3.	 Junior school pedagogy: How to incorporate ‘best practice’ in the open learning 
centre and beyond. This project focuses on individual needs, team teaching, stu-
dent engagement, well-being and curriculum building.
	4.	 Whole school data collection and analysis: How and what data do we collect? 
How do we interpret and use this to inform better practice and achieve better 
student outcomes. What are the gaps in our data? How do we assist staff in 
understanding and using data on a regular basis?
11  Professional Experience and Project-Based Learning as Service Learning
www.ebook3000.com

184
	5.	 Year 10 (and student’s representative council, SRC) environmental investiga-
tions: How do we interact with/create/build the environment around us? School-­
based project and community links. Working with others to create a more 
sustainable future for all.
Preservice teachers are responsible for developing a planning document in nego-
tiation with the School Partnerships’ Coordinator and the Applied Curriculum 
Project mentor teacher(s).
The Applied Curriculum Project Plan must:
•	 Identify the key issues giving rise to the project.
•	 Provide a rationale for focusing on this project.
•	 Make reference to the relevant educational theory and/or literature or policy.
•	 List the aims of the project.
•	 List the expected measurable outcomes.
•	 Contain an action plan that documents tasks/subtasks, who is responsible for 
them and the timeline for each task.
•	 Describe the evaluation method to determine the success, or otherwise, of the 
outcomes in meeting stated aims.
•	 List the professional skills that will be incorporated in the Applied Curriculum 
Project (e.g. planning, negotiating, leadership, time management, evaluation, 
teamwork, problem solving, entrepreneurship, communicating, researching, 
project management).
At the completion of the Applied Curriculum Project task, the preservice 
teacher(s) are required to produce a project report that:
•	 Provides a brief description of the project and its outcomes
•	 Provides evidence of how project aims were met or not met and why with refer-
ence to relevant educational theory/or literature or policy cited in the plan
•	 Comments on progress according to their Action Plan and advise of any changes 
to this plan and the reasons for any changes
•	 Evaluates the success or otherwise of the outcomes with reference to the evalua-
tion methodology described in the plan
•	 Describes how each of the five, or more, professional skills nominated in their 
plan were applied during the Applied Curriculum Project
The School Partnerships’ Coordinator and Applied Curriculum Project mentor 
teacher(s) are invited to provide feedback about the Applied Curriculum Project 
outcomes and the professional skills displayed by the preservice teacher(s) during 
the project.
Recent research by Arnold, Edwards, Hooley and Williams (2012) confirmed the 
following positive learning outcomes of Applied Curriculum Project engagement:
Support student learning, exploration of connection between the practice and theory of 
teaching, project evaluation and evolving understanding of social context through the nego-
tiated development of an aspect of curriculum important to the school. The process enables 
B. Eckersley et al.

185
preservice teachers to work cooperatively with mentor teachers not only on curriculum but 
on the creation of intellectual and practical space for the professional engagement of ideas, 
knowledge and comprehension of schooling. (p. 68)
Applied Curriculum Project engagement has also provided opportunities to 
develop a culture of ‘teachers as researchers’ (Robinson, 2003) in partner schools. 
The Victoria University College of Education has a strong reputation for its collab-
orative practitioner research (CPR) methodology that engages key school teaching 
and learning stakeholders in research planning and design, data collection and, 
importantly, data analysis relating to their school practice. In such contexts, univer-
sity staff and preservice teachers work alongside school teachers in the pursuit of 
research activity negotiated with the school to address an inquiry of specific and 
immediate concern to the school and its community.
Over the past 5 years, the Victoria University College of Education has collabo-
rated with clusters of primary and secondary schools as part of School Centres for 
Teaching Excellence (SCTEs: 2013/2014) and currently Teaching Academies for 
Professional Practice (TAPP: 2015/2016) that have been funded by the Victorian 
Department of Education and Training. The placement of significant groups of pre-
service teachers within these school clusters has enabled sophisticated and more 
enduring Applied Curriculum Project research projects undertaken by professional 
learning teams of preservice teachers, teachers and university educators to support 
school improvement and change. University resources and networks have enhanced 
schools’ research activity allowing for links to be made to other researchers under-
taking comparable work and allowing schools to access appropriate venues and 
forums for dissemination of findings. Interested teachers can gain credit for their 
research and mentoring activity within a university postgraduate program and can 
access research methodology units with the option of onsite delivery of such units 
available for teacher participants.
Not only have the Applied Curriculum Projects demonstrated a strengthening of 
the communities of practice in each school, but they have also shown these partner-
ships also raise the educational aspirations of students in schools. This is done by 
enabling greater, deeper and more sustained contact between school and university 
students. Many of the Victoria University preservice teachers have been educated in 
schools located in the western and northern suburbs of Melbourne (i.e. similar areas 
to the schools they are entering) and thus have the potential to be key role models 
for the school students. This is a region in which a mixture of factors – low SES, 
high levels of culturally and linguistically diverse students and low social and edu-
cational capital – make the transition from school to work or further study a difficult 
one for many young people. Victoria University is committed to this socially inclu-
sive approach that offers expertise in working with the particular needs of such 
communities.
11  Professional Experience and Project-Based Learning as Service Learning
www.ebook3000.com

186
Aspire Program: Deakin University
As discussed earlier, research has highlighted that preservice teacher placements in 
low socio-economic schools have a more profound effect for disrupting stereotypes, 
helping preservice teachers learn about students’ cultural backgrounds and connect-
ing student behaviour and learning with what teachers do (Sleeter, 2008). Sleeter 
also found that when preservice teachers are mentored and supported appropriately 
when working with diverse students who are culturally different from themselves 
(and/or experiencing poverty), they are often more likely to go on to teach these 
students. The Deakin University Aspire program partners with low socio-economic 
schools to facilitate preservice teacher placement in these schools with the aim of 
supporting local school communities’ efforts to raise higher education aspirations.
The Aspire program is now in its fifth year of operation and is funded through the 
Higher Education Participation Program (HEPP). The program provides additional 
emphasis on understanding how the school-university partnerships can be used to 
better prepare primary and secondary teachers. Preservice teachers learn to support 
this greater diversity in higher education access by using more equitable (applied 
and experiential) pedagogies that are also sustainable throughout their future careers 
as primary and secondary teachers. Early research on the Aspire program indicates 
the applied learning pedagogy of preservice teachers provides authentic learning 
opportunities for primary and secondary school students, raising student learning 
outcomes and access and equity in education. Most of the school students who par-
ticipate in the Aspire program do not have parents/carers who have attended a uni-
versity and have never previously experienced the sociocultural environment of a 
university. Aspire enables opportunities for community and parent/carer engage-
ment in the program through immersive on-campus experiences.
Over the first 5 years, the Aspire program has immersed 550 local school stu-
dents each week on campus at the university, enabling school students from years 6 
to 10 to experience ‘life’ as a university student. Led by preservice teachers, the 
Aspire program offers hands-on learning experiences for school students across the 
Deakin University faculties. Preservice teachers work closely with cohorts of school 
students exploring higher education pathways. The co-developed learning modules 
are aligned with the Victorian and National Curriculum and support local school 
improvement agendas with particular focus on literacy and numeracy development. 
Each Aspire module has an academic expert to support and mentor both the preser-
vice teachers and the local school students.
Through their teaching in the Aspire program, preservice teachers are able to 
align their developing teaching practice and pedagogy to the Australian Professional 
Standards for Teachers at the graduate level. Preservice teachers from the Masters 
of Applied Learning and Teaching, the Bachelor of Education and the Bachelor of 
Health and Physical Education work with Aspire school student cohorts. For many 
B. Eckersley et al.

187
of the preservice teachers, this is their initial contact with school students and school 
settings. Many of the preservice teachers who align with the Aspire program are 
career change enrolments. This status brings a unique set of skills and experiences 
that are highly valuable to the program. They come to the program with excitement, 
life experience and knowledge in fields outside of teaching. The role of preservice 
teachers as capacity builders was identified by school leadership teams early in the 
program and disrupted the way many of our schools viewed preservice teachers. 
Many of the Aspire preservice teachers have subsequently gone on to find employ-
ment in partner schools.
This expansive partnership also enables stakeholders to work across traditional 
school-university boundaries resulting in a paradigm shift for how professional 
experience is viewed. Through an exploration of the tensions and discontinuities 
while working across and between institutional boundaries, Aspire stakeholders are 
enabled to develop a critical and transformative view of initial teacher and school 
student education. Our research has uncovered a range of practices and outcomes as 
evidence:
•	 A more consistent and collaborative approach across university faculties.
•	 Preservice teachers, university teacher educators and school-based teacher edu-
cators co-developing Aspire curriculum has enabled a closer alignment of initial 
teacher education theory and practice.
•	 Transformation of preservice teacher learning through an applied pedagogical 
teaching and learning approach.
•	 Preservice teachers are positioned as boundary-crossers where they teach and 
learn across school, university and community sites.
•	 Preservice teachers work closely with student data and school leaders to align 
school students with the Aspire program. Preservice teachers recognize low SES 
school students’ high aspirations and expectations as part of the program.
•	 The Aspire program is aligned with school improvement plans and innovations.
•	 Authentic ‘real-world’ learning opportunities.
•	 A non-hierarchical approach to initial teacher education through the engagement 
in the partnership. This is particularly evident in the co-development of program 
curriculum.
The Aspire program aims to raise student aspirations by working collaboratively 
with schools, universities, students, parents, community and government. The 
Aspire program embraces an educational approach that no longer considers disad-
vantage as a barrier. This robust school-university partnership continues to cham-
pion higher education equity and access in the community while improving the 
quality of graduate teachers by working more effectively across their organizational 
boundaries.
11  Professional Experience and Project-Based Learning as Service Learning
www.ebook3000.com

188
Yirrkala Indigenous Schools’ Program: The University 
of Melbourne
The traditional placement has not always served the needs of the communities in 
which preservice teachers enter, as was found to be the case in a cluster of remote 
Northern Territory schools. This section describes a professional experience that 
takes place as part of an elective subject in the Masters of Teaching at Melbourne 
University’s Graduate School of Education (MGSE). What has developed since 
2011 is a partnership that has become known as the Yirrkala Indigenous Schools – 
MGSE program. The professional experience aspect of this elective subject takes 
place in two schools in the Yirrkala community, one is the Yirrkala Community 
School (YCS), and the other is the Yirrkala Homelands School (YHS) which ser-
vices the Laynhapuy Homelands in the region. Preservice teachers travel over 
4000 km from their University campus in Melbourne to Yirrkala and live in the 
community during their placement.
For many years, the Yirrkala community has hosted preservice teachers from a 
number of teacher education institutions throughout Australia for more traditional 
placements. Yolŋu and Balanda (non-Indigenous) teachers in Yirrkala have much 
experience with preservice teachers coming from afar for a short time, learning 
about the community, schools and classrooms, having requisite practical teaching 
hours signed off and reported on and then returning to their homes with little reci-
procity with the community. While these more traditional placements are important 
for preservice teachers to learn about remote communities and gain understanding 
of Indigenous cultures, it is as important for the communities to participate and 
ensure learning is ‘two-way’, and there are further and deeper benefits for the com-
munity at large. The MGSE-Yirrkala program embraces the Yolŋu concept: bala ga 
lili. Loosely translated, this term means reciprocity, learning from each other and 
give and take. Since this partnership, and specifically this preservice teacher profes-
sional experience, began in 2011, the importance of a reciprocal relationship with 
all members of the Yolŋu communities of the area has been emphasized. Teachers 
and community members have come to understand that hosting these preservice 
teachers is not a burden on them, rather an experience that benefits everyone.
Once selected, the preservice teachers begin to work closely with each other, 
their university lecturers and, importantly, members of the Yirrkala community (i.e. 
the principals and teachers of both schools as well as Elders and other community 
members) to ensure that their visit contributes something of value to the community. 
This begins before the preservice teachers arrive in Yirrkala with connections being 
made and conversations undertaken about the current needs of the schools. Upon 
arrival in Yirrkala, the preservice teachers participate in cultural induction facili-
tated by one of the school principals and where they meet some of the teachers and 
also some of the families from the community. The focus of this induction is to sup-
port the preservice teachers’ navigation of the local community mores, traditions 
and customs both respectfully and comfortably. This induction also facilitates the 
B. Eckersley et al.

189
first face-to-face planning and collaboration for the projects that are to be ­undertaken 
by the preservice teachers. Because of the physical distance between Melbourne 
and Yirrkala, the collaborative planning conversations have until that point been 
conducted via email, skype or conference calls.
Each year the projects are guided by the needs and priorities of the schools and 
so have varied considerably. Examples of projects include:
•	 The Northern Territory (NT) government equipped the schools and classrooms 
with new technology including interactive whiteboards, computers and iPads. A 
number of preservice teachers devised and facilitated professional development 
sessions on the use of this technology in situ.
•	 Preservice teachers worked in collaboration with school students and a ranger as 
part of the on-country learning program to build and plant food gardens in some 
of the homelands.
•	 In another of the homelands, a group of preservice teachers travelled out with 
sports equipment and stayed on country for a number of nights. After working 
with the teachers during the day, in which they devised and taught a number of 
language and science activities, they were involved in after-hours activities. The 
preservice teachers led activities that included team games and ball handling 
activities. In the spirit of bala ga lili, the school students and their parents recip-
rocated by teaching the preservice teachers about their land, taking them to fish-
ing and hunting areas and teaching them about their music and dance.
•	 Preservice teachers were the audience and ‘students’ for Yolŋu adult teachers 
who were completing a Diploma of Education for the Batchelor Institute of 
Indigenous Tertiary Education. The preservice teachers provided feedback to the 
Yolŋu teachers and worked with them to develop lessons that were taken back to 
different homeland classrooms.
•	 Other contributions include involvement in sports carnivals and assisting with 
the creation of artworks and rehearsals for the annual Garma Festival.
This way of working closely has led directly to the recruitment of new teachers 
who are informed, engaged and better prepared to teach in the cultural interface 
(Nakata, 2007). Principals and community Elders report benefits of programs like 
this as they have the opportunity to observe and work with preservice teachers in 
more in-depth ways. The preservice teachers’ first-hand experience of living in 
Yolŋu communities and their learning about the Yolŋu history, language and culture 
better equip them for remote and community school employment. Evidence that 
many return to the Northern Territory as teachers extends the mutual benefit. The 
Yirrkala Community School and Yirrkala Homelands School have both employed a 
number of the preservice teacher graduates who have participated in this program. 
The provision of quality education programs in remote communities, including 
those that the Yirrkala homelands schools serve, is a national priority (Close the Gap 
Local Implementation Plan Yirrkala, 2011).
11  Professional Experience and Project-Based Learning as Service Learning
www.ebook3000.com

190
Conclusion
The three university programs outlined here each began before the release of the 
2015 TEMAG report. However, they are each effectively meeting the perceived 
needs of communities by providing via a service learning model, teacher education 
professional experiences that are outside the traditional professional experience. 
Each program provides evidence of Fox and Wilson’s (2015) claim that to become 
a teacher, it is not enough to acquire classroom skills, but to gain knowledge and 
understanding of the communities in which these schools operate and the lives of 
the students attending these schools is critical. It was the practice that formed the 
new understandings (sayings), the new actions (doings) and the new ways people 
related to each other in schools and broader communities (relatings) that created the 
new knowledge and that ‘practices come into being because people, acting not alone 
but collectively, bring them into being’ (Kemmis et al., 2013, p. 31). The programs 
each illustrate that professional experience outside of the traditional professional 
experience is important not only in the development and learning of preservice 
teachers but also to the schools and communities in which these alternative profes-
sional experiences are conducted.
Victoria University’s Applied Curriculum Project, Deakin University’s Aspire 
Program and the University of Melbourne’s Yirrkala Indigenous Schools’ Program 
are each addressing how best to develop prospective teachers’ understandings about 
social justice and community development. Partnerships schools are collaborating 
with university-based initial teacher education departments to ensure preservice 
teachers ‘service learning’ and contributions align with the schools’ priorities. The 
Applied Curriculum Project and Yirrkala Indigenous Schools’ program take place 
within the partner schools where as Aspire regularly brings school students to the 
university campus.
In essence, the three programs aim to build strong university and community 
partnerships and employ different approaches to achieve similar outcomes. These 
differences are important too. However, the focus on strong partnerships that advance 
the learning of preservice teachers through professional experience and at the same 
time offer mutual benefits for the school communities – communities of practice – is 
a common aspect that unites and demonstrates the strength of these programs.
References
Abel, C. F. (2004). A justification of the philanthropic model. In B. W. Speck & S. L. Hoppe (Eds.), 
Service learning: History, theory and issues (pp. 45–57). Westport, CT: Praeger.
Aikens, N., & Barbarin, O. (2008). Socio-economic differences in reading trajectories: The con-
tribution of family, neighborhood, and school contexts. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
100, 235–251.
Akkerman, S. F., & Meijer, P. C. (2011). A dialogical approach to conceptualizing teacher identity. 
Teaching and Teacher Education, 27, 308–319.
B. Eckersley et al.

191
Arnold, J., Edwards, T., Hooley, N., & Williams, J. (2012). Conceptualising teacher education and 
research as ‘critical praxis’. Critical Studies in Education, 53(3), 281–295.
Aquila, F., & Dodd, J. (2003). Learn and serve Ohio: Annual evaluation report. Cleveland, OH: 
Cleveland State University.
Bates, A., & Lin, M. (2015). Service-learning and teacher education. New Waves, 18(1), III.
Carrington, S., & Saggers, B. (2008). Service-learning informing the development of an inclusive 
ethical framework for beginning teachers. Teaching and Teacher Education, 24, 795–806.
Carrington, S., Mercer, K. L., Iyer, R., & Selva, G. (2015). The impact of transformative learning 
in a critical service-learning program on teacher development: Building a foundation for inclu-
sive teaching. Reflective Practice, 16(1), 61–72. doi:10.1080/14623943.2014.969696.
Close the Gap Local Implementation Plan Yirrkala. (2011). Yirrkala Gurrutu’ Mirri Mala Reference 
Group, Australian Government, Northern Territory Government, East Arnhem Shire Council. 
Retrieved from: https://static1.squarespace.com/static/569308c7dc5cb46e49dc9ee5/t/5773d10
12994ca10788adfcf/1467207984578/YIRRKALA_30_Sept_2011.pdf
Cochran-Smith, M., & Lytle, S. L. (2009). Inquiry as stance, practitioner research for the next 
generation. New York: Teachers College Press.
Day, C., & Gu, Q. (2010). The new lives of teachers. Oxon, UK: Routledge.
Dewey, J. (1897). My pedagogic creed. The School Journal, LIV, 77–80.
Eckersley, B., Davies, M., Arnold, J., Edwards, T., Hooley, N., Williams, J., & Taylor, S. (2011). 
Vision unlimited: Inspiring participant knowledge in schools. Melbourne, Australia: Victoria 
University. Retrieved from: http://education.vu.edu.au/visionunlimited/report.pdf.
Eilertsen, T. V., Moksnes Furu, E., & Rørne, K. (2011). Learning beyond the traditional: Preservice 
teachers as partners in school development. In M. Mattsson, T. V. Eilertsen, & D. Rorrison 
(Eds.), A practicum turn in teacher education. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Engestrom, Y. (2011). Expansive learning at work. Journal of Education and Work, 14(1), 133–156.
Eyler, J., & Giles, D. E., Jr. (2002). Beyond surveys: Using the problem solving interview to 
assess the impact of service-learning on understanding and critical thinking. In A. Furco & 
S. H. Billig (Eds.), Service learning: The essence of pedagogy (pp. 147–160). Greenwich, CT: 
Information Age Publishing.
Fox, A., & Wilson, E. (2015). Networking and the development of professionals: Beginning teach-
ers building social capital. Teaching and Teacher Education, 47, 93–107.
Friere, P. (1996). Pedagogy of the oppressed. London: Penguin Books.
Jagla, V., Erickson, J., & Tinkler, A. (2013). Transforming teacher education through service-­
learning. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Johnson, B., Down, B., Le Cornu, R., Peters, J., Sullivan, A., Pearce, J., & Hunter, J. (2015). 
Promoting early career teacher resilience: A socio-cultural and critical guide to action. 
Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Kemmis, S., & Smith, T. (2008). Praxis and praxis development. In Enabling praxis: Challenges 
for education (pp. 3–13). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Kemmis, S., Wilkinson, J., Edwards-Groves, C., Hardy, I., Grootenboer, P., & Bristol, L. (2013). 
Changing practices, changing education. Singapore, Singapore: Springer Science & Business 
Media.
Kruger, T., Davies, A., Eckersley, B., Newell, F., & Cherednichenko, B. (2009). Effective and 
sustainable university-school partnerships: Beyond determined efforts by inspired individuals. 
Canberra, Australia: Teaching Australia.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1998). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Le Cornu, R. (2015). Key components of effective professional experience in initial teacher 
education in Australia. Melbourne, Australia: Australian Institute for Teaching and School 
Leadership.
Le Cornu, R., & Ewing, R. (2008). Reconceptualising professional experiences in pre-service 
teacher education… reconstructing the past to embrace the future. Teaching and Teacher 
Education, 24(7), 1799–1812.
11  Professional Experience and Project-Based Learning as Service Learning
www.ebook3000.com

192
Lukenchuk, A., Jagla, V., & Price. (2013). Critical discourse: Analysis of service learning perspec-
tives and models. In V. Jagla, J. Erickson, & A. Tinkler (Eds.), Transforming teacher education 
through service-learning. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
McMurtrie, D. H., Coleman, B. K., Ruppert, N., & Senn, G. J. (2014). The impact of service 
learning on middle level pre-service teachers. Current Issues in Middle Level Education, 19(1), 
36–42.
Muijs, D., Harris, A., Chapman, C., Stoll, L., & Russ, J. (2009). Improving schools in socio-
economically disadvantaged areas: A review of research evidence. School Effectiveness and 
School Improvement, 15, 149–175.
Nakata, M. (2007). The cultural interface. The Australian Journal of Indigenous Education, 
36(S1), 7–14.
Nitschke-Shaw, D., Bauer, D., Brown, M., Bryant, L., Gibans-McGlashan, A., Taylor, K., et al. 
(1997). Best practices: Service-learning in teacher education in New Hampshire.
Pessate Schubert, P., Thomas, D., & Lehman, K. (2006). Lessons learned in service learning: 
Personnel preparation through community action. Mentoring & Tutoring, 14(1), 67–79.
Robinson, V. (2003). Teachers as researchers: A professional necessity. SET: Research information 
for teachers, 1, 27–29.
Rossner, P., & Commins, D. (2012). Defining enduring partnerships: Can a well-worn path mean 
effective, sustainable and mutually beneficial relationship? Queensland College of Teachers. 
Retrieved October 20, 2016, https://www.qct.edu.au/PDF/DefiningEnduringPartnerships.pdf
Scales, P. C., Blyth, D. A., Berkas, T. H., & Kielsmeier, J. C. (2000). The effects of service-­
learning on middle school students’ social responsibility and academic success. The Journal of 
Early Adolescence, 20, 332–358.
Sleeter, C. (2008). Equity, democracy, and neoliberal assaults on teacher education. Teaching and 
Teacher Education Journal, 24, 1947–1954.
Taylor, M., Klein, E., & Abrams, L. (2014). Tensions of reimagining our roles as teacher educa-
tors in a third space: Revisiting a co/auto ethnography through a faculty lens. Studying Teacher 
Education, 10, 3–19.
Teacher Education Ministerial Advisory Group [TEMAG]. (2015). Action now: Classroom ready 
teachers report. Retrieved October 30, 2016, from Canberra: https://docs.education.gov.au/
documents/action-now-classroom-ready-teachers-report
Tsui, A., & Law, D. (2007). Learning as boundary-crossing in school-university partnerships. 
Teaching and Teacher Education, 23, 1289–1301.
Wenger, E. (1998). Learning in communities of practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Wilson, E., & Demetriou, H. (2007). New teacher learning: Substantive knowledge and contextual 
factors. The Curriculum Journal, 18, 213–229.
B. Eckersley et al.

193
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_12
Chapter 12
Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring 
Four Models for Developing ‘Classroom-­
Ready’ Teachers
Sharon Tindall-Ford, Susan Ledger, Judy Williams, and Angelina Ambrosetti
Abstract  ‘Classroom-ready’ graduate teachers require a sound understanding of 
the complex context that constitutes the ‘classroom’ in which they are expected to 
teach. The preservice teachers’ experiences within schools provide critical insights 
into these complexities and provide ongoing professional development towards 
their classroom readiness. It is in the school setting where theory learnt at university 
can inform and support preservice teachers to make sense of their observations of 
students’ learning, teachers’ teaching and their own teaching practice. We contend 
that within a traditional professional experience, the opportunities to link educa-
tional theory to teaching practice are usually incidental rather than purposeful, with 
preservice teachers often having limited opportunity to observe and experience the 
multifaceted nature of being a teacher. At both the state and national levels, govern-
ments are advocating for the improvement of preservice teachers’ school experi-
ences and for universities to ensure the graduation of ‘classroom-ready’ teachers. 
This chapter examines how initial teacher education providers are enhancing preser-
vice teachers’ teaching and learning experiences through innovative in-school 
immersion programs with the goal of producing more professionally prepared, 
‘classroom-ready’ graduates. The chapter showcases four different models of school 
immersion programs from across Australia, outlining the purpose, structure and 
intended outcomes of each. A critique of these models highlighting tensions and 
vulnerabilities to implementation of immersion programs results in recommenda-
tions for initial teacher education providers who are seeking to support the immer-
sion of preservice teachers as they transition into the teaching profession.
S. Tindall-Ford (*) 
University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW, Australia
e-mail: sharontf@uow.edu.au 
S. Ledger 
Murdoch University, Perth, WA, Australia 
J. Williams 
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
A. Ambrosetti 
Central Queensland University, Noosaville, QLD, Australia
www.ebook3000.com

194
Introduction
Immersion programs within initial teacher education are learning experiences 
organised and supported by universities and schools that offer opportunities for a 
co-teaching/co-learning model to exist (Cook & Friend, 1995). Immersion pro-
grams enable the preservice teacher and mentor teacher to negotiate shared respon-
sibility for planning, delivering and evaluating instruction for a group of students. 
They provide an authentic learning experience for preservice teachers where they 
are involved and mentored across all aspects of school life. Immersion programs 
also allow for a ‘third space’ (Zeichner, 2010) where preservice teachers’ practical 
experiences in schools are reconceptualised to create a learning community in 
which all participants are actively involved in the development of their professional 
knowledge and skills. We argue that the immersion context responds to Zeichner’s 
(p. 89) concern about the ‘commonly existing disconnection between the campus 
and school-based parts of teacher education programs’.
Collaborative partnerships between a university and school(s) are essential in 
immersion programs to ensure preservice teachers have sustained and supported 
teaching and learning experiences within a school setting. Immersion programs 
enable school and university personnel to work together to ensure that any possible 
disconnections between university theoretical learning and in-school experiences 
are meaningfully integrated through purposeful links between theory and practice. 
The purpose of immersion programs is to help connect on-campus learning with 
real school classrooms (see Bahr & Mellor, 2016). Immersion develops an inte-
grated learning environment for preservice teachers so they can develop a compre-
hensive understanding of schools, classrooms and student learning, as well as 
confidence in their own teaching capabilities and their readiness to enter the teach-
ing profession. This chapter showcases four school-university immersion programs 
across diverse locations in Australia. The context, structure and implementation of 
each immersion program are discussed, implementation tensions and vulnerabilities 
are highlighted, and recommendations for future immersion programs are proposed. 
However, caution exists with presenting these as exemplars as Bahr and Mellor 
(2016) suggest, ‘the variability of teaching contexts, learners and teaching areas 
restricts the generalisability of the findings’ (p.49).
Initial Teacher Education Programs
Over the last 100 years, teacher training has moved from the traditional school-­
based pupil-teacher apprenticeship model to one in which there is structured learn-
ing of educational theory in higher education institutions coupled with practical 
teaching experiences in schools. The role of Australian initial teacher education 
providers is to teach teachers how to teach, and schools the place where preservice 
teachers practise teaching (Dyson, 2005). In Australia, the original 2-year teacher 
S. Tindall-Ford et al.

195
education programs were extended to 3-year diplomas, and since the 1980s, univer-
sities have provided 4-year undergraduate Bachelor of Education programs and 
postgraduate programs of 1 or 2 years.
In more recent years, the role of universities in the development and delivery of 
teacher education has come under intense scrutiny (Darling-Hammond & Adamson 
2013; Mayer, 2014). There has been a movement since the turn of the twenty-first 
century to shift teacher education from universities back to schools (Broadley, 
Ledger, & Sharplin, 2013) under the supervision of school-based mentor teachers, 
with relatively minor input from university-based teacher educators. This is particu-
larly evident in the United Kingdom where there has been a move away from 
university-­based teacher education to a school-based apprenticeship model of train-
ing (Robinson, 2006). This model of school-based teacher education has also 
touched Australia with the re-emergence of teacher internship programs including 
the Teach for Australia model (Broadley & Ledger, 2012; Dinham, 2014) and 
12-month internships. Interestingly, Kamenetz (2014) reported that one in five 
teachers in initial teacher education in the United States of America was trained in 
alternative certification programs.
Whilst current education policy and initial teacher education reforms are increas-
ingly directed at strengthening the practice component within initial teacher educa-
tion with greater emphasis on school experience rather than university-based 
learning (Mattsson, Eilertsen & Rorrison, 2011; Mayer, 2014), research also high-
lights the importance of teachers’ theoretical and content knowledge to support stu-
dent learning (Darling-Hammond & Bransford, 2005). Empirical studies show 
effective initial teacher education programs are those that develop preservice teach-
ers’ content and pedagogical knowledge, have an academically rigorous core cur-
riculum underpinned by an enquiry approach connecting theory to practice and 
provide extensive supported teaching practice (Allen, Howells, & Radford, 2013, 
Darling-Hammond & Bransford, 2005). The challenge for many initial teacher edu-
cation programs has been to balance pedagogical theory and professional practice 
(Ure, Gough, & Newton, 2009). The four different models of school immersion 
programs showcased in this chapter aim to purposely integrate university theory 
with school experiences to ensure the initial teacher education programs were aca-
demically robust and incorporated strong university and school partnerships.
Immersion Programs in Initial Teacher Education
Whilst there is a general agreement for extensive supported experiences in schools 
that are meaningfully connected to university coursework, how this is actualised has 
been problematic. The divide between university theory and professional practice 
(Brady, 2002; Smedley, 2001) has also been observed in other professional pro-
grams such as accountancy (Albrecht & Sack, 2000; Stanley, 2010), nursing and 
medicine (Feng et  al., 2013). The above  studies found that students who were 
12  Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring Four Models for Developing…
www.ebook3000.com

196
mentored and immersed in their professional practice as part of their academic pro-
gram, graduated with greater understanding of their respective professions.
The idea of an ‘immersive experience’ to support preservice teachers to be work-
force ready (Apsland, 2016) has led to a wide range of extended, practical innova-
tions within initial teacher education. The use of communities of practice (Lave & 
Wenger, 1991; Le Cornu, 2010; Rossner & Commins, 2012) has been advocated as 
a means of providing immersive experiences for preservice teachers in schools. 
However, creating a learning community is often not possible in traditional practi-
cums due to time constraints and other logistical challenges, the focus being on 
preservice teachers’ demonstrating effective teaching practice and supervising 
teachers’ assessing that practice (Allen & Peach, 2007; Furlong & Maynard, 1995; 
Hastings, 2004, 2010). Hence, there has been a need to reconceptualise school/uni-
versity partnerships and practicums to ensure that experiences in schools are rigor-
ous and meaningful, that the theory-practice divide is addressed and that opportunities 
for preservice teachers to work in partnership over a sustained period of time with 
mentor teachers are created. Kruger, Davies, Eckersley, Newell, and Cherednichenko 
(2009) conceptualise partnerships between initial teacher educators and schools:
… as a distinguishing characteristic of those teacher education programs with practices 
linking school teachers, preservice teachers and teacher educators in more direct and ongo-
ing ways than the conventional teacher practicum. The nature of the partnership is that its 
impact is in the participation and learning of the individual participants but also that the 
enhanced university–school relationship needs to be organised at the level of the institu-
tions. (p. 43)
More than a decade ago, Korthagen, Loughran, and Russell (2006) offered a 
framework of seven principles that guide effective initial teacher education pro-
grams. Two of these principles directly speak to the efficacy of immersion pro-
grams, that is, learning about teaching requires an emphasis on those learning to 
teach working closely with teachers as peers in supportive communities of learners, 
and learning about teaching requires meaningful relationships between schools, 
universities and preservice teachers.
Practicum as partnership affords preservice teachers an immersive experience 
within the whole range of activities in the teaching profession, enabling the preser-
vice teacher to experience a greater cross-section of the life of the school, as well as 
the multifaceted tasks of a teacher. When immersed in practice, preservice teachers 
have access to department intranets, assessment procedures, resources and day-to-­
day tasks such as roll keeping, reporting, individual education plans and ongoing 
interactions with colleagues and parents. These so-called ‘hidden’ elements of the 
teaching profession are ‘learnt’ whilst immersed in practice and can contribute to 
producing ‘classroom-ready’ graduates (Broadley et al., 2013). Preservice teachers 
are more than ‘visitors’ in the classroom; the benefits of this immersion can be lik-
ened to Zeichner’s (2010) notion of a transforming ‘third space’ enabling the pre-
service teachers ‘to inhabit simultaneously their student and teacher identities 
[through] gently being eased into a sense of belonging to the broader teacher and 
school communities, at least partly because of the confidence and comfort…’ 
(Forgasz, 2016, p. 110).
S. Tindall-Ford et al.

197
Immersion Programs: Australian Context
There have been numerous reviews, agreements and blueprints in Australia that 
have advocated for stronger collaborative partnerships between initial teacher edu-
cation and schools to connect theory and practice in order to produce teachers who 
are ‘classroom ready’. The latest Australian report into initial teacher education, the 
Teacher Education Ministerial Advisory Group’s (TEMAG) Action Now: Classroom 
Ready Teachers Report (2015), centred on five main themes that are leading to sig-
nificant policy reform as follows:
	1.	 Stronger quality assurance of teacher education courses
	2.	 Rigorous selection for entry to teacher education courses
	3.	 Improved and structured practical experience for preservice teachers
	4.	 Robust assessment of graduates to ensure classroom readiness
	5.	 National research and workforce capabilities
Immersion programs can be linked to three of the five themes from the Action 
Now Report in that preservice teachers are immersed within a school for an extended 
period of time. Immersion provides opportunities for the preservice teacher to be a 
teacher in the classroom, thus experiencing the planning, teaching and assessment 
cycle in an authentic context. Immersion also provides the opportunity for robust 
assessment of a preservice teacher’s practice against the Australian Professional 
Standards for Teachers (Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership, 
2011). Immersion programs that offer an internship as a component of the extended 
placement contribute to specific workforce capabilities by providing high-quality 
graduates that are ‘classroom ready’ (Broadley & Ledger, 2012).
Surveying how Australian universities structure their professional experience 
placements, the Studying the Effectiveness of Teacher Education Report (2015) 
found that only 8% of graduates were involved in placements that lasted between 13 
and 15 weeks, with the majority completing internships of 4–6 weeks (63%). There 
was no evidence of immersion programs, internships or extended placements 
beyond 15  weeks in the document. The professional experience component of 
newly graduated teachers around the nation reveals a diverse combination of place-
ment scheduling within their initial teacher education programs. Less than 1% of 
3480 respondents had experienced a distributed practicum (1 or 2 days per week) as 
well as an internship, whilst only 11% had experienced the combination of a block 
practicum, a distributed practicum and an internship. There was a perception from 
respondents, including the cohort of principals, that preservice teachers who com-
pleted an internship were more prepared than those who did not. The findings from 
the Longitudinal Teacher Education and Workforce Study Report (2013) also high-
lighted the importance of extended professional experience in schools, with the 
Studying the Effectiveness of Teacher Education Report (2015) stating that teacher 
education graduates typically are underprepared for the teaching profession.
The four immersion programs discussed in this chapter contest these findings, as 
each includes an extended school placement, opportunities for observations and 
12  Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring Four Models for Developing…
www.ebook3000.com

198
teaching experiences in a range of contexts, integration of school experiences with 
university coursework, mentoring by expert teachers and opportunities for shared 
learning experiences with other preservice teachers, mentors and teacher educators. 
The immersion programs discussed reflect many of the characteristics of successful 
initial teacher education programs summarised in Australia’s recent Longitudinal 
Teacher Education and Workforce Study (LTEWS 2013) and Studying the 
Effectiveness of Teacher Education Report (2015). The four models below offer 
examples of Bahr and Mellor’s (2016) call for research on teacher education to 
provide a stronger body of evidence of programs where there is ‘mutual benefit 
designed into collaborative enterprise between school-based and campus-based 
educators’ (p.16).
Model: Victoria (Monash University)
Introduction
The Advanced Placement model at Monash University was developed and first 
implemented in 2001 at the Gippsland campus and then adopted at the Peninsula 
campus, where it is still in operation. The aim was to provide final-year Bachelor of 
Education (Primary) preservice teachers with a new way of experiencing learning to 
teach in the last phase of their undergraduate degree. The model, which links school 
life to university life, was conceptualised by Michael Dyson, Lecturer in Education 
at Monash University Gippsland. This model was based on his earlier work in a 
school-based program, which was first implemented in the mid-1990s when the 
compulsory 4-year degree was introduced. Dyson redesigned the school-based pro-
gram to become the Advanced Practicum, which enabled a:
worldview of learning [and to] facilitate a synergy between theory and practice…The 
interns themselves drew the pieces together to form new understandings, took responsibil-
ity for their own learning, their relationships, and the formation of their identity as a teacher. 
(Dyson, 2010, p. 9)
Broadly, the aims of the Advanced Placement program are:
	1.	 To provide a framework in which preservice teachers develop an ongoing and long-­term 
relationship with a school community
	2.	 To provide an opportunity for preservice teachers to respond as adult learners to the demands 
and experiences of their work and to develop the communication and interpersonal skills 
expected of a professional
	3.	 To induct preservice teachers into the profession as reflective teachers with a realistic aware-
ness of the nature and scope of contemporary schooling
	4.	 To contribute to establishing a collegial relationship between mentor and mentee in a recip-
rocal professional learning environment (Monash University Advanced Placement Guide, 
2014, p. 3)
S. Tindall-Ford et al.

199
Context
The Advanced Placement program is an example of immersion that provides sus-
tained connection to one school and classroom for the whole year. It was designed 
to give final-year undergraduate preservice teachers an opportunity to be immersed 
in the daily routines and culture of their placement school and its community from 
the start of the school year. It enables the preservice teachers to become part of the 
school community more easily than if they began their placement later in the term. 
The principles behind the Advanced Placement model are explained to participating 
schools and preservice teachers at an information session towards the end of the 
previous year. A unit guide is provided to every participating school and preservice 
teacher to ensure all participants understand the focus and structure of the 
program.
Structure and Implementation
Preservice teachers begin their placement on the first day of the school year, which 
is usually 1 month before the beginning of the university semester. They remain in 
the same class with the same teacher for the whole school year, so they experience 
the ‘behind-the-scenes’ preparation that teachers undertake before children begin 
the school year. They may be involved in classroom set-up, planning meetings and 
professional development opportunities. The organisation of their 40 days of pro-
fessional experience is as follows:
End of the year before: preservice teachers are notified of their school in 
November and are encouraged to visit the principal and meet with their mentor 
teacher, if possible.
Semester one: 15 days of immersion (1 or 2 days per week) from day 1 of the 
school year, until near the end of term one. This also includes additional voluntary 
days the preservice teacher is able to undertake. This concludes with five consecu-
tive days at the end of term one of the school year.
Semester two: preservice teachers undertake 20 consecutive days culminating in 
full management of the classroom for at least 3 weeks. Voluntary days are encour-
aged and negotiated with the mentor teacher throughout the semester.
Whilst the Advanced Placement is intensively based on schools, preservice 
teachers also attend three seminar days per semester at university. These provide 
on-campus classes on topics such as classroom management, assessment and cur-
riculum. Guest speakers, usually teachers and/or principals from participating 
schools, are also invited to talk about topics such as professional organisations, legal 
liability and duty of care. These seminars provide preservice teachers with opportu-
nities to reflect on their placement experiences with the support of their colleagues 
and teacher educators. In addition to supporting the learning of the preservice teach-
ers, the work of the university-based teacher educators involved in the program 
12  Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring Four Models for Developing…
www.ebook3000.com

200
includes developing and maintaining close professional relationships with schools 
and mentor teachers. One of the philosophical bases of the program is the impor-
tance of relationships in learning to become a teacher. This not only applies to the 
preservice teachers and mentor teachers but also to the teacher educators them-
selves. Critical to the success of the program is effective communication between 
all participants and the direct involvement of teacher educators in the schools as 
much as possible.
Model: Western Australia (Murdoch University)
Introduction
In 2011, Murdoch University in collaboration with Curtin University and the 
University of Western Australia successfully tendered for funding from the 
Australian Government’s National Partnership Quality Teacher reform. The Western 
Australian Combined Universities Training School (WACUTS) program offered a 
select-entry 12-month internship to high-calibre preservice teachers spanning 
kindergarten-­year 12 in rural and metropolitan school contexts. The program gradu-
ated 50 interns per annum for 3 years (2011–2013) with a 92% employment rate 
(Hall, 2013). When national partnership funding ceased in 2013, the WACUTS 
internship model and structure was adopted by Murdoch University and used as a 
blueprint for internships across all accredited initial teacher education programs. 
The Murdoch Internship and Immersion Models (MIMs) continue to cater for K-12 
initial teacher education options spanning rural and metropolitan schools. The 
12-month MIMs’ program, currently graduates up to 40 interns each year with an 
employment rate of over 90% (Foxall, 2014; Hall, 2013). It offers a combination of 
immersion and internship features within its program structure.
Background
In 2010, the Tertiary Educators Rural, Regional and Remote Network (TERRR 
Network) was formed in Western Australia, a region that spans over 2.6 million km2. 
The collaborative goal of the group was to improve the quality of graduates working 
in rural Western Australia. The TERRR Network developed a research project to 
improve the capacity of universities to prepare teachers for employment in rural and 
remote locations (Trinidad, Sharplin, Ledger, & Broadley, 2014). The Western 
Australian Combined Universities Training School (WACUTS) internship emerged 
as a program initiative from the TERRR Network targeting both rural and metro-
politan school needs and contexts. The aim of the Western Australian Combined 
Universities Training School Program (WACUTS) and the subsequent Murdoch 
S. Tindall-Ford et al.

201
Internship and Immersion Models’ (MIMs’) program was to strengthen the nexus 
between theory and practice and in so doing reconnect schools and universities 
(Sclanders, Saggers, & Stuart, 2014).
Structure and Implementation
Research conducted nationally by Ure et al. (2009) classified teacher education pro-
grams under four professional learning models: ‘partnership and collaborative 
learning, reflective learning, clinically applied and pedagogical content knowledge 
focused’ (p. 13). Although the Murdoch Internship and Immersion Models (MIMs) 
are primarily a clinically applied extended practicum, they capture components of 
Ure and colleagues’ four identified models within their essential elements, stake-
holders and processes. Although the process of closely combining university peda-
gogical theory and school experience can be linked to past apprenticeship models 
(Broadley, Ledger, & Sharplin, 2013), the Murdoch Internship and Immersion 
Models also incorporate twenty-first-century demands and technologies to address 
recognised weaknesses of new graduates. The following essential elements, stake-
holders and processes are involved in the MIMs’ 12-month internship and immer-
sion program.
Essential Stakeholders
Internships rely on the interconnectivity and contribution of key stakeholders from 
universities, schools and education sectors. Each contributes in different ways to an 
ongoing and evolving integrated community of practice. The following stakeholders 
and the relationships between each are considered essential for the success of the 
program, however each relationship also presents inbuilt points of contestation.
Intern/Associate  A select-entry preservice teacher is chosen through a rigorous 
selection process of academic screening as well as individual and group 
interviews.
Mentor  An experienced mentor selected by principals and university staff is 
responsible for guiding the assigned intern through a gradual release of responsibil-
ity model (Fisher & Frey, 2008; Gallagher & Pearson, 1989).
School Coordinator  A designated school-based coordinator is responsible for 
overseeing the day-to-day logistics of supporting interns and mentors. Typically, 
school coordinators hold positions of leadership within the school as it has been 
found that leadership support increases effectiveness of program implementation.
University Coordinator  A university academic or designated coordinator of 
interns has the responsibility for monitoring, managing and communicating with all 
12  Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring Four Models for Developing…
www.ebook3000.com

202
key stakeholders. This role encompasses conceptualising, modifying and reviewing 
each element of the program.
Department Coordinator  In Western Australia, the workforce and planning 
directorates provided invaluable support for universities. Funding opportunities that 
align with their areas of priority and shortage have benefitted the entire range of 
internship programs including Western Australian Combined Universities Training 
School (2012–2014), Edith Cowan’s Residency Program (2011–2014), Teach for 
Australia (2013) and Murdoch Internship Models including Pilbara Cities Internship 
Program (2014–2017).
Essential Processes
The process for selection, induction, professional learning, monitoring and reflec-
tion is typically conducted over 18 months. The selection is completed 6 months 
prior to the beginning of the program. An effective communication channel for all 
participants is a priority for operationalising internships (Broadley et  al., 2013; 
Foxall, 2014; Sclanders, et al., 2014). The MIMs’ program provides instructions 
around roles, responsibilities, milestones, professional learning opportunities, 
assessment timelines and operational milestones. In addition, MIMs utilised an 
electronic platform to support an online community of practice. This was consid-
ered an invaluable learning tool for the internship (Broadley & Ledger, 2012) and 
provided a ‘third space’ for reflecting on their practice. Although the MIMs differ 
slightly within each of the school contexts, the essential components remain the 
same as outlined below.
Essential Components
	 1.	 A full calendar year program where interns are based in partnership schools 
whilst enrolled externally in their initial teacher education program.
	 2.	 A selective entry program based on high academic performance and identified 
positive disposition to teach.
	 3.	 A range of professional learning opportunities throughout the year is offered 
for interns and mentors including inductions both collectively and in situ, ongo-
ing site-based professional learning and university workshops each term.
	 4.	 Mentors complete the national online supervising preservice teachers’ modules 
as a baseline requirement. Additional mentoring professional learning is 
­provided including Hudson and Bird’s (2015) Mentoring for Effective Teaching 
program.
	 5.	 A combination of two block placements (10 days +50 days) and 50 distributed 
immersion days across the year (100 total days).
S. Tindall-Ford et al.

203
	 6.	 The Gradual Release of Responsibility and Co-Teaching Model (Pearson & 
Gallagher, 1983) operates in all aspects of the internship.
	 7.	 Interns contribute to a range of day-to-day demands of the profession including 
report writing, intranet use, attendance and parent communication.
	 8.	 All participants contribute to the online community of practice.
	 9.	 A range of interschool and interclass exchanges and initiatives is encouraged to 
add variety to the program and alleviate pressure points.
	10.	 Interns meet face to face weekly with the school coordinator/mentor and online 
with university teacher education academics to reflect on the Australian 
Professional Standards for Teachers (Australian Institute for Teaching and 
School Leadership, 2011) and critical learning incidents.
The MIMs’ 12-month combined internship and immersion program is a select-­
entry program. Students apply knowing the commitment necessary to meet the 
requirements. Logistically, interns enrol in their final-year units externally; how-
ever, they can enrol internally in semester one and use the non-contact school days 
to attend university if preferred. This blended mode of delivery provides the flexibil-
ity needed to juggle the demands of university whilst at the same time meeting the 
demands of school. The program relies on strong partnerships between university, 
schools, teacher registration board and the Department of Education. However, 
these strengths are also its points of vulnerability as success relies on the ongoing 
relationship and commitment by individuals within the program.
Model: New South Wales (University of Wollongong)
Introduction
In New South Wales, from 2015, the Board of Studies, Teaching and Educational 
Standards (BOSTES) mandated a 2-year Master of Teaching degrees to replace 
1-year Graduate Diplomas of Education. This policy change led initial teacher edu-
cation providers to review and reconceptualise their postgraduate teacher education 
programs. The change from a 1-year to a 2-year program provided an opportunity 
to strengthen the practical component of teacher education programs, an important 
imperative as discussed in the introduction to this chapter. This section provides a 
discussion of an initiative by a New South Wales university to enhance preservice 
teachers’ experiential learning through a Professional Immersion Program (PIP).
12  Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring Four Models for Developing…
www.ebook3000.com

204
Context
The purpose of the Professional Immersion Program (PIP) was to immerse preser-
vice teachers into the culture of a school and provide opportunities for preservice 
teachers to observe teachers’ teaching and students’ learning during the first semes-
ter of a Master of Teaching program. The Professional Immersion Program (PIP) 
was developed from a small-scale immersion program offered within the previous 
Graduate Diploma of Education. This program provided a select number of second-
ary preservice teachers, who had shown strong academic results and demonstrated 
professionalism and commitment on their first professional experience, the oppor-
tunity to be immersed into a secondary school setting under the guidance of a men-
tor. The Graduate Diploma of Teaching immersion program ran for 3 years from 
2012 to 2014 and was researched using a case study framework to identify what 
would be required for an up-scaled immersion program within a Master of Teaching 
program.
Based on the Graduate Diploma of Teaching immersion program and a series of 
meetings with local schoolteachers, school leaders and university teacher educators, 
the Professional Immersion Program (PIP) was developed. The primary goal of the 
PIP was to facilitate preservice teachers to make important connections between 
practical school experiences and university-based studies during the first semester 
of the Master of Teaching program. To achieve this, the Professional Immersion 
Program included organised school experiences (e.g. undertaking professional 
learning with peers and mentor teachers, conducting a lesson study with a mentor 
teacher), targeted classroom observations across a range of contexts, reflective tasks 
as well as professional conversations with school leaders and school mentors and 
university teacher educators. All activities were aligned to a specific university sub-
ject so explicit links could be made between the subjects’ educational theory and 
practical school and classroom experiences. To further support the links between 
university theory and preservice experiences at school, mentor teachers and school 
leaders taught in the Master of Teaching first-year subjects. Additionally, profes-
sional conversation workshops were held at the immersion school where preservice 
teachers discussed and reflected on their understandings of a specified topic (e.g. 
differentiation or behaviour management) with other preservice teachers, col-
leagues, school teachers/mentors and university-based teacher educators. These 
conversations were carefully scaffolded by both school teacher/mentors and 
university-­based teacher educators to support preservice teachers’ understanding of 
how theory informs practice.
Evidence of the success of immersion experiences enhancing preservice teach-
ers’ ability to connect theories learnt at university with classroom observation was 
demonstrated in the small-scale Graduate Diploma of Education immersion pro-
gram and supported by previous research (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Conkling, 2008). 
An unanticipated benefit of the professional conversation workshops was enhanced 
understandings between school teacher/mentors and university-based teacher edu-
cators of each other’s context and the differing needs of individual preservice 
S. Tindall-Ford et al.

205
­teachers. This resulted in greater collaboration between the university and immer-
sion schools, leading to the Professional Immersion Program (PIP) appearing to be 
more cohesive. The problematic nature of building collaborative relationships 
between schools and universities has been discussed earlier in the chapter (e.g. 
Zeichner, 2010), and professional conversation workshops to some extent bridged 
this divide.
Structure and Implementation
The Professional Immersion Program (PIP) was a 16-day immersion experience for 
preservice teachers enrolled in the Master of Teaching Primary or Master of 
Teaching Secondary program. The PIP commenced in the second week of the 
Master of Teaching program; preservice teachers had 4 days in a designated immer-
sion school with specific daily tasks. Tasks included accessing the school’s different 
policies (e.g. welfare, literacy, numeracy, etc.), observing teachers teaching differ-
ent year levels, observing a range of subjects being taught and collecting informa-
tion regarding school resources (computers, iPads, library, internet, sports 
equipment, etc.). Preservice teachers were paired so as to support the preservice 
teachers’ immersion experience, to reduce anxiety, to facilitate shared conversations 
on their observations and to provide opportunities for preservice teachers to under-
take team teaching. Preservice teachers returned for 1 day at university to discuss 
and reflect on their tasks, observations and experiences during the 4-day intensive 
immersion. The 4-day intensive immersion experience was designed to demonstrate 
to preservice teachers the reality of the complex nature of schools and teaching to 
inform and confirm their choice of teaching as their profession. After the first week, 
preservice teachers had 1 day a week for 12 weeks immersed within the school, fol-
lowed by a 3-week placement at the end of the first semester and a 3-week place-
ment at the end of the second semester, totalling a 46-day integrated immersion/
practicum program.
To support the implementation of the Professional Immersion Program (PIP), a 
number of initiatives were employed based on the previous Graduate Diploma of 
Teaching immersion program:
•	 Immersion schools, in-school coordinators and school leaders were invited to a 
2-h workshop summarising the purpose and structure of the PIP.
•	 Workshops and all correspondence with schools, school leaders and mentor 
teachers placed an emphasis on the importance of teachers’ professional and 
practical knowledge being complementary to university theoretical knowledge.
•	 Preservice teachers were organised in pairs and matched to a selected mentor 
classroom teacher.
•	 Paired preservice teachers were expected to observe a wide range of classrooms, 
year levels, subjects and school activities including bus duty, yard duty, school 
sport, faculty/staff and professional learning and welfare meetings.
12  Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring Four Models for Developing…
www.ebook3000.com

206
•	 School leaders had a role within the PIP by engaging in a scheduled professional 
conversation with preservice teachers discussing school structure, philosophy, 
school plan and professional expectations.
•	 A well-structured program was communicated to all participants through work-
shops, emails and meetings. Each week of the PIP had a specific focus of tar-
geted school experiences, classroom observations and reflective tasks.
The Professional Immersion Program was evaluated after the first year. Changes 
were implemented in response to feedback from focus groups and school leaders, 
which included a reduction of the number of activities and flexibility in what tasks 
were completed based on the school context. Greater in-servicing of mentor teach-
ers and an online platform were established to share and communicate information 
to all participants.
Model: Queensland (Central Queensland University)
Introduction
At the beginning of the new millennium, Central Queensland University launched 
the Bachelor of Learning Management (BLM), an undergraduate teaching degree 
that was developed in consultation with Queensland schools located in its regional 
footprint. The goal of the BLM was to produce workplace-ready and future-­
orientated graduates who would be the future agents of change within a twenty-first-­
century education circumstance (Smith & Lynch, 2010). In order to achieve such 
goals, the professional experience component of the BLM was explicitly linked to 
the coursework undertaken on campus (Ingvarson, Beavis, Danielson, Ellis & Elliot, 
2005). As such, the preservice teachers applied theory to practice through ‘portal 
tasks’ that were completed during the professional experience. A portal task can be 
described as a structured experience that demonstrates and applies understanding of 
important teaching knowledge (Smith & Lynch, 2010). The professional experience 
component of the BLM thus became integral, and due to this, it included over 
130 days of professional practice. The final year of the BLM program placed pre-
service teachers into a school for 87 days, creating a context of workplace immer-
sion for the demonstration and application of teaching knowledge.
Context
The Bachelor of Learning Management (BLM) program is delivered on five regional 
Queensland sites (Bundaberg, Gladstone, Mackay, Noosa and Rockhampton) with 
a sixth regional site added in 2012 at the Geraldton University Centre in Western 
Australia. Students in the Bachelor of Learning Management (BLM) are enrolled 
S. Tindall-Ford et al.

207
internally and are located within the university campus footprint. Partnership 
arrangements with schools are a vital component of the success of the program, and 
each campus footprint has a number of schools that mentor preservice teachers; 
these schools are referred to as ‘teaching schools’. The success of the final-year 
immersion program relies on teaching schools that will mentor and embrace the 
preservice teachers into the school community. The preservice teacher is seen as a 
school staff member and is treated as a teacher rather than a preservice teacher. In 
this respect mentor teachers and school staff receive specific professional develop-
ment that provides them with a clear understanding of the intentions of the program 
as well as the expected outcomes and learning of the preservice teachers. Like other 
immersion programs, a number of roles are key to the success of the preservice 
teachers. Each teaching school has a nominated site coordinator who is paid as a 
university tutor and delivers school-based professional development sessions to pre-
service teachers. Teaching schools also have an allocated university coordinator 
who supports, troubleshoots and works in collaboration with the site coordinators, 
preservice teachers and mentor teachers.
Structure and Implementation
The final year of the Bachelor of Learning Management (BLM) program consists of 
three professional experiences known as Embedded Professional Learning 3, 4 and 
5 that occur over the course of three school terms. The structure of these culminat-
ing courses is shown in Table 12.1.
Preservice teachers are allocated to a school in the previous year so that they can 
meet their mentor teacher and be inducted into the school prior to the beginning of 
their placement. This process is designed to build the foundations of mentoring 
whereby the preservice teachers and mentor teachers form a professional relation-
ship and begin to discuss expectations and goals for the year.
Key to the success of the professional experience in the final-year program is the 
combination of work experience days and assessable days. The positioning of the 
work experience days in embedded professional learning 3 (EPL3) at the beginning 
Table 12.1  Final-year professional experience structure
Embedded professional learning 3
Undertaken in school term 1 and 
school term 2
  Two student-free days (work experience) followed by ten 
consecutive days (work experience)
  Ten single day visits (five work experience and five 
assessable) followed by 15 consecutive assessable days
Embedded professional learning 4
Undertaken in school term 3
  Twenty consecutive assessable days
Embedded professional learning 5 (internship)
Undertaken in school term 3
  Thirty consecutive assessable days
12  Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring Four Models for Developing…
www.ebook3000.com

208
of the school year intends to set up the preservice teacher for success. The preser-
vice teachers attend the first 12 days (two student-free days and ten consecutive 
days) of the new school year and experience firsthand how the school year begins. 
Preservice teachers attend professional learning sessions with their mentor teacher, 
assist their mentor in physically setting up the classroom and observe how the class-
room environment is developed and how relationships with learners are built. They 
also observe their mentor teaching and assessing, and have the opportunity to par-
ticipate in developing student profiles. This initial component of EPL3 provides the 
preservice teacher with the opportunity to become an integral part of the classroom 
and teaching team.
After the initial 12 days in EPL3, preservice teachers continue to attend their 
placement classroom 1  day each week for 10  weeks and have specified tasks 
­allocated to perform that include profiling, planning, teaching and assessing. During 
this time however, the preservice teachers are also attending university classes 
whereby they are completing their final theoretical, curriculum and pedagogy 
courses. EPL3 is one of their final courses and has a weekly tutorial that supports 
the preservice teacher during their placement with preparatory and reflective tasks. 
Once the preservice teachers have completed all university coursework and assess-
ment, they begin a 3-week continuous block placement that requires them to engage 
in the full range of roles and duties of a teacher.
Following on directly from EPL3 is embedded professional learning 4 (EPL4). 
Although the mid-year holidays separate the EPL3 and EPL4, the momentum 
gained in EPL3 can be further developed as the preservice teachers are required to 
immerse themselves in the role of the teacher by teaching continuously for 4 weeks. 
In this respect, the preservice teacher continues to cultivate the teaching knowledge, 
skills and behaviours expected of a workplace, ‘classroom-ready’ graduate. The 
identified planned outcome of EPL4 is that the preservice teachers demonstrate all 
37 descriptors of the Australian Professional Standards for Teachers (APST) at 
graduate level. Thus, at the conclusion of EPL4, preservice teachers are assessed 
against the graduate standards and, if they are successful, continue onto an intern-
ship. Embedded professional learning 5 (EPL5) consists of a compulsory unpaid 
internship that provides an opportunity for the application and consolidation of the 
APST at the graduate level. During the internship period, preservice teachers are 
granted ‘authorisation’ to teach’ by the Queensland College of Teachers (the state 
regulatory authority) and are able to assume 50% of their mentor’s workload. 
Preservice teachers, in many instances, team-teach with their mentor and are viewed 
by their school as a beginning classroom teacher.
The 13 weeks of continuous placement that the preservice teachers experience 
(along with the associated work experience days) in the final year of the BLM pro-
vides them with explicit opportunities to develop into ‘classroom-ready’ graduates 
who have the ‘know-how’, ‘know-what’, ‘know-why’ and ‘know-when’ (Ambrosetti, 
2010, p. 39). Feedback from preservice teachers confirms that the final-year immer-
sion and internship program are considered the most valuable part of their degree 
and indicate that they experience growth in their confidence of becoming and being 
a teacher (Ambrosetti, 2015). However, some barriers are faced by the preservice 
S. Tindall-Ford et al.

209
teachers during the final-year professional experience program. These include a 
limited ability for earning an income during the continuous placement and a heavy 
workload for which they were not paid.
Discussion: Comparison of the Four Models
Although the four models have been presented as examples of immersion within 
initial teacher education, we drew on case study methodology to analyse and com-
pare the programs. According to George and Bennett (2005, p. 67), comparison of 
case studies in educational research is dependent on having ‘a clearly defined and 
common focus’. The four models highlighted commonalities and divergences as 
well as tensions and vulnerabilities. The models are all unique in regard to their 
context, design and implementation, however, there are important distinguishable 
elements shared across each of the programs.
Firstly, each has a focus on knowledge transfer of preservice teachers from uni-
versity theory to practical learning and teaching in schools. As Dyson (2010) argued, 
preservice teachers need to be provided with opportunities within initial teacher 
education programs to progress ‘both personally and professionally as educators’ 
(p. 8). The opportunity for preservice teachers to take responsibility for their own 
learning, negotiate their role in the school and develop greater understanding of 
themselves as an educator, the school context and their teaching colleagues is also a 
characteristic of each of these programs. Secondly, each immersion program 
strengthened tripartite relationship between schools, universities and teacher educa-
tion by providing an extended opportunity for preservice teachers to be immersed 
within a school as well as support structures to ensure high-quality communication 
between all parties. Research has shown that extended placements may lead to part-
nerships that contribute to improved and strengthened tripartite relationships 
between schools, universities and education sectors (Broadley & Ledger, 2012; 
Foxall, 2014: Trinidad et al., 2014).
In addition to the similar distinguishable elements of the four immersion models, 
there were shared commonalities in relation to personnel, processes and practices. 
For example, preservice teachers, mentors and university colleagues worked col-
laboratively in all four programs. Although the nomenclature differed for key par-
ticipants within each program, the roles and responsibilities remained similar. Also, 
one of the four programs had selected entry of high-calibre students who were 
paired with experienced mentor teachers. All four cases identified the importance of 
providing professional learning for mentors. They also highlighted the fundamental 
importance of leadership backing from both school and university personnel for the 
ongoing sustainability and success of the models. Finally, a range of common prac-
tices were revealed across the immersion programs including early start dates; 
clearly defined, scaffolded program based on gradual release of responsibility 
model (Fisher & Frey, 2008; Gallagher & Pearson, 1989); and a combination of 
placement timing ranging from distributed days to block placements over an 
12  Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring Four Models for Developing…
www.ebook3000.com

210
extended period of time. It must be noted that there are two critical differences 
between the immersion programs showcased in this chapter and traditional 
internships.
Firstly, internships are usually in the final year of a teacher education program 
and are 5 days a week for an extended period of time with the expectation that the 
preservice teacher undertakes the full range of responsibilities expected of a teacher 
with a reduced workload (Longitudinal Teacher Education and Workforce Study, 
2013). The four immersion cases discussed structured school experiences so preser-
vice teachers had a gradual immersion within a school context prior to any extended 
teaching practice. Secondly, during an internship, making connections between 
theory and practice is often ad hoc or incidental. The immersion cases were deliber-
ately organised to explicitly address the theory/practice nexus. Within the immer-
sion cases, preservice teachers were supported to make important connections 
between theory and practice by mentors (school or university teacher educators).
Comparing the Australian immersion models revealed a range of benefits but 
equally similar points of tension or vulnerabilities embedded in the immersion pro-
grams. The main benefits of the immersion program relate to opportunities provided 
for the professional and personal growth of the preservice teachers, as they had 
sustained connection to their students and mentor teachers and the wider school 
community. This enabled the preservice teachers to be seen as, and to perceive 
themselves as, a genuine part of the school community rather than short-term visi-
tors with limited personal or professional connections. Another benefit of the 
immersion programs was the strengthening of the tripartite relationship between 
schools, universities and education sectors, where the idea of learning from profes-
sional experience was expanded to include all participants. This collaborative 
approach to professional experience included the strengthening of preservice teach-
ers’ understanding of how educational theory informs effective practice and the 
opening up of possibilities for mentor teacher/teacher educator interactions and pro-
fessional learning about mentoring.
In terms of shared points of tension or vulnerabilities, the four models all reported 
that to ensure that the immersion program was successful for all involved, there is a 
need for ongoing collaboration between university-based teacher educators and 
school-based mentors. Whilst this occurred in all the cases, it takes time and com-
mitment to ensure that such collaboration is maintained and is seen to be of benefit 
to the school mentors and to the teacher educators. This ongoing collaboration 
requires commitment of time and effort at the school level and university and often 
relies on the goodwill of key players. The ‘hidden costs’ of collaboration such as 
ongoing generosity of those working beyond their remit or scope of work are high-
lighted as concerning and worthy of further research.
Professional learning about mentoring is also essential for the success of any 
immersion program, as argued by Dyson (2010). The challenge for participants in 
these four immersion programs was to provide timely and effective professional 
learning about mentoring and to share how different mentoring styles and processes 
can be improved to support the learning of preservice teachers. This raises the issue 
of whose knowledge is valued in professional experience and how different 
S. Tindall-Ford et al.

211
­perspectives of what it means to learn to teach can be incorporated to support pre-
service teachers. Analysis of the cases presented here suggested that there is a strong 
need for immersion programs to be continually monitored and modified to meet the 
contextual (or different) demands of the school, university and students.
One point of difference between the models was the length of time and tasks 
employed by the programs. Some programs combined immersion with block place-
ments, whilst others were purely immersion experiences. The immersion programs 
ranged from 16 to 100 days; each had clearly defined goals and structure, but it 
could be argued that 16 days across a calendar year provides limited exposure to all 
components of the classroom and yearly demands, such as significant school events 
including reports, assessment, carnivals, field trips, parent nights and planning ses-
sions. However, it must be noted that the 16 days of immersion was followed by two 
3-week professional experience in the same school; in this case, the immersion 
provided the foundation for the following assessed 30 days of teaching.
Another point of difference between the models was the issue of selection of 
preservice teachers for participation in the immersion program. In the Western 
Australian program, preservice teachers were selected on the basis of academic 
results, whilst the programs in Victoria, New South Wales and Queensland involved 
all preservice teachers in a particular year level or course. A select-entry program 
based on merit could be argued and seen as comparable to a typical honour’s pro-
gram. This raises the issue of equity and access and whether or not the benefits of 
such programs should be open to all students. We have argued in this chapter that 
immersion in the life of a school and classroom for an extended period of time has 
many benefits for the professional learning of all those who participate in some type 
of immersion program as part of their professional experience. The provision of a 
range of immersion programs would cater for the perceived inequity issue and 
diversity of student argument, as well as addressing the ‘access’ and ‘opportunity to 
learn’ issues. Many factors impact students’ ability to apply or commit to 12-month 
or 87-day internships, and it is for this reason that many initial teacher education 
programs provide options for their preservice teachers.
Conclusions and Recommendations for Future Immersion 
Programs
The description, comparison and analysis of the four immersion programs provided 
a number of insights and recommendations for consideration in other such pro-
grams in the future. Whilst universities have to make decisions based on their own 
contexts, priorities and expertise, we believe that this chapter has illuminated some 
important guiding principles that should be considered for the development or 
enhancement of future immersion programs.
First, the development of any immersion program is dependent upon close col-
laboration between universities and schools. The staff need to have a shared 
12  Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring Four Models for Developing…
www.ebook3000.com

212
­commitment and understanding of the purpose and structure of the immersion pro-
gram and open and respectful communication to ensure that preservice teachers are 
supported in the best ways possible. This includes the collaborative development 
and use of a range of artefacts such as handbooks, information workshops/forums, 
presentations at staff meetings and an online platform for mentor teachers, preser-
vice teachers and university staff, thereby ensuring communication between all 
immersion participants and encouraging a sense of joint ownership of the 
program.
Second, we believe that immersion programs should be based on an action 
research model, in which data is collected and reviewed and ongoing improvements 
can be made. Immersion programs may also be important for workforce planning, 
in particular for staffing rural and remote schools. Immersing preservice teachers in 
difficult to staff schools that have high turnover of teachers may support prepared-
ness for diverse school contexts.
Finally, we believe that immersion programs offer a unique opportunity to build 
a true ‘community of practice’ in which the professional learning of preservice 
teachers, mentor teachers and teacher educators work together to share ‘problems of 
practice’. These problems are collaboratively explored, and a culture of co-learning 
and co-teaching is therefore fostered. Professional experience as immersion in 
schools provides enhanced opportunities for preservice teachers to not only develop 
their knowledge and skills as ‘classroom-ready’ graduates but to construct their 
professional identity as a valued member of the teaching profession.
The immersion programs described above provide empirical data missing from 
the Australian professional experience literature. The discussions align with many 
of the characteristics of successful initial teacher education programs summarised 
in Australia’s recent Longitudinal Teacher Education and Workforce Study (LTEWS 
2013), The Key Components of Effective Professional Experience (Le Cornu, 2015) 
and Bahr & Mellor’s (2016) Australian Education Review: Building Quality in 
Teaching and Teacher Education. The findings also highlight points of vulnerability 
and the hidden costs of collaborations. Commonalities across of models were 
revealed. However, the immersion programs differed in regard to form, funding and 
effectiveness, and because of this, a further call for research in the area is required. 
Additional, longitudinal studies would be beneficial to the field.
References
Albrecht, W., & Sack, R. (2000). Accounting education: Charting the course through a perilous 
future. (Accounting Education Series No. 16). Sarasota, FL: American Accounting Association.
Allen, J., & Peach, D. (2007). Exploring connections between the in-field and on-campus com-
ponents of a pre-service teacher education program: Student perspective. Asia-Pacific Journal 
Cooperative Education, 8(1), 23–36.
Allen, J. M., Howells, K., & Radford, R. (2013). A ‘Partnership in Teaching Excellence’: Ways 
in which one school-university partnership has fostered teacher development. Asia-Pacific 
Journal of Teacher Education, 13(1), 99–110.
S. Tindall-Ford et al.

213
Ambrosetti, A. (2010). Primary education and the learning manager. In B. A. Knight & D. Lynch 
(Eds.), Applied learning management: New approaches for the new millennium. Frenchs 
Forest, Australia: Pearson Education Australia.
Ambrosetti, A. (2015). Professional placements, mentoring practices and workplace readiness: 
What are the connections? International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change, 2(1), 
1–15.
Aspland, T. (2016, February 4). We can’t afford to ignore the teacher exodus. The Drum, Opinion 
piece. Retrieved from http://www.abc.net.au/news/thedrum/recent-articles/
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership. (2011). Australian Professional Standards 
for Teachers. Retrieved May 16, 2016, from AITSL: http://www.aitsl.edu.au/
Bahr, N., & Mellor, S. (2016). Building quality in teaching and teacher education. Melbourne, 
Australia: ACER. Retrieved from http://research.acer.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=102
5&context=aer
Brady, L. (2002). School university partnerships – What do schools want? Australian Journal of 
Teacher Education, 27(1), 1–8.
Broadley, T., & Ledger, S. (2012). An online community designed to support future makers in edu-
cational reform. In Brown, Hartnett, & Stewart (Eds.), Future challenges, sustainable futures 
(pp. 152–158). Wellington, New Zealand: ASCILITE.
Broadley, T., Ledger, S., & Sharplin, E. (2013). New frontiers or old certainties: The preservice 
teacher internship. In D. Lynch & T. Yeigh (Eds.), Teacher education in Australia: Investigations 
into programming, practicum and partnerships (pp.  94–108). Brisbane, Australia: Oxford 
Global Press.
Conkling, S. (2008). Music teacher education partnerships as professional development. Retrieved 
September 2011, from www.aare.edu.au: http://www.aare.edu.au/08pap/jos08482.pdf
Cook, L., & Friend, M. (1995). Co-teaching: Guidelines for creating effective practices. Focus on 
Exceptional Children, 28, 3.
Darling-Hammond, L., & Adamson, F. (2013). Developing assessments of deeper learning: The 
costs and benefits of using tests that help students learn. Stanford, CA: Stanford University, 
Stanford Center for Opportunity Policy in Education.
Darling-Hammond, L., & Bransford, J. (2005). Preparing teachers for a changing world: What 
teachers should learn and be able to do. San Francisco: Wiley.
Dinham, S. (2014). The worst of both worlds: How the US and UK are influencing education 
in Australia. Walter Neal Oration, Perth, Western Australia 28th October, 2014. Australian 
College of Educators.
Dyson, M. (2005). Australian teacher education: Although reviewed to the eyeball is there evi-
dence of significant change and where to now? Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 30, 1. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.14221/ajte.2005v30n1.4
Dyson, M. (2010). What might a person-centred model of teacher education look like in the 21st 
century? The transformism model of teacher education. Journal of Transformative Education, 
8(1), 3–21.
Feng, J.-Y., Chang, Y.-T., Chang, H.-Y., Erdley, W. S., Lin, C.-H., & Chang, Y.-J. (2013). Systematic 
review of effectiveness of situated e-learning on medical and nursing education. Worldviews on 
Evidence-Based Nursing, 10(3), 174–183.
Fisher, D., & Frey, N. (2008). Better learning through structured teaching: A framework for the 
gradual release of responsibility. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development.
Forgasz, R. (2016). Rethinking the observation placement: A community/cohort approach to early 
professional experiences. In R. Brandenburg, S. McDonough, J. Burke, & S. White (Eds.), 
Teacher education innovation, intervention and impact (pp. 99–116). Singapore, Singapore: 
Springer.
Foxall, G. (2014, June). A primary school internship model: Graduate teacher performance as 
perceived by employing principals. Thesis for Master of Education, Faculty of Education and 
the Arts, Edith Cowan University.
12  Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring Four Models for Developing…
www.ebook3000.com

214
Furlong, J., & Maynard, T. (1995). Mentoring student teachers: The growth of professional knowl-
edge. London: Routledge.
Gallagher, M., & Pearson, P. (1989). Discussion, comprehension, and knowledge acquisition in 
content area classrooms (Tech. Rep. No. 480). Urgana, IL: University of Illinois, Center for 
the Study of Reading.
George, A. L., & Bennett, A. (2005). Case studies and theory development in the social sciences. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hall, G. (2013). Clinical experience in initial teacher preparation: Integrating course and field 
work. Internal working paper for the Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership, 
Melbourne.
Hastings, W. (2004). I felt so guilty: The emotional dimension of supporting problematic pre-ser-
vice teachers. In Australian Association for Research in Education annual conference (pp. 
1–11). Melbourne, Australia: AARE.
Hastings, W. (2010). Expectations of a pre-service teacher: Implications of encountering the unex-
pected. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 38(3), 207–219.
Hudson, P., & Bird, L. (2015). Investigating a model of mentoring for effective teaching. Journal 
of Teaching Effectiveness and Student Achievement, 2(2), 11–21.
Ingvarson, L., Beavis, A., Danielson, C., Ellis, L., & Elliot, A. (2005). An evaluation of the 
Bachelor of Learning Management at Central Queensland University: Final report. Melbourne, 
Australia: Australian Council for Educational Research.
Kamenetz, A. (2014). For teachers, many pathways into the classroom…. Some say too many. 
National Higher Ed, September, 12, 2014. Retrieved from http://www.npr.org/sections/
ed/2014/09/12/347375798/for-teachers-many-paths-into-the-classroom-some-say-too-many
Korthagen, F., Loughran, J., & Russell, T. (2006). Developing fundamental principles for teacher 
education programs and practices. Teaching and Teacher Education, 22(8), 1020–1041.
Kruger, T., Davies, A., Eckersley, B., Newell, F., & Cherednichenko, B. (2009). Effective and 
sustainable university-school partnerships – beyond determined efforts by inspired individuals. 
Canberra, Australia: Teaching Australia, Victoria University School of Education.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Le Cornu, R. (2010). Changing roles, relationships and responsibilities in changing times. Asia-­
Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 38(3), 195–206.
Le Cornu, R. (2015). Key components of effective professional experience in initial teacher 
education in Australia. Melbourne, Australia: Australian Institute for School Teaching and 
Leadership.
Longitudinal Teacher Education and Workforce Study (LTEWS) Final Report, Nov (2013). Curtin 
University, Australia. Worldly.
Mattsson, M., Eilertsen, T. V., & Rorrison, D. (2011). A practicum turn in teacher education. 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Mayer, D. (2014). Forty years of teacher education in Australia: 1974–2014. Journal of Education 
for Teaching, 40(5), 461–473.
Monash University. (2014). Monash University advanced placement guide. Berwick, Australia: 
Monash.
Pearson, P. D., & Gallagher, M. C. (1983). The instruction of reading comprehension. Contemporary 
Educational Psychology, 8, 317–344.
Robinson, W. (2006). Teacher training in England and Wales: Past, present and future perspectives. 
Educational Research and Perspectives, 33(2), 19–36.
Rossner, P., & Commins, D. (2012). Defining enduring partnerships: Can a well-worn path be an 
effective, sustainable and mutually beneficial relationship? Brisbane, Australia: Queensland 
College of Teachers.
Sclanders, M., Saggers, J., & Stuart, J. (2014). An evaluation of the ***** primary school intern-
ship program and the training schools project. Perth, Australia: The NEXUS Network.
Smedley, L. (2001). Impediments to partnership: A literature review of school-university links. 
Teachers and Teaching: Theory and Practice, 7(2), 189–209.
S. Tindall-Ford et al.

215
Smith, R., & Lynch, D. (2010). Rethinking teacher education: Teacher education in the knowledge 
age. Sydney, Australia: AACLM Press.
Stanley, T. (2010). Bridging the gap between tertiary education and work: A model of situated 
learning in accountancy. Retrieved 2011, from www.aare.edu.au: https://www.aare.edu.
au/04pap/owe04331.pdf
Teacher Education Ministerial Advisory Group. (2015). Action now: Classroom ready teachers. 
Canberra, Australia: Australian Government.
Trinidad, S., Sharplin, E., Ledger, S., & Broadley, T. (2014). Connecting for innovation: Four uni-
versities preparing preservice teachers to teach in rural, regional and remote Western Australia. 
Journal of Research in Rural Education, 29(2), 1–13.
Ure, C., Gough, A., & Newton, R. (2009). Practicum partnerships: Exploring models of practicum 
organisation in teacher education for a standards-based profession. Australian Government 
Office for Learning and Teaching. Retrieved from http://www.olt.gov.au/resources
Zeichner, K. (2010). Rethinking the connections between campus courses and field experiences in 
college and university based teacher education. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1–2), 89–99.
12  Immersion Programs in Australia: Exploring Four Models for Developing…
www.ebook3000.com

217
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_13
Chapter 13
Paired Placements in Intensified School 
and University Environments: Advantages 
and Barriers
Catherine Lang and Hoa Thi Mai Nguyen
Abstract  The intensified school and university environments currently in Australia 
require universities and schools to develop new models of professional experience 
practice that meet political and economic drivers. In this chapter, we will present 
two examples where a paired placement professional experience model was imple-
mented in partnership with local schools. Each of the paired placement models were 
informed by sociocultural theories to move beyond the master-apprentice model of 
preservice teacher education to a more innovative and collaborative practice that we 
consider advantageous to the profession. The authors each led the implementation 
of the model in their respective universities and collected empirical data from pre-
service teachers, supervising teachers, principals and university lecturers. We will 
also discuss some of the complexities we encountered when implementing the mod-
els. The models presented were different in delivery and format, yet there were 
similarities in the barriers encountered when we tried to expand them to encompass 
a wider cohort of schools and preservice teachers. We believe it is important to pro-
vide this account of our experiences with paired placement models to broaden the 
discussion by acknowledging concerns related to expanding successful localised 
models for wider implementation. We work in a complex education environment 
and believe that a single model of professional experience, paired placement or 
otherwise, will never accommodate the political and economic needs of schools, 
preservice teachers and universities.
C. Lang (*) 
La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
e-mail: c.lang@latrobe.edu.au 
H.T.M. Nguyen 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia

218
Introduction
Professional experience is a core component of initial teacher education courses, yet 
how we analyse practice is the topic of much discussion in academic circles 
(Grossman, 2016). In this chapter, we present two paired placement models that 
were implemented to better prepare preservice teachers for the classroom. 
Internationally, discussion remains focused on what is the best way to organise the 
core practice of professional experience in the curriculum and pedagogy of teacher 
education (Grossman, 2016). In Australia, professional experience in initial teacher 
education also continues to be a challenging aspect of teacher education courses in 
universities (Bloomfield, 2010; Le Cornu, 2010). There is constant political pres-
sure and demand for a higher level of accountability especially in the professional 
experience component of initial teacher education (Ewing, Lowrie, & Higgs, 2010; 
Sim, 2006; White, Bloomfield, & Le Cornu, 2010). Most recently the Teacher 
Education Ministerial Advisory Group (TEMAG, 2014) review into initial teacher 
education (ITE) in Australia resulted in a series of recommendations, most of which 
have been adopted by the Federal Government (Department of Education and 
Training, 2015), several of which concern the professional experience component 
of initial teacher education.
It is now mandated through the national leadership body, the Australian Institute 
for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL), that teacher educators provide 
improved and structured professional experience that meets quality assurance stan-
dards (AITSL, 2015a). In the ideal situation, partnerships between universities and 
schools can provide collaborative, reflective and authentic high-quality experiences 
for preservice teachers. The tension lies in the minimal level of control universities 
have over what occurs within the school gates. Responding to these circumstances, 
we as teacher educators have implemented two different paired placement models 
to enhance preservice teachers’ professional learning during professional experi-
ence. The theory underpinning each model indicates that paired placement enhances 
dialogue and promotes reflective practice. In this respect preservice teachers 
embrace collaborative learning using peers as an additional source of learning and 
support. There is also evidence that paired placements complement the professional 
experience of the supervising teachers through a triadic approach to teaching, learn-
ing and reflective practice. This will be elaborated further in this chapter when we 
present our individual models.
The model of teacher education in Australia has predominantly been one where 
preservice teachers are provided with theoretical courses at university and then 
classroom experience in a ‘master-apprentice’ model (Mattsson, Eilertsen, & 
Rorrison, 2011, pp. 8–9). Professional experiences in these programs rely on the 
guidance of supervising teachers and/or supervisors from the university who may or 
may not perform a mentoring role. For this reason, we will use the term supervising 
teacher throughout this chapter and university mentor where appropriate. There are 
many issues documented related to this model such as variability in mentoring qual-
ity from the supervising teachers (Smagorinsky, Cook, Moore, Jackson, & Fry, 
C. Lang and H.T.M. Nguyen
www.ebook3000.com

219
2004), a hierarchical relationship between the supervising teachers and preservice 
teachers (Kopp & Hinkle, 2006; Stanulis & Russell, 2000) and ineffective univer-
sity and school partnerships (Ledoux & McHenry, 2008; McLaughlin & Black-­
Hawkins, 2007). It is apparent that the quality of relationships between supervising 
teachers and preservice teachers is closely related to the quality of the learning 
experience and is often out of the control of the teacher educators. Cohen, Hoz, and 
Kaplan (2013) also argue that ‘entrusting preservice teachers in the hands of mentor 
teachers is not the answer to proper preparation in the practicum’ (p. 374). The qual-
ity of practicum also depends much on the role of others including school profes-
sional staff, parents, principals and professional experience coordinators who are 
critically important to create a supportive learning culture for the preservice teach-
ers. Consequently, some universities have adopted a more collaborative or collegial 
relationship with schools and have increased a focus on professional experience 
conversations and preservice teacher reflection during and after their teaching prac-
tice (Le Cornu, 2007). Professional experiences are now being seen as ‘opportuni-
ties for preservice teachers to not only identify what they think...but also how they 
came to develop those views and perspectives’ (Le Cornu, 2016, p. 87).
Paired Placements in Professional Experience
Some recent models of professional experience have identified peers as a source of 
complementary learning and support for preservice teachers with paired placements 
trialled internationally (Dang, 2013; Gutierrez, 2016; Nguyen, 2017; Sorensen, 
2014). The use of peers as another source of learning has been reported to show 
promise as an approach to improve the quality of preservice teacher education as 
well as reciprocal in-service teacher learning for over a decade (Bullough et al., 
2003; Nokes, Bullough, Egan, Birrell & Merrell Hansen, 2008). The formal use of 
peers as an additional source of support is not new, and the literature since the late 
1980s shows increasing interest with the concept being examined from a range of 
perspectives. There are many researchers who have focused on the effects of paired 
placement models (Bullough et al., 2003; Dang, 2013; Gardiner & Robinson, 2009; 
Lang, Neal, Karvouni & Chandler, 2015; Nokes et al., 2008; Smith, 2002; Walsh, 
Elmslie, & Tayler, 2002), Some have explored the concept of peer mentoring (Le 
Cornu, 2005; Nguyen, 2013), whereas others have used peers solely for observation 
(Anderson, Barksdale, & Hite, 2005). There is also a body of literature focused on 
peer tutoring and peer coaching (Benedetti, 1999; Vacilotto & Cummings, 2007). 
The term paired placement seems to be a popular descriptor that refers to the peer-­
based arrangement during the professional experience where two preservice teach-
ers are assigned to work with one supervising teacher, as well as each other, in their 
school placements.
Within this growing interest in paired placements, researchers have reported 
positive effects of paired placement that have resulted in increased professional 
dialogues between supervising teachers and preservice teachers (Gardiner, 2010; 
13  Paired Placements in Intensified School and University Environments: Advantages…

220
Nokes et al., 2008); support and improved learning for preservice teachers (Dang, 
2013; Farrell, 2008; Hsu, 2005; McCarthy & Youens, 2005) and identity develop-
ment (Gutierrez, 2016). Gemmell (2003) argued that ‘what they [the preservice 
teachers] learned from peers was different but complementary from what they 
learned from their mentor teachers and resource staff’ (p. 1). For example, when 
preservice teachers were placed in pairs on placement, they developed skills in com-
promising, collaboration and problem-solving as well as reporting that they felt 
more supported by their peer with whom they shared ideas, problems and successes 
(King, 2006). Similarly, another study reported that a large majority of preservice 
teachers in paired placements ‘found that working in pairs helped them gain confi-
dence and... [enabled them] to see themselves as a teacher’ (Harlow & Cobb, 2014, 
p. 79). Gardiner (2010) reported that teachers who supervised paired placements 
‘valued the additional perspectives and help in the classroom derived from triadic 
collaboration’ (p. 244).
While there are benefits of paired placements, other researchers have noted that 
there are also challenges (Le Cornu, 2005; Nguyen & Hudson, 2012). For example, 
research into peer-based models has revealed some less positive effects such as peer 
conflicts and uneven distribution of the workload and/or assessment processes 
(Baeten & Simons, 2014; Dang, 2013; Wilson, Godinho, Parr & Longaretti, 2002). 
There are also tensions related to the intensified work environments in schools that, 
in some cases, have resulted in difficulty placing preservice teachers in any model, 
let alone a paired model, because of the extra workload it may bring for supervising 
teachers. In Australia, the supervision of preservice teachers is not core business in 
schools and, generally, it is not built into teachers’ workloads until they reach the 
highly accomplished level of the Australian Teacher Professional Standards (see 
APST 6.2, AITSL, 2015b). Everyday demands of teaching, administration and gen-
eral planning make supervision of preservice teachers an unattractive proposition 
for many teachers. While many researchers previously cited have expounded the 
advantages of paired placements, there is a clear need for a deeper understanding of 
barriers related to paired placements in the Australian context.
In this chapter, consistent with the purpose of this volume to highlight innova-
tions and practice in Australia, we provide two models from different universities in 
two Australian states. Each has implemented a paired placement model into their 
initial teacher education courses, though the models operate differently. In both 
universities, meaningful advantages have been reported by all involved in the paired 
placement model; however, significant barriers have emerged in the management of 
each of the models since the university tried to expand the localised model to a 
wider cohort of students and schools. The following section presents a discussion of 
the literature that informed the implementation of the two models. This is followed 
by an explanation of each model that includes a discussion of the challenges that act 
as barriers to implementing each model over a whole degree program or a whole 
cohort of students.
C. Lang and H.T.M. Nguyen
www.ebook3000.com

221
Pedagogical and Political Drivers of Paired Placement Models
The underpinning theory of both models drew upon Vygotskian concepts of joint 
activity and the zone of proximal development (ZPD) (Vygotsky, 1978). Vygotsky 
posited that the majority of learning does not occur individually but rather through 
the interaction that takes place through problem-solving, negotiation, communica-
tion and collaboration with other people in social contexts. The paired placement 
professional experience models presented in this chapter foster preservice teachers’ 
learning through participation in joint activities with peers, sharing ideas, giving 
and receiving feedback and supporting each other. We argue that during profes-
sional experience, this learning takes place within the zone of proximal develop-
ment, where preservice teachers learn collaboratively and vicariously with a peer 
(Vygotsky, 1978). Others also have argued that during the peer-based activities, 
such as peer conversation, co-planning and team teaching, preservice teachers can 
increase their level of performance (Baeten & Simons, 2014; Walsh & Elmslie, 
2005).
Concurrently the implementation of paired placements is one response to the 
current political climate of teacher education in Australia. As discussed earlier, 
reviews of teacher education conducted over recent decades have been highly criti-
cal of what is perceived to be a gap between the reality of the school classroom and 
the curriculum and the practice of teacher education. The Teacher Education 
Ministerial Advisory Group (TEMAG) report into teacher education titled ‘Action 
Now: Classroom Ready Teachers Report’ (Department of Education and Training, 
2015) has as a key focus on a greater integration of theory and practice in the deliv-
ery of teacher education courses. The report delivered 38 recommendations, several 
of which are directly related to professional experience:
Recommendation 19: Higher education providers deliver integrated and structured profes-
sional experience throughout initial teacher education programs through formalised 
partnership agreements with schools.
Recommendation 24: School leaders actively lead the integration of preservice teachers in 
the activities and culture of their school (Department of Education and Training, 2015, 
p. xiv).
In developing our models, these political and pedagogical drivers influenced 
both design and operation. The next section of the chapter provides more detail 
about each of the paired placement models.
Model A: Collaborative Paired Placement Model
The collaborative paired placement model was implemented on the first profes-
sional experience for a Master of Teaching (secondary) program in a large univer-
sity in a metropolitan city in New South Wales. The model was implemented in 
schools that had already signed a partnership agreement with the university. In that 
agreement the schools had agreed that they would accept a cohort of students for the 
13  Paired Placements in Intensified School and University Environments: Advantages…

222
paired placement. In this agreement the university also made a commitment to 
improve the quality of the professional experience by providing an academic men-
tor to work with the school and preservice teachers to develop a tailored curriculum 
for the professional experience. In this model, supervising teachers were offered the 
opportunity to supervise two preservice teachers at the same time. If teachers did 
not want to supervise two preservice teachers, then preservice teachers were still 
placed in pairs, but with different supervisors in the same school for the purpose of 
peer collaboration and observation. However, as a result, most preservice teachers 
were placed in pairs with one supervising teacher, as well as in groups of four to 
eight in a school. They were supported to make focused critical observations of their 
supervising teachers and their pair using an observation protocol that utilised the 
descriptors from the Australian Professional Standards for Teachers at the Graduate 
level. The university provided an academic as a mentor who met the school-based 
group of preservice teachers each week over the 4-week placement. The purpose of 
these meetings was to discuss the focused observations of the preservice teachers 
and to scaffold their development of collaborative teaching and learning practices. 
At some schools the university academic mentor invited supervising teachers to 
these meetings. While this was considered the ideal practice, it did not always occur 
due to supervising teachers being unable to commit to this extra duty. Other schools 
allocated time for the supervising teachers to participate in the paired placement 
discussions, indicating a stronger level of commitment to the success of this model 
of professional experience.
Model B: The Teaching School Embedded Paired Placement 
Model
The teaching school model for professional experience was implemented in a mul-
ticampus university in Victoria and focused on placing preservice teachers in pairs, 
in schools for 2 days a week over a whole year or a whole semester. An important 
aspect of this model that was attractive to partner schools was that preservice teach-
ers had to meet minimum grade requirements to apply for this paired placement 
and to present at the school for interview prior to being accepted (Lang et al., 
2015). This model was available to final-year preservice teachers in Master’s or 
Bachelor’s courses in primary or secondary contexts. In the first pilot of this model, 
the partner schools were co-located or in close proximity to the university campus. 
This enabled the preservice teachers to travel between school and campus readily. 
While the university committed to providing schools with their final-year students, 
the schools also committed to ensure that supervising teachers in the teaching 
school model were their most experienced teachers. In larger schools, as many as 
28 preservice teachers were placed in pairs in a single school; while in smaller 
primary schools, there may only have been one or two pairs of preservice teachers 
placed. All primary preservice teachers were paired with one supervising teacher; 
C. Lang and H.T.M. Nguyen
www.ebook3000.com

223
however, sometimes secondary preservice teachers could only be paired in one of 
their discipline specialisations.
The intention of the model for the university and the teaching schools was to 
improve the professional agency of preservice teachers while also supporting the 
professional development of the supervising teachers. The 2 days a week embedded 
placement allowed preservice teachers to have a more authentic teaching experience 
during all stages of the school year as opposed to an episodic 15- or 20-day place-
ment. Their experience was similar to that of a part-time teacher who is at the school 
for the same days each week of the whole year or semester and could experience the 
ebb and flow of school life including staff meetings, professional development, 
reporting to parents, school sports and fetes, for example. There were high expecta-
tions between the university and the schools of a shared information flow, as well as 
preservice teachers and supervisor experiences that expanded beyond the boundar-
ies of the traditional master-apprentice model. The intention was to run tutorials at 
the school as well as beam in lectures for the students that teachers could also attend 
if they did not have classroom duties.
The teaching school model is now in its fifth year of operation and has been 
expanded to a third regional campus. The university is actively promoting the model 
to an increasing number of schools because it satisfies the AITSL recommendations 
for authentic experiences and partnerships in initial teacher education. To support 
the participating schools in the paired placement model and preservice teachers for 
such an extended period, the university committed to providing academic advisors 
to conduct relationship visits to the school each semester as well as free professional 
development opportunities. There was also a guaranteed rapid response process if 
any issues arose between preservice teachers and supervising teachers. The latter 
was common to all participating schools.
Enablers and Barriers Encountered in These Paired 
Placement Models
This chapter builds on our earlier and separate publications that report on the advan-
tages of the paired placement model (Lang et al., 2015; Nguyen, 2013). In sum-
mary, these publications present the evidence of a stronger community of learning 
between preservice teachers and supervising teachers who participated in the paired 
placement models. There is evidence of both models enabling an effective zone of 
proximal development allowing preservice teachers to work together to evolve their 
teacher identity. In this project we use comparative analysis of our previous empiri-
cal data from our pilot studies and identified three enabling factors that develop the 
quality of paired placement programs. Firstly, there must be commitment from all 
stakeholders; secondly, trust and respect between the paired preservice teachers are 
essential; and finally there must be strong lines of communication between all 
13  Paired Placements in Intensified School and University Environments: Advantages…

224
stakeholders. In the following section, we will address the enabling factors observed 
in both of the models and the barriers encountered.
Model A
University A implements the model of paired placement within the partnership 
school for the first block of professional experience in the initial teacher education 
program. Implementing the model in other placement blocks has been very chal-
lenging, especially in secondary schools where there has been a reluctance to host a 
large cohort of preservice teachers at one time, and also where the supervising 
teachers have hesitated to take two preservice teachers simultaneously. Thus the 
commitment from schools was reported to be a critical factor in implementing this 
model.
A high level of commitment from the preservice teachers enhanced the quality of 
their learning in Model A. The preservice teachers reported that if it were not a 
compulsory requirement to work in pairs during their professional experience, their 
peer interaction would not have happened the way it did. The model required a com-
mitment of extra time and additional work from the preservice teachers themselves, 
as they had to observe each other, share lesson plans, give feedback, and team teach 
if required. They were unable to realise the benefits of this arrangement until they 
were committed to the process and experienced it personally. For example, one of 
the preservice teachers said:
I saw this process as very interesting because if we were not assigned to work together, we 
wouldn’t have been interested in each other. It had to be a necessity, and we only realised 
later that it was interesting and beneficial. (Lena)
They reported that their peer interactions grew more active as the placement 
continued. Their comments indicated that at the beginning, the interaction was 
reluctant and only to fulfil the requirements of the program. Later on, they reported 
that they had come to enjoy working with their peer. The following quote typifies 
comments made from preservice teachers:
At first, I did not like it because I had to work with someone I did not know... Later when 
we talked with each other, I found it easy to share with my peer. I thought to myself that I 
was so lucky that I was with Lena because we got along really well, but we also got along 
in a professional way. It wasn’t just like ‘Hey buddy, let’s go partying on the weekend’. We 
both have very similar ideas and we were keen to use what we’ve learnt at university.
The preservice teachers also acknowledged the importance of support from their 
supervising teacher and the university mentor assigned to them during the profes-
sional experience who created an environment in which the preservice teachers 
were encouraged to work together. Most of the supervising teachers in the primary 
partnership schools were willing to take two preservice teachers at the same time as 
they had a high opinion of this model, as the following quotes reveal:
C. Lang and H.T.M. Nguyen
www.ebook3000.com

225
They learn from each other as well as me, so that’s just an extra person to learn from. And 
I’m here, I know everyone at the school, but if you come by yourself it’s a bit scary and a 
bit daunting but if you have someone with you that’s in your position then you don’t feel as 
scared anymore and you’re able to get on with what you’re here for, so I think it’s a very 
good idea.
Coming in pairs it definitely really helpful for them, because I think back to my pracs and 
how I was by myself on class. I think it’s much better for them to come together when they 
can because they support each other and it’s not as intimidating for them.
It’s a real positive having two extra adults in your room, let alone pre-service teachers, who 
are supportive, it means that you’re team-teaching pretty much all the time even though 
they’re not necessarily teaching lessons, they’re still in that room supporting me and sup-
porting the students, so it’s been really beneficial, definitely.
The university mentors commented that the model helped preservice teachers 
realise that teaching is not an isolated profession and that teachers are often colle-
gial in practice. The university mentors were required to convene a meeting of all 
the preservice teachers weekly. In these meetings the preservice teachers were 
encouraged to reflect on their teaching and relate this to the professional standards 
in their handbook. Discussion focused on the experiences of peers working together, 
which reinforced the advantages of working in pairs through a variety of other activ-
ities including peer observation, peer feedback, co-teaching, co-planning and shar-
ing workload. This reinforcement of the benefits of the model encouraged the 
preservice teachers’ commitment to learning together and supporting each other.
Trust between the pairs, and between the supervising teacher and the preservice 
teacher, is seen as a critical factor in implementing Model A. Trust between two 
preservice teachers created a favourable atmosphere for peers to work together 
freely and effectively and connect with each other. Some pairs in Model A knew 
each other and had worked with each other in their program before. They found it 
very comfortable to work together during their paired placement. Even some pairs 
who worked with each other for the first time still considered their pair as a sound-
ing board. Some of the following quotes indicate how they trusted each other and 
valued each other’s ideas:
It’s been really good because I feel like every time we observe each other we learn from 
each other.
[What] we did was bounce ideas for lessons off each other, and that was good.
We discuss ideas together, and I guess I shouldn’t underestimate that. I just think that when 
I prepare my lessons I prepare them on my computer by myself, but no, we do discuss ideas 
for the lessons together.
University mentors were allocated to the same school for the professional experi-
ence each year in order to support the development of a trusting relationship between 
university and school staff. Some of the university mentors conducted mentoring 
training and professional learning workshops for teachers. This model helped to 
develop a trusting relationship between the university mentors and supervising 
teachers because they were going to the same site every year. The familiarity of the 
same person supporting the preservice teachers each year helped build a strong and 
13  Paired Placements in Intensified School and University Environments: Advantages…

226
trusting relationship to allow the supervising teachers to contribute and enhance the 
quality of mentoring in the model. Breaking down the barriers between university 
and schools allowed staff at both institutions to work together to provide the preser-
vice teachers with authentic professional experience.
There were communication challenges in implementing Model A between the 
university and schools. The success of the model relied on a clear set of guidelines 
for students and a guidebook for supervising teachers. Given that supervising teach-
ers are mostly focused on their daily teaching responsibilities and necessary admin-
istration duties, they often do not have time to read complex documents and 
instructions. There are also schools that accept preservice teachers from several 
universities, each having different placement arrangements, so clear and concise 
communication is critically important in sustaining the quality learning of preser-
vice teachers. Data from interviews with supervising teachers and preservice teach-
ers indicated there were inconsistencies in implementing this model across schools 
causing some misunderstanding from the supervising teachers’ perspective. One of 
the teachers said:
All I would say is, I know Rachel (academic mentor) was sending out emails each week 
with what elements they were focusing on and I read through those emails but I did find 
that, with everything else that’s going on, what with it being the end of term 3, I don’t think 
I was really on top of what element they were focusing on, so I guess if we were going to 
do that properly we would all need to be involved in that in a meeting from the outset and 
talk about that trajectory right from the beginning, because I just left that to Rosie and 
Maggie to manage in their own self-reflection.
Similarly, there were several comments expressing the confusion in terms of the 
work allocation between pairs, as one of them said:
In the future I would just make sure that there were concrete guidelines for sections in 
shared lessons, so that each person knew what they were responsible for teaching and what 
they were not.
Model B
As the teaching school model was expanded, barriers began to emerge. Some barri-
ers were internal to the university and some came from schools. Model B was modi-
fied to accommodate local conditions of a variety of schools. There were challenges 
related to timetable changes both at the university and the different schools. For 
example, in 2016, the teaching school model of embedded paired placement for a 
semester or a year was only adopted in six partner schools. A larger number of part-
ners (30) accepted paired placements of students in 3- or 4-week blocks; however, 
the majority of placement schools continued with the traditional 1:1 model. It was 
clear that there is a greater acceptance of paired placements in primary schools than 
secondary schools. Secondary schools were more reluctant to take preservice teach-
ers in paired placements. In some cases, this is related to the difficulty of pairing 
students according to discipline areas.
C. Lang and H.T.M. Nguyen
www.ebook3000.com

227
Comments such as the following from a secondary school are indicative of the 
feedback received from schools that declined the paired placements:
The purpose of the mentor is to provide quality feedback on a lesson, to do this with 2 stu-
dents would be very difficult. I think the work load for a staff member with 2 preservice 
teachers is expecting too much. I also query the effect on morale of the student sharing with 
another student, some students are more forthwright (sic) than others. I question the benefit 
to their confidence.
Our number one priority is our students and the quality of the teaching as part of the teach-
ing and learning cycle. On speaking to many of the staff here they are not in favour of 
supervising two preservice teachers. I know it is not for the money however two students is 
too much.
This was not always the case in the secondary classroom. When supervising 
teachers are committed to the model, there was evidence that they saw the advan-
tages of it. One history teacher commented on the benefit of the paired placement 
not only for the ability to do small group work in the class but also for his own learn-
ing. He expressed delight in having a more recent graduate of the senior secondary 
school subject that he was teaching. He commented via email that he asked the pair 
of preservice teachers to plan the revision for the upcoming exam and was impressed 
at the novel and interactive approach they took. Another commented in the focus 
group:
Students could be involved in the planning, could volunteer to teach sections with me, we 
really built the team approach. They felt they could help and chip in and explain. It built 
their confidence too. One would even Google a topic to help me explain a concept and find 
a clip to demonstrate it during the lesson. They were not passive observers.
One primary school principal expounded its benefit to improving student out-
comes. Her suburban school catered for many students from different countries, and 
the advantages of having the equivalent of three teachers in a class were seen as 
highly beneficial:
We have about 43 different cultures with a range of oral language experiences and abilities. 
We find having two extra adults in all the classes in the junior years is a great benefit to the 
students and teachers, and the parents love it too. They see the ratio drop from to 1 adult to 
24 children to 1 to 8. The three become one teacher for that class, with three sets of eyes to 
plan, three sets of eyes to implement, and three sets of eyes to reflect what was happening 
in the classroom and how things might be changed the next time they teach.
In all placements, the role of the supervising teacher is critically important for 
the model to be successful. As indicated in the above quotes, when the supervising 
teachers assign preservice teachers shared tasks, implement team teaching and have 
regular meetings with preservice teachers for planning and reflection, the outcomes 
are beneficial to all.
As Model B expanded, there were isolated situations where preservice teachers 
were not as compatible as would have been desirable. One of the primary supervis-
ing teachers commented that the paired placement model took more time when the 
13  Paired Placements in Intensified School and University Environments: Advantages…

228
skills and abilities varied between the two preservice teachers. She felt the need to 
conduct separate meetings to ensure that each preservice teacher’s privacy was 
maintained:
I needed more time to give feedback, time for individuals. In my class I had the experience 
that one was weaker.
In contrast to this another supervising teacher commented: ‘they were able to 
observe each other, we worked in a three way situation …’, however I gave indi-
vidual feedback for personal privacy.
While preservice teachers who apply and are successful in gaining a paired 
placement often extol its advantages, the time commitment is also a barrier in Model 
B. Preservice teachers needed to commit to 2 days a week for a whole semester, not 
just for a 4-week block in the semester. This program is highly promoted on the 
university website as well as the internal learning management system. It is not 
mandatory, however, and at most only 10–15% of preservice teachers nominated to 
be part of it.
We have found when we promote Model B that some principals are reluctant to 
accept paired placements of preservice teachers. We present the following comment 
to illustrate the tension that universities encounter when changing a traditional pat-
tern of preservice teacher supervision. For example, a principal said:
I know the university want it so that they [the preservice teachers] can reflect with each 
other, but they kind of reflect with each other and build up their relationship without build-
ing up a strong relationship with the teacher because they don’t need the teacher so much.
Another principal questioned how crowded a classroom would get with three 
adults in it.
Trust between the supervising teacher and the preservice teachers, and likewise 
between the pair of preservice teachers, is key in Model B. One preservice teacher 
commented on how she felt fully trusted by her supervising teacher:
There is more room for collaboration and team work. Unlike being on prac for a couple of 
weeks, preservice teachers in the teaching school program are able to get up at any point, 
during any lesson, or on any day, without disrupting the class environment/flow.
While this relates partly to the 2 days a week nature of the model, it also empha-
sises how the preservice teacher’s professional agency is enhanced in this model 
and how the supervising teachers develop a trust in the abilities of the preservice 
teachers in their classrooms. The trust that develops between the pairs in the class-
room is evident in their feedback, for example:
I think I was lucky that I had a partner that I’d never worked with before but we had similar 
interests and we got along really well so I felt like I could go to him no matter what. I would 
ask anything anytime and he would be the same, even if we were doing team teaching we’d 
both be standing out the front bouncing off each other teaching and then meanwhile we’d 
be whispering things to each other like ‘let’s do this’ or ‘should we do this?’, we’d be reas-
suring each other the whole time. So that was awesome.
C. Lang and H.T.M. Nguyen
www.ebook3000.com

229
When communication factors are in deficit, we have found that they act as barri-
ers to successful implementation of paired placement models. There is a greater 
need of relationship management between schools that deliver the program and the 
university, particularly as the implementation of the model expands. A strategy in 
response to this need for stronger relationships was the implementation of regular 
school visits, managed by an Academic Liaison Team of adjunct academics to build 
up a relationship with the school over the year.
The implementation of Model B has become more complex as the paired place-
ment model expands across year levels and cohorts. The opportunity was opened to 
third year students in their final semester in 2015. We found that some supervising 
teachers needed to be reminded that third year students have different requirements 
from fourth year or master’s level students. It is a challenge to pair students in the 
same year level because Model B is opt in, not mandatory. While the university has 
ensured that they communicated this with the supervising teachers, the feedback has 
been that this is not an ideal situation. Despite the opportunity for our third year 
students to be mentored informally by fourth year or master’s level students, the 
university has discontinued this practice.
Discussion
In this chapter we have presented two models of paired placement implemented to 
accommodate the economic and political drivers of initial teacher education in 
Australia. These paired placement models cannot eliminate all tensions related to 
professional experience, however. In practice, developing innovative school part-
nerships takes time and resources. The models of paired placement in professional 
experience that we have presented in this chapter are usually advantageous to those 
who participate (Lang et al., 2015; Nguyen, 2013) and satisfy some of the political 
drivers by providing an authentic transition into the profession. However, in our 
experience, there are a series of operational barriers and challenges. Neither model 
would be successful without professional and academic staff setting up contracts, 
accommodating local curricula and maintaining strong communication between 
universities and schools.
We each have experienced greater success using these models with one cohort of 
preservice teachers from one degree program. Complexities arose with Model B 
when a variety of cohorts had the option of undertaking the model, which intro-
duced difficulties in timetabling in two campus locations. The different structure of 
the annual calendar in schools and semesters in university presents challenges in 
timetabling that require extra planning and administrative overload. We have also 
each noted the importance of the school and university commitment required to 
enable the program to succeed. Supervising teachers need time to meet and discuss 
with preservice teachers and university academic mentors. University academic 
mentors must be allocated time to visit schools. These meetings must be part of 
teachers’ and academics’ workload, and when this occurs, the model works best. 
13  Paired Placements in Intensified School and University Environments: Advantages…

230
Furthermore the economic constraints posed when students have part-time jobs, and 
full-time university courses limit their opportunities to be flexible in schools for 
2 days a week for a whole semester. This is a constant tension for the implementa-
tion of Model B. The university staff involved in implementing both models are 
considering informing preservice teachers of their pairs prior to the start of the 
professional experience and provide stronger support for working in pairs within the 
subject in which the professional experience is embedded.
Australian teacher education providers are in a period of change brought about 
by TEMAG (Department of Education and Training, 2015) and other economic 
requirements. In the design and delivery of initial teacher education degrees, we 
believe that a paired placement model should be a mandatory requirement for pre-
service teachers for at least one placement in their degree program. The advantages 
of paired placement are evident in the ability to create a powerful space in educating 
classroom-ready teachers. However, universities and schools need to commit 
resources to sustain the partnerships like those described in this chapter. In both 
models the support of dedicated professional and administration staff cannot be 
underestimated. Each model requires substantial resourcing to coordinate inter-
views, pair preservice teachers and provide suitable instructions to schools. This 
must be factored into the workload of academic staff as well as supervising 
teachers.
Conclusions and Recommendations
The paired placement model provides preservice teachers with a rich experience in 
terms of what they are able to achieve and learn with each other. We emphasise the 
need for the option of paired placement models like the two described in this chap-
ter. The peer interaction that occurs in the paired placement models nurtures preser-
vice teachers and minimises the power imbalance that can be present in other 
models. The paired placement models encourage professional learning for supervis-
ing teachers as well as preservice teachers. Grounded in partnership and focused on 
practice, the paired placement models should be dialogical and collaborative, thus 
fostering a more equal balance of power between participants. We believe that our 
research into this model of delivery provides detail that can inform innovative 
design of the professional experience component of ITE programs. This informa-
tion may enable risk management strategies to be put in place to ensure a successful 
introduction of the paired placement model. Cohen et al. (2013) suggested that ‘the 
implications will suggest a broader view of the professional experience, designing a 
new teacher education program embedded in school organizational culture’ (p. 345). 
We also advocate the need to adapt models to suit local cultures, organisational 
structures and partnership agreements between schools and universities.
C. Lang and H.T.M. Nguyen
www.ebook3000.com

231
References
Anderson, N.  A., Barksdale, M.  A., & Hite, C.  E. (2005). Preservice teachers’ observations 
of cooperating teachers and peers while participating in an early field experience. Teacher 
Education Quarterly, 32(4), 97–117.
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL). (2015a). Statement of Intent. 
Retrieved March 2017, from http://www.aitsl.edu.au/docs/default-source/board-of-directors-
resources/statement-of-intent-july-2015-final.pdf?sfvrsn=2
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL). (2015b). Australian Professional 
Standards for Teachers. Retrieved March 2017 from http://www.aitsl.edu.au/australian-profes-
sional-standards-for-teachers/standards/list
Baeten, M., & Simons, M. (2014). Student teachers’ team teaching: Models, effects, and conditions 
for implementation. Teaching and Teacher Education, 41, 92–110. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
tate.2014.03.010
Benedetti, T. A. (1999). An investigation of peer coaching in the foreign language student teach-
ing practicum. (Ph.D.), The Ohio State University, Ohio, USA. Retrieved from http://proquest.
umi.com.ezproxy.lib.rmit.edu.au/pqdweb?did=733095381&Fmt=7&clientId=16532&RQT=3
09&VName=PQD
Bloomfield, D. (2010). Emotions and ‘getting by’: A pre-service teacher navigating professional 
experience. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 38(3), 221–234. doi:10.1080/13598
66x.2010.494005.
Bullough, J. R. V., Young, J., Birrell, J. R., Cecil Clark, D., Winston Egan, M., Erickson, L., & 
Welling, M. (2003). Teaching with a peer: A comparison of two models of student teaching. 
Teaching and Teacher Education, 19(1), 57–73.
Cohen, E., Hoz, R., & Kaplan, H. (2013). The practicum in preservice teacher education: A review 
of empirical studies. Teaching Education, 24(4), 345–380. https://doi.org/10.1080/10476210.2
012.711815.
Dang, T. K. A. (2013). Identity in activity: Examining teacher professional identity formation in 
the paired-placement of student teachers. Teaching and Teacher Education, 30, 47–59. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2012.10.006
Department of Education and Training. (2015). Action now: Classroom ready teach-
ers 
report. 
Retrieved 
May 
2015, 
from 
https://docs.education.gov.au/documents/
action-now-classroom-ready-teachers-report
Ewing, R., Lowrie, T., & Higgs, J. (2010). Teaching and communicating: Rethinking professional 
experiences. Melbourne, Australia: Oxford University Press.
Farrell, T. S. C. (2008). ‘Here’s the book, go teach the class’: ELT practicum support. RELC 
Journal, 39(2), 226–241. doi:10.1177/0033688208092186.
Gardiner, W. (2010). Mentoring two student teachers: Mentors’ perceptions of peer placements. 
Teaching Education, 21(3), 233–246.
Gardiner, W., & Robinson, K. S. (2009). Paired field placements: A means for collaboration. The 
New Educator, 5, 81–94.
Gemmell, J. C. (2003). Building a professional learning community in preservice teacher educa-
tion: Peer coaching and video analysis. (Ed.D), University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, 
USA. Retrieved from http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?did=765182921&Fmt=7&clientId=20
806&RQT=309&VName=PQD
Grossman, P. (2016, August 22–24). The turn towards practice: Building practice-based teacher 
education. Keynote Presentation 41st Annual Association for Teacher Education in Europe 
Conference. Fontys University of Applied Sciences – Eindhoven, Netherlands.
Gutierrez, A. (2016). Exploring the becoming of pre-service teachers in paired placement mod-
els. In R.  Brandenburg, S.  McDonough, J.  Burke, & S.  White (Eds.), Teacher education: 
Innovation, intervention and impact (pp. 139–155). Singapore, Singapore: Springer.
Harlow, A., & Cobb, D. J. (2014). Planting the seed of teacher identity: Nurturing early growth 
through a collaborative learning community. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 39(7), 
70–88.
13  Paired Placements in Intensified School and University Environments: Advantages…

232
Hsu, S. (2005). Help-seeking behaviour of student teachers. Educational Research, 47(3), 307–318.
King, S. (2006). Promoting paired placements in initial teacher education. International Research 
in Geographical and Environmental Education, 15(4), 370–386.
Kopp, E.  M., & Hinkle, J.  L. (2006). Understanding mentoring relationships. Journal of 
Neuroscience Nursing, 38(2), 126–131.
Lang, C., Neal, D., Karvouni, M., & Chandler, D. (2015). An embedded professional paired place-
ment model: ‘I know I am not an expert, but I am at a point now where I could step into the 
classroom and be responsible for the learning’. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 
43(4), 338–354. doi:10.1080/1359866X.2015.1060296.
Le Cornu, R. (2005). Peer mentoring: Engaging pre-service teachers in mentoring one another. 
Mentoring 
& 
Tutoring: 
Partnership 
in 
Learning, 
13(3), 
355–366. 
https://doi.
org/10.1080/13611260500105592.
Le Cornu, R. (2007). Learning circles in the practicum: An initiative in peer mentoring. Paper 
presented at the 2007 ATEA Conference ‘Quality in Teacher Education: Considering Different 
Perspectives and Agendas’. The University of Wollongong, NSW.
Le Cornu, R. (2010). Changing roles, relationships and responsibilities in changing times. Asia-­
Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 38(3), 195–206. doi:10.1080/1359866X.2010.493298.
Le Cornu, R. (2016). Professional experience: Learning from the past to build the future. Asia-­
Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 44(1), 80–101. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13598
66X.2015.1102200
Ledoux, M. W., & McHenry, N. (2008). Pitfalls of School-University Partnerships. The Clearing 
House: A Journal of Educational Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 81(4), 155–160. doi:10.3200/
tchs.81.4.155–160.
Mattsson, M., Eilertsen, T. V., & Rorrison, D. (2011). A practicum turn in teacher education. 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publisher.
McCarthy, S., & Youens, B. (2005). Strategies used by science student teachers for subject knowl-
edge development: A focus on peer support. Research in Science & Technological Education, 
23(2), 149–162.
McLaughlin, C., & Black-Hawkins, K. (2007). School–university partnerships for educational 
research—distinctions, dilemmas and challenges. The Curriculum Journal, 18(3), 327–341. 
doi:10.1080/09585170701589967.
Nguyen, H. T. M. (2013). Peer mentoring: A way forward for supporting preservice EFL teachers 
psychosocially during the practicum. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 38(7), 31–34.
Nguyen, H. T. M. (2017). Models of mentoring in language teacher education. Cham, Switzerland: 
Springer.
Nguyen, H. T. M., & Hudson, P. (2012). Peer group mentoring: Preservice EFL teachers’ col-
laborations for enhancing practices. In A. Honigsfeld & M. G. Dove (Eds.), Co-teaching and 
other collaborative practices in the EFL/ESL classroom: Rationale, research, reflections, and 
recommendations (pp. 231–241). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Nokes, J. D., Bullough, R. V., Jr., Egan, W. M., Birrell, J. R., & Merrell Hansen, J. (2008). The 
paired-placement of student teachers: An alternative to traditional placements in secondary 
schools. Teaching and Teacher Education, 24(8), 2168–2177.
Sim, C. (2006). A national overview of teacher education in Australia. In G. Reinstra & A. Gonczi 
(Eds.), Entry to the teaching profession: Preparation, practice, pressure and professionalism 
(pp. 18–22). ACT: Australian College of Educators.
Smagorinsky, P., Cook, L. S., Moore, C., Jackson, A. Y., & Fry, P. G. (2004). Tensions in learn-
ing to teach: Accommodation and the development of a teaching identity. Journal of Teacher 
Education, 55(1), 8–24. doi:10.1177/0022487103260067.
Smith, J. D. N. (2002). The development of tandem teaching placements. Mentoring & Tutoring: 
Partnership in Learning, 10(3), 253–274. doi:10.1080/1361126022000022507.
Sorensen, P. (2014). Collaboration, dialogue and expansive learning: The use of paired and mul-
tiple placements in the school practicum. Teaching and Teacher Education, 44, 128–137. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2014.08.010.
C. Lang and H.T.M. Nguyen
www.ebook3000.com

233
Stanulis, R. N., & Russell, D. (2000). ‘Jumping in’: Trust and communication in mentoring student 
teachers. Teaching and Teacher Education, 16(1), 65–80.
Teacher Education Ministerial Advisory Group (TEMAG). (2014). What characteristics should be 
fostered and developed in graduate teachers through their initial teacher education? Canberra, 
Australia: Australian Government, Department of Education and Training.
Vacilotto, S., & Cummings, R. (2007). Peer coaching in TEFL/TESL programmes. ELT Journal, 
61(2), 153–160. doi:10.1093/elt/ccm008.
Vygotsky, L.  S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Walsh, K., & Elmslie, L. (2005). Practicum pairs: An alternative for first field experience in early 
childhood teacher education. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 33(1), 5–21. doi:10.1
080/1359866052000341098.
Walsh, K., Elmslie, L., & Tayler, C. (2002). Pairs on practicum (trial): Early childhood students 
collaborate with peers in preschool/kindergarten. Paper presented at the Australian Association 
for Research in Education (AARE) Conference, Brisbane, Queensland.
White, S., Bloomfield, D., & Le Cornu, R. (2010). Professional experience in new times: Issues 
and responses to a changing education landscape. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 
38(3), 181–193.
Wilson, J., Godinho, S., Parr, G., & Longaretti, L. (2002). Rethinking peer teaching. Paper pre-
sented at the Australian Association for Research in Education (AARE) Conference, Brisbane, 
Queensland.
13  Paired Placements in Intensified School and University Environments: Advantages…

235
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6_14
Chapter 14
Educating Future Teachers: Insights, 
Conclusions and Challenges
Angelina Ambrosetti, Ros Capeness, Jeana Kriewaldt, and Doreen Rorrison
Introduction
— Innovative (adjective): having new ideas about how something can be done —
When we speak of being innovative, we refer to changing processes, products 
and ideas or creating better ones. Taking the notion of innovation seriously, this 
volume provides research findings of new practices in professional experience in 
Australian initial teacher education programs and offers alternative ways of con-
ceiving and enacting professional experience.
This volume’s genesis lies in the questions that we posed when we began this 
project:
	1.	 What are the promising innovations in thinking about, rethinking and enacting 
professional experience to better prepare prospective teachers to effectively enter 
the workforce?
A. Ambrosetti (*) 
Central Queensland University, Noosaville, QLD, Australia
e-mail: a.ambrosetti@cqu.edu.au 
R. Capeness 
Queensland College of Teachers, Toowong, QLD, Australia
e-mail: ros.capeness@qct.edu.au 
J. Kriewaldt 
Melbourne Graduate School of Education, The University of Melbourne,  
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
e-mail: jeana@unimelb.edu.au 
D. Rorrison 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia 
Charles Sturt University, Bathurst, NSW, Australia
e-mail: drorrison@csu.edu.au
www.ebook3000.com

236
	2.	 What can new research contribute in strengthening teacher preparation in schools 
and early learning centres?
	3.	 What might these promising innovations mean for the range of stakeholders 
responsible for designing and implementing teacher education including teacher 
educators, supervising teachers, policymakers, employers and regulatory 
authorities?
The area of professional experience was chosen as the focus of this volume as it 
is broadly acknowledged as a critical component of learning to teach (Darling-­
Hammond, 2010; White, Bloomfield, & Le Cornu, 2010). Yet university knowledge 
is often privileged over practice-based learning. Concerns abound that there is a 
disconnection between what preservice teachers learn in university-based settings 
and what they learn and enact in school-based settings, which has led to a call for a 
‘practicum turn’ in initial teacher education. This important turn is marked by new 
and ‘different arrangements, approaches and concepts for practice that draw special 
attention to practicum learning’ (Mattsson, Eilertsen, & Rorrison, 2011, p. 2). It is 
by forging meaningful connections between university-based and school-based 
teacher educators, and particularly by designating experienced people in dedicated 
roles to work across both sites that the preparation of teachers can be genuinely 
strengthened (Rorrison, 2011).
Jennifer Gore (2001) rightly claims that ‘more field experience in and of itself is 
not necessarily better for preservice teachers’ (p. 126). Rather, it is the quality and 
range of professional experience that matters, the ways that relationships are man-
aged and nurtured that make a difference, and how coursework and assessment are 
authentically connected to professional experience that is important. Taking into 
account practical considerations from the number of days spent at school sites to 
learning to understand how teacher education can better work as a holistic system 
supported by all partners, it is necessary to recast the problem of preparing teachers. 
The call to a practicum turn then is a call to build a communicative space to effec-
tively interlace practice and theory within specific education contexts.
As highlighted in many of the chapters, the changing landscape of initial teacher 
education policy in Australia has created opportunities to reimagine the structure, 
the relationships and the tools of the professional experience component. In this 
respect, the recommendations from the Teacher Education Ministerial Advisory 
Group (TEMAG) report, Action Now: Classroom Ready Teachers (2015), provides 
challenges and opportunities that enable us to rethink teacher preparation. Although 
current initial teacher education accreditation processes and accountabilities have 
changed rapidly, leaving many teacher educators feeling that there is little flexibility 
for difference and innovation, the documented accounts in this volume provide 
strong examples of the types of innovations that can occur within this evolving 
landscape.
The goal of initial teacher education is to produce ‘classroom-ready’ graduate 
teachers. Yet this is a contested term. Some educationalists describe classroom 
readiness as the point at which the graduate standards, as set by the Australian 
Institute for Teaching and School Leadership, has been achieved. Others state that 
A. Ambrosetti et al.

237
classroom readiness encapsulates more than what is described in the Australian 
Professional Standards for Teachers (Gore, 2015). We maintain that the profes-
sional experience component of initial teacher education programs is essential in 
supporting preservice teachers to reach this level and to develop more extensively.
The conceptual frameworks and the empirical studies explored in the chapters in 
this volume offer new insights to teacher educators. Drawing together some of the 
insights, conclusions and challenges that have surfaced as a result of the innovations 
documented in this volume, we present three key themes:
•	 That successful partnerships are characterised and defined by variability and 
contextual knowledge
•	 That nontraditional experiences in professional placements can be points of sig-
nificant learning
•	 That classroom readiness is enabled and enhanced through collaborative spaces.
Successful Partnerships Are Characterised and Defined 
by Variability and Contextual Knowledge
School-university partnerships are an integral element of educating future teachers. 
These partnerships respond to the requirement that teachers need to be sufficiently 
developed if they are to begin their career well prepared and ready to fulfil the chal-
lenges of their complex professional role. In this sense they are more than classroom 
ready. These partnerships between schools and universities must be effective, 
authentic and sustainable (Zeichner, 2010). Several chapters in this volume provide 
insights into the elements that enable such successful partnerships to flourish. 
Findings from Chaps. 2, 3, 4, 5 and 12 are now discussed.
The authors of Chap. 2 report on two important aspects of successful partner-
ships as a result of their policy review and examination of four partnership projects. 
Firstly, they argue that partnerships must cater to the individual needs and require-
ments of the partnership participants. They describe, in relation to their research, 
how partnership agreements were structurally implemented to reach the goals of 
their initial teacher education programs. The projects included partnerships that 
focused on specific preservice teacher learning, mentor teacher professional learn-
ing, mutual learning among participants and the implementation of an internship 
program. Secondly, and just as importantly, the authors identified that it was more 
essential to focus on the outcomes and successes of the partnership than the specific 
type of partnership that was developed. Although funding and resourcing were cru-
cial factors in enabling the success of the partnerships explored in this chapter, the 
authors emphasise that flexibility within official policy to address the specific needs 
and contextual factors were the real drivers of success.
Chapter 12 discusses the analysis of four different immersion programs. A key 
finding from the comparison of the models examined highlights related findings 
about partnerships. While there were similarities in each immersion program, each 
14  Educating Future Teachers: Insights, Conclusions and Challenges
www.ebook3000.com

238
was unique in structure and organisation and responded to specific contextual needs 
of accreditation processes and/or local workforce requirements. The success of each 
immersion model was a result of ongoing collaboration and joint ownership between 
the schools and universities involved. As such, the authors report that these factors 
strengthened established partnerships as they actively valued, encouraged and sup-
ported close working relationships between preservice teachers and mentor teach-
ers, and between school-based and university-based teacher educators. Taking a 
different theoretical perspective, the authors of Chap. 5 present their examination of 
partnerships and experiences of professional practice using cultural-historical activ-
ity theory. The authors identified boundary objects and brokers that brought the 
different activity systems together to create a space in which partnerships could 
become more collaborative and achieve strong learning for their preservice 
teachers.
Innovative examples of how ‘the third space’ or ‘hybrid spaces’ have been used 
to forge stronger partnerships between universities and schools are theorised in 
Chap. 3. Flexible and contextually grounded knowledge within school-university 
partnerships have enabled the creation of new spaces for learning. By interrogating 
the ways that third space is variously conceptualised in respect to partnerships and 
professional experience, the creation of new ways of doing and thinking has emerged 
that draw upon multiple sources of knowledge, collaboration and shared responsi-
bilities. Similarly, Chap. 4 discusses how cogenerativity as a theoretical construct 
can be utilised to endorse the importance of collaboration and shared work for creat-
ing new understandings between interested parties. The authors of Chap. 4 have 
provided three examples of how cogenerativity develops and strengthens partner-
ships between schools and universities. Collectively these examples demonstrate 
how cogenerativity provides opportunities to transform learning for all 
participants.
Nontraditional Experiences in Professional Placements 
as Points of Significant Learning
Several chapters in this volume shine a spotlight on the structure and composition 
of professional experience through immersion programs, paired placements and 
service learning placements. Each innovation identifies that time, commitment, 
trust and strong partnerships are required to ensure success. These examples of 
innovative, nontraditional professional experiences are promising accounts that sig-
nal ways that professional experience can present preservice teachers with contex-
tually unique opportunities to develop their professional knowledge. Nontraditional 
placements are not easy to implement as the authors of Chap. 13 report. Across the 
world, paired placements are growing in popularity and are often established to 
achieve specific goals. However, along with those positive aspects that facilitate 
successful outcomes for the preservice teachers, there are barriers and complexities. 
A. Ambrosetti et al.

239
The authors argue that all stakeholders (schools, supervising teachers and university 
supervisors) need to be committed to the goals of professional experience and sup-
porting pairs of preservice teachers during their placements. The authors also argue 
that open communication between all stakeholders is important as well as the need 
for strong levels of trust and respect between preservice teachers. Thus, strong, open 
partnerships are foundational requirements when implementing an alternative 
model. Tinkering at the edges however can be fraught.
Service learning can and arguably should be an integral part of initial teacher 
education programs, yet it is not usually considered a traditional professional expe-
rience. The authors of Chap. 11 remind us that developing prospective teachers 
should not be limited to professional experiences in classrooms, and they report that 
nontraditional placements are promising sites for personal growth for participants. 
Drawing on three examples of service learning placements, the authors show how 
each example positions the preservice teachers as boundary crossers. This can be 
seen in the way that preservice teachers undertake specific projects that are com-
munity partnerships and collaborations that contribute to growth in their teaching 
competence. Likewise, the immersion programs presented in Chap. 12 are nontradi-
tional placements that aim to develop and/or consolidate real-world professional 
knowledge and skills. These long-term placements can better enable preservice 
teachers to take on the role of the teacher and embrace a wider range of the complex 
elements of teachers’ work rather than what may be possible over a shorter period. 
The authors report that these immersive approaches enable preservice teachers to 
become part of the school community and better able to make connections between 
theory and practice.
Classroom Readiness Is Enabled and Enhanced 
Through Collaborative Spaces
Chapters 6, 7 and 8 focus on the practices of mentoring within professional experi-
ence to show how these practices support preservice teachers to learn to be and to 
become. Communication is key to transforming practice and to enabling self-­
formation, and the authors of these chapters identify that mentoring as praxis pro-
vides a space for this to occur. Using examples of mentoring in action, the authors 
highlight that when a mentoring relationship is a collaborative rather than a hierar-
chical expert/novice approach, a space for preservice teachers to learn to be occurs. 
Chapter 8 provides an example of mentoring in action through an online space that 
demonstrates how sharing practice with peers and experts can support preservice 
teachers to interrogate their practice beyond the confines of the school setting.
In Chaps. 9 and 10, research on how dialogues about practice can be enhanced 
during the professional experience is reported. The use of a developmental assess-
ment rubric tool in Chap. 9 promotes professional conversations between mentors 
and preservice teachers, and specifically encourages preservice teachers to reflect 
14  Educating Future Teachers: Insights, Conclusions and Challenges
www.ebook3000.com

240
on their learning and their students’ learning. Preservice teachers have commented 
that their participation and engagement in the communicative spaces enabled by the 
assessment rubric encouraged them to be proactive in their own learning and devel-
opment. The use of a teaching tracker tool described in Chap. 10 provides the 
opportunity for mentors to give descriptive feedback to preservice teachers about 
their teaching, building their capacity to make professional judgements. In this 
respect the tool enables communicative spaces for dialogue about practice. The 
examples, however, report that the tools work only when participants involved in the 
experience contribute to the communicative space and engage in collaborative dis-
cussions about practice. These processes show promise in building prospective 
teachers’ capacities to make professional judgements, forming ‘a key and critical 
element of professional practice’ (Groundwater-Smith & Mockler, 2009, p. 8).
Policy Directions
Many of the chapters in this volume have identified that the introduction of a set of 
nationally agreed professional standards for teaching has been a significant driver of 
the recent quality teaching agenda in Australia. The Australian Professional 
Standards for Teachers (APST), endorsed by all Federal, State and Territory 
Ministers for Education in December 2010, have been implemented across all juris-
dictions since 2012. The form and focus of the standards have had powerful effects 
in shaping how initial teacher education is understood in Australia and in identify-
ing what can reasonably be expected of a graduate teacher in terms of being ‘class-
room ready’ (TEMAG, 2015). Paradoxically, teacher professional standards may 
deprofessionalise teaching by diminishing how the scope and purposes of teaching 
are articulated (Kriewaldt, 2015).
The notion of teacher knowledge as a complex and continuously changing amal-
gam is strongly evidenced in the literature over the last 15 years (Fenwick & Weir, 
2010; McCormack & Thomas, 2005; Santoro, Reid, Mayer, & Singh, 2012). The 
seven professional standards articulate the professional knowledge, practice and 
engagement required of teachers across four career stages (graduate, proficient, 
highly accomplished and lead teacher) and reflect the continuum of teachers’ devel-
oping professional expertise of what they know and are able to do (Australian 
Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL), 2011). The graduate level of 
the APST outlines the expected performance at graduation from an initial teacher 
education program, and in these statements, it highlights that graduate teachers are 
still evolving their professional skills and identity. This continuum of learning and 
developing is important to keep in mind in terms of focussing on what should be a 
shared responsibility for quality teaching preparation and outcomes.
Consequently, as well as this intense national focus on the role initial teacher 
education plays in the preparation of effective teachers, there is also another matter 
of concern. This refers to the impact that certain factors have on beginning teachers’ 
knowledge development once teachers have graduated from their initial teacher 
A. Ambrosetti et al.

241
preparation. These factors include employment type (full time, part time, casual), 
diversity of school context and induction support received (Mayer et al., 2014). 
Higher education institutions, in partnership with systems, employers, schools and 
regulatory authorities, are collectively responsible for continuous improvement and 
raising public confidence in the teaching profession, not just teacher education 
providers.
In this volume, we have presented innovative approaches for finding productive 
solutions and ways forward in third or hybrid spaces within the professional experi-
ence component of initial teacher education. These are approaches that could also 
be extended to differently imagined partnerships between systems, schools, univer-
sities and regulatory authorities. It is important to note that a number of recommen-
dations from the TEMAG report (2015) also focus on supporting beginning teachers 
and workforce planning challenges. Like all successful partnerships, these recom-
mendations take time to establish and evolve. This invariably creates a mismatch 
between the time needed for the deep engagement necessary for successful and 
sustainable outcomes and the limited timeframes imposed by governments for evi-
dencing reform. We argue that innovative and insightful practice helps fill this gap.
Government policy is right to focus on strengthening the ways in which higher 
education institutions approach the development of effective and well-prepared 
graduate teachers. However, it is important that accountability and regulatory mech-
anisms lead to improvements, and not have the counter-effect of reducing the qual-
ity of some programs by constraining providers from developing the types of 
innovative approaches that feature in this volume.
Teaching is one of the single largest professions in Australia. In a climate of 
reform that is also focused on the effectiveness of teachers’ practice, there is a grow-
ing expectation that teachers will enable better learning outcomes for all students. 
This has implications for the range of skills needed by teachers, especially when 
dealing with twenty-first century skills (Asia Society, 2014), and necessitates a bet-
ter understanding of developments and trends that will both shape the teacher work-
force of the future as well and allow teachers the best possible opportunities to be 
effective practitioners (Weldon, 2015).
As we write, the new requirement for a final-year teacher performance assess-
ment is being developed for implementation across all Australian teacher education 
programs from 2018. This requirement stipulates that prior to graduation, preser-
vice teachers must present evidence of their impact on student learning after the 
completion of a cycle of planning, teaching, assessing and reflecting. Australia is 
poised to follow in the path of some states in the United States of America who use 
the edTPA, which, in turn, has built on the Performance Assessment for California 
Teachers (PACT) model (Reagan, Schram, McCurdy, Chang, & Evans, 2016). In 
the edTPA, the performance assessment task assesses planning, instruction and 
assessment domains of teaching using a structured portfolio approach.
The means by which preservice teachers are required to account for their prac-
tices using a performance assessment can powerfully shape their understandings of 
what matters (Allard, Mayer, & Moss, 2014; Soslau, Kotch-Jester, & Jorlin, 11 
December 2015). Teacher performance assessments may have positive formative 
14  Educating Future Teachers: Insights, Conclusions and Challenges
www.ebook3000.com

242
effects or they may diminish opportunities for reflection if the tasks are not well-­
designed (Greenblatt & O’Hara, 2015). What form the Australian TPA tool will 
take, and what impact this will have on program and graduate quality, remains to be 
seen. No doubt this will generate a new level of interest and scrutiny within the 
professional experience component of initial teacher education. How this knowl-
edge and practice can be demonstrated, evidenced and assessed within initial teacher 
education programs, particularly in terms of impact on student learning, raises the 
important question of how best to make consistent judgements or assessments of 
what graduate teachers know and can do to demonstrate classroom readiness 
(Buchanan & Schuck, 2016; Mayer, 2015). This volume provides evidence that 
many teacher educators and initial teacher education providers are well positioned 
to generate new programs and in what we see “as a natural evolution….[where] 
those responsible for professional learning are creating their own arrangements to 
meet the needs or constraints of their context” (Rorrison, Hennissen, Bonanno & 
Männikkö Barbutiu, 2016, p. 125).
Conclusion
This volume extends the growing literature in this area by offering insights into 
professional experience and by providing a point of departure for constructing alter-
native conceptions. Along with perspectives offered by scholars from a range of 
institutions, these approaches provide opportunities to explore the value of integrat-
ing field-based learning and academic-based learning. The findings in Educating 
Future Teachers provide teacher educators and policymakers with insights of what 
is possible in the context of a strongly regulated, accountability-driven teacher edu-
cation landscape. We conclude with a call to reimagine ‘the prac’ and to challenge 
university-based teacher educators and school-based teacher educators to work 
together to strategically create a system to ensure that all preservice teachers receive 
quality opportunities to learn in and through their placements in the field, interlaced 
with their coursework studies. We see a greater need for people who work across 
sites. We also see a greater need for codesigned curriculum and joint assessment and 
a shift away from mindsets such as ‘us and them’ and ‘here and there’.
Together we have engaged critically in reconsidering what might be stronger or 
more productive ways of thinking about professional experience. We have sought to 
provide a flexible and supportive space for scholarship. We have achieved this by 
working collectively and collaboratively with a range of teacher educators open to 
new ways of preparing prospective teachers and who were optimistically innovating 
in their research. Our focus shifted from considering aspects of professional experi-
ence as a stand-alone component of teacher education to considering, in their local 
contexts, the joint work between schools and universities and between teacher edu-
cators and teachers (Ure, 2010; Zeichner, 2010).
Joint work matters. By enacting this in professional experience, and in teacher 
education more widely, we prepare future teachers who understand that they have 
A. Ambrosetti et al.

243
entered a collaborative profession and that education is a public enterprise for the 
common good of all participants.
References
Allard, A. C., Mayer, D., & Moss, J. (2014). Authentically assessing graduate teaching: Outside 
and beyond neoliberal constructs. The Australian Educational Researcher, 41(4), 425–443.
Asia Society Global Cities Education Network. (Asia Society). (2014). Early teacher develop-
ment: Trends and reform directions.
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL). (2011). National professional 
standards for teachers. Carlton, Australia: Ministerial Council for Education, Early Childhood 
Development and Youth Affairs (MCEECDYA).
Buchanan, J., & Schuck, S. (2016). Preparing a ‘classroom ready’ teacher: The challenge for 
teacher educators. In I. Gibbs (Ed.), Teacher education: Assessment, impact and social per-
spectives (pp. 1–22). Hauppage, NY: Nova Science Publishers.
Darling-Hammond, L. (2010). Teacher education and the American future. Journal of Teacher 
Education, 61(1–2), 35–47. doi:10.1177/0022487109348024.
Fenwick, A., & Weir, D. (2010). The impact of disrupted and disjointed early professional develop-
ment on beginning teachers. Teacher Development. An International Journal of Teachers 
Professional Development, 14(4), 501–517.
Gore, J. (2001). Beyond our differences: A reassembling of what matters in teacher education. 
Journal of Teacher Education, 52(2), 124–135.
Gore, J. (2015). Insights of impact of teacher education programs: A focus on classroom observa-
tion. Melbourne, Australia: Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership.
Greenblatt, D., & O’Hara, K. E. (2015). Buyer beware: Lessons learned from EdTPA implementa-
tion in New York state. Teacher Education Quarterly, 42(2), 57–67.
Groundwater-Smith, S., & Mockler, N. (2009). Teacher professional learning in an age of compli-
ance: Mind the gap. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Kriewaldt, J. (2015). Strengthening learners’ perspectives in professional standards to restore rela-
tionality as central to teaching. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 40(8), 83–98.
Mattsson, M., Eilertsen, T., & Rorrison, D. (2011). A practicum turn in teacher education. 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Mayer, D. (2015). What is classroom ready? How do we determine it? Professional Educator, 
14(5), 4–7.
Mayer, D., Doecke B., Dixon, M., Allard, A., White, S., Kline, J., et al. (2014). Studying the 
Effectiveness of Teacher Education (SETE) final progress report.
McCormack, A., & Thomas, K. (2005). The reality of uncertainty: The plight of casual beginning 
teachers. Change: Formations in Education, 8(1), 17–31.
Reagan, E.  M., Schram, T., McCurdy, K., Chang, T.-H., & Evans, C.  M. (2016). Politics of 
policy: Assessing the implementation, impact, and evolution of the performance assess-
ment for California teachers (PACT) and edTPA. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 24, 9. 
doi:10.14507/epaa.24.2176.
Rorrison, D. (2011). Border crossing in practicum research. Reframing how we talk about practi-
cum learning. In M. Mattsson, T. V. Eilertsen, & D. Rorrison (Eds.), A practicum turn in 
teacher education (pp. 19–44). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishing.
Rorrison, D., Hennissen, P., Bonanno, P., & Männikkö Barbutiu, S. (2016). Problematising practi-
cum arrangements. Sharing experiences from different traditions and contexts. European 
Journal of Teacher Education ATEE 41st Annual Conference Educating the Best Teachers: a 
Challenge for Teacher Education. Published Conference Proceedings (peer reviewed).
14  Educating Future Teachers: Insights, Conclusions and Challenges
www.ebook3000.com

244
Santoro, N., Reid, J., Mayer, D., & Singh, M. (2012). Producing ‘quality’ teachers: The role of 
teacher professional standards. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 40(1), 1–3.
Soslau, E., Kotch-Jester, S., & Jorlin, A. (2015). The dangerous message teacher candidates infer: 
If the edTPA does not assess it, I don’t have to do it. Teachers College Record.
Teacher Education Ministerial Advisory Group (TEMAG). (2015). Action now; classroom ready 
teachers. Canberra, Australia: Department of Education.
Ure, C. (2010). Reforming teacher education through a professionally applied study of teaching. 
Journal of Education for Teaching, 36(4), 461–475. doi:10.1080/02607476.2010.513860.
Weldon, P. (2015). The teacher workforce in Australia: Supply, demand and data issues. Policy 
insights issue 2. Melbourne, Australia: ACER.
White, S., Bloomfield, D., & Le Cornu, R. (2010). Professional experience in new times: Issues 
and responses to a changing education landscape. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 
38(3), 181–193.
Zeichner, K. (2010). Rethinking the connections between campus courses and field experiences in 
college and university-based teacher education. Journal of Teacher Education, 61(1–2), 89–99. 
doi:10.1007/s11165-009-9141-1.
A. Ambrosetti et al.

245
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018 
J. Kriewaldt et al. (eds.), Educating Future Teachers: Innovative Perspectives  
in Professional Experience, DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-5484-6
A
Activity theory, 6, 71–84, 238
Activity theory analysis, 71–84
Agency, 8, 38, 46, 55–57, 63, 65, 108, 109, 
140, 152, 153, 158, 161, 162, 164, 
167–169, 223, 228
Agentic learning, 145–148
Ambrosetti, Angelina, 1–9, 33–46, 93, 95, 
159, 193–212, 235–243
Andrews, Rebecca, 7, 105–119, 123–132
APST. See Australian Professional Standards 
for Teachers (APST)
Aspire program, 177, 186–187, 190
Australian context, 197–198, 220
Australian Professional Standards for Teachers 
(APST), 8, 18, 20, 25, 61, 62, 77, 93, 
94, 138–140, 142, 144–149, 151, 152, 
154, 178, 186, 197, 203, 208, 220, 222, 
237, 240
B
Boundary crossing, 6, 17, 73–75, 78, 80, 81, 
83, 84
Boundary objects and brokers, 6, 71–84, 238
C
Capeness, Ros, 1–9, 235–243
Case study, 8, 13–28, 75, 77, 78, 81, 83, 84, 
99, 163, 204, 209
Changing landscape, 66, 106–107, 236
Classroom evidence, 159, 160, 169
Classroom-ready, 2, 8, 18, 25, 28, 95, 140, 
159, 183, 193–212, 221, 230, 236, 237, 
239–240, 242
Clinical approach, 164
Cogenerativity
literature, 51–58
in practice, 67
Collaborative practice, 222
Communicative space, 7, 92, 98, 101, 
105–119, 236, 240
Community, 4, 6–8, 20, 24, 26, 27, 35,  
39–41, 44, 51–53, 55, 57, 58, 62,  
63, 72, 74–76, 80–84, 92, 94, 106,  
110, 111, 124–126, 128–132,  
141, 176–182, 184–190, 196, 198,  
199, 201–203, 207, 210, 212,  
223, 239
Communities of practice, 6–8, 53, 55, 57,  
62, 76, 84, 106, 176, 177, 181, 185,  
190, 196
Conversation, 5–9, 23, 41, 43, 50–52, 59, 62, 
64, 65, 67, 77, 92, 94, 97, 98, 115, 116, 
119, 124, 125, 127–131, 137–154, 
158–162, 164, 166–170, 176, 188, 189, 
204–206, 219, 221, 239
Co-teaching triads, 50, 53, 60, 61, 63, 65
Critical, 2, 6, 7, 9, 17, 34–38, 75–78, 80–82, 
107–109, 111, 116, 117, 123–128, 
130–132, 138, 153, 159, 169, 170, 180, 
187, 190, 200, 203, 210, 219, 221, 222, 
224–227, 236, 240, 242
Critical pedagogy, 124, 126
D
Descriptive observation, 8, 158, 160–162, 
164–169
Design-based research, 128, 130
Developmental assessment, 7, 137–154, 239
Index
www.ebook3000.com

246
Dialogic
approach, 98, 100, 162
exchange, 42, 43, 51, 52, 54, 65
mentoring, 98
Dialogue, 7, 8, 23, 37–38, 43, 46, 50, 52, 53, 
55, 57, 59–61, 74, 92, 98, 124, 126, 
127, 130, 153, 157–170, 218, 219,  
239, 240
Diverse communities, 180
Diversity in perspectives, 113–115
E
Eckersley, Bill, 8, 72, 106, 175–190, 196
Educational inequality, 127
Epistemological, 15, 37, 106, 107, 132
Experience, 1–9, 14, 17, 18, 20, 22–24, 26,  
27, 33–46, 50, 51, 53, 54, 58–62, 
64–67, 71–84, 92–101, 106–115, 
117–119, 124, 125, 128–130, 132–154, 
158–160, 162, 163, 167, 169, 170, 
175–190, 194–199, 201, 204–212, 
218–230, 235–242
F
Forgasz, Rachel, 3, 6, 14, 17, 22,  
33–46, 196
Formative assessment, 139, 147
G
Generativity, 52, 56
Graduate, 5, 8, 23–25, 50, 62, 71, 73, 77, 
137–140, 145–147, 149, 151–154,  
158, 176, 178, 186–189, 196, 197,  
200, 201, 203–206, 208, 212, 222,  
227, 236, 240–242
Graduate teachers, 73, 137, 138, 147, 187, 
203, 236, 240–242
Grimmett, Helen, 6, 49–68
Group mentoring, 128, 130
H
Hadley, Fay, 7, 105–119, 123–132
Heck, Deborah, 6, 13–28, 33–46, 49–68
Hybridity, 34–37, 39, 41, 43, 46
I
Immersion programs, 8, 9, 193–212, 237–239
Initial teacher education, 2, 3, 6, 7, 14–18, 20, 
22, 23, 25, 27, 28, 34, 35, 40, 49–68, 
71, 91, 94, 137, 138, 154, 158, 169, 
170, 176, 177, 187, 190, 194–198, 200, 
202, 203, 209, 211, 212, 218, 220, 221, 
223, 224, 229, 230, 235–237, 239–242
Inquiry, 8, 38, 44, 73, 77, 97, 99, 111, 124, 
125, 128, 164, 166–167, 179, 185
Integrative pedagogical model, 110–111
Inter-individual territory, 98–99
J
Jurisdictions, 6, 9, 14–18, 26, 28, 73, 240
K
Kelly, Nick, 3, 7, 105–119, 123–132
Kickbusch, Steven, 7, 105–119, 123–132
Kriewaldt, Jeana, 1–9, 157–170, 235–243
L
Lang, Catherine, 9, 217–230
Learning to be, 7, 92, 97, 105–119
Ledger, Susan, 6, 8, 13–28, 193–212
Lifeworld, 106, 107
Loughland, Tony, 6, 71–84
Low socio-economic schools, 73, 180, 186
M
Master-apprentice model, 82, 218, 223
Melbourne declaration, 18
Mentoring
practices, 91, 95–101, 118, 169
as praxis, 7, 91–101, 124, 239
programs, 111, 124, 125, 128
relationships, 7, 91–94, 96, 99, 109, 111, 
113, 118, 125, 239
as support, 93–94
Mentorship programs, 92, 131
Mentor teachers, 8, 22, 41, 43, 46, 52, 53, 55, 
58, 60–64, 66, 92, 95, 106, 107, 113, 
115–118, 124, 127, 158–161, 164, 
166–168, 184, 185, 194–196, 199, 200, 
204–210, 212, 219, 220, 237, 238
Metalogue, 6, 49–68
Metanarrative, 50
Methodology of metalogue, 49–68
MTeach program, 54, 58, 59, 63, 65, 66, 158
Mutually educative, 7, 91, 96, 101
Index

247
N
Nash, Melanie, 8, 157–170
Nguyen, Hoa Thi Mai, 6, 9, 71–84,  
95, 217–230
Nielsen, Barbara, 8, 137–154
O
O’Brien, Mia, 7, 105–119, 123–132
Online mentoring, 7, 92, 123–132
Ontological, 106, 107
P
Paired placement, 9, 217–230, 238
Participatory approaches, 19, 38
Partnership(s), 3, 4, 6, 8, 13–28, 33–46, 
49–68, 71–75, 77, 82–84, 99, 100,  
106, 138, 152, 162, 169, 176, 178, 
180–188, 190, 194–197, 200–203,  
207, 209, 218, 219, 221, 223, 224,  
229, 230, 237–239, 241
Partnership policy, 13–28
Pedagogical, 41, 53, 92, 96, 98, 100,  
106–108, 110–111, 113, 115, 117,  
118, 126, 127, 161, 163, 169, 177,  
187, 195, 201, 221
Peer support, 9, 196, 219, 220, 239
Policy reforms, 14, 16–19, 22, 25–28, 34, 197
Post-lesson conversations, 8, 161, 162, 164, 
169, 170
Power differentials, 38, 41, 53
Practice
architecture, 179
of teaching, 3, 19, 83, 97, 99, 125, 126, 
129, 130, 132, 139–141, 158, 160, 161, 
167–170, 186, 195, 196, 210, 219
Practicum, 3, 4, 16, 45, 80, 160, 176, 196–198, 
201, 205, 219, 236
Praxis, 7, 81, 91–101, 107, 110, 123–132,  
179, 239
Preparation of future teachers, 242
Preservice teacher(s), 3, 4, 6–9, 14, 17, 19–21, 
24–27, 34–36, 40–46, 52, 53, 55, 
57–64, 66, 72, 73, 75–83, 95, 97, 99, 
100, 106–115, 117, 118, 124, 125, 
129–132, 138–140, 142–154, 158–170, 
176–178, 180–190, 194–204, 206–212, 
218–230, 236–242
Preservice teacher identity, 6, 40, 42–44
Professional
conversations, 8, 41, 140, 145, 148, 
158–160, 169, 176, 204–206, 239
experience, 1–9, 14, 17, 20, 22, 24, 26, 
33–46, 50, 51, 53, 54, 58–62, 64–67, 
71–84, 92, 94, 95, 99, 101, 106–111, 
113–115, 117–119, 124, 125, 128, 130, 
137–154, 175–190, 197, 199, 204, 206, 
207, 209–212, 218–222, 224–226, 229, 
230, 235–239, 241, 242
learning, 4, 8, 17, 19–22, 27, 40, 53, 62, 
74, 80–83, 93–95, 99, 107, 108, 115, 
138, 141, 157–170, 176, 177, 181, 183, 
185, 198, 201, 202, 204, 205, 207–212, 
218, 225, 230, 237
reasoning, 167
Project-based learning, 8, 175–190
R
Reid, Catherine, 8, 17, 157–170, 240
Relational agency, 8, 55–57, 158, 161, 164, 
167, 169
Roles of mentors and mentees, 91
Rorrison, Doreen, 1–9, 16, 34, 110, 125, 195, 
218, 235–243
Rubric, 7, 8, 137–154, 239, 240
S
School based experiences, 3
School-university partnerships, 3, 6, 15–17, 
19–25, 27, 42, 46, 49–68, 71–73, 83, 
176, 180, 186, 187, 196, 237, 238
Self-regulation, 112, 140, 145, 151, 153
Service learning, 8, 175–190, 238, 239
Shared understanding, 50, 51, 55, 142,  
151, 160
Situated learning experience, 181
Spirit of play, 111–113, 118
Summative assessment, 139–141, 148, 151
Supervising teacher, 18, 20, 44, 45, 75–77, 
81–83, 93, 95, 99, 100, 107, 130, 
138–154, 196, 217–220, 222–230,  
236, 239
Support to supervision, 94–96
Suspending judgement, 164–166, 168
Sweeney, Trudy-Ann, 8, 137–154
Synopsis of chapters, 5–9
System partnerships, 50, 55, 64, 65
T
Talbot, Debra, 7, 91–101
TeachConnect, 7, 128–132
Teacher development, 25
Index
www.ebook3000.com

248
Teacher Education Ministerial Advisory Group 
(TEMAG), 2, 18, 25, 28, 176, 183, 190, 
197, 218, 221, 230, 236, 240, 241
Teacher education partnerships, 6, 16,  
41, 58–64
Teacher education programs, 2, 3, 9, 17, 18, 
39–41, 50, 60, 64, 73, 109, 111, 138, 
143, 151, 154, 158, 176, 177, 180, 
194–198, 200–203, 209–212, 221, 224, 
230, 235, 237, 239–242
Teacher educators, 2, 4, 6, 8, 14–17, 22, 24, 
35, 36, 38, 40–46, 52, 53, 55, 58, 62, 
72, 84, 94, 99, 100, 106, 107, 110, 113, 
115–118, 131, 138–150, 153, 154, 158, 
161, 163–165, 168, 169, 176, 178, 181, 
187, 195, 196, 198–200, 204, 210, 212, 
218, 219, 236–238, 242
Teacher reflection, 219
Teaching and learning, 3, 9, 19, 20, 25, 60, 77, 
96, 97, 101, 106–107, 125, 148, 162, 
167, 169, 180, 185, 187, 194, 222, 227
Teaching methods as boundary objects, 78–80
Teaching standards, 94, 95, 101, 151
Teaching Tracker Tool, 161–164,  
166–168, 240
Technical skills, 94, 95, 123, 125, 130
Theory, 2–4, 6, 7, 14, 16, 17, 27, 33–46,  
50, 55, 59, 60, 71–84, 97, 98, 100, 
106–112, 123, 124, 126, 128, 130,  
132, 158, 161, 163, 176–180, 184,  
187, 194–197, 201, 204–206, 208–210, 
218, 221, 236, 238, 239
Theory-practice divide, 17, 40, 42, 196
Theory-practice gap, 34, 44, 72, 78, 81
Thirding-as-othering, 36–37, 41, 42, 46
Third space hybridity, 41
Third space of dialogue, 37–38
Third space theory, 6, 34–46
Thornton, Jane, 8, 157–170
Tindall-Ford, Sharon, 6, 8, 13–28,  
193–212
Tobin, Kellie, 8, 50, 53, 73, 175–190
Transformative
learning, 67, 94, 99, 101
teacher education, 96–98
U
University mentor as boundary broker, 80–83
W
Wade-Leeuwen, Bronwen, 5, 7, 105–119, 
123–132
White, Simone, 3, 6, 13–28, 72, 97, 106,  
218, 236
Williams, Judy, 6, 8, 33–46, 184, 193–212
Willis, Linda-Dianne, 6, 33–46, 49–68, 163
Windsor, Sally, 8, 157–170, 175–190
Work integrated learning, 3
Y
Yirrkala Indigenous School, 177, 188–190
Index

