
EDUCATION IN CRISIS

 Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s 
 CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES 
 Series 
 Campaign and Election Reform,  Glenn H. Utter and Ruth Ann 
Strickland
 Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley 
 Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner 
 Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear 
 Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith 
 Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources,  Zachary A. Smith and 
Katrina D. Taylor 
 Rich and Poor in America, Geoffrey Gilbert 
 U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson 
 U.S. Social Security, Steven G. Livingston 
 Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn 
 For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com .

 Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, 
and nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others. 
 Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other 
primary-source material, a directory of organizations and 
agencies, annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, 
and an index. 
 Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series 
will find the information they need in order to have a better 
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and 
economic issues facing the world today. 

This page intentionally left blank 

 EDUCATION IN CRISIS 
 A Reference Handbook 
 Judith A. Gouwens 
 CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES 
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

 Copyright 2009 by ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior 
permission in writing from the publisher. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Gouwens, Judith A. 
  Education in crisis : a reference handbook / Judith A. Gouwens. 
   p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues) 
  Includes bibliographical references and index. 
  ISBN 978–1–59884–170–1 (hardcover : alk. paper) — ISBN 
  978–1–59884–171–8 (e-book) 
  1. Education—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Education—United 
States—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Title. II. Series. 
  LB17.G6 2009 
  370.973—dc22   2009003075 
 13 12 11 10 09 1 2 3 4 5 
 This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
 Visit www.abc-clio.com for details. 
 ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911 
 Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911 
 This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
 Manufactured in the United States of America. 

 This book is dedicated to all of the teachers on the front line 
of education reform, teachers who believe that the children 
whose lives they touch can learn well, who go to work 
every day committed to helping the children in their 
classrooms learn well, and who make a difference in 
those children’s learning and lives. 

This page intentionally left blank 

ix
 Contents 
 Preface, xv 
 Acknowledgments, xxi 
 1 
Background and History, 1
 Education Reform for Equity, 7
 Education Reform for Quality, 12
 Bringing Equity and Quality Reforms Together, 18
 The State of Public Education in the United States and the 
Continued Need for Reform, 20 
 Diversity of the U.S. School Population, 20
 Increasing Rates of Poverty, 21
 Disparity in School Funding,  22
 Highly Qualified Teachers, 23
 References, 25
 2 
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 31
 Curriculum and Teaching Models, 32
 Direct Instruction, 32
 Integrated Curriculum, 34
 Multiple Intelligences, 36
 Brain-Based Education, 37
 Differentiated Instruction, 39
 Assessment and Accountability, 40
 Tests and Quizzes, 41
 Observations of Students, 41
 Performance-Based Assessments and Portfolios 
of Student Work, 42
 Standardized Tests, 43
 Options for Alternative Schooling, 45
 Small Schools, 46

x Contents
 Magnet and Themed Schools, 47
 Single-Sex Education, 48
 Charter Schools, 49
 Educational Vouchers, Tuition Tax Credits, 
and Scholarships, 51
 Home Schooling, 53
 Comprehensive School Reform, 54
 The Yale School Development Program, 55
 Accelerated Schools, 57
 Effective Schools, 58
Outcome-Based Education, 59
 Business Models Applied to School Reform, 60
 Total Quality Management, 61
 The Baldrige Model, 61
 Standards-Based Education, 62 
 The Call for New Kinds of Reforms in Education , 66
 References , 67
 3 
Education Reform—A Global Enterprise, 75
 Education Reform in South Africa , 79
 Education Reform in Finland , 85
 Education Reform in China , 90
 Education Reform in France , 94
 Education Reform in Chile , 99
 Lessons to be Learned , 103
 Lesson 1. Educational Equity , 104
 Lesson 2. Governance of Education , 106
 Lesson 3. Accountability for Student Learning , 107
 Lesson 4. Quality of Learning Environments , 108
 Lesson 5. Access to Education , 108
 Lesson 6. Preparation and Professional Development 
of Teachers , 109
 Lesson 7. Capacity of Teachers and School Leaders 
to Change , 110
 Globalization and Education , 111
References, 113
 4 
Chronology, 119
 References , 134
 5 
Biographical Sketches, 135
 James A. Banks , 135

Contents xi
 David Berliner , 136
 Benjamin Bloom , 137
 Jerome Bruner , 138
 James P. Comer , 139
 Linda Darling-Hammond , 140
 Lisa Delpit , 141
 Chester Finn , 142
 Paolo Freire , 143
 Michael Fullan , 143
 Mary Hatwood Futrell , 144
 Howard Gardner , 145
 John Goodlad , 146
 Ken Goodman , 147
 E. D. Hirsch, Jr. , 148
 Madeline Cheek Hunter , 149
 Jonathan Kozol , 150
 Gloria Ladson-Billings , 150
 Deborah Meier , 151
 Sonia Nieto , 152
 Nel Noddings , 153
 Rod Paige , 154
 Diane Ravitch , 155
 Lauren B. Resnick , 155
 Theodore Sizer , 157
 Mark Tucker , 157
 Grant Wiggins , 158
 References , 159
 6 
Data and Documents , 161
 Brown v. Board of Education , 161
 Brown v. Board of Education II , 167
 National Defense Education Act, P.L. 85–864 , 171
 A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform , 172
 The Risk , 173
 Indicators of the Risk , 175
 Hope and Frustration , 177
 Excellence in Education , 178
 The Learning Society , 179
 The Tools at Hand , 181
 The Public’s Commitment , 182
 Effective Schools Correlates , 184
 National Education Goals , 189

xii Contents
 National Education Goals from  Goals 2000: 
Educate America Act (1996) , 190
 Goals in “No Child Left Behind” (2002) , 194 
 No Child Left Behind: Reauthorization of the Elementary 
and Secondary Education Act , 194
 The Dangerous Consequences of High-Stakes Standardized 
Testing , 196
 Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study , 199
 The Progress in International Reading Literacy Study , 202
 The Programme for International Student 
Assessment (PISA) , 203
 Data from the National Assessment of Educational 
Progress (NAEP) , 205
 7 
Directory of Organizations , 209
 Governmental Agencies , 210
 Regional Educational Laboratories , 210
 Comprehensive Centers , 213
 National Content Centers , 216
 Parent Information and Resource Centers , 218
 Research Organizations and Institutes , 228
 Issues-Focused Education Reform Organizations , 230
 Academic Achievement , 230
 Inclusion , 232
 Gender Issues in Education , 233
 Comprehensive Education Reform Models , 234
 Curriculum and Assessment Reform , 237
 Teacher Quality , 239
 School Choice , 240
 Urban Education , 241
 Equity and Civil Rights , 242
 Education Policy , 244
 Parent and Community Partnerships , 245
 Membership Organizations , 246
 8 
Resources, 251
 Print Resources , 251
History of Education Reform, 251
 Books , 251
 Journals and Journal Articles , 253
 Reports , 255

Contents xiii
 Modern Issues in Education Reform , 256
 Books , 256
 Journal Articles , 268
 Reports , 270
 International Perspectives on Education Reform , 275
 Books , 275
 Journals and Journal Articles , 277
 Reports , 279
 Nonprint Resources , 280
 Glossary, 287
 Index, 293

This page intentionally left blank 

xv
 P
ublic education in the United States is in crisis. Nearly every 
day there is a media report that keeps the failures of public 
education at the forefront of our national consciousness. Our 
government and media fuel that fire with reports that describe 
schools that are failing and that place the blame for our economic 
woes on our system of public education. Nearly everyone knows 
that there is a crisis in education. But not everyone agrees on what 
the nature of that crisis is. 
 Some say that the crisis is one of  quality , predicting a dismal 
future for the economic viability of the United States in the global 
marketplace based on what they perceive is the inadequacy of 
our system of public education. They point to international rank-
ings that purport to show that the scores of children in the United 
States fall short of those of our international competitors. The 
most recent Trends in Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) 
and Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) 
show average student scores from the United States on these tests 
rank below the scores of students from several other developed 
or industrialized countries in reading, mathematics, and science. 
More information about these tests and test scores can be found in 
Chapters 3 and 6 of this book. 
 Interestingly, many of the countries whose students score 
higher on the tests than U.S. students look past the rankings of 
test scores in their determination that what makes the United 
States strong in the global marketplace is the creativity and inno-
vation that U.S. students learn. Those countries, including China 
and Japan, understand that standardized test scores do not mea-
sure creativity and innovation. China, Japan, and several other 
countries are seeking to implement curriculum and teaching prac-
tices that foster creativity and problem solving, curriculum and 
 Preface 

xvi Preface
teaching practices that have all but been abandoned in the United 
States in the pursuit of knowledge- and skills-based teaching and 
learning in efforts to improve standardized test scores. 
 Other analysts have reviewed and reanalyzed both national 
and international test scores and used them to show that the ma-
jority of students in the United States are  learning well, and that 
the crisis is one of equity . They point to the achievement gap as 
evidence that our schools are failing minority children and chil-
dren whose families live below the poverty line. According to 
UNESCO figures, the rate of poverty among school-aged children, 
nearly 22 percent, is higher in the United States than in any other 
industrialized nation except Mexico. Gerald Bracey’s reanaly-
sis of the test data that links students’ achievement to the level 
of poverty in their schools should be a wake-up call for policy 
makers in the United States. (See Chapter 3 for more information 
about Bracey’s analysis.) It is not enough to improve schools; the 
issue of childhood poverty must be addressed if we really want 
all children to learn to high levels. 
 Linda Darling-Hammond, George Wood, and a number of 
other education reformers who make up the Forum for Educa-
tion and Democracy published a report, “Democracy at Risk: 
The Need for a New Federal Policy in Education.” These reform-
ers assert that all children in the United States have the right to 
a high-quality education, and they point to inequity as a critical 
impediment to improved public education. Based on the premise 
that it is the federal government that has the most leverage for 
equity in education, they argue that “underlying all federal efforts 
should be a commitment to paying off the long-standing educa-
tional debt our nation has accrued by allowing an unequal system 
to self-perpetuate for hundreds of years” (2008, 19). 
 No Child Left Behind (Elementary and Secondary Educa-
tion Act, 2002; PL107–110) is intended to provide additional 
teaching and support services for children who live in poverty 
or who attend schools with high levels of poverty to help fill the 
gap between their learning and that of their more affluent peers. 
Unfortunately, many educators believe, some of the provisions 
of No Child Left Behind have actually resulted in more inequity 
for the children most in need. The accountability requirements of 
No Child Left Behind have narrowed the curriculum to include, 
in many schools, only reading, mathematics, and science—the 
subjects that are tested to determine the quality of schools. Social 
studies, the arts, physical education, recess, and even lunchtimes 

Preface xvii
have been cut so that there is more time for teaching the subjects 
that are tested. 
 Although one of the provisions of No Child Left Behind is 
the requirement that school districts employ only highly qualified 
teachers, children in the poorest schools continue to have teachers 
with the least experience and who are the least qualified. They at-
tend schools whose facilities are in need of renovation, with larger 
class sizes, and with fewer libraries, less technology, fewer high-
quality instructional materials, and more outdated textbooks. 
 Between the  Brown v. Board of Education  decision in the 1950s 
and about 1990, schools in the United States made progress to-
ward equity; the gap in achievement between African American 
and Hispanic children on the one hand and white children on the 
other narrowed considerably. In the last decade and a half, how-
ever, not only has no progress been made in paying off the edu-
cational debt but the debt has actually grown as the courts have 
either refused to hear cases about civil rights and segregation of 
schools or even reversed earlier decisions that impact equity in 
schools. According to a wide variety of sources, schools are as ra-
cially segregated as, and in some cases even more so than, they 
were before  Brown . Jonathan Kozol’s latest book,  The Shame of the 
Nation: The Restoration of Apartheid Schooling in America (2005), 
documents the deplorable conditions in many of these resegre-
gated schools. 
 Still other observers of education believe that the real crisis 
in education in the United States is the impending demise of our en-
tire system of public education . They point to the neoliberal agenda 
of right-wing think tanks and business groups that view educa-
tion as an opportunity for financial profit and that work toward 
privatizing education and dismantling the system of public edu-
cation that has been a pillar of our democratic society. Kenneth 
Saltman (2007), DePaul University professor, speaks for critical 
educators in asserting that “a number of privatization initiatives 
are being enacted through a process involving the dismantling of 
public schools followed by the opening of for-profit, charter, and 
deregulated public schools” (p. 5). 
 Critics of the neoliberal agenda argue that the use of pub-
lic resources for such private schools is part of a redistribution of 
economic wealth that goes against the democratic principles upon 
which our country was founded. In effect, these critics warn that 
school privatization is part of the neoliberal “class warfare waged 
by the rich on the rest” (Saltman 2007, 8), and that inequity in the 

xviii Preface
education system serves the purpose of the neoliberal agenda for 
privatization.
 I believe that the crisis in education involves quality, equity, 
and the threat of privatization. All of these issues must be ad-
dressed to close the achievement gap and to ensure that public 
education in the United States continues as one of the pillars of 
our democratic way of life. 
 So What Are We to Do? 
 Nel Noddings, professor emerita from Stanford University, ar-
gues that before beginning any reform, we need to identify the 
problem. According to Noddings, solutions are often sought and 
enacted without identifying the problem—and then they solve 
nothing. Noddings argues also that the problem might not be the 
same for all schools or all school districts (2007). But agreeing on 
what the problem is, is the first step to finding solutions. 
 Once there is consensus about what the problem is, we 
should look to past education reform efforts to understand what 
has worked, what has not worked, and what the effects of those 
efforts have been. According to Noddings, there is much to be 
learned from our history with education reform. Finding  a solu-
tion might not be the answer because “one size fits all” really fits 
no school or school districts; reforming U.S. education may re-
quire a whole array of solutions. Chapters 1 and 2 describe the 
history of education reform in the United States and a variety of 
reform efforts that could serve as possible solutions. We can also 
look to what other countries are doing and have done to reform 
education, and Chapter 3 provides accounts of some other coun-
tries’ education systems and reform efforts. 
 Teachers must be at the forefront of the process of identifying 
problems and proposing solutions. In the United States, teachers 
have often been left out of the process of education reform. Very 
few teachers, for example, were involved in the development of 
the national goals, and similarly, few teachers were involved in 
the development of No Child Left Behind. But the responsibility 
for implementing reforms falls to teachers, and their commitment 
to any reform effort is critical to success. 
 I have spent nearly 40 years in education—as an elementary 
teacher; as a school and school district administrator; as a senior 
research associate consulting and working with schools, school 

Preface xix
districts, and state departments of education in the process of ed-
ucation reform; as an evaluator of educational programs; and as a 
university professor and researcher. During my career, I have met 
countless numbers of teachers who are committed to the learning 
of their students and truly making a difference, not only in their 
students’ learning, but also in their students’ lives. These teach-
ers work hard, not because of mandates or legislated account-
ability, but because of their commitment to the learning of their 
students.
 Real education reform doesn’t happen in legislative bodies 
or through mandates. It doesn’t happen because members of the 
media or government officials describe teachers as not doing their 
jobs or not qualified. It doesn’t happen because teachers are of-
fered bonuses to improve their students’ test scores or because 
their jobs are threatened if they don’t. Real education reform hap-
pens in the hearts and minds of teachers who come to know and 
understand the children they teach, their lives outside school, 
and the myriad strengths the children bring into their classrooms. 
These committed teachers design learning opportunities for the 
children in their classrooms that connect the curriculum to the 
children’s real lives outside school so that the children see value 
in learning. It is then and only then that children will learn well. 
It is the work of good teachers to mentor and coach that learning. 
 Noddings tells us that it will take creativity and innovation 
(what we Americans are known for internationally) to identify the 
problems in our public education system and to find solutions 
that will truly address the problems. “We need to engage in fresh 
thinking,” she says. 
 We should draw back from standardization and out-
moded structures of schooling, but remain willing to 
analyze, adapt, and revise promising old ideas. In the 
process, we should avoid dehumanizing teachers and 
students and explore new ways to educate for genuine 
intellectual growth, moral commitment, and democratic 
citizenship. (2007, 83) 
 We can view the crises in our education system as occasions 
to wring our hands and place blame. Or we can view the crises 
as opportunities for real reform of our schools. In 1978, Ronald 
Edmonds, one of the first researchers to investigate the character-
istics of effective schools, challenged educators to look forward to 

xx Preface
new solutions. In a speech titled “Some Schools Work and More 
Can,” he said, 
 We can whenever, and wherever we choose, successfully 
teach all children whose schooling is of interest to us. 
We already know more than we need in order to do this. 
Whether we do it must finally depend on how we feel 
about the fact that we haven’t so far. (1979, 32) 
 References 
 Baer, J., S. Baldo, K. Ayotte, and P. J. Green. 2007.  The Reading Literacy 
of U.S. Fourth-Grade Students in an International Context: Results from the 
2001 and 2006 Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS)
(NCES 2008–017). Washington, DC: National Center for Education 
Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. 
 Darling-Hammond, L., and G. Wood. 2008. “Democracy at Risk: The 
Need for a New Federal Policy in Education.” Athens, OH: Forum for 
Democracy and Education. 
 Edmonds, R. R. 1979. “Some Schools Work and More Can.”  Social Policy
9, 28–32. 
 Gonzales, P., J. C. Guzman, L. Partelow, E. Pahlke, L. Jocelyn, 
D. Kastberg, and T. Williams. 2004.  Highlights from the Trends in 
International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) 2003 (NCES 
2005–005). U.S. Department of Education, National Center for 
Education Statistics. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 
 Kozol, J. 2005.  The Shame of the Nation: The Restoration of Apartheid 
Schooling in America. New York: Crown. 
 Noddings, N. 2007.  When School Reform Goes Wrong. New York: Teachers 
College Press. 
 Saltman, K. J. 2007.  Capitalizing on Disaster: Taking and Breaking Public 
Schools. Boulder, CO: Paradigm. 

xxi
 T
here are a number of people whom I would like to thank for 
their help and encouragement throughout the process of writing 
this book. Holly Heinzer, Mim Vasan, Kim Kennedy-White, and 
Lauren Thomas from ABC-CLIO worked so patiently and encour-
agingly with me as I developed the manuscript for this book. The 
advice and feedback that they provided helped immeasurably. 
 I would also like to thank Janice Mulqueeny, a wonderful 
friend who is a school administrator, for her support and expert 
advice throughout the development of this book. Jan’s intuition 
about when I needed encouragement is uncanny—she called or 
e-mailed often when I had run into a snag and helped me to get 
past it! Many thanks also to Karen McElvogue, one of my former 
students at Roosevelt University, for reading and providing feed-
back and suggestions on a draft of the manuscript. 
 Special thanks go to my life partner and best friend, Thomas 
Gouwens. His love, support, and encouragement always help me 
to persevere. 
 Acknowledgments 

This page intentionally left blank 

1
 R
eform of public education has become a key element of 
public discussion and political platform in the United States. 
The report “39th Annual Phi Delta Kappa/Gallup Poll of the 
Public’s Attitudes Towards the Public Schools” affirms that “K-12 
schooling is near the top of the agenda in state and national policy 
discussions, and the efforts to improve student achievement dom-
inate those discussions” (Rose and Gallup 2007, 34). One cannot 
open a newspaper or news magazine in the United States without 
a headline, article, or editorial that addresses the quality of pub-
lic education in the United States. Googling “education reform” 
results in more than 14 million hits, which include papers and ar-
ticles that critique the state of education, organizations that offer 
support and technical assistance for reforming or improving edu-
cation, and a wide variety of strategies for doing so. Bookstores 
are full of books describing what is wrong with public education 
or explaining how to “fix” the problems of public education. Edu-
cation reform is a hot topic. 
 Policy makers and business people often link student achieve-
ment with the ability of the United States to compete in the global 
marketplace, and they believe that student achievement must be 
improved so that the United States can continue to be competitive 
in the global market. This discourse has been based on compari-
sons of student achievement in the United States with that of other 
countries. Since the International Association for the Evaluation of 
Educational Achievement conducted its first pilot study (between 
1959 and 1962) comparing the achievement of 13-year-olds from 
12 countries in mathematics, reading comprehension, geography, 
science, and nonverbal ability, such comparison studies have been 
 1 
 Background and History 

2 Background and History
conducted periodically. Recent comparisons have shown that stu-
dent achievement in reading, mathematics, and science, for exam-
ple, in the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study 
(TIMSS) administered in 2003, showed the average score of fourth-
graders in the United States to rank 15th out of the 25 countries 
that participated in the study. Similarly, at the eighth grade level, 
students from the United States ranked 15th of the 44 countries in 
the study. These data, as well as more comparisons of U.S. student 
achievement in mathematics, science, and reading, can be found 
in Chapter 6. 
 Many educators, on the other hand, believe that the purpose 
of schooling is not related to the economy or improving the stand-
ing of the United States in the global marketplace. Instead, they 
believe that the purpose of schooling is to develop productive citi-
zens who are prepared to participate actively in the democratic 
process in the United States. They believe that schools should be 
reformed to provide opportunities for children to learn more and 
to learn better for the benefit of our democratic society, and they 
believe that schools can and should reform or reorganize to ensure 
those opportunities. 
 In general, there is a consensus in the United States that schools 
should reform and that children could learn more and better. The 
debate about school reform has focused not on whether reform is 
necessary but on the purpose of reform and on how to accomplish 
this monumental task. Perspectives on school reform and how 
schools should be reformed are directly related to their proponents’ 
view of society in general and what their proponents believe is the 
purpose and function of public education. 
 One can see how such differing perspectives have been at 
play from the beginnings of public education in the United States. 
Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson, signers of the Declara-
tion of Independence and early statesmen of the United States, 
both independently set forth propositions for public education 
because they believed that the democratic form of government 
outlined in the new Constitution would require an educated 
citizenry. Franklin’s and Jefferson’s ideas for education were dif-
ferent in many ways, representing their very divergent views of 
human nature and society. Franklin (1749) proposed that educa-
tion be available to all boys, and that it be publicly funded, while 
Jefferson’s proposal would have created a system to educate an 
elite class to serve as leaders of the new nation and the state of 
Virginia. Even though their visions for public education differed, 

Background and History 3
founders of our country like Franklin and Jefferson laid the foun-
dation for the system of free, public education that has developed 
in the United States. 
 Franklin’s and Jefferson’s ideas demonstrate how education 
can be and has been viewed as reflecting society and as shaping 
it. As our society has changed, there have been calls for schools to 
change or reform. One example of societal change was the great 
influx of immigrants into the United States in the 19th century. 
Horace Mann, who was appointed secretary of the first Massa-
chusetts board of education in 1837, is often called the father of 
public education in the United States. As secretary of the board of 
education, Mann worked to raise public support for education, to 
improve the education and working conditions of teachers, and 
to establish libraries in public schools. Mann called for universal 
public education to help new immigrant children to assimilate into 
American culture, as well as to have some measure of social con-
trol over a population that was both booming and becoming more 
diverse. Interestingly, Mann also visited schools in other countries 
and promoted educational ideas that he learned in his travels in a 
publication that he edited, the Common School Journal,  and in a se-
ries of reports that he wrote about the state of schools in Massachu-
setts. Educational historians agree that schools in Massachusetts 
improved greatly as a result of Mann’s work to reform them. 
 Another example of early school reform was a response to the 
progression in the United States from a predominantly agrarian 
society to a more industrial society that began in the 19th century 
and continued into the 20th century. Frederick W. Taylor, an indus-
trial engineer, developed his principles of “scientific management” 
to promote efficiency and productivity in industry by observing 
people doing their jobs in their workplaces and finding ways to 
make them more productive by increasing their efficiency. Taylor 
is often called the first efficiency expert. In the early 20th century, 
those principles were also applied to the management and organi-
zation of schools (Callahan 1962). As schools and school popula-
tions became larger, reformers called for regulation and efficiency, 
drawing on the ideas of Taylor. Raymond Callahan describes how 
schools used Taylor’s ideas to organize schools and classrooms 
and to view students as workers and their learning as the product 
of schooling. Taylor is often cited as influencing the organization 
of the modern high school, where teachers are specialized and 
students move from teacher to teacher to learn the subjects they 
specialize in. 

4 Background and History
 The ideas of Franklin and Jefferson foreshadowed a discourse 
in the United States on the purpose of schooling and on two major 
goals of educational reform—quality and equity—that often seem 
to be in conflict with one another. While Franklin believed that 
all boys should have the opportunity to be educated through a 
comprehensive and practical curriculum—equity, Jefferson be-
lieved that public education should be available in three levels, 
with only the lowest level of basic education available to all free 
children and the other levels whose curriculum included sciences 
and philosophy available based on merit—excellence or quality. 
The tension between equity and quality is evident in the debate 
and discourse in the United States to this day. 
 Until the middle of the 20th century, school reform efforts in 
the United States generally reflected societal changes in the United 
States; reforms were instituted slowly and generally by way of 
local initiatives in response to societal changes, identification of 
specific needs, or the setting of new priorities. For example, as 
families left farms and rural areas and moved into towns and cities
and as bus transportation became available and practical for chil-
dren who lived in rural areas, the one-room schoolhouse gradu-
ally became a thing of the past. Such a reform was usually the 
result of a community deciding that it could save money or offer 
more educational opportunities for children in a larger school. 
Such reforms, initiated as responses to locally identified needs, 
according to Merilee Grindle (2004), “rarely . . . get on national 
political agendas” (p. 28). 
 In the 1950s, however, two things happened that thrust educa-
tion into the political, and thus national, spotlight. They generated 
the political action that Grindle (2004) argues is necessary to put 
education reform on the public agenda. These two events brought 
about reform on a scale and at a pace not previously imagined; 
they set the stage for school reform efforts through the last half of 
the 20th century and into the 21st. The reform efforts precipitated 
by these events were not intended to reflect societal changes as 
had school reform efforts prior to the 1950s. Instead, the purpose 
of these new reforms was to  bring about  societal change. Those two 
events were the  Brown v. Board  Supreme Court decision and the 
successful launch of Sputnik I, the first artificial satellite sent into 
orbit by the Soviet Union and the impetus for the U.S.–U.S.S.R. 
space race. The effects of these two events on education represent 
what often seem to be the competing goals of equity in and quality 
of schooling in general, and in school reform in particular. They 

Background and History 5
also represent the first significant federal involvement in education 
in the United States, since education was a responsibility tradition-
ally reserved for the states by the framers of the U.S. Constitution. 
 The first of those events, the U.S. Supreme Court decision in 
Oliver L. Brown et al. v. the Board of Education of Topeka (KS) et al.
(347 U.S. 483), announced in 1954, laid the foundation for massive 
educational reform efforts centered on equity. Although there had 
been many lawsuits arguing against racial segregation at the state
level before this, no case had been argued before the Supreme 
Court since its 1896 decision in Plessy v. Ferguson  (163 U.S. 537). The 
Plessy v. Ferguson  decision had upheld the doctrine of “separate but 
equal” that had been used to justify segregation not just in schools, 
but also in all areas of American life. The separate schools and dual 
school districts affirmed by the  Plessy  decision were rarely equal, 
with schools for black children having fewer resources, older text-
books, and poorer facilities. 
 In the 1950s, there were many schools in the United States 
that were segregated, and a large number of states had laws that 
prohibited African American and white children from going to 
schools together. Linda Brown, a third-grader in Topeka, Kansas, 
was one of those children. She was not allowed to attend the ele-
mentary school only seven blocks from her home because it was a 
school for white children. Instead, she had to walk a mile, through 
a railroad switching station, to a bus stop where she caught a bus 
that took her to an elementary school for black children. In the 
summer of 1950, the National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People (NAACP) asked Linda Brown’s father, Oliver 
Brown, and 12 other black families to attempt to enroll their chil-
dren in “white” schools in Topeka. The children were all denied 
enrollment, and the NAACP filed suit against the Topeka school 
district on behalf of the 13 families. The Brown  case (so named be-
cause Brown was the first in alphabetic order of the last names of 
all the plaintiffs) brought together the Topeka case with four other 
cases on appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court. Together the appeal 
represented about 200 plaintiffs who sought the dismantling of 
racial segregation in schools. Into the 1950s (and even beyond in 
a few states, including Alabama which  still has a segregation law 
on its books), there were laws in several states in the United States 
that required school districts to provide dual school systems, one 
to educate white children and another to educate black children. 
In those states, it was illegal to educate white and black children 
in the same classrooms in the same school buildings. 

6 Background and History
 The five individual cases that formed the  Brown  case before 
the U.S. Supreme Court were all initially filed in 1950 and 1951; 
they had originated in Delaware, Kansas, South Carolina, Vir-
ginia, and the District of Columbia. Charles Hamilton Houston, 
NAACP attorney, was instrumental in bringing the cases together 
on appeal, and Thurgood Marshall, also of the NAACP (who 
would go on to serve as the first black associate justice of the U.S. 
Supreme Court), headed a team of attorneys who argued the case 
before the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court ruled that racial 
segregation in schools “violates the Fourteenth Amendment to 
the U.S. Constitution, which guarantees all citizens equal protec-
tion of the laws” (Brown v. Board of Education), and ordered the 
dismantling of separate school systems for black children. This 
ruling overturned the “separate but equal” doctrine that had been 
in place since Plessy v. Ferguson . 
 In a subsequent ruling, sought in 1955 because some of the 
states involved in the original Brown  case had not yet begun to 
implement the remedies required by the 1954 ruling, the U.S. 
Supreme Court affirmed its  Brown  decision and ordered that 
children be admitted to schools “on a racially nondiscriminatory 
basis with all deliberate speed” (Brown v. Board of Education, 349 
U.S. 294). The NAACP initiated these cases to begin to dismantle 
segregation wherever it existed in U.S. society, but the  Brown deci-
sions have had far-reaching effects in terms of equity in U.S. pub-
lic schools as well as in society in general. The transcripts of the 
Brown decisions are found in Chapter 6. 
 The second of those events focused the attention of the coun-
try on improving the quality of students’ learning in schools, 
colleges, and universities in the United States. Shortly after the 
second Brown  decision, in 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sput-
nik I, the first artificial satellite to orbit the earth. In the context of 
the distrust, tension, and competition between the United States 
and the Soviet Union during the Cold War, the successful launch 
of Sputnik I generated a furor in the United States. While there 
had been many calls for improving the content and the teaching 
of mathematics and science before the successful launch, Sputnik 
I thrust those calls into the public eye as the space race had the 
public looking to place blame for the Soviet Union having taken 
first place in that race. Interestingly, there had been few compari-
sons of education quality between the United States and other 
countries before Sputnik I, but the space race seems to have been 
the beginning of global comparisons of educational outcomes. 

Education Reform for Equity 7
 The U.S. Congress began hearings to determine why the 
Soviet Union was ahead of the United States in the space race 
and what could be done to be competitive in the future. The hear-
ings identified the quality of science and mathematics education 
in the United States as one of the issues that kept the United States 
from being competitive. In 1958, Congress enacted the National 
Defense Education Act (NDEA), the first comprehensive federal 
education legislation that linked education to national defense. 
According to the U.S. Department of Education, 
 To help ensure that highly trained individuals would be 
available to help America compete with the Soviet Union 
in scientific and technical fields, the NDEA included sup-
port for loans to college students, the improvement of 
science, mathematics, and foreign language instruction 
in elementary and secondary schools, graduate fellow-
ships, foreign language and area studies, and vocational-
technical training. (U.S. Department of Education 2007) 
 In other words, the enactment of the NDEA linked school 
outcomes with the ability of the United States to compete inter-
nationally, a theme that echoes throughout educational reforms 
into the 21st century. The NDEA also initiated an agenda of U.S. 
federal involvement in and funding of educational reform, a re-
sponsibility previously left entirely to individual states. 
 These two events, the  Brown  decisions and the beginning of 
the space race, began two threads that wind throughout educa-
tional reform in the United States. Those two threads, equity and 
quality, have run their courses from the 1950s into the 21st century, 
sometimes far apart, sometimes intertwining, but always evident 
in calls for and responses to educational reform. 
 Education Reform for Equity 
 The two landmark Supreme Court decisions,  Brown  and  Brown II , 
mark the beginning of the march to equity in the United States, 
not only in education, and not only for racial minorities, but also 
in nearly every aspect of our society. In terms of equity in the edu-
cation specifically of African American children and of racial and 
ethnic minorities in general, court decisions have often paved the 
way to reform, even though that reform happened very slowly. 

8 Background and History
 After the  Brown decisions, there were several other U.S. 
Supreme Court cases that led to significant educational reforms 
in terms of equity. Among them are  Green v. County School Board of 
New Kent County (391 US 430; 1968);  Swann v. Charlotte- Mecklenberg 
Board of Education  (402 US 1; 1971); and  Keyes v. Denver School 
District No. 1  (413 US 187; 1973). The decision in the  Green case 
ordered school districts to dismantle dual school systems, and 
required districts to desegregate facilities, staff, faculties, extra-
curricular activities, and transportation—factors that came to be 
called the “Green factors” and that were subsequently used to 
guide the development of desegregation plans for many school 
districts. The Swann  decision allowed for busing to achieve inte-
gration, and the Keyes  decision awarded to Hispanic children the 
same rights earlier decisions had awarded to African American 
children. 
 In his analysis of the history of school desegregation, Robert 
Lowe, professor of educational policy and leadership at Marquette 
University in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, argues that although the 
courts were slow to enforce the integration of schools, 
 the [Supreme Court] decisions provided federal legiti-
macy to the fight against discrimination and helped in-
spire a variegated movement for civil rights of which the 
demand for school desegregation would be a part—in fact 
perhaps the most recalcitrant part, as the pace of school 
desegregation was glacial after  Brown.  (Lowe 2004) 
 Instead of waiting for the courts to enforce integration, and 
fortified by the Supreme Court’s decision, the NAACP worked 
with black families to force the issue in school districts through-
out the South. In 1957, in Little Rock, Arkansas, for example, the 
school board was set to implement its integration plan with the 
enrollment by the NAACP of nine students in the formerly all-
white Central High School. When Governor Orval Faubus called 
out the Arkansas National Guard to keep the nine black students 
from entering the school, and white parents protested to keep 
the black students out of the school, the NAACP persisted, and 
eventually federal marshals escorted the nine students into the 
school.
 The Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s, and particularly the 
March on Washington in 1963, where Dr. Martin Luther King de-
livered his famous “I Have a Dream” speech, led to the passage in 

Education Reform for Equity 9
1964 of the Civil Rights Act (PL 88–352). The 1964 Civil Rights Act 
outlawed segregation in U.S. schools and other public places, as 
well as discrimination in government, housing, and employment. 
The Brown decisions and the Civil Rights Act provided the impe-
tus for a great expansion of educational opportunity for children 
in poverty, children with special needs and disabilities, children 
who spoke languages other than English as their first languages, 
and the children of migrant agricultural workers. 
 President Lyndon Johnson announced the “War on Poverty” 
in his inaugural address. Johnson’s “war” saw education as one 
of the ways to combat poverty, and along with a number of other 
social and economic programs also aimed at reducing poverty. 
Johnson proposed several compensatory education initiatives. The 
first among them was the Head Start program. Head Start began in 
1965 as a preschool program for children from low-income families. 
Based on the view of education as the great equalizer, the Head 
Start program was designed to address the social, emotional, edu-
cational, health, nutrition, and psychological effects of poverty that 
stood in the way of the children’s educational success, in other 
words, to make up for the disparity in school readiness between 
these children and those of middle- and upper-income families. 
Over the years since its inception, Head Start has served many, 
many children, and it is one of only a handful of educational pro-
grams that has been studied longitudinally. According to W. Steven 
Barnett (2002), director of the National Institute for Early Education 
Research (NIEER), “Nearly four decades of research establish that 
Head Start . . . improves the lives and development of the children 
and families it serves” (p. 1). 
 In a study of the effects of Head Start, UCLA researchers 
Eliana Garces, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie (2000) found that 
Head Start did indeed have long-term effects. Interestingly, the 
effects seemed to differ by the race of the participants. For white 
Head Start participants, the researchers found a “significantly in-
creased probability of completing high school and attending col-
lege, as well as elevated earnings in one’s early twenties” (p. 1). 
Head Start participants who were African Americans were found 
to be “less likely to have been charged or convicted of a crime” 
(p. 1). The study also found that African American males were 
more likely to have completed high school, when compared to 
their siblings. In other words, Head Start has affected its partici-
pants not only during preschool but also long after they had left 
the Head Start program. 

10 Background and History
 The federal government also enacted the Elementary and Sec-
ondary Education Act (ESEA) in 1965. While the ESEA included 
provisions for funding school libraries, supplemental services, 
and state departments of education, the most significant part of 
ESEA was, and continues to be, Title I. Title I, subtitled “Education 
of Children of Low Income Families,” was intended to provide 
federal funds to supplement the education of elementary and sec-
ondary school children in poverty—to provide services that would 
make up for the detrimental effects of poverty on their learning, 
particularly in the areas of reading, language arts, and mathe-
matics. The successful authorization of ESEA led to the addition 
of provisions for education of children whose parents are migrant 
agricultural workers in 1966, and Title VII, which supports bilin-
gual education for children who are “limited English proficient” 
(LEP), in 1968. In the 1988 reauthorization of ESEA, the addition 
of the Jacob Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Act 
recognized the special needs of children identified as gifted and 
talented. Subsequent reauthorizations of the ESEA changed the 
specifics of the law, but the basic intent of providing supplemental
educational services to children in poverty remained the same 
until No Child Left Behind (NCLB; PL 107–110, 2002). NCLB, the 
latest reauthorization of the ESEA, greatly expanded the scope 
of the legislation to include the achievement of state-developed 
educational standards by all public school children, not just those 
living in poverty. 
 Shortly after the ESEA was first enacted, Congress com-
missioned a study to determine the level of educational ineq-
uity in the United States. James Coleman, then a sociologist 
at Johns Hopkins University, conducted a large-scale study 
of U.S. children and schools. His report, issued in 1966, con-
cluded that there were inequities both in the quality of schools 
and in the quality of children’s learning. Coleman’s report was 
controversial, however, because one of his findings was “that 
a child’s early years at home had a significant impact on later 
performance in school and that an achievement gap existed 
between blacks and whites despite similarities in their teach-
ers’ training, salaries, and curriculum” (Hanna 2005, 4). The 
identification of an achievement gap supported the notion of 
compensatory education for poor and minority children; at 
the same time, Coleman argued that differing levels of finan-
cial support for schools had little effect on how well children 
learned. While many people saw Coleman’s report as a call for 

Education Reform for Equity 11
high-quality preschool education to help minority children and 
children in poverty begin to address the achievement gap be-
fore they began elementary school, others viewed the Coleman 
findings as a rationale for not addressing the achievement gap 
more rigorously. 
 The Civil Rights Act also gave rise to a more critical look 
at education as gendered practice. Title IX of the Education 
Amendments of 1972 states succinctly, “No person in the U.S. 
shall, on the basis of sex be excluded from participation in, or 
denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under 
any educational program or activity receiving federal aid.” 
Originally intended to address inequities for women in higher 
education, Title IX has been enforced by the U.S. Office of Civil 
Rights, ensuring both academic and athletic opportunities for 
girls and women. Initially, Title IX was used almost exclusively 
to support the provision of athletics and sports opportunities 
for girls and women that were equitable to those provided 
for boys and men. But the gender equity proposed in Title IX 
soon was applied to all areas of education. To provide support 
for the implementation of gender equity, the Women’s Educa-
tional Equity Act (WEEA) was passed in 1974. WEEA provides 
“funding at all levels of education for programs of national, 
statewide, or general significance to overcome sex stereotyping 
and achieve educational equity for girls and women” ( Valentin 
1997, 4). The American Association of University Women has 
worked to support the implementation of both Title IX and 
WEEA, funding research that identifies gender inequities in 
schools (see Orenstein 1994; Sadker and Sadker 1995), provid-
ing professional development to teachers focused on how to 
ensure gender equity in their classrooms, and advocating for 
gender equity through continued enforcement of and funding 
for both Title IX and WEEA. 
 Parent groups had organized as early as the 1930s to advocate 
for public education for their children with disabilities. Spurred 
on by the Brown decisions and the Civil Rights Act, they contin-
ued to struggle for educational rights for their own children. In 
1975, Public Law 94–142, the Education of All Handicapped Chil-
dren Act, was enacted. This law requires states to develop pro-
grams that provide “a free appropriate public education” to all 
children with disabilities. Prior to 1975, many children with dis-
abilities were excluded from public schools. PL 94–142, according 
to Priscilla Pardini (2002),

12 Background and History
 proved to be landmark legislation, requiring pub-
lic schools to provide students with a broad range of 
disabilities—including physical handicaps, mental retar-
dation, speech, vision and language problems, emotional 
and behavioral problems, and other learning disorders—
with a “free appropriate public education.” Moreover, it 
called for school districts to provide such schooling in 
the “least restrictive environment” possible. 
 This law, renamed the Individuals with Disabilities Educa-
tion Act (IDEA), has been reauthorized twice, in 1990 and 1997. 
Each of these reauthorizations has strengthened the law, ensuring 
that more and more children with disabilities are served in schools 
in ways that allow them to reach their full potential. Schools are 
required to develop an individual education plan (IEP) for each 
child who has a disability; an IEP specifies the educational ser-
vices, the setting, the curriculum, and the types of instruction that 
will most appropriately address that child’s learning needs. Today, 
children who have disabilities are “included” as much as possible 
in regular education classrooms; they are served by special edu-
cation teachers and other support staff who work in tandem with 
regular education teachers so that the children who have disabili-
ties become part of the social interaction of the regular classroom. 
Currently, according to the National Center for Education Statis-
tics, more than 13 percent of U.S. public school children qualify 
for and receive special education services. 
 All of these reforms, whether the result of legislation or of 
court decree, have greatly expanded access to the educational sys-
tem in the United States. Many more children have opportunities 
for a free, appropriate, and public education as a result. But edu-
cational equity is only one part of educational reform. 
 Education Reform for Quality 
 Parallel to educational equity is the theme of educational quality. 
The launch of Sputnik focused the United States on the quality of 
mathematics and science programs across the nation in the 1950s, 
and the National Defense Education Act provided more than a 
billion dollars of federal funds to address what were viewed at 
the time as shortcomings in the educational system. In addition to 
funds for improving the content and the teaching of mathematics 

Education Reform for Quality 13
and science, the NDEA supported the development and expan-
sion of school libraries, the improvement of teacher education, 
the teaching of foreign languages in elementary and secondary 
schools, vocational and technical education, graduate fellowships, 
and loans for college students. 
 According to Larry Abramson (2008), as a result of NDEA’s 
focus on improving science instruction in schools and classrooms, 
“Educational tools began to change. Lab kits and overhead pro-
jectors were added, and educational films became part of the cur-
riculum.” There were changes, also, in mathematics education. 
Reform in mathematics curriculum, begun with little notice before 
the launch of Sputnik, came from many different directions and 
organizations, among them the University of Illinois Committee 
on School Mathematics and the Commission on School Mathe-
matics of the College Entrance Examination Board. The calls for 
reform, strengthened by NDEA, resulted in the introduction of 
calculus courses in high school, as well as what came to be known 
as “new math,” an approach to the teaching and learning of math-
ematics that focused on theoretical and abstract concepts rather 
than basic arithmetic computation. 
 Before the 1980s, the rhetoric about the quality of education in 
the United States was just rhetoric; there had been no large-scale 
study of the quality of education that paralleled the Coleman study 
of educational equity. In 1981, the U.S. secretary of education, Terrell 
Bell, established a National Commission on Excellence in Education 
and charged that commission with conducting a comprehensive 
review of education in the United States. Bell asked the commission 
to place particular emphasis on programs and practices that pro-
duced high levels of learning and prepared children for college and 
university entrance. That commission held hearings and gathered 
and analyzed data on the quality of education in the United States. 
In 1983, it issued a report, “A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for Ed-
ucational Reform,” that has shaped the discourse about educational 
reform since its publication. The report, like the calls for school im-
provement that led to the NDEA, linked the quality of education in 
the United States and the educational achievement of U.S. children 
to our national defense and our standing as a global power. 
 The report began with a letter to President Ronald Reagan 
and the nation, opening with these words: 
 Our nation is at risk. Our once unchallenged preemi-
nence in commerce, industry, science, and technological 

14 Background and History
innovation is being overtaken by competitors through-
out the world. This report is concerned with only one of 
the many causes and dimensions of the problem, but it 
is the one that undergirds American prosperity, security, 
and civility. 
 The language of the report is strong and direct; it character-
ized education in the United States as being “eroded by a rising 
tide of mediocrity that threatens our very future as a Nation and a 
people.” The commission chided the American public and educa-
tional community for allowing this to happen. According to the re-
port, “If an unfriendly foreign power had attempted to impose on 
America the mediocre educational performance that exists today, 
we might well have viewed it as an act of war. . . . We have, in ef-
fect, been committing an act of unthinking, unilateral educational 
disarmament.” The commission concluded its analysis of the 
quality of education with recommendations for the improvement 
of education, public, private, and parochial, at all levels, that “the 
American people can begin to act on now, that can be implemented 
over the next several years, and that promise lasting reform.” 
 The Nation at Risk report challenged parents and students to 
become involved in school reform and in improving learning. For 
parents, the commission described a dual role in school reform—
that of setting expectations for their children and that of advocat-
ing for real reforms in their children’s schools. The commission 
exhorted children to take advantage of the educational opportu-
nities afforded them. 
 The Nation at Risk report is important because it was the 
first real blueprint for comprehensive school reform centered 
on the quality of student learning. It addressed nearly every 
aspect and every level of schooling, and at least a decade before 
reformers were calling for educators to view schools as systems, 
the report recognized that comprehensive reform must involve 
all of the parts of the system at once, rather than the “tinker-
ing around the edges” approaches often taken by schools. The 
authors of the report made recommendations for curriculum 
and expectations for learning that foreshadowed the standards-
based education reform that did not begin until nearly a decade 
later. They also recognized the critical role that parents and stu-
dents themselves play in improving schools and learning. The 
report, which was forward-looking in its comprehensiveness, 
lacked strategies for implementing recommended reforms. 

Education Reform for Quality 15
 Unfortunately, the  commission had no authority to do anything 
other than make recommendations, and the federal government 
provided no resources for any organized implementation of the 
reforms the report recommended. The introduction of “A Na-
tion at Risk” can be found in Chapter 6. 
 The Nation at Risk report generated a public focus on school 
quality, a focus that led to a proliferation of school reform research, 
as well as consultants, organizations, and programs, all promising 
to improve the quality of schools and the outcomes for children. 
Schools and school districts also began to look to successful busi-
ness models, such as management by objective, the Deming man-
agement method, and others, for help in reorganizing their school 
operations.
 At the same time, during the 1980s, many of the nation’s 
governors were working both within and across their states on 
education reform. At the National Governors Association (NGA) 
meeting in Idaho in the summer of 1985, school reform was high 
on the agenda. Governor Lamar Alexander, chair of the NGA, 
shared his concern about the link between education and the 
economy in general, and in particular, the availability of an able 
workforce and global competitiveness. As a result of their discus-
sion at that meeting, the governors set seven school reform tasks 
for themselves. The reform tasks included improving school lead-
ership and teaching, raising standards for learning and helping 
at-risk children to meet them, promoting parent involvement and 
school choice, and using technology more effectively in education 
(Vinovskis 1999). 
 The governors continued to work on their education reform 
agenda, and when George Herbert Walker Bush was elected pres-
ident with education as a key part of his campaign platform, the 
governors held him to his promise as the “education president” 
to meet with them to discuss education reform. That meeting took 
place in Charlottesville, Virginia, in September 1989. At the meeting,
the governors and President Bush agreed that there should be a 
set of national education goals that could provide a direction for 
school reform in the United States, and they set six goals to be 
met by the nation and by the schools by 2000. A list of the goals is 
found in Chapter 6. They also agreed that states and local commu-
nities should determine how the goals would be met. The goals 
were announced by President Bush in 1990. 
 The National Education Goals Panel (NEGP) was established 
by Congress in July 1990 to monitor, assess, and report on the 

16 Background and History
progress of the nation’s schools in reaching the national educa-
tion goals. The bipartisan NEGP was made up of federal and state 
officials; they were charged with issuing annual reports on the 
progress toward the goals in the nation and in the states. The first 
report of the NEGP was released in 1991; the NEGP continued 
to publish annual reports about the progress of education reform 
each year until 2000. The NEGP published numerous other reports
on a wide variety of educational reform topics related to the goals, 
including indicators and strategies for reaching the national edu-
cational goals and “tool kits” for various stakeholders in school 
reform. One of the most significant of the reports, in terms of 
future education reform, was “Promises to Keep: Creating High 
Standards for American Students” (1993), which was a call for 
the development of national curriculum standards. In 2000, the 
NEGP was disbanded by Congressional mandate. 
 At the same time that Congress established the NEGP, several 
states and urban school districts joined forces in 1990 to begin the 
New Standards Project to support the National Educational Goals 
and the development of the new national standards. According to 
Elizabeth Spalding (2000), the New Standards Project was made 
up of 
 a national coalition of approximately 17 states and seven 
urban school districts, co-directed by Lauren Resnick of 
the Learning, Research, and Development Center of the 
University of Pittsburgh and Marc Tucker of the National 
Center on Education and the Economy in Washington, 
D.C. (p. 758) 
 This project brought hundreds of educators together to 
develop assessments that were aligned with both the National 
Education Goals and curriculum standards that were being 
developed by a number of professional education associations 
such as the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, the 
National Council of Teachers of English, the National Council 
for Social Studies, and so on. (The U.S. Department of Educa-
tion funded the development of standards for the arts, civics and 
government, English language arts, foreign languages, geogra-
phy, history, and science.) One of the goals of the New Standards 
Project was to create performance assessments and portfolios 
that allowed children “to demonstrate their ability to meet per-
formance standards that were being developed simultaneously” 

Education Reform for Quality 17
(Spalding 2000, 759). In other words, the performance assess-
ments and portfolios informed the development of the standards 
as the development of the standards informed the assessments. 
 In 1991, at the request of Secretary of Education Lamar Alex-
ander, Congress also established the National Council on Educa-
tion Standards and Testing (NCEST) and charged that council with 
examining the feasibility of national curriculum standards and a 
method of assessing them. Although no national curriculum stan-
dards have been adopted and declared mandatory by the federal 
government, the standards developed by the professional educa-
tion organizations have been debated nationally, and many states 
have either adopted them or modeled state standards after them. 
 In 1994, President Bill Clinton signed the Goals 2000: Educate 
America Act (PL 103–227) into law. The purpose of the Goals 2000 
legislation was to provide funding to states and school districts 
to support their own standards-based education reform processes 
and projects. According to the text of the legislation, the law was 
based on the following principles of effective change: 
 
1. All students can learn; 
 
2. Lasting improvements depend on school-based 
leadership;
 
3. Simultaneous top-down and bottom-up reform is 
necessary;
 
4. Strategies must be locally developed, comprehensive, 
and coordinated; and 
 
5. The whole community must be involved in developing 
strategies for system-wide improvement. (Title III. Sec. 301. 
Findings) 
 The Goals 2000: Educate America Act required states to 
develop or adopt rigorous content, performance, and opportu-
nity to learn standards and to measure children’s achievement 
relative to those standards, and for school districts to align their 
curricula with the standards. (Content standards specify what 
children should learn, performance standards specify how well 
they should learn, and opportunity to learn standards describe 
the resources that should be available to children to support the 
learning.) The law also required states to publish report cards of 
their progress toward standards-based reform. 
 For the first time, this legislation allocated federal funds 
for states and school districts to support their school reform 

18 Background and History
 efforts. And for the first time, federal legislation demonstrated 
the understanding that teachers  are on the front lines of edu-
cation reform by including provisions and substantial funding 
for professional development, as well as for the development of 
professional development standards and models. At the same 
time, the legislation maintained state autonomy in terms of the 
standards and assessments to measure achievement of the stan-
dards, as well as the processes states might use to reform educa-
tion to meet the national goals. In 1996, the Goals 2000: Educate 
America Act was amended to eliminate the requirement for 
opportunity to learn standards. 
 According to the U.S. Constitution, the administration of 
education is not a federal responsibility; it is left to the states. The 
Goals 2000 legislation was the first federal legislation that inter-
vened in general education. In states whose constitutions or laws 
supported control of education by local communities, adopting 
state standards and assessments interfered with local control. 
Most of the states participated in the Goals 2000 initiative; a 
few, however, chose not to. Among them was Iowa, where the 
state constitution explicitly reserved control of public education 
for local communities. To address the issue of local control, the 
Goals 2000: Educate America Act included provisions for local 
school districts or consortia of local districts to apply for funding 
for standards-based school reform in states that had opted not to 
participate.
 Bringing Equity and Quality 
Reforms Together 
 Throughout the recent history of education reform in the United 
States, the balance has shifted back and forth between equity 
and quality. But until the current authorization of the Elementary 
and Secondary Education Act, No Child Left Behind (PL 107–110), 
no initiative has brought them together so explicitly. No Child Left 
Behind (NCLB) brings together the equity historically intended 
by the ESEA and the quality represented by the standards-based 
reforms of America 2000 and Goals 2000. Its provisions, however, 
go far beyond those of earlier authorizations of the ESEA and 
Goals 2000, especially in terms of accountability for meeting the 
goals set by the law. NCLB revised the national goals enacted by 

Bringing Equity and Quality Reforms Together 19
Congress in America 2000 and Goals 2000, replacing them with 
the following performance goals: 
 By 2013–2014, all students will reach high standards, at 
a minimum attaining proficiency or better in reading/
language arts and mathematics. 
 All limited English proficient students will become 
proficient in English and reach high academic standards, 
at a minimum attaining proficiency or better in reading/
language arts and mathematics. 
 By 2005–2006, all students will be taught by highly qualified 
teachers.
 All students will be educated in learning environments that 
are safe, drug-free, and conducive to learning. 
 All students will graduate from high school. 
 The law includes performance indicators for each of the five 
goals, as well as penalties and sanctions for schools and school 
districts that do not achieve what the law calls “adequate yearly 
progress” (AYP) toward all students meeting the state standards. 
 NCLB not only requires that schools meet the standards over-
all or that only the average students meet the standards. It also 
requires that schools consider and be evaluated by the perfor-
mance of the many subgroups that make up the schools’ popula-
tions. For the first time, schools are being held accountable for 
the academic progress of every child, and schools are required 
to report separately on the progress of minority groups, children 
in poverty, homeless children, children whose first languages are 
other than English, and children with disabilities. One of the great 
strengths of NCLB is that schools must make plans to improve the 
achievement of all children. 
 But NCLB has also been criticized by states, school districts, 
parent groups, and many special interest groups for a number 
of reasons. Among the many criticisms of NCLB are that the law 
requires annual testing of all children in school districts that re-
ceive funding under the law, that it is unrealistic to think that 
all children will demonstrate proficiency on such tests, that the 
law has not been fully funded, and that the law far oversteps 
the Constitutional right of the federal government to regulate 
education in the states. The analysis of some critics of NCLB is 

20 Background and History
that the standards have been set so high that by 2014, nearly all 
schools in the United States will be considered failing, and some 
studies are beginning to support that analysis. (See Cavanaugh 
and Hoff 2008.) 
 Since the  Brown  decisions, which set precedent for and re-
sulted in equity of access to education for so many children pre-
viously not served by U.S. public education, and the launch of 
Sputnik I, which spurred the first federal foray into improving the 
quality of learning in the United States, great strides have been 
made, particularly in the expectations of the public and the fed-
eral government about the outcomes of public education. But we 
have far to go to realize those expectations. There are still many 
children in the United States whose access to a high-quality edu-
cation is challenged by a number of factors that have yet to be 
adequately addressed. 
 The State of Public Education 
in the United States and the Continued 
Need for Reform  
 Although the system of public education in the United States has 
been involved in some level of reform for more than half a cen-
tury, the visions of many reformers for equity and quality have 
not been realized. There are many challenges to education reform 
in the United States. Among them are the increasing diversity of 
the school population, including the number of children living in 
poverty and the number of children whose home language is not 
English; inequity in school funding and other resources, includ-
ing the quality of teaching, for education both among and within 
the states; and a political climate that seems not to support the 
equity envisioned by the Brown decisions. 
 Diversity of the U.S. School Population 
 One of the biggest challenges to education reform in the United 
States is the increasing diversity of the U.S. population in general, 
and in particular, the diversity of the children enrolled in public 
schools. According to the Center for Public Education (2007), in 
1970, 79 percent of the children enrolled in public schools were 
white, 14 percent were black, 6 percent were Hispanic, and 1 percent 

Increasing Rates of Poverty 21
were Asian or Pacific Islander. In 2006, of the 49,676,964  children 
enrolled in kindergarten through grade 12 in public schools in 
the United States, 55.9 percent were white, 16.9 percent black, 
20.5 percent Hispanic, 4.5 percent Asian and Pacific Islander, and 
1.2 percent American Indian or Alaska Native. Of those students, 
8.5 percent were English language learners, and 13.6 percent 
were identified as having disabilities. The demographics of most 
urban school districts in the United States are very different from 
these, however, with fewer than 10 percent of the school popu-
lation consisting of white students, and many individual urban 
schools consisting of nearly 100 percent minority students. 
 The number of children who are English language learners 
(whose first language is not English) is growing as well. Accord-
ing to Jeanne Batalova (2007), the number of LEP (limited English 
proficient) children enrolled in U.S. public schools increased 
65 percent between 1994 and 2004, with about 5 million LEP chil-
dren enrolled in kindergarten through grade 12 in the 2003–2004 
school year. Some large urban school districts serve as many as 
several hundred different language groups; a typical urban school 
in an area where new immigrants settle may serve children who 
speak 40 or more languages. Batalova (2007) also cites statistics 
from the U.S. Census Bureau that show that LEP children are 
twice as likely to live in poor families as children who speak only 
English or who speak English very well. 
 Increasing Rates of Poverty 
 Even more disturbing, according to the National Center for Chil-
dren in Poverty, 12.8 million children, or 17.5 percent, live in fami-
lies whose incomes fall below the poverty line (annual income of 
$20,000 or less for a family of four). This number represents an in-
crease of 1.2 million children between 2000 and 2006. Thirty-nine 
percent, or more than 28 million of the nation’s children, lived in 
low-income homes (annual income of $41,000 for a family of four) 
in 2006. For children living in cities, the poverty rate is much higher, 
presenting a greater challenge to urban schools. In addition, the 
National Center estimates that the actual number of children in 
poverty is higher than reported, given flaws that have been identi-
fied in the way that poverty is calculated. The number of children 
not covered by health insurance is estimated to be 8.7 million, an in-
crease of 600,000 between 2005 and 2006 (Fass and Cauthen 2007). 

22 Background and History
 Disparity in School Funding 
 The 2008  Education Week  report “Quality Counts” grades the na-
tion and the states’ educational outcomes and policies. The report 
gives the grade of C+ to the nation overall in the area of school fi-
nance; only one state, West Virginia, earns the grade of A, and one, 
New Jersey, the grade of A–. The grades are based on measures of 
equity among state school districts and per-pupil spending. Ac-
cording to the report, the national average for adjusted per-pupil 
expenditures in 2005 was $7,372, with average per-pupil expendi-
tures ranging from $12,429 in the District of Columbia to $5,463 in 
Utah (p. 57). 
 In the United States, each state has its own school funding sys-
tem, with schools in a few states funded entirely by the state while 
schools in other states rely at least partially on local funding. Even 
in states where public funding is “equalized” by the state, schools 
in more affluent areas often have more resources because parents 
can afford to provide what the schools cannot. The Education Trust 
studies state funding for education periodically. In its 2004 study, 
the Education Trust found that “in 25 of the 49 states studied, the 
highest poverty school districts get fewer resources than the lowest-
poverty districts” (Carey 2004, 2). According to Kevin Carey (2004), 
“School funding experts generally agree that high-poverty schools 
need more resources to meet the same standards” as schools with 
lower rates of poverty (p. 2). Under No Child Left Behind, Con-
gress set a funding standard that would have states provide dis-
tricts with “additional funding per low-income student equal to 
40 percent of the average per student amount” (p. 3), but when that 
formula is applied, the disparity is even greater, with “the highest-
poverty schools in 36 states receiving fewer cost-adjusted dollars 
that the lowest-poverty districts” (p. 5). 
 In a later study, Carey and Marguerite Roza (2008) compared 
two schools that serve primarily students who come from low-
income families. One of the schools, in Virginia, spends more than 
twice as much per student ($14,040) as the other, in North Caro-
lina ($6,773). Even though their student populations are similar, 
student performance at the Virginia school exceeds the state stan-
dards in mathematics and science, while student performance at 
the North Carolina school falls below the state average. The higher 
funding at the Virginia school ensures more experienced teachers; 
more books, computers, and instructional materials; and smaller 
classes so that teachers have time to meet the needs of individual 

Increasing Rates of Poverty 23
students. The researchers found that it is not only state funding 
that is inequitable. Since federal funds are allocated at least par-
tially on the amount of state funding a school has, the Virginia 
school receives more federal funding than the North Carolina
school, exacerbating the disparity between the funding of the two 
neighboring states. 
 Highly Qualified Teachers 
 One of the provisions of No Child Left Behind is that all teachers
should be “highly qualified”; they should be fully certified to teach 
the grade levels or subjects that they teach. “Quality Counts” also 
presents data that describe states’ efforts to recruit high quality 
teachers and provide the professional development they need to 
help them become even better. In explaining why the 2008 report 
focuses on teaching, the executive summary of the report notes 
that “teaching matters more to student learning than any other 
school-related factor” (p. 8); a subsequent analysis of the data on 
teaching finds that “a few good teachers in a row can raise stu-
dents’ achievement significantly” (p. 20). But just being certified 
may not be enough for teachers to be effective; the factors that 
characterize effective teaching or a clear understanding of how 
teaching affects student learning have been elusive. It is inter-
esting that in a half-century of efforts at the national level in the 
United States to reform education, and in the extensive research 
that has been conducted on education during that time, so little 
has been learned about teaching effectiveness or how to prepare 
teachers to be effective. Bess Keller, author of the analysis of the 
data on teaching, notes that only a handful of states gather data 
on teachers and teaching in ways that can be linked to student 
achievement data. 
 After this half-century of scrutiny of public education in the 
United States, as well as the efforts over that time to improve the 
quality of education, educational quality as measured by student 
achievement falls far short of what was envisioned in the optimis-
tic goals set by the America 2000, the Goals 2000, and the NCLB 
legislation. The National Assessment of Educational Progress 
(NAEP) measures student achievement across the nation annu-
ally in reading and mathematics at the fourth and eighth grade 
levels. Each year the National Center for Education Statistics 
(NCES) publishes “The Nation’s Report Card,” an analysis of the 
data from the NAEP. Scores from the NAEP are organized into 

24 Background and History
four levels: below basic, basic, proficient, and advanced, with 
proficient as the level of performance envisioned for all children. 
NAEP defines proficient as denoting “solid academic perfor-
mance. Students reaching this level have demonstrated compe-
tency over challenging subject matter.” Analysis of data from the 
2007 administration of the NAEP finds that only 31.7 percent of 
fourth-graders and 29.2 percent of eighth-graders demonstrated 
proficiency (proficient and advanced levels) in reading, and only 
38.6 percent of fourth-graders and 31 percent of eighth-graders 
scored at the proficient or advanced level in mathematics (Na-
tional Center for Education Statistics 2008). 
 Interestingly, the same NAEP data show that while in some 
states the achievement gap between children living in poverty 
and their peers from more affluent families narrowed slightly 
between 2006 and 2007, in both reading and math, the gap has 
remained fairly constant nationally. At the fourth grade level in 
math, for example, the difference between the average scores of 
children eligible for free lunch (i.e., living in poverty) and those 
not eligible for free lunch has remained the same, 24 points, since 
2003 (National Center for Education Statistics 2008). Tables of data 
from NAEP can be found in Chapter 6. 
 The 2007 report cards also report on the white-black and 
white-Hispanic achievement gaps, comparing them from 1990 to 
2007. According to the mathematics report, “significant score gaps 
persisted between White students and their Black and Hispanic 
peers” with no significant differences between the gaps in 1990 
and 2007 (p. 27). 
 Jonathan Kozol has chronicled inequity and the effects of in-
equity in U.S. schools in a number of books and articles. Accord-
ing to Kozol (2005), many people believe that 
 the great extremes of racial isolation that were mat-
ters of grave national significance some thirty-five or 
forty years ago have gradually but steadily diminished 
in more recent years. The truth, unhappily, is that the 
trend, for well over a decade now, has been precisely 
the reverse. Schools that were already deeply segre-
gated over twenty-five or thirty years ago are no less 
segregated now, while thousands of other schools 
around the country that had been integrated either vol-
untarily or by the force of law have since been rapidly 
resegregating. 

References 25
 According to researchers Gary Orfield and Chungmei Lee 
(2007) of the UCLA Civil Rights Project, “The country’s rapidly 
growing population of Latino and black students is more segre-
gated than they have been since the 1960s and we are going back-
ward faster in the areas where integration was most far-reaching” 
(p. 4). Activists for racial equality attribute the widening of the 
achievement gaps to this resegregation and the unwillingness of 
the Justice Department and the Supreme Court to pursue deseg-
regation and increased  equity for minority children, particularly 
those in poverty. In support of their contention, these activists cite 
the 2007 Supreme Court decision in  Parents Involved in Community 
Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1 et al.  (551 US ___ 2007). In their 
ruling in this case, the Court barred using race as a determining 
factor in assigning children to schools to achieve racial balance. The 
Court acknowledged that there are advantages to integration, but it 
severely limited the ways that school districts may achieve integra-
tion. The ruling effectively stops many school districts whose efforts 
toward voluntary integration have involved assignment of children 
to school on the basis of race, and those districts are challenged to 
find ways to integrate schools without the consideration of race. 
 In half a century of school reform efforts for equity and quality, 
there have been some gains. Children with disabilities, girls, En-
glish language learners, and children who are members of racial 
and ethnic minorities have gained rights under the law; unfortu-
nately, those rights, which are not always evident in the real world 
of schools, are being eroded (Orfield, Eaton, and the Harvard Project 
on School Desegregation 1996). All children have made some gains 
in achievement in reading and mathematics; however, with only 
about a third of the nation’s children demonstrating proficiency, 
and persistent achievement gaps between children in poverty and 
their more affluent peers, and between black and Hispanic chil-
dren and their white peers, there definitely is work to be done. 
 References 
 Abramson, L. 2007. “Sputnik Left Legacy for U.S. Science Education.” 
NPR’s All Things Considered . September 30. http://npr.org/templates/
story/story/pho?storyid=14829195.
 Anderson, R. C., E. H. Hiebert, J. A. Scott, and I. A. G. Wilkinson. 1985. 
Becoming a Nation of Readers: The Report of the Commission on Reading.
Champaign, IL: Center for the Study of Reading. 

26 Background and History
 Barnett, W. S. 2002. “The Battle over Head Start: What the Research 
Shows.” Paper presented at Congressional Science and Public Policy 
briefing on the impact of Head Start, September 13. 
 Batalova, J. 2006. “Spotlight on Limited English Proficient 
Students in the United States.” US in Focus. Migration Policy 
Institute. http://www.migrationinformation.org/USfo6us/display.
cfm?ID=373. 
 Brown Foundation for Educational Equity, Excellence and Research. 
http://brownvboard.org/foundation. 
 Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954) (USSC+). http://www.
nationalcenter.org/brown.html. 
 Brown v. Board of Education, 349 U.S. 294 (1955) (USSC+). http://www.
nationalcenter.org/cc0725.htm. 
 Callahan, R. E. 1962.  Education and the Cult of Efficiency. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
 Carey, K. 2004.  The Funding Gap 2004: Many States Still Shortchange Low-
Income and Minority Students. Washington, DC: The Education Trust. 
 Carey, K., and M. Roza. 2008.  School Funding’s Tragic Flaw. Seattle, WA: 
Education Sector, Center on Reinventing Public Education. 
 Cavanaugh, S., and D. J. Hoff. 2008. “Schools Found Likely 
to Miss NCLB Targets.”  Education Week online, September 25. 
http://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2008/09/25/06ayp.h28.
html?tmp=1754231223.
 Center for Public Education. 2007. “At-a-Glance: Changing 
Demographics.” Practical Information and Analysis about Public Education.
http://www.centerforpubliceducation.org/site/c.kjJXJ5MPIwE/
b.3633965/Diversity. 
 Center for Public Education. 2008. “School Context: What is the Racial 
and Ethnic Makeup of our Schools?” Practical Information and Analysis 
about Public Education . http://www.centerforpubliceducation.org/
site/c.kjJXJ5MPIwE/b.3523701/k.5B61/School_context_What_is_the_
racial_and_ethnic_make_up_of_our_schools.htm#national.
 Fass, S., and N. K. Cauthen. 2007.  Who are America’s Poor Children? The 
Official Story. New York: National Center for Children in Poverty. 
 Franklin, Benjamin. 1749. “Proposals Relating to the Education 
of Youth in Pensilvania.” http://www.archives.upenn.edu/
primdocs/1749proposals.html. 
 Fullan, M. 2007.  The New Meaning of Educational Change, 4th ed. New 
York: Teachers College Press. 
 Garces, E., D. Thomas, and J. Currie. 2000. “Longer Term Effects of Head 
Start.” http://www.econ.ucla.edu/people/papers/Currie/Currie139.pdf. 

References 27
 Goals 2000 History. n.d. http://www.ed.gov/pubs/G2KReforming/
g2ch1.html.
 Grindle, M. S. 2004.  Despite the Odds: The Contentious Politics of Education 
Reform. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 Hanna, J. 2005. “The Elementary and Secondary Education Act: 40 Years 
Later.”  News Features & Releases. Harvard Graduate School of Education. 
http://www.gse.harvard.edu/news_events/features/2005/08/
esea0819.html.
 Horn, C. L., and M. Kurlaender. 2006.  The End of Keyes—Resegregation 
Trends and Achievement in Denver Public Schools. Cambridge, MA: 
The Civil Rights Project at Harvard University. http://www.
civilrightsproject.ucla.edu/research/deseg/denver–4_5_06.pdf. 
 International Association for the Evaluation of Educational 
Achievement. 2007. “Brief History of IEA.” http://www.iea.nl/brief_
history_of_iea.html.
 Jefferson, Thomas. 1779.  A Bill for the More General Diffusion of Knowledge.
http://oll.libertyfund.org/?option=com_staticxt&staticfile=show.php%
3Ftitle=755&chapter=86186&layout=html&Itemid=27 .
 Kozol, J. 2005. “Still Separate, Still Unequal: America’s Educational 
Apartheid.” Harper’s Magazine 311 (1864). www.mindfully.org/
Reform/2005/American-Apartheid-Education1sep05.htm.
 Lipman, P. 2004.  High Stakes Education: Inequality, Globalization, and 
Urban School Reform . New York: Routledge Falmer. 
 Lowe, R. 2004. “The Strange History of School Desegregation.” 
Rethinking Schools 18 (3). http://www.rethinkingschools.org/
archive/18_03/stra183.shtml. 
 Lowe, R. 2007. “Backpedaling Toward Plessy.”  Rethinking Schools 22 (1): 
14–17.
 NASA. 2007. “Sputnik and The Dawn of the Space Age.” http://
history.nasa.gov/sputnik/.
National Center for Educational Statistics. 2008. The Nation’s Report Card: 
Mathematics 2007 . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. 
 National Center for Educational Statistics. 2008.  The Nation’s Report Card: 
Reading 2007 . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. 
 National Commission on Excellence in Education. 1983. “A Nation at 
Risk: The Imperative for Education Reform.” Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Education. http://ed.gov/pubs/NatAtRisk/risk.html. 
 National Education Goals Panel. November 1993. “Promises to Keep: 
Creating High Standards for American Students.” Washington, DC: 
National Education Goals Panel. http://www.ed.gov/legislation/
GOALS2000/TheAct/sec102.html.

28 Background and History
 The National Commission on Excellence in Education. 1983. “A Nation 
at Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform.” http://www.ed.gov/
pubs/NatAtRisk/index.html.
 Noguera, P. 2003.  City Schools and the American Dream: Reclaiming the 
Promise of Public Education . New York: Teachers College Press. 
 Orenstein, P. 1994.  School Girls: Young Women, Self-Esteem, and the 
Confidence Gap. New York: Doubleday. 
 Orfield, G., S. Eaton, and the Harvard Project on School Desegregation. 
1996. Dismantling Desegregation: The Quiet Reversal of Brown v. Board of 
Education. New York: The New Press. 
 Orfield, G., and C. Lee. 2007.  Historic Reversals, Accelerating 
Resegregation, and the Need for New Integration Strategies. Los Angeles: 
The Civil Rights Project, UCLA. 
 Pardini, P. 2002. “The History of Special Education.”  Rethinking Schools
16 (3). http://www.rethinkingschools.org/archive/16_03/Hist163.shtml. 
 Rose, L. C., and A. M. Gallup. 2007. “The 39th Annual Phi Delta Kappa/
Gallup Poll of the Public’s Attitudes toward the Public Schools.”  Phi
Delta Kappan 89 (1): 33–48. 
 Rotberg, I. C. 2004. “Preface.” In  Balancing Change and Tradition in Global 
Education Reform, edited by I. C. Rotberg, vii–ix. New York: Rowman 
and Littlefield Education. 
 Sadker, M., and D. Sadker. 1995.  Failing at Fairness: How Our Schools 
Cheat Girls. New York: Scribner. 
 Shannon, P. 2004. “What’s the Problem for which  No Child Left Behind is the 
Solution?” In Saving Our Schools: The Case for Public Education Saying No to 
“No Child Left Behind,” edited by K. Goodman, P. Shannon,  Y. Goodman, 
and R. Rapoport, 12–26. Berkeley, CA: RDR Books. 
 Spalding, E. 2000. “Performance Assessment and the New Standards 
Project: A Story of Serendipitous Success.”  Phi Delta Kappan 81 (10): 
758–764.
 Street, P. 2005.  Segregated Schools: Educational Apartheid in Post-Civil 
Rights America. New York: Routledge. 
 Tyack, D., and L. Cuban. 2001. “Progress or Regress?” In  The Jossey-Bass 
Reader on School Reform , 5–42. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
 U.S. Census Bureau. 2005.  School Enrollment—Social and Economic 
Characteristics of Students: October 2003. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics Administration. 
 U.S. Department of Education. 2007. “The Federal Role in Education.” 
http://www.ed.gov/about/overview/fed/role.html. 

References 29
 Valentin, I. 1997. “Title IX: A Brief History .” 25 Years of Title IX Digest.
Newton, MA: Women’s Educational Equity Act (WEEA) Resource Center 
at EDC. http://www2.edc.org/GDI/publications_SR/t9digest.pdf. 
 Vinovskis, M. A. 1998.  Overseeing the Nation’s Report Card: The Creation 
and Evolution of the National Assessment Governing Board. Washington, 
DC: National Assessment Governing Board. 
 Vinovskis, M. A. 1999.  The Road to Charlottesville: The 1989 Education 
Summit. Washington, DC: National Education Goals Panel. 

This page intentionally left blank 

31
 S
ince the 1950s, there has been an ongoing critique of public 
education in the United States. Problems have been identified 
in nearly every aspect of schooling, and calls for school reform 
have come from nearly every sector of U.S. society. The problems 
identified in public education generally fall under the larger head-
ings of equity and quality described in Chapter 1. Indeed, one of 
the most serious problems associated with public education in the 
United States today is that in the aggregate, its student achieve-
ment is not competitive with that of other developed nations. 
Even though student achievement in the United States seems to 
be improving slightly overall, there is a persistent gap between 
the achievement of white and Asian students and that of African 
American and Hispanic students that is as large today as it was 
in the 1970s. According to an analysis of National Assessment of 
Educational Progress (NAEP) data by Manhattan Institute Senior 
Fellows Abigail Thernstrom and Stephan Thernstrom (2003), there 
is a four-year skills gap. “By twelfth grade,” the Thernstroms as-
sert, “on average, black students are four years behind those who 
are white or Asian. Hispanics don’t do much better” (p. 12). In 
other words, if average white and Asian students are achieving 
at the 12th grade level, on average their African American and 
Hispanic peers are achieving at the eighth grade level. 
 Proposals for solutions have come from many different 
 directions—education professionals, psychologists, neurologists 
and brain researchers, the business community, politicians, par-
ents, and the general public. Each of the calls and solutions for 
educational reform has brought with it a philosophical perspec-
tive and a political agenda that extended beyond the face value 
 2 
 Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions 

32 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
of those calls and solutions. Nearly every proposed solution has 
also generated controversy or backlash that has affected its imple-
mentation.
 The myriad solutions proposed to address the problems 
represent not only a range of political and philosophical per-
spectives but also a wide range of scale. Solutions range from 
the introduction of specific teaching strategies in individual 
classrooms to those that call for comprehensive school reform 
at the national level. There are solutions that are characterized 
as “top-down,” mandated by the federal or state government or 
by school administrators, with penalties for noncompliance, and 
there are approaches that are “bottom-up,” those initiated by 
teachers seeking solutions to the problems they face on a day-to-
day basis in their schools and classrooms. Some solutions attempt 
to apply business practices to education, while others begin with 
what neuroscience is learning about the brain. This chapter de-
scribes a wide range of proposed solutions, the political or philo-
sophical perspectives they represent or that are associated with 
them, and controversies they have generated. 
 Curriculum and Teaching Models 
 There are many models of curriculum and teaching that have 
been adopted by schools as part of their reform efforts with the 
goal of improving student achievement. They represent a wide 
variety of educational philosophies and theories, and like most 
other aspects of schooling, each of them has proponents and crit-
ics. Each of the models described here links curriculum (content) 
and teaching (what teachers do to facilitate learning). 
 Direct Instruction 
 Direct Instruction (DI), according to the Web site of the National 
Institute for Direct Instruction (NIFDI), is “a model for teaching 
that emphasizes well-developed and carefully planned lessons 
designed around small learning increments and clearly defined 
and prescribed teaching tasks” (NIFDI n.d.). DI, a behaviorist 
(stimulus-response) approach to learning, uses prescribed cur-
riculum and lessons that are scripted; teachers read the scripts 
and elicit responses from students as part of the lessons. The stu-
dent responses are scripted as well, and teachers cue students to 

Curriculum and Teaching Models 33
provide the correct responses. Proponents of scripted DI assert 
that the lessons and their sequences are carefully researched; 
skills and concepts are broken down into their smallest com-
ponents and taught in the prescribed sequence. According to 
the developers of DI, teacher creativity and autonomy are not 
necessary parts of the teaching and learning process, and the 
scripts ensure that teachers pace their instruction appropriately 
and that what teachers say and do with their students results in 
learning. 
 DI was developed by Siegfried Engelmann and Wesley Becker, 
education professors at the University of Oregon and directors of 
NIFDI. They and their colleagues claim that DI results in improved 
student achievement in nearly all curriculum areas, and they cite 
an analysis of studies of DI by the American Institutes for Research 
that claims to show that DI not only improved student achieve-
ment in academics but also improved children’s self esteem and 
behavior (NIFDI). 
 Another program based on scripted direct instruction is Suc-
cess for All, developed at Johns Hopkins University by Robert 
Slavin. Success for All is a program for teaching reading; it was 
named one of only two programs rated “moderately strong evi-
dence of positive effects” by the American Institutes for Research. 
The other such program was Engelmann and Becker’s DI. The 
Success for All program is currently in place in 1,200 schools, and 
more than 30 external studies of Success for All have supported its 
effectiveness (Success for All 2008). 
 Critics of DI argue that DI does not address individual chil-
dren’s learning needs, that it promotes memorization and rote 
learning rather than concept development and thinking, and 
that it deskills teachers. Many educators and cognitive psy-
chologists believe that rote memorization does not result in real 
learning; students who memorize information may not be able 
to use or critique that information. Experienced teachers believe 
and  research in cognitive psychology supports the notion that 
children learn in many different ways and at different times. For 
these teachers and psychologists, teaching in only one way may 
leave out students whose learning needs do not match the pre-
scribed methods or sequence of DI. They argue that it makes no 
sense to present the same lessons to students who may already 
know the content and those who are not ready to learn that con-
tent, either because of development or because of a lack of pre-
requisite learning. 

34 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Critics of DI believe that classroom teachers who know their 
students are in the best position to plan for their instruction; they 
can address the students’ learning needs and preferences, and 
they can determine the appropriate time for teaching content. 
Classroom teachers can also connect the content of lessons to 
their students’ lives outside school, making the lessons culturally 
and personally relevant to students. Critics describe DI lessons 
as culturally irrelevant and inappropriate for many urban and 
inner city children, and they cite studies (see Ryder, Sekulski, and 
Silberg 2003) that showed student achievement to be lower in 
classrooms where teachers use DI than in non-DI classrooms. 
 Integrated Curriculum 
 Many educators believe that it is important for students to con-
nect what they learn in one curriculum area to what they learn 
in other areas, and they cite research in cognitive psychology 
and neuroscience that defines learning as a process of connect-
ing learning in meaningful ways. They argue that the world is 
not divided into subject areas, and integrating the curriculum has 
the potential to make what children learn more authentic and rel-
evant to their experiences in the real world. Educators often call 
integrated curriculum “theme study,” in which the curriculum is 
organized around themes or big questions, rather than a sequence 
of discrete skills and concepts. The theme provides a context for 
learning specific skills and concepts. 
 An example of integrated curriculum might be a unit orga-
nized around the theme of the westward movement in the United 
States. In this unit, children would study the plants and animals 
along the Oregon Trail (science); they would learn about the land 
formations from east to west in the United States (geography); 
they would read real accounts of traveling on the Oregon Trail 
in the form of journal entries (history); and they would calculate 
distance and the amount of provisions necessary for such a trip 
(mathematics). They might even write “journals” of someone’s 
experiences along the Oregon Trail (creative writing) or paint a 
mural of life on the Oregon Trail (art). According to Sam Haus-
father (1995), a teacher researcher, “thematic instruction incorpo-
rates processes that involve focusing on meaning to make sense of 
the world and relying on one’s intelligence to solve problems and 
discover relationships” (p. 3). While the focus of these classrooms 
may be themes or “big questions,” there is still skill, strategy, and 

Curriculum and Teaching Models 35
concept teaching and learning going on. Instead of teaching skills, 
strategies, and concepts as separate modules of learning, how-
ever, teachers teach them and students learn them in the context 
of themes that provide opportunities for authentic application 
and for developing critical thinking. 
 The U.S. Department of Education’s NCLB newsletter 
(Ashby 2007), The Achiever , showcased a public elementary school 
in Oklahoma City that integrates the arts throughout the curricu-
lum. Integrating the arts “is moving students beyond the rudi-
mentary practices of memorization and recitation by providing 
a myriad of creative channels for learning the same subject mat-
ter” (p. 3). Linwood Elementary School is part of Oklahoma A+ 
Schools, a network of schools in Oklahoma modeled after North 
Carolina’s A+ Schools Program. In an evaluation of the North 
Carolina A+ Schools, researchers found that the program has 
positive effects on students, teachers, schools, and communities, 
including an enriched school environment, increased equity, im-
proved student achievement, and greater parent and community 
involvement (Nelson 2001). The results at Linwood Elementary 
School are similar, including high student achievement. Linwood 
serves an ethnically, racially, and linguistically diverse popula-
tion of students, 92 percent of whom qualify for free or reduced-
price lunches. According to Nicole Ashby (2007), Linwood “has 
exceeded the state’s targets by at least a 40-percentage point mar-
gin” with 92 percent of fourth-graders demonstrating proficiency 
in reading compared to the Oklahoma City average of 74 percent, 
and 85 percent proficiency in mathematics compared to 66 per-
cent citywide in 2006 (p. 3). The A+ Schools model also draws on 
and enacts multiple intelligence theory, described below. 
 Proponents of “back to basics” education often are critical of 
curriculum integration. They express concern that children may 
not focus on learning the skills and concepts that they need to 
know when learning is organized around themes or the curricu-
lum is integrated. Critics believe that skills and concepts should 
be taught in a specific sequence, a sequence that may be difficult, 
if not impossible, to follow when the skills and concepts are inte-
grated or taught as part of a theme study. Critics also argue that 
teachers spend an inordinate amount of time integrating the cur-
riculum, sometimes focusing on planning elaborate activities to 
teach what might otherwise be considered simple skill lessons. 
Further, religious conservatives express concern about such meth-
ods of organizing teaching and learning because, they believe, 

36 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
themes often involve the teaching of values that should be left to 
parents and religious institutions. 
 Multiple Intelligences 
 Multiple intelligences is a theory developed and researched by 
Howard Gardner, Harvard University psychologist, that chal-
lenges the definition of intelligence as measured by traditional in-
telligence tests as too narrow. Instead, Gardner (2003) proposed 
that each individual possesses an array of intelligences, which he 
defines as biopsychological potentials. Based on interviews with 
people from all walks of life and on research about the brain, Gard-
ner originally proposed seven different intelligences; his continued 
research identified three more intelligences. Each of the intelligences 
Gardner has identified use different parts of the brain. The intelli-
gences include linguistic intelligence, logical-mathematical intel-
ligence, musical intelligence, bodily kinesthetic intelligence, 
spatial intelligence, interpersonal intelligence, intrapersonal intel-
ligence, naturalistic intelligence, existential intelligence, and moral 
intelligence (Smith 2002). Further, Gardner’s work challenges the 
traditional theory that intelligence is something that people are 
born with; instead, he believes, and his research supports, the idea 
that intelligences are developed through life experiences. In other 
words, intelligence is not static; schools can help children raise their 
levels of these intelligences. The application of Gardner’s multiple 
intelligences in schools requires that curriculum be designed and 
teaching be planned to provide learning experiences that develop 
all of the intelligences. 
 The Key Learning Community (Kunkel 2007) in Indianapolis, 
Indiana, is a school organized around Howard Gardner’s theory of 
multiple intelligences. The word “community” is part of the name 
of the school, explains Key principal Christine Kunkel, because of 
the staff’s “belief in the power of collaboration. We teach students 
how to work with others on projects, how to network with people 
out in the neighborhoods, and how to talk to one another when 
there is a dispute” (p. 207), evidence of Gardner’s interpersonal 
intelligence at work. Students at Key have opportunities within 
“regular classes”—language arts, mathematics, science, social 
studies, music, the arts—and special classes to develop their in-
telligences through project-based learning and presentations of 
those projects, and they participate in Mentor and Apprenticeship 
programs with professionals and practitioners who work in areas 

Curriculum and Teaching Models 37
of interest to the students. Students at the Key Learning Commu-
nity document their learning through video portfolios that allow 
them, their parents, and their teachers to view the development of 
their intelligences, their academic achievement, and their interests 
over the time they spend at the school. 
 Kunkel reports that the school “boasts the highest gradua-
tion rate” among public high schools in Indianapolis, with 89 per-
cent of its 2006 graduates going on to college. She also notes that 
some of the program’s most important outcomes, which include 
self-knowledge and self-confidence, interpersonal skills, and 
leadership, cannot be measured by traditional tests or presented 
quantitatively. 
 Another school organized around multiple intelligences is 
the Gardner School in Vancouver, Washington. At the Gardner 
School, children are not grouped by age; instead, the school builds 
diverse learning communities in which each child is viewed as 
an individual with individual talents, strengths, and learning 
needs. The mission of the Gardner School includes “teaching to 
the uniqueness of each mind,” and the curriculum at the Gardner 
School, an independent pre-kindergarten through eighth grade 
school, is “emergent,” emerging from and responding to the in-
terests of the children (Gardner School 2008). 
 Critics of multiple intelligences theory argue that Gardner’s 
work has not been tested empirically and that Gardner’s intelli-
gences do correlate with what is traditionally tested as intelligence. 
Proponents of traditional measurements of intelligence also express 
concern that multiple intelligences cannot be measured. But sup-
porters of multiple intelligences see the theory as the impetus for 
educators to view their students in a very different light. Instead 
of asking whether  their students are “smart,” multiple intelligences 
theory provides the basis for educators to assume that all of their 
students are “smart,” and to look, instead, at their students’ intel-
ligence profiles to learn which of their students’ intelligences are 
already developed. This knowledge can lead to teaching that will 
develop intelligences that are not yet fully developed as well as to 
targeting teaching at those intelligences that are developed. 
 Brain-Based Education 
 Brain-based education, a concept that has been developing since 
the 1980s, has a simple definition. According to Eric Jensen, pro-
ponent of brain-based education, it is the application of research 

38 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
about the brain to the teaching and learning process. Jensen has 
argued for more than 20 years that education should take advan-
tage of the huge strides made in research on how the brain works, 
as well as help educators learn about how to apply that research 
in schools and classrooms. 
 Neurologist and middle school teacher Judy Willis (2008) cau-
tioned that the connections between brain research and education 
have not all been made yet, but she also says, “We do need to take 
some temporary leaps of faith across the parts of the bridge that 
are not yet sturdy and try interventions before the research is com-
plete” (p. 426). According to Willis, in finding ways to apply brain 
research to teaching, there “will be important challenges to meet, 
but the next decade will reward us with extraordinary opportuni-
ties” (p. 427). 
 While they may be taking “leaps of faith,” proponents of 
brain-based education have proposed principles for educators 
to consider when implementing brain research in schools and 
classrooms. Each of the principles is based on interpretations of 
findings about the brain, some of them fairly certain, but others 
fairly tentative. In their seminal text, Making Connections: Teach-
ing and the Human Brain , Renate Caine and Geoffrey Caine (1991) 
stated that the guiding principle of brain-based teaching should 
be to understand that “brain research establishes and confirms 
that multiple complex and concrete experiences are essential for 
meaningful learning and teaching” (p. 5). According to Caine 
and Caine (1991), to reflect the research on the brain and learn-
ing, teachers should plan and implement “lifelike, enriching, and 
appropriate experiences for learners” and “ensure that students 
process experiences in such a way as to increase the extraction of 
meaning” (p. 8). In other words, based on what is known about 
the brain and learning, it is complex, real-world experiences that 
lead to real learning. In a brain-based classroom, children are 
engaged in projects that are hands-on and authentic. Instead of 
reading about recycling and learning to say, “Reduce, reuse, re-
cycle,” for example, children would be engaged in designing and 
conducting a recycling project as they research how the materials 
they gather can be reused and recycled. 
 Other researchers have described the importance of the learn-
ing environment as a key finding of brain research. According to 
Marilee Sprenger (1999), brain research suggested that learning 
environments should allow children to interact socially as well 
as to interact with the environment itself. Learning environments 

Curriculum and Teaching Models 39
should be enriched, and they should present challenges and offer 
opportunities for play. 
 Other researchers, including psychologists and neuroscien-
tists, believe that it is too early to design educational interventions 
based on current findings of brain research. According to Robert J. 
Sternberg (2008), “Someday, brain science may give us conclu-
sions that clearly point in one direction or another. We are not 
there yet. For the most part, the brain metaphor is comforting 
and may even be useful. But it does not provide us with unequiv-
ocal conclusions that lead to one educational practice versus an-
other” (p. 419). 
 Differentiated Instruction 
 According to Tracey Hall (2002), senior research scientist at the 
National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum, “Differ-
entiated instruction applies an approach to teaching and learning 
so that students have multiple options for taking in information 
and making sense of ideas” (p. 2). When teachers differentiate in-
struction, they purposely plan lessons that address the interests, 
learning styles, and needs of the individual students in their class-
rooms with the purpose of helping each child learn and succeed. 
Teachers can differentiate instruction in several different ways to 
meet the varied learning needs, styles, and preferences of their 
students.
 Carol Ann Tomlinson (2000) listed four elements of differen-
tiated instruction—content, process, product, and learning envi-
ronment. Teachers can differentiate  content  in a variety of ways, 
such as providing instructional materials at a variety of levels, 
providing reading materials or other content information in audio 
or video form, and teaching small group lessons to either supple-
ment or extend learning as students’ needs warrant. 
 Teachers who differentiate  process  provide a variety of learn-
ing activities from which they and children may choose. These 
could include small and large group teaching, cooperative group 
learning, learning centers, manipulatives or other materials for 
hands-on learning, and opportunities for students to pursue areas 
of personal interest related to the content. 
 Differentiating  products  could take the form of allowing stu-
dents to demonstrate their learning in different ways, allowing 
students the choice of working alone or with a partner to create 
a product that documents the learning, and providing rubrics for 

40 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
judging the products that communicate clearly what the expecta-
tions are for the learning. 
 Providing a differentiated learning environment can include 
arranging a classroom so that there are areas where students who 
need quiet can work and also areas for group work, allowing stu-
dents who need to move to learn the space they need and the calm 
and quiet that other students need, and having a variety of learn-
ing materials that reflect diversity. 
 Tomlinson and Amy Germundson (2007) compared differen-
tiated instruction to playing jazz with its improvisation, its intent 
to create personal connections, and ultimately, the music it makes. 
They say, “The teacher who uses differentiation in practice says, 
‘Whatever it takes to ensure success for each student, I’m willing 
to try.’ In those moments of purpose, sensitivity, and improvisa-
tion, jazz happens” (p. 29). 
 While there have been no large-scale studies of differenti-
ated instruction, smaller studies have documented its value to 
children’s learning. Several studies of differentiated instruction in 
reading, for example, show that in addition to children’s reading 
ability improving, their attitude toward reading also improved 
(Baumgartner, Lipowski, and Rush 2003). A study of differen-
tiated learning in a high school showed that after five years of 
differentiating instruction, the average student’s reading level in-
creased more than two years (Fisher and Frey 2001). 
 Critics of differentiated instruction cite the difficulty of dif-
ferentiating effectively as a drawback. Teaching each lesson in a 
variety of ways to meet students’ perceived learning styles and 
preferences, according to the critics, has not been proven effective 
by research. Other critics, often educational researchers, label dif-
ferentiated instruction a fad, citing the lack of empirical evidence 
of learning styles themselves, and argue that even if such styles 
exist, little real assessment of learning styles precedes differenti-
ated instruction (Stahl 1999). 
 Assessment and Accountability 
 Documenting or assessing students’ learning is an important ele-
ment of education reform. It is important to know what students 
are learning for a number of reasons. Assessment can be used to 
give students feedback about their learning. Information from as-
sessments can help teachers understand what their students are 

Assessment and Accountability 41
learning and what they still need to know; teachers can use that 
information to plan for teaching that addresses the needs that are 
identified through the assessment. Assessment information can 
be used to make decisions about the effectiveness of programs, 
schools, and school districts. 
 There are many ways to document student learning. At the 
classroom level, teachers use tests and quizzes, observations of 
their students, performance-based assessments, portfolios of 
student work, and standardized tests. Each of these forms of as-
sessment has the potential to provide information about student 
learning. Many educators believe that the best assessment pro-
grams include a variety of assessment tools to be able to create as 
complete a profile of student learning as possible. 
 Experts in assessment and evaluation describe the best as-
sessment programs as including “multiple measures” of student 
learning, an array of assessment tools that offer the opportunity to 
view a student’s learning from many different perspectives over a 
period of time, rather than at one point in time. 
 Tests and Quizzes 
 Classroom-level tests and quizzes are most often designed by 
teachers or provided as part of the supporting materials with 
textbooks. Tests and quizzes, which typically have a set of ques-
tions, each with a “right” answer, can provide information about 
how students are learning and understanding facts and knowl-
edge. While they are not always easy to design, they are usually 
fairly easy to score; answers are right or wrong. Tests and quizzes 
are easy to evaluate, but they provide limited information about 
students’ learning because of the kinds of content that can be ad-
dressed in a test or quiz and because they give a “snapshot” view 
of student learning, a view at only one point in time. 
 Observations of Students 
 Observation of students can provide information to teachers 
not only about what students are learning, but also about how 
they are learning. Teachers can observe students’ strengths and 
weaknesses, the processes and strategies that students use, and 
the ways that students interact with other students. Observa-
tion is most effective as an assessment strategy when teachers 
gather their observations and record them in a systematic way. 

42 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Observations rarely generate scores; instead, they provide qual-
itative information about students’ learning. Observations are 
valuable because they can provide information about children’s 
learning processes and interactions, but they are time-consuming 
and difficult to analyze and aggregate. Because it is difficult to 
analyze and aggregate observation data, observations usually 
do not provide information that can be used to evaluate progress 
of groups of children or programs. 
 Performance-Based Assessments 
and Portfolios of Student Work 
 Performance-based assessments have the potential for teachers to 
understand how their students use skills, knowledge, and con-
cepts in the context of solving a problem or designing a product, 
project, or performance. Performance-based assessments are often 
called “authentic” because they require students to apply skills, 
knowledge, and concepts in real-world situations. Such assess-
ments don’t have one correct answer; instead, teachers use rubrics 
or scoring guides to judge each student’s performance. 
 A performance-based assessment task, for example, might 
ask an elementary student to pretend that she is planning a pizza 
party for her class. She will need to decide how many and what 
kinds of pizza to order and to calculate how much the pizza will 
cost. As part of the assessment, she might be expected to survey 
her classmates about the kinds of pizza they like as well as how 
many pieces they would eat; organizing that information into a 
graph or table might also be a part of the task. She might also be 
asked to decide from a set of menus which pizza restaurant to 
order the pizza from and to justify her decision in writing. A task 
like this could provide information about how the child gathers 
information; how she organizes information in graphs or tables; 
how she performs mathematical operations such as addition, 
multiplication, and division; how she applies them; and how she 
explains her thinking. 
 Portfolios are collections of samples of students’ work. Be-
cause work samples from various times throughout a school year 
or even throughout a students’ school career can be included in 
them, portfolios have the potential to show how students’ learn-
ing develops over time. Many schools use portfolios of students’ 
writing to document how their students grow as writers; pieces 
of writing are selected for inclusion in portfolios by both teachers 

Assessment and Accountability 43
and students. Schools that use portfolios often have specific crite-
ria for the pieces to be included in portfolios; they might include 
writing in a specific set of genres (expository writing, narrative 
writing, persuasive writing, poetry), or pieces of writing in the 
various stages of the writing process (prewriting, first drafts that 
are unedited, edited pieces, and final pieces). Students are often 
asked to review their own portfolios and reflect on their own 
progress; teachers may evaluate students’ portfolios through a 
standard rubric or scoring guide. 
 Performance-based assessments and portfolios have the ad-
vantage of documenting students’ learning through products 
and processes that are engaging for students and that are part of 
the teaching and learning process, rather than taking time from 
it. A further advantage of portfolios is that they can include sam-
ples of everyday work rather than work that is developed just 
for assessment. However, scoring or rating of performance-based 
assessments and portfolios requires thoughtful judgment on the 
part of teachers; if performance-based assessments or portfo-
lios are used as part of student evaluation across classrooms or 
schools, teachers must be trained to judge them consistently so 
that ratings are comparable. This consistent judgment provides a 
measure that testing experts call interrater reliability—the assur-
ance that a score determined by one “rater” will be the same as 
the score determined by any other “rater.” Without the training 
of “raters,” scores from performance assessments may provide 
information only to classroom teachers; they have little value for 
judging the effectiveness of schools or programs. 
 Standardized Tests 
 Standardized achievement tests are administered by most 
schools to gather information about students’ learning that can 
be compared to standards, to rank students relative to their 
learning, or to provide information about groups of children 
or programs. What makes standardized tests “standardized” is 
that they consist of a set of questions or items that are adminis-
tered to all children at a particular grade level under standard 
conditions—at the same time of year, with the same instructions, 
the same time constraints, and the same method of responding 
(usually “bubbling in” answers on an answer sheet that can be 
scanned). Such standardized testing is required under No Child 
Left Behind. 

44 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Standardized tests can provide information about individual 
children’s learning, but they are more appropriately used to pro-
vide information about the learning of groups of children, whole 
schools, and whole school districts. They are limited, however, 
like other tests and quizzes, in the kinds of information that they 
can provide. Critics of standardized testing argue that the most 
important learning outcomes—thinking processes, problem solv-
ing, and applying skills and concepts appropriately—are not well 
documented or measured by standardized tests. 
 Further, standardized test scores are often misinterpreted and 
misused. Some school districts use test scores as the only measure 
to decide whether children pass to the next grade. Critics argue 
that test scores often don’t provide information about the most 
important learning outcomes, so multiple assessment results 
should be used to make such decisions. Research on tests and stu-
dent achievement has found that the largest factors in a child’s 
test score are the socioeconomic status of her family and her par-
ents’ level of education. When school districts use standardized 
test scores to evaluate the quality of teachers or as a way to grade 
schools, the teacher and school evaluations may only reflect what 
students bring with them to school, not the quality of their school 
experience.
 Currently, No Child Left Behind (NCLB) requires schools 
to administer standardized tests to all children in grades three 
through eight, and at one point in high school, typically 10th grade. 
Those scores, aggregated for entire schools and disaggregated by 
children’s race, ethnicity, first language, and disability, are used to 
determine schools’ progress toward having all children proficient 
in reading, language arts, and mathematics by the year 2014. Indi-
vidual states determine appropriate levels of progress for schools, 
what NCLB terms “adequate yearly progress,” and schools that 
do not demonstrate adequate yearly progress are identified and 
penalized. Schools that fail to make adequate yearly progress for 
several years are labeled failing schools, and school districts may 
even close failing schools. 
 Critics of NCLB’s accountability requirements decry what 
they call the misuse of standardized testing. Under NCLB, stan-
dardized test scores are used to make what educators call “high 
stakes” decisions about individual children, and they are used 
to make “high stakes” decisions about schools. FairTest, the Na-
tional Center for Fair and Open Testing, is a nonprofit watchdog 
on testing in schools. FairTest argues that 

Options for Alternative Schooling 45
 standardized tests, especially norm-referenced multiple 
choice tests, are harmful to children and to education; 
[and that] basing high-stakes decisions on standard-
ized tests (high school graduation, advancement, etc.) 
is bad educational practice while basing decisions about 
teachers and schools on test results damages education. 
(FairTest n.d.) 
 FairTest’s full explanation of the harmful effects of “high-stakes” 
testing is found in Chapter 6. 
 Critics of NCLB accountability also cite the standardized test-
ing requirement as responsible for a narrowing of the curriculum. 
Since standardized test scores are reported only for reading, lan-
guage arts, and mathematics, these critics say, schools have re-
duced the amount of time children spend learning about subjects 
and curriculum areas that are not tested. In a study of the impact 
of NCLB on instructional time in elementary schools by the Center 
on Education Policy (McMurrer 2008), findings confirmed that the 
curriculum in many schools has indeed been narrowed. The study 
found that 44 percent of elementary schools increased instructional 
time for English language arts, including reading, and mathemat-
ics. To accommodate these increases, schools reported decreasing 
time for social studies, science, art, music, and physical education. 
One-fifth of the schools surveyed also decreased time for recess or 
eliminated it altogether. 
 Options for Alternative Schooling 
 A number of school reformers have suggested that it is not only 
curriculum, teaching, and assessment that should be reformed 
and improved. Rather, they recommend, the very organiza-
tion of schooling should be reinvented to meet the needs of the 
changing and diverse population of children served by schools 
in the United States, as well as the expectations of the children’s 
families. In addition, some reformers argue that “one size fits 
all” schools really fit no one, and they propose that parents have 
choices in the kinds of schools their children attend. Such options 
include charter schools, magnet or themed schools, single-sex 
schools, educational vouchers, tuition tax credits and scholar-
ships, and home schooling. These options are intended to allow 
children and their parents to select schools or forms of schooling 

46 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
that meet their individual preferences, to offer competition to 
public schools, and to address the issues of quality or equity that 
provide the impetus for education reform in the United States. 
Schools of choice are most often found in urban school districts. 
 Small Schools 
 At a time when schools have become larger, more bureaucratic, 
and less personal, small schools, small learning communities, and 
schools within schools have been proposed as formats for ad-
dressing some of the problems students face in large high schools, 
especially those that serve low-income students. Small schools 
typically have student populations of less than 400; small learning 
communities and schools within schools sometimes divide larger 
high schools into small units within a larger building. Small learn-
ing communities and schools within schools typically have the 
autonomy that small schools have for organization, curriculum, 
and teaching, although they may share facilities within a larger 
school. Because these schools are smaller, teachers and adminis-
trators know individual students, and as a result, there is more 
student accountability for learning, attendance, and discipline. 
Many small schools, small learning communities, and schools 
within schools have themes or particular curriculum focuses. 
 Tobin McAndrews and Wendell Anderson (2002) identified 
a number of benefits of small schools that include higher student 
achievement and lower drop-out rates than comparable students in 
large high schools; a greater sense of belonging and higher student 
social and academic self-esteem; higher attendance and graduation 
rates; fewer discipline problems; and lower administrative costs. 
They caution, however, that just reducing the size of a school is not 
enough to reap the benefits. Instead, they argue, rigorous academic 
programs must accompany the creation of small nurturing envi-
ronments to produce positive results in student learning. 
 In their evaluation of 75 small schools opened between 2002 
and 2005 as part of the New Century High Schools Initiative in 
New York City, Eileen Foley, Allan Klinge, and Elizabeth Reisner 
found benefits similar to those identified by McAndrews and An-
derson. In their study, Foley, Klinge, and Reisner (2007) found that 
18 percent more New Century High Schools students graduated 
on time than comparable students in larger New York City high 
schools (78.2 percent versus 60.6 percent). The researchers also 
found that students in the small schools benefited from “close 

Options for Alternative Schooling 47
student-teacher relationships and adult mentoring of youth, the 
extension of student learning outside the regular school setting 
and school day, and the use of data to track student performance” 
(p. ii). In addition to the New Century High Schools in New York 
City, small schools networks have been created in other urban 
school districts, including Oakland, Los Angeles, Houston, Chi-
cago, Cincinnati, Baltimore, and Boston, according to the Small 
Schools Project of the Coalition for Essential Schools. 
 Magnet and Themed Schools 
 Magnet schools are public schools that are part of local school 
districts and that have curriculums or themes intended to attract 
students. Such themes include fine arts, technology, mathematics 
and science, ecology, foreign language immersion, performing arts, 
military science, and agricultural science. Magnet schools were 
first proposed as a means of voluntary desegregation. The curricu-
lum and instructional programs at magnet schools are designed 
to draw both minority and nonminority students to help achieve 
racial balance and diversity, and most magnet schools continue 
to have diversity as one of their goals. Typically, magnet schools 
draw students from across entire school districts or entire regions 
of school districts rather than from specific attendance areas as 
neighborhood schools do. While magnet schools are typically 
locally funded at the same level as other schools in their school 
districts, states have often been ordered by courts to provide deseg-
regation funds to supplement local funds as part of desegregation 
remedies. In addition, there are funds allocated for magnet schools 
in the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), No Child 
Left Behind (NCLB). Part C of that law provides for magnet school 
funding, as well as information about application for the funds and 
permissible uses of the funds. 
 There have been many evaluations of student achievement in 
magnet schools, Adam Gamoran (1996), a sociologist, conducted 
a study that compared magnet high school student achieve-
ment with the achievement of peers in comprehensive public 
high schools, private Catholic high schools, and private nonreli-
gious schools. His findings showed that students in magnet high 
schools outperformed their peers in other high schools in reading, 
science, and social studies. In mathematics, the students in private 
Catholic high schools performed better. Another study of student 
performance in magnet schools that compared magnet school 

48 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
students in St. Louis to their non-magnet school peers found that 
“magnet students substantially outperform[ed] non-magnet stu-
dents on state assessments in reading, mathematics, social stud-
ies, and science” (Yu and Taylor 1997, 19). There are also studies 
that found that attending a magnet school did not result in higher 
student achievement, but no studies have found magnet schools 
to have negative effects. 
 The main drawback of magnet and themed schools is that 
they typically require higher levels of funding to operate than 
neighborhood schools. Extra funding is required to support the 
special programs offered with more specialized teachers, facili-
ties, and materials. In many school districts where systems of mag-
net schools were part of desegregation orders or plans, the magnet 
schools were dismantled or returned to neighborhood schools 
once school districts were no longer responsible for desegrega-
tion and the higher levels of funding available to them because 
desegregation orders were withdrawn. 
 Single-Sex Education 
 Single-sex education has reemerged as an option for schools. Single-
sex education is generally defined as schools or classrooms where 
boys and girls are assigned based on gender—boys are in class-
rooms or schools attended only by boys, girls with only girls. While 
there have been same-sex parochial and private schools, nearly all 
public schools have traditionally been coeducational. But new re-
search in psychology and neurology has shown that there are real 
physical differences between boys and girls, differences that affect 
how they learn. According to Leonard Sax, a psychologist and phy-
sician who is promoting single-sex education based on research he 
has conducted, the number of single-sex classrooms increased by 
more than 10 times between the 2000–2001 and 2005–2006 school 
years (Sax 2005). 
 While Sax believes that single-sex education has the potential 
to improve learning for both boys and girls, he argues that just 
separating students by gender is not enough to bring about im-
proved learning. Teachers and administrators must understand 
the differences between boys and girls and learn how to teach 
them effectively. Sax (2005) explained, “In the past decade, how-
ever, good research has demonstrated that there are, in fact, hard-
wired differences in the ways girls and boys learn, and that there 
are evidence-based techniques that can exploit those differences.” 

Options for Alternative Schooling 49
He recommends much more research be conducted, and that, for 
now at least, single-sex education should be a choice for parents 
to make, rather than a requirement for all children. It is interesting 
to note that although Sax claims to have conducted research about 
single-sex classrooms, none has been published or reviewed. 
 In its 2005 review of studies of single-sex education at the 
elementary and secondary level, the U.S. Department of Educa-
tion, Fred Mael, and colleagues found that although there are few 
studies of single-sex public schools in general, or public or private 
elementary or middle schools, there are trends worth noting. Ac-
cording to the researchers, most of the studies showed single-sex 
education to have positive results in terms of academic achieve-
ment and socio-emotional development, both “current and long 
term” (p. xvii). These researchers call for more systematic and sci-
entific research, both to better understand the results of single-sex 
schooling and to understand the costs and benefits of single-
sex schools. David Sadker and Karen Zittleman (2004), who have 
conducted many studies of single-sex education, particularly 
for girls, recommended caution when considering single-sex 
schools. Their research, conducted in parochial schools for girls, 
found that the benefits of those schools may be related to factors 
other than their segregation by sex (p. 9). 
 Aricka Flowers, in an article published by the Heartland In-
stitute in Chicago, reported that the U.S. Department of Education 
gave schools and school districts the go-ahead to open single-sex 
schools and classrooms in November 2006. Flowers (2007) noted 
that “critics [of single-sex schooling] worry that single-sex classes 
and schools do not adequately reflect the real world.” Children 
who experience only single-sex classrooms and schools may not 
be prepared for workplaces, other educational settings, and so-
ciety in general. Others are concerned that single-sex schools or 
classrooms are discriminatory; the American Civil Liberties Union 
has filed a number of lawsuits in school districts planning single-
sex schools, claiming that single-sex schools violate the equal pro-
tection clause of the U.S. Constitution. 
 Charter Schools 
 One option parents have for school choice is charter schools. Ac-
cording to U.S. Charter Schools, “Charter schools are nonsec-
tarian public school of choice that operate with freedom from 
many of the regulations that apply to traditional public schools” 

50 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
(Overview). The state of Minnesota enacted the first charter law 
in 1991, and since then, 40 states, Puerto Rico, and the District 
of Columbia have enacted laws to establish and regulate charter 
schools. In general, charter schools are granted their charters, or 
contracts, to operate by states, local school boards, or other state-
established chartering agencies or sponsors that include, in some 
states, universities. Typically, state laws allow only a specific 
number of charter schools to be opened within the state. Charters 
are given for a period of three to five years, and they may be re-
newed. While charter schools are exempt from many policies of 
the school districts in which they are located, charter schools are 
accountable to their chartering agencies, whether those are states, 
local school districts, or universities, for student achievement and 
for fiscal responsibility. 
 Charter schools are generally governed by boards that are in-
dependent of local school districts or states; the governing boards 
or agencies they represent may be for-profit or not-for-profit. Many 
charter schools are organized around principles or themes that are 
different from those typically represented by public schools; these 
include themes similar to magnet schools, such as Montessori, 
technology, foreign language immersion, fine arts, and expedition-
ary learning. Most often, charter schools are located within urban 
school districts, and they may be considered “limited enrollment,” 
having specific requirements for enrollment, i.e., test scores. In 2008, 
according to U.S. Charter Schools, there were more than 3,500 char-
ter schools across the United States and Puerto Rico, and more than 
1 million children were enrolled in them (U.S. Charter Schools). 
 Analysis of the demographics of the 150 charter schools that 
participated in the 2003 National Assessment of Educational Prog-
ress (NAEP) showed that, “in comparison to other public schools, 
higher percentages of charter school fourth-grade students are 
Black” (National Center for Education Statistics 2003), suggesting 
that minority families are more likely to take advantage of the 
opportunity to attend charter schools. This same study showed 
that the performance in both reading and mathematics of fourth-
graders attending charter schools “was not measurably differ-
ent” from the performance of fourth grade students with “similar 
racial/ethnic backgrounds” in other public schools. There have 
been many other studies of charter school performance (Braun, 
Jenkins, and Griggs 2006; Hoxby 2004a; Hoxby 2004b; Roy and 
Mishel 2005), with little agreement about whether charter schools 
offer advantages in terms of improved student learning. 

Options for Alternative Schooling 51
 Educational Vouchers, Tuition Tax 
Credits, and Scholarships 
 Educational vouchers are generally public grants that allow low-
income parents to send their children to public or private schools 
of their choice; there are also some privately funded voucher 
programs, with one such program in Arizona. In the Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin, educational voucher program, the largest and longest 
running in the United States, voucher schools receive $6,501 for 
each full-time student enrolled. In the 2006–2007 school year, 
17,410 Milwaukee students participated in the program, accord-
ing to Rethinking Schools Online  (2002). In an  ERIC Digest  on edu-
cational vouchers, Margaret Hadderman explained that although 
the provisions of voucher programs vary from state to state, in 
general, a child would qualify for a voucher when the school he 
would normally attend has been labeled a failing school. Had-
derman (2000) described several studies of voucher programs 
that report parent and student satisfaction with their experiences 
in voucher-funded schools; at the same time, studies of student 
achievement are inconclusive (p. 3). There have been a number of 
lawsuits testing the constitutionality of vouchers being used for 
parochial schools or schools with religious affiliation, but none 
of them seems to have set a national legal precedent. Some states 
allow vouchers to be used in parochial schools or schools with 
religious affiliations, while others do not. 
 Similar to vouchers in terms of providing financial support 
for children to attend schools of choice is the tuition tax credit. 
Currently, Minnesota and Iowa have limited tax credits for edu-
cation expenses that include private school tuition, and several 
other states are considering them. According to the Center for Ed-
ucation Reform (2008), “School tax credits refund expenses made 
toward education up to a fixed figure. . . . The qualifying criteria 
cover educational expenses such as tutoring, texts, and comput-
ers, and in states that have them so far, private school tuition.” 
The amount of tax credit or deduction allowed and the specific 
expenses that qualify for tax credits or deductions are determined 
by state law. Among the organizations calling for the institution of 
such tax credits is the Mackinac Center for Public Policy, a Michi-
gan organization committed to the privatization of education. 
 At least five states have public scholarship programs that pro-
vide funding for special needs students to attend private schools 
that provide instructional programs that more closely meet their 

52 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
needs. In these states, parents apply directly to the state for scholar-
ships, rather than depending on their school districts to determine 
when a placement outside the school district might better serve 
their children. The Bush administration has proposed provid-
ing scholarships also to children who attend schools labeled as 
“failing.” These scholarships would allow the students to attend 
private schools instead of their “failing” public schools. 
 There are many proponents and supporters of charter 
schools, vouchers, and other options for school choice. Abigail 
Thernstrom, a commissioner of the U.S. Commission on Civil 
Rights and senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute in New York, 
and Stephan Thernstrom (2003), a Harvard University professor 
and senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute, argued that charter 
schools, which can be “radically different” from traditional pub-
lic schools, have the potential to close the racial achievement gap 
(p. 273). These researchers believe that public school systems and 
teacher unions preserve the mediocrity they argue is prevalent in 
most public schools, and that charter schools, without the con-
straints of those traditions, can provide incentives for creativity 
and innovation, as well as motivation for excellence. The Thern-
stroms are also proponents of vouchers, asserting that they allow 
low-income families the same power to choose schools for their 
children that middle-class parents have by virtue of their ability 
to choose where they live. 
 Business leaders and conservative politicians support options 
for school choice for many reasons, not the least of which is that 
they believe that school choice has the potential to spur compe-
tition in the “school marketplace.” For them, public school sys-
tems should not have a monopoly on education. Viewing schools 
as businesses whose product is student achievement, business 
leaders argue that competition for students can drive education 
reform, make public schools more efficient, and, like private busi-
nesses, lead to the closing of schools that do not show improving 
student achievement. 
 Others, including researcher and public policy analyst Ken-
neth J. Saltman (2007) of DePaul University, argued that vouchers, 
tax credits and deductions, and charter schools, like other choice 
options, serve the purposes of dismantling U.S. public education 
and supporting the role of for-profit corporations in privatizing the 
nation’s schools. He asserts that privatization subverts the tradi-
tional purpose of public education—that of developing a citizenry 
prepared to participate actively in the democratic process. Saltman 

Options for Alternative Schooling 53
and many other educators argue that a free public education is 
critical to the democratic process, that public education should not 
be privatized, and that doing so has the potential to further under-
mine the equity that a free public education can provide. 
 Still other critics assert that charter schools and other choice 
options work against equity in education. They argue that schools 
of choice do not serve all children, that choices are not always 
available to the children most in need of them, and that choices 
such as vouchers offer false hope to the families most in need of 
high-quality education. Charter and magnet schools may have en-
trance requirements such as high test scores; they may not serve 
special education and other high-needs children. Critics of such 
choice plans argue that many parents of children most in need of 
high-quality options have little information about such choices, 
do not advocate for or act as agents on behalf of their children, or 
simply do not have access to choice options because of barriers 
such as transportation. In many cases, vouchers do not provide 
enough money to pay full tuition at high-quality private schools, 
and private schools that do serve voucher students are often un-
regulated and sometimes of questionable quality. 
 Critics of choice programs also argue that magnet schools, 
charter schools, and voucher programs take the best and most 
capable students from regular public schools, leaving the public 
schools to educate those children with the highest needs, often 
the most difficult to teach. Charter schools and vouchers also take 
funding from public schools coffers, critics assert, decreasing the 
funds available for regular public schools. 
 Still others decry choice, particularly when vouchers or tax 
credits are used to pay for children to attend parochial schools or 
other schools with religious affiliations, as a violation of the U.S. 
Constitution’s separation of church and state. They believe that 
such schools should not be supported in any way by public funds. 
The courts have sometimes concurred. In Arizona in May 2008, 
the state supreme court struck down the state’s voucher program, 
citing the state prohibition against using public funds to support 
religious institutions. 
 Home Schooling 
 One other choice option that seems to be gaining in popularity is 
home schooling. According to Mark Penn, author of  Microtrends: 
The Small Forces Behind Tomorrow’s Big Changes  (2007), the number of 

54 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
home-schooled children increased nearly 30 percent between 1999 
and 2003, the last year that the National Center for Education Sta-
tistics (NCES) did a census of children who were home-schooled. 
Penn (2007) argued that “home-schooled kids in America actually 
outnumber charter school and voucher students combined ” (p. 295). 
States vary in their regulation of home schooling, from some that 
do not require parents to notify the state at all of their children’s 
home schooling to some states that require standardized testing 
and the use of a state-approved curriculum for home-schooled 
children. 
 In studies of home-schooled student achievement reported 
in 2001 by the Home School Legal Defense Association, “home 
schoolers outperformed their public school peers by 30 to 37 per-
centile points across all subjects” (p. 1). The studies also found no 
achievement gaps between minority and nonminority children 
or between genders; they also found little variance that could 
be attributed to parents’ levels of education, even though many 
parents who homeschool their children have had no teacher 
education (p. 4). 
 Comprehensive School Reform 
 Many educators and researchers have long believed, echoing “A 
Nation at Risk,” that all components of a school or school district 
must be addressed together to bring about real change in the per-
formance of the schools and the learning of the children in them. 
Recognizing that schools and school districts are systems in which 
each component affects and is affected by each other component 
is key to such comprehensive reform. Peter Senge (1990) of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, used the phrase “systems-
thinking” to explain that in systems, one “can only understand the 
system . . . by contemplating the whole, not any individual part 
of the pattern” (p. 7). In a systems-thinking approach to school re-
form, all components of a school or school district must be exam-
ined as a whole, not as separate pieces of the educational puzzle. 
 Beginning in the 1960s, researchers and educators began to 
investigate and develop models for comprehensive school reform. 
The models in general were generated in two different ways. One 
of those ways was to begin with a set of theoretical principles and 
determine how a school could be organized and operated if it 
were aligned with those principles. Yale child psychiatrist James 

Comprehensive School Reform 55
Comer developed a model of school reform based on accepted 
principles of child development and sociological research on the 
relationship between school and family, particularly the impor-
tance of that relationship for minority and low-income families. 
Beginning with those principles and that research, Comer and his 
associates designed a model of school organization and manage-
ment. That model will be described further below. 
 The other way school reform models have been developed 
is through research on and evaluation of the components of ef-
fective schools. A number of researchers responded to the Cole-
man study (see Chapter 1) by designing studies that sought to 
verify that effective schools existed; in other words, they looked 
for schools that outperformed other comparable schools even 
when controlling for the “outside of school” factors identified by 
Coleman as having the most effect on the quality of children’s 
learning. These studies did confirm the existence of some effec-
tive schools, and researchers began to study the effective schools 
to look for commonalities among them. In the late 1970s and early 
1980s, researchers identified characteristics that were common to 
the effective schools they had studied, and a number of models of 
comprehensive school reform were developed based on the rede-
sign of schools around those characteristics (Mace-Matluck 1987). 
Some of those models are described below. 
 The Yale School Development Program 
 The comprehensive school reform process developed by James 
Comer is called the Yale School Development Program (SDP). The 
implementation of SDP is a five-year cycle of work to “replace tra-
ditional school organization and management with an operating 
system that works for schools and the students they serve” (Yale 
School Development Program Staff 2004, 18). The SDP, based on 
children’s six developmental pathways—physical, cognitive, psy-
chological, language, social, and ethical—seeks not only to raise 
student achievement but also, as the program vision states, “to 
create a just and fair society in which all children have the sup-
port for development that will allow them to become positive and 
successful contributors in family, work, and civic life” (p. 18). In 
his description of the SDP model, Charles Payne (1991) compared 
Comer’s basic principles to those of John Dewey, summing up 
the underlying philosophy of SDP thus: “If the adults in a child’s 
life behave as if they are in a community, children are likely to 

56 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
develop into healthier adults, and part of that development will 
be expressed in intellectual growth” (p. 12). Dewey, considered 
one of the most influential educators in the United States in the 
20th century, believed that education should be child-centered 
and responsive to each individual child as a member of a learning 
community that includes adults who model for children what it 
means to be a learning community member. 
 SDP is built on an organizational structure within each school 
of three teams made up of administrators, teachers, support staff, 
students, and parents. In the school reform process, these teams 
develop and implement a comprehensive school plan that includes 
goals for teaching, learning, and assessment, as well as vehicles for 
sharing information about the school with the entire community. 
The process is cyclic; it includes professional development for teach-
ers and other school staff to support the curriculum and teaching 
addressed in the school plan as well as revision to the plan based 
on analysis of the information generated by periodic and ongoing 
assessment of both student learning and other program goals. 
 Over its life of more than 40 years, the SDP has been imple-
mented in many urban schools and schools that serve children 
from low-income families throughout the United States. During 
that time, many external evaluations have been conducted on the 
effects of SDP in schools. Christina Ramirez-Smith (1995), for ex-
ample, described the implementation of the SDP in an inner-city 
elementary school in Newport News, Virginia, that resulted in a 
67 percent increase in student test scores and “a spirit of unity” 
among school personnel, parents, and students (p. 19). Testimoni-
als from other schools report similar results. More importantly, 
the SDP staff of the Yale Child Study Center has engaged in sys-
tematic analysis of data about the implementation and outcomes 
of the SDP on an ongoing basis, and there have also been external 
evaluations of schools involved in SDP. Internal evaluations of ele-
mentary and middle schools that have fully implemented the SDP 
have shown gains in student achievement that were significantly 
greater than comparable schools in the same school districts not 
implementing the SDP. These studies also show improvement in 
students’ attendance rates, behavior, and self-concept, as well as 
school climate and parent participation (Haynes, Emmons, Ge-
breyesus, and Ben-Avie 1996). Thomas Cook, H. D. Hunt, and 
Robert Murphy (2000) studied the effects of SDP on an elementary 
school in Chicago and found results that were similar to those of 
SDP’s internal analyses. 

Comprehensive School Reform 57
 Accelerated Schools 
 Accelerated Schools is a comprehensive school reform process 
similar to the SDP in that it is based on developing a school com-
munity that takes responsibility for the learning of children. In 
addition to the community of parents, children, and school per-
sonnel envisioned by the SDP, however, the Accelerated Schools 
extends the notion of community to include local businesses and 
service organizations. Accelerated Schools focuses on the social, 
emotional, and academic needs of each child through a gover-
nance model that includes the entire community. Begun in 1986 
by Henry Levin of Stanford University, Accelerated Schools be-
gins with the strengths of children (rather than their deficits or 
weaknesses), is intentionally flexible to implement within a wide 
variety of school contexts, and builds the capacity of teachers 
(Siegle 2006). 
 In Accelerated Schools, all school personnel, parents, and com-
munity members serve on teams that plan for, implement, and 
evaluate the results of the implementation of initiatives that ad-
dress problems that the teams identify in the schools. Because the 
implementation of Accelerated Schools is unique to each school, 
each Accelerated School works on its own priorities. One school, for
instance, with a problem with student attendance might have a 
team that works to address the attendance issue. Another school 
might have a team working on improving student behavior or 
mathematics achievement. What sets Accelerated Schools apart 
is that parents and community members are integral members of 
each improvement team. 
 The Accelerated Schools model seeks to transform schools 
and classrooms into powerful learning environments (PLEs) 
where learning is “authentic, interactive, learner-centered, in-
clusive, and continuous” (Finnan, Schnepel, and Anderson 2003, 
392). In other words, teachers in Accelerated Schools are expected 
to provide the kinds of learning environments that are most often 
provided to gifted and high-achieving children and that most mi-
nority children and children living in poverty rarely experience. 
In a study of classrooms in schools where Accelerated Schools 
was being implemented, the researchers found a correlation be-
tween the degree of implementation of PLEs and higher student 
achievement. In other words, the more a classroom reflected the 
characteristics of a PLE, the higher was the achievement of stu-
dents in that classroom. 

58 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Other studies have evaluated the overall effects of Acceler-
ated Schools on achievement of at-risk students. A study by How-
ard Bloom, Sandra Ham, Laura Melton, and Julieanne O’Brien 
(2001) of third-graders’ achievement in reading and mathematics 
in schools implementing Accelerated Schools followed the schools 
through their first five years of implementation. The researchers 
noted that during their first three years of implementation of Ac-
celerated Schools, the focus of the reform efforts was on school 
governance and school culture rather than on classroom prac-
tice. Consequently, “there were no positive impacts in the first 
two years, a slight decline in the third year—as schools began to 
modify their curriculum and instruction—and a gradual increase 
in the fourth and fifth years. The average third-grade reading and 
math scores in the fifth year exceeded the predicted levels by a sta-
tistically significant amount” (Bloom, Ham, Melton, and O’Brien 
2001, 7). The researchers concluded that Accelerated Schools was 
successful in improving the achievement of at-risk students. 
 Effective Schools 
 The Effective Schools movement has a long history of shaping 
school reform efforts. The mission of Effective Schools is  Learning
for All , and Ronald Edmonds summed up its philosophy, when 
he said, 
 We can, whenever and wherever we choose, successfully 
teach all children whose schooling is of interest to us. We 
already know more than we need to do that. Whether or 
not we do it must finally depend on how we feel about 
the fact that we haven’t so far. (Lezotte n.d., 2) 
 The Effective Schools movement is organized around seven 
correlates: (1) instructional leadership, (2) clear and focused mis-
sion, (3) safe and orderly environment, (4) climate of high expec-
tations, (5) frequent monitoring of student progress, (6) positive 
home-school relations, and (7) opportunity to learn and student 
time on task. These correlates were derived from years of research 
on schools that were effective in helping students achieve high 
levels of learning; the correlates are descriptors of those schools. 
A complete explanation of the correlates of effective schools is 
found in Chapter 6. 
 Although there is not a specific process for implementing Ef-
fective Schools that can be applied at all schools, school districts 

Comprehensive School Reform 59
and schools that implement these correlates engage in a cyclic 
and recursive process that involves gathering and analyzing data 
about the extent to which each of the correlates is in place in their 
school or school district, planning for improvement of each of 
them, engaging in professional development to support their im-
provement, gathering and analyzing data about their improve-
ment, and revisiting and revising the improvement plans relative 
to the data. 
 The main criticism of Effective Schools is that no specific pro-
cess has been developed or is promoted by the proponents of Ef-
fective Schools that will lead schools to have the characteristics, 
and they can’t be applied. Rather, the characteristics can serve 
only as goals for schools. Critics argue that schools need a process 
to reach the goals; without a process, Effective Schools cannot be 
viewed as a model. The correlates of effective schools, however, 
are evident in many other education reforms, including the No 
Child Left Behind legislation. 
 Outcome-Based Education 
 Outcome-Based Education (OBE) combines the correlates of Effec-
tive Schools with the alignment of a high-quality curriculum, an 
effective and efficient instructional program that leads students to 
mastery of the outcomes, and a program of formative and summa-
tive assessments to document that mastery. Built on a foundation 
that included work by Benjamin Bloom, OBE draws on notions of 
mastery of content rather than coverage of content. What is dis-
tinctive about OBE is that it requires a school or school district 
to focus completely on learning outcomes of significance, that is, 
what is important for students to know and be able to do. Wil-
liam G. Spady, a key proponent of OBE, “urge[d] schools to gen-
erate ‘exit outcomes’ based on the challenges and opportunities 
that students will face after graduation, and then to ‘design down’ 
from the outcomes for all other aspects of educational delivery” 
(McNeir 1993, 2). The philosophy of OBE, like Effective Schools, 
is that all students can learn, but that they learn in different ways 
and need different amounts of time to learn well. OBE requires 
schools and teachers to vary the instruction students receive and 
the amount of time students have to achieve the outcomes, rather 
than allowing time to be a determiner of learning. In other words, 
students’ opportunities to learn continue until they achieve mas-
tery, and mastery of outcomes is documented whenever it hap-
pens. In many cases, OBE school districts extended the school 

60 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
day and the school year to allow for the additional time students 
needed to master outcomes and demonstrate that mastery. 
 In OBE, students typically document their learning, not 
through paper and pencil, one-right-answer tests, but through 
projects and performances that allow them to apply the learning 
in a meaningful, real-world context. Examples of such assess-
ments might be as simple as young children who are learning 
about money counting out sums of money with real coins or giv-
ing change as they play store; for older children, it might mean re-
searching a character from history and preparing journal entries or 
letters about a historical event from that character’s perspective. 
 OBE was adopted and implemented by many schools 
and school districts in the United States and promoted by sev-
eral states. Schools and school districts that implemented OBE 
 reported that student achievement increased, but no large-scale 
evaluations of OBE have been conducted. Because OBE did not 
rely on standardized achievement tests but rather locally devel-
oped outcomes, it would have been difficult to make comparisons 
of student achievement. Interestingly, there are many similarities 
between OBE and standards-based reforms. 
 In spite of its purported success, OBE generated controversy, 
particularly among political and Christian conservatives. The 
critics of OBE, including Phyllis Schlafly, raised several concerns, 
among them that the “exit outcomes” of many OBE school districts 
included values that had the potential to conflict with conserva-
tive Christian morals and values. Other critics were concerned 
with the notion that “all children can learn,” believing that it is the 
responsibility of schools to rank students, or in Spady’s words, 
“to sort and select” students. Interestingly, while few schools in 
the United States would currently own up to implementing OBE, 
OBE is being implemented widely outside the United States, pri-
marily in Africa, New Zealand, and Australia. A discussion of 
such an OBE implementation is included in Chapter 3. 
 Business Models Applied 
to School Reform 
 Several business models have been applied to comprehensive 
school reform. In general, the business models in education are 
based on the premise that student learning is the product of 

Business Models Applied to School Reform 61
schools, with families, the general public, and business com-
munity considered the consumers of this product. These models 
evaluate schools in terms of their productivity, and they view 
competition as key to motivating schools to be successful. Some 
of the models include Total Quality Management, the Baldridge 
Model, and Management by Objective. 
 Total Quality Management 
 Total Quality Management (TQM), a model developed by 
W. Edwards Deming, author and business consultant, has as its 
foundation the development of shared organizational goals and 
aims. Combined with the principles of Effective Schools, it was 
applied to schools as Total Quality Schools. According to National 
School Services, an organization that has promoted and supported 
the model, Total Quality Schools is “a focused plan for continuous 
school improvement . . . that involves the whole school commu-
nity in all aspects of improvement” (National School Services). 
The Total Quality Schools Process (TQSP) involves several phases 
that include learning the principles of TQSP; gathering and ana-
lyzing data about the current state of the school or school district, 
both to identify needs that should be addressed and to establish 
a baseline against which improvements can be measured; devel-
oping a strategic plan to address the needs identified; providing 
training and professional development to implement the plan; 
and evaluating the effects of the plan by comparing new data with 
baseline data. Key to the TQSP is Deming’s principle of requiring 
statistical evidence of quality; the challenge in schools is to deter-
mine how to generate and analyze statistical evidence about the 
goals and aims of the school and school district. 
 The Baldrige Model 
 The Baldrige model is also based on Deming’s Total Quality Man-
agement principles, but it extends the TQM model by adding 
specific criteria for implementation of “quality” in nearly every 
aspect of a school district. These criteria, the Malcolm Baldrige 
Criteria for Performance Excellence, provide benchmarks for 
schools as they seek to improve. According to the Web site of the 
Montgomery County (Maryland) Public Schools, a school district 
that has won awards for its improvement and its student achieve-
ment, school personnel credit the implementation of the Baldrige 

62 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
process for their results (Montgomery County Public Schools 
2006). Using the “Plan Do Study Act” process (similar to the 
TQSP), schools plan for improvement. In Baldrige schools, teach-
ers teach children the “Plan Do Study Act” process to help the 
students set goals for and assess their own learning. The Baldrige 
model provides a set of strategies and processes for improvement 
at the leadership, classroom, and student levels, as well as recom-
mendations for parents and parent involvement. At the classroom 
level, for example, Baldrige begins by establishing a culture that is 
characterized by acceptance and trust, and teachers make children 
partners in the development of quality through personal goal set-
ting. Teachers use a set of “teaching tools” that focus on quality, 
they lead their students in gathering and analyzing data about 
their own learning, and teachers themselves gather and analyze 
data to document student progress and to plan for their teaching 
(Montgomery County Public Schools 2006). 
 Critics of applying business models to education argue that 
the business metaphor is not appropriate for education because 
the purpose of schooling is very different from that of business. 
Many educators believe that schools exist to socialize students 
into American society and to create an educated citizenry who are 
prepared to participate actively in U.S. democracy, not to support 
U.S. competition in the global marketplace. With this purpose, 
students and student achievement are not products to be mar-
keted; rather they are participants in education. Critics also decry 
the push for competition between and among publicly funded 
schools; instead, they believe that all public schools should be ad-
equately funded and have the resources they need to provide a 
high-quality education for all children in the United States. 
 Standards-Based Education 
 Since the federal government began requiring states to adopt 
or develop standards and assessments that document students’ 
progress toward meeting those standards in the 1990s, schools 
and school districts have focused their reform efforts on helping 
students meet the standards and demonstrate that on state assess-
ments. Many schools have worked to align their curricula with 
state and national standards, develop local assessments that doc-
ument student achievement of the standards, and refine teaching 
so that children experience success relative to the standards. They 

Standards-Based Education 63
use data from student assessments to further refine the curricu-
lum and the quality of teaching. 
 No Child Left Behind (NCLB) builds accountability for results 
into the teaching and learning process. NCLB requires not only 
that students participate in state assessments but also that they 
make progress each year toward proficiency in those assessments. 
Schools are expected to show what NCLB terms “adequate yearly 
progress” (AYP) toward the goal of all students demonstrating pro-
ficiency in reading and mathematics by the year 2014. Schools must 
not only show that most of their students are making progress in 
the aggregate; NCLB requires them to break down the achievement 
data by groups that include race, families’ income level, English 
language proficiency, and special education. The great strength of 
NCLB is the expectation that it communicates that all students can 
and will learn to high standards, and that schools are accountable 
for finding strategies to ensure the learning of all students. 
 As schools seek to have their students meet the standards for 
AYP, many of them have turned to a number of strategies that 
have been termed “standards-based education.” Interestingly, 
standards-based education includes strategies developed earlier 
as part of other comprehensive school reform models, like the 
Comer model and OBE. Evidence of other models can be found in 
the alignment and mapping of curriculum; designing instruction 
to lead to achievement of standards; raising expectations for all 
children to meet the standards; checking, assessing, and analyz-
ing children’s work relative to the standards; and developing and 
using benchmark assessments. 
 Unlike other standards-based reform initiatives, NCLB in-
cludes standards for teacher quality. According to the law, teach-
ers are expected to be what the law terms “highly qualified.” To 
be considered highly qualified, teachers must have a bachelor’s 
degree, state certification, and proof that they “know each sub-
ject they teach” (U.S. Department of Education 2004). While the 
law requires that all teachers in all schools be highly qualified by 
the 2005–2006 school year, some flexibility has been added to the 
regulations in terms of the length of time experienced teachers 
had to demonstrate that they were highly qualified; some flex-
ibility has also been added for rural and small school districts 
where the size of the district dictates that teachers, especially at 
the high school level, teach more than one subject. At the same 
time, NCLB requires schools to notify parents if their children 
have teachers who are not highly qualified. Research shows the 

64 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
importance of effective teaching to children’s learning; setting 
and enforcing standards of teacher quality are critical for raising 
student achievement. 
 NCLB adds to standards-based education stringent account-
ability measures. The achievement of all students in third through 
eighth grade, and at one point in high school, must be evaluated 
each year through tests that have been determined by their states 
to measure progress toward state standards. The law includes 
penalties for schools where students, both in the aggregate (all 
together) and disaggregated (analyzed by race, gender, poverty, 
first language, disability), do not demonstrate AYP for three years 
in a row, up to and including closing the school or reconstituting 
it. Such schools are labeled “failing,” and they are required to no-
tify parents of that status. Parents of children in schools that are 
failing may transfer their children to schools that are not failing; 
children in a failing school are also entitled to individual tutoring, 
usually provided by independent contractors who are not school 
employees and often not certified teachers; and in some cases, 
they are eligible for vouchers to attend private schools. 
 In its report of a nationwide series of dialogues on standards 
and standards-based education, McREL (Mid-continent Research 
for Education and Learning) (Goodwin 2003) found that “the pub-
lic appears to have an entirely different agenda for school reform 
than most educators and policymakers. As a result, even if schools 
succeed in boosting test scores and avoiding sanctions, they could 
nonetheless fail to increase public satisfaction with or support for 
public schools” (p. 7). McREL conducted focus groups with mem-
bers of the general public about “where people stand on standards-
based education,” and among its findings are the following: 
 Standards are meaningless without tests, but 
•
accountability should be based on more than just test 
scores; 
 True accountability makes schools more responsive to 
•
parents and communities, not to outside officials; 
 Parents and students are a crucial yet often missing part 
•
of most accountability systems; and 
 The biggest problems with public schools have little to 
•
do with standards or academics. (p. 2) 
 In other words, participants in these focus groups agree that 
standards and accountability are important to school reform, 

Standards-Based Education 65
but they disagree with the way NCLB uses standards and test-
ing. They see NCLB as making local school districts and schools 
responsible to state and federal governments, but these partici-
pants believe instead that schools and school districts should be 
accountable and responsive to students, parents, and their local 
communities. When queried about the problems they see in pub-
lic schools, participants’ concerns were less about academics and 
much more about character, values, and safety in schools. 
 The U.S. Department of Education has publicized a few suc-
cesses that it attributes to No Child Left Behind, but critics look 
at how the NCLB funds are distributed, the amount of money 
 required to implement the provisions of the law compared to the 
amount of money allocated, and the impossible goal of all chil-
dren demonstrating proficiency by 2014 as major flaws in the law. 
NCLB funding is supposed to provide services to the children 
most in need, but critics say that is not how the funds have been 
distributed.
 According to Mary Kusler, the assistant director of gov-
ernment relations for the American Association of School 
Administrators, . . . under the current formula, districts 
with high enrollments and relatively low poverty rates 
receive more money per Title I pupil than districts with 
small enrollments and high poverty rates. (Hoff 2007, 18) 
 Critics of NCLB often call the law an “unfunded mandate,” 
arguing that the amount of money states and school districts must 
spend to meet the requirements of the law is far more than is being 
provided by the federal government. The National Education 
Association (NEA) and several states filed a lawsuit against the 
U.S. Department of Education in 2005 “simply asking the Bush 
administration to allow parents to spend hard-earned tax dol-
lars on their children’s classrooms—not bureaucracy, paperwork 
and testing companies” (NEA 2008). A January 8, 2008, ruling by 
the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit agreed 
with the plaintiffs that states and school districts should not be 
expected to spend state or local money to implement the require-
ments of NCLB, but how that ruling will affect the implementa-
tion of the law is not yet clear. What is clear is that NCLB has not 
been fully funded; the full amount of funds allocated for NCLB 
has never been appropriated by Congress or even earmarked in 
the president’s budget. 

66 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Other critics argue that the goal of all students to be proficient 
by 2014 is impractical, if not impossible, and that by 2014, nearly 
all schools in the United States, even those currently considered 
high performing, will be labeled “failing.” In their study of the 
impact of adequate yearly progress on schools in the Great Lakes 
states, Edward Wiley, William Mathis, and David Garcia (2005) 
projected that as many as 95 percent of schools in Illinois, Indi-
ana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, and Wisconsin will have been 
labeled failing by 2013. Studies of California schools have come 
to the same conclusion (Cavanaugh and Hoff 2008). Some public 
policy analysts even believe that declaring so many schools fail-
ing is the intent of the underlying philosophy of the law. Saltman 
(2007) asserted that “Clearly, NCLB is designed to accomplish the 
implementation of privatization and deregulation in ways that 
open action could not” (p. 7). 
 The Call for New Kinds 
of Reforms in Education 
 Nel Noddings (2007) believes that “most reform movements, 
paradoxically, have been flawed by moral shortcomings,” even 
when they are “started on high moral ground” (p. 79). Children’s 
achievement in school depends only partly on what happens 
in school. According to Noddings, “Success in school is largely 
 dependent on social and economic factors over which schools 
have no control” (p. 81). She argues that until the United States 
is willing to commit to improving the social and economic condi-
tions in which so many children live, reform efforts will fail. 
 The Forum for Education and Democracy, convened by prom-
inent educators, educational researchers, and education reform-
ers, released a report, “Democracy at Risk: The Need for a New 
Federal Policy in Education” (Darling-Hammond, Wood, and 
Glenn 2008), that calls for an approach to education reform aimed 
at both equity and quality. The vision of the Forum for a new fed-
eral policy includes a real commitment to high-quality curricu-
lum for all children; serious financial investment in teaching, both 
in training for new teachers and in professional development 
for those already teaching in schools; and equalizing resources 
so that all children attend schools that have quality teachers, the 
materials and textbooks they need, and school buildings that are 

References 67
safe and in good repair. Further, the report suggests four new pri-
orities for education at the federal level: they are “paying off the 
educational debt,” a debt that has accrued for poor and minor-
ity children  because of the many years of inequity in education 
and in society in general that they have experienced; developing 
skilled educators who are professionals and are viewed as such; 
supporting educational research and real innovation; and engag-
ing, involving, and educating local communities in playing out 
these strategies to reach the vision of a free, universal public edu-
cation system that provides real opportunities for learning and 
advancement for all children. 
 The challenge of reforming education in the United States 
is not that there are no solutions—there are just no easy solu-
tions. There are many reform efforts that have shown success 
in raising student achievement. Whether schools succeed in 
closing the achievement gap and helping all students learn well 
in school will depend on how the social and economic issues 
in our country are addressed; schools and teachers having the 
resources and latitude to make changes necessary to improve 
curriculum and teaching; and the commitment of the general 
public, parents, teachers, school administrators, and students to 
improvement. 
 References 
 A+ Schools Program. n.d. “Research and Results.” Greensboro, NC. 
http://aplus-schools.uncg.edu/overviewofkeyfindings.pdf. 
 Ashby, N. 2007. “Arts Integration at Oklahoma School Provides 
Multiple Paths for Learning.” The Achiever 6 (6): 1, 3–4. 
 Baumgartner, T., M. Lipowski, and C. Rush. 2003. “Increasing Reading 
Achievement of Primary and Middle School Students through 
Differentiated Instruction.” PhD diss., Saint Xavier University, 
Chicago. 
 Bloom, H. S., S. Ham, L. Melton, and J. O’Brien. 2001. “Evaluating 
the Accelerated Schools Approach: A Look at Early Implementation 
and Impacts on Student Achievement in Eight Elementary Schools.” 
New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation. ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 460791. 
 Braun, H., F. Jenkins, and W. Griggs. 2006.  A Closer Look at Charter 
Schools Using Hierarchical Linear Modeling . Washington, DC: National 
Center for Educational Statistics. 

68 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Caine, R. N., and G. Caine. 1991.  Making Connections: Teaching and 
the Human Brain. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and 
Curriculum Development. 
 Carr, J. F., and D. E. Harris. 2001.  Succeeding with Standards: Linking 
Curriculum, Assessment, and Action Planning.  Alexandria, VA: Association 
for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
 Cavanaugh, S., and D. J. Hoff. 2008. “Schools Found Likely 
to Miss NCLB Targets.”  Education Week Online, September 25. 
http://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2008/09/25/06ayp.h28.
html?tmp=1754231223.
 Center for Education Reform. 2008. “Just the FAQs—Tuition Tax Credits 
and Tax Deductions.” http://www.edreform.com/index.cfm?fuseAction
=document&documentID=59.
 Cook, T. D., H. D. Hunt, and R. F. Murphy. 2000. “Comer’s School 
Development Program in Chicago: A Theory-Based Evaluation.” 
American Educational Research Journal 37 (2): 535–597. 
 Darling-Hammond, L., G. Wood, and B. Glenn. 2008. “Democracy at 
Risk: The Need for a New Federal Policy in Education.” Athens, OH: 
Forum for Education and Democracy. 
 FairTest.  K-12 Testing. http://www.fairtest.org/k–12. 
 Finnan, C., K. C. Schnepel, and L. W. Anderson. 2003. “Powerful 
Learning Environments: The Critical Link Between School and Classroom 
Cultures.”  Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk 8 (4): 391–418. 
 Fisher, D., and N. Frey. 2001. “Access to the Core Curriculum: Critical 
Ingredients for Students.”  Remedial and Special Education 22 (3): 148–157. 
 Flowers, A. 2007. “Single-Sex Public Schools OK: Education 
Department.” Chicago: Heartland Institute. http://www.heartland.org/
Article.cfm?artid=20434.
 Foley, E. M., A. Klinge, and E. R. Reisner. 2007.  Evaluation of New Century 
High Schools: Profile of an Initiative to Create and Sustain Small Successful 
High Schools. Washington, DC: Policy Studies Associates, Inc. 
 Gamoran, A. 1996. “Do Magnet Schools Boost Student Achievement?” 
Educational Leadership 54 (2): 42–46. 
 Gardner, H. 2003. “Multiple Intelligences after Twenty Years.” Paper 
presented at the American Educational Research Association Annual 
Meeting, Chicago. http://www.pz.harvard.edu/PIs/HG_MI_after_20_
years.pdf.
 Gardner School Web site. 2008. http://www.gardnerschool.org/. 
 Goodwin, B. 2003. “Digging Deeper: Where Does the Public Stand on 
Standards-based Education?” Issues Brief. Aurora, CO: Mid-Continent 
Research for Education and Learning. 

References 69
 Hadderman, M. 2000. “Educational Vouchers.”  ERIC Digest 137. Eugene, 
OR: ERIC Clearinghouse on Educational Management. 
 Hall, T. 2002. “Differentiated Instruction.” Wakefield, MA: National 
Center on Accessing the General Curriculum. http://www.cast.org/
publications/ncac/ncac_diffinstruc.html. 
 Hausfather, S. 1995. “Creating a Theme Study Classroom around 
‘Big’ Questions: Opportunities and Constraints.” Paper presented 
at the annual meeting of the National Council for the Social Studies, 
Chicago, Illinois. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 
291711). 
 Haynes, N. M., C. L. Emmons, S. Gebreyesus, and M. Ben-Avie. 1996. 
“The School Development Program Evaluation Process.” In  Rallying
the Whole Village: The Comer Process for Reforming Education , edited by 
E. T. Joyner, J. P. Comer, and M. Ben-Avie, 123–146. New York: Teachers 
College, Columbia University. 
 Hoff, D. J. 2007. “Usually Contentious Title Formula is No NCLB 
Barrier.”  Education Week 27 (14): 18–19. 
 Home School Legal Defense Association. 2001.  Home Schooling 
Achievement . Purcellville, VA. 
 Hoxby, C. 2004a.  A Straightforward Comparison of Charter Schools and 
Regular Public Schools in the US . Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of 
Economic Research. 
 Hoxby, C. 2004b.  Achievement in Charter Schools and Regular Public 
Schools in the US: Understanding the Differences. Cambridge, MA: 
Taubman Center for State and Local Government, Kennedy School of 
Government.
 Jensen, E. 1998.  Teaching with the Brain in Mind. Alexandria, VA: 
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
 Jensen, E. 2008. “Principles of Brain-Based Learning.” http://www.
brainexpo.com/BBLearn/principles.asp.
 Jensen, E. C. 2008. “A Fresh Look at Brain-Based Education.”  Phi Delta 
Kappan 89 (6): 409–417. 
 Kunkel, C. 2007. “The Power of Key: Celebrating 20 Years of Innovation 
at the Key Learning Community.”  Phi Delta Kappan 89 (3): 204–209. 
 Lake, K. 2001. “Integrated Curriculum.”  School Improvement Research 
Series (SIRS): Research You Can Use. Portland, OR: Northwest Regional 
Educational Laboratory. http://www.nwrel.org/scpd/sirs/8/c016.
html.
 Lezotte, L. W. n.d. “Revolutionary and Evolutionary: The Effective 
Schools Movement.” http://www.effectiveschools.com/images/
stories/RevEv.pdf. 

70 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Lezotte, L. W. 1991.  Correlates of Effective Schools: The First and Second 
Generation . Okemos, MI: Effective Schools Products, Ltd. 
 Mace-Matluck, B. 1987.  The Effective Schools Movement: Its History and 
Context. Austin, TX: Southwest Educational Development Lab (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED304781). 
 Mael, F., A. Alonso, D. Gibson, K. Rogers, and M. Smith. 2005. “Single-
Sex Versus Coeducational Schooling: A Systematic Review.” Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation and 
Policy Development, Policy and Program Studies Service. http://www.
ed.gov/rschstat/eval/other/single-sex/single-sex.pdf.
 McAndrews, T., and W. Anderson. 2002. “Schools Within Schools.” 
ERIC Digest 154. Eugene, OR: ERIC Clearinghouse on Educational 
Management (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED461915). 
 McMurrer, J. 2008. “Instructional Time in Elementary Schools: A Closer 
Look at Changes for Specific Subjects.” From the Capital to the Classroom: 
Year 5 of the No Child Left Behind Act. Washington, DC: Center on 
Education Policy. 
 McNeir, G. 1993. “Outcome-Based Education.”  ERIC Digest 85. http://
eric.uoregon.edu/publications/digests/digest085.html. 
 Montgomery County Public Schools. 2006. “Baldrige Education Criteria 
for Performance Excellence.” http://www.montgomeryschoolsmd.org/
info/baldrige.
 National Center for Education Statistics. 2003. “Executive Summary, 
America’s Charter Schools.” The Nation’s Report Card. Washington, 
DC: Institute for Educational Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. 
http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/studies/charter/2005456.asp. 
 National School Services. n.d. “The Total Quality School Process.” 
http://www.n-s-s.com/tqsp.htm. 
 NEA. 2008. “Stand Up for Children:  Pontiac v. Spellings. ”  Issues in 
Education. http://www.nea.org:80/home/10675.htm. 
 Nelson, C. A. 2001.  The Arts and Education Reform: Lessons from a Four-
Year Pilot of the A+ Schools Program. Greensboro, NC: A+ Schools 
Program. http://aplus-schools.uncg.edu/overviewofkeyfindings.pdf. 
 NIFDI. n.d. “What is Direct Instruction?” Eugene, OR. www.nifdi.org. 
 Noddings, N. 2007.  When School Reform Goes Wrong. New York: Teachers 
College Press. 
 O’Shea, M. R. 2005.  From Standards to Success. Alexandria, VA: 
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
 Payne, C. 1991. “The Comer Intervention Model and School Reform in 
Chicago: Implications of Two Models of Change.”  Urban Education 26 
(8): 8–24. 

References 71
 Penn, M. J. 2007.  Microtrends: The Small Forces Behind Tomorrow’s Big 
Changes. New York: Twelve. 
 Ramirez-Smith, C. 1995. “Stopping the Cycle of Failure: The Comer 
Model.” Educational Leadership 52 (5): 14–19. 
 Rossell, C. 2005. “Whatever Happened to Magnet Schools.”  Education 
Next 4 (3). http://www.hoover.org/publications/ednext/3220691.
html. 
 Roy, J., and L. Mishel. 2005.  Advantage None: Reexamining Hoxby’s 
Findings of Charter School Benefits. Washington, DC: Economic Policy 
Institute.
 Ryder, R. J., J. L. Sekulski, and A. Silberg. 2003.  Results of Direct 
Instruction Reading Program Evaluation Longitudinal Results: First Through 
Third Grade 2000–2003. Milwaukee: University of Wisconsin. 
 Sadker, D., and K. Zittleman. 2004. “Single Sex Schools: A Good Idea 
Gone Wrong?”  Christian Science Monitor , April 8. http://www.sadker.
org/PDF/SingleSexSchools.pdf. 
 Saltman, K. J. 2007.  Capitalizing on Disaster: Taking and Breaking Public 
Schools. Boulder, CO: Paradigm. 
 Sax, L. 2005. “The Promise and Peril of Single-Sex  Public Education: 
Mr. Chips Meets Snoop Dogg.”  Education Week , March 2. http://www.
singlesexschools.org/edweek.html. 
 Senge, P. M. 1990.  The Fifth Discipline: The Art & Practice of the Learning 
Organization . New York: Doubleday. 
 Siegle, D. 2006. “The Last Word: An Interview with Gene Chasin, CEO 
of Accelerated Schools Plus.”  Journal of Advanced Academics 18 (1): 
146–154.
 Small Schools Project Web site. http://www.smallschoolsproject.org. 
 Smith, M. K. 2002. “Howard Gardner and Multiple Intelligences.” 
The Encyclopedia of Informal Education . http://www.infed.org/
thinkers/gardner.htm. 
 Sprenger, M. 1999.  Learning & Memory: The Brain in Action. Alexandria, 
VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
 Stahl, S. A. 1999. “Different Strokes for Different Folks? A Critique of 
Learning Styles.” American Educator (Fall). http://www.aft.org/pubs-
reports/american_educator/fall99/DiffStrokes.pdf. 
 Sternberg, R. J. 2008. “The Answer Depends on the Question: A Reply to 
Eric Jensen.” Phi Delta Kappan 89 (6): 418–420. 
 “Struggle Against Vouchers Continues in Milwaukee and Across 
Nation.” 2002. Rethinking Schools Online. http://www.rethinkingschools.
org/special_reports/voucher_report/index.shtml. 

72 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
 Success for All Foundation. 2008. “Programs Excluded by Reading First 
Top List of Research-Based Programs.” Baltimore, MD. http://www.
successforall.net/press/press_csrq.htm. 
 Thernstrom, A., and S. Thernstrom. 2003.  No Excuses: Closing the Racial 
Gap in Learning. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
 Tienken, C., and M. Wilson. 2001. “Using State Standards and Tests to 
Improve Instruction.”  Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation 7 (13). 
http://PAREonline.net.getvn.asp?v=7&n=13. 
 Tomlinson, C. A. 2000. “Differentiation of Instruction in the Elementary 
Grades.” ERIC Digest. Champaign, IL: ERIC Clearinghouse on 
Elementary and Early Childhood Education (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 443572). 
 Tomlinson, C. A., and A. Germundson. 2007. “Teaching as Jazz.” 
Educational Leadership 64 (8): 27–31. 
 U.S. Charter Schools. n.d. “History.” http://www.uscharterschools.org/
pub/uscs_docs/o/history.htm. 
 U.S. Charter Schools. n.d. “Overview.” http://www.uscharterschools.
org/pub/uscs_docs/o/index.htm. 
 U.S. Department of Education. 2004. “Fact Sheet: New  No Child Left 
Behind Flexibility: Highly Qualified Teachers.” http://www.ed.gov/
nclb/methods/teachers/hqtflexibility.html. 
 U.S. Department of Education. 2002. “Part C: Magnet School 
Assistance.” http://www.ed.gov/policy/elsec/leg/esea02/pg65.
html. 
 Wasley, P. 2002. “Small Classes, Small Schools: The Time is Now.” 
Educational Leadership 59 (5): 6–10. 
 Watkins, D., and W. A. Kritsonis. 2008. “Aristotle, Philosophy, and 
the Ways of Knowing through the Realms of Meaning: A National Study 
on Integrating a Postmodernist Approach to Education and Student 
Academic Achievement.”  National Forum of Applied Educational 
Research Journal 21 (8) (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 
499545). 
 “What is a Magnet School?” n.d . Public School Review. http://www.
publicschoolreview.com/articles/2. 
 Wiley, E. W., W. J. Mathis, and D. R. Garcia. 2005. “Executive Summary.” 
The Impact of the Adequate Yearly Progress Requirement of the Federal 
‘No Child Left Behind’ Act on Schools in the Great Lakes Region. Tempe, 
AZ: Education Policy Studies Laboratory. http://epsl.asu.edu/epru/
documents/EPSL-0509–109-EPRU-exec.pdf.
 Willis, J. 2008. “Building a Bridge from Neuroscience to the Classroom.” 
Phi Delta Kappan 89 (6): 424– 427. 

References 73
 Yale School Development Program Staff. 2004. “Essential 
Understandings of the Yale School Development Program.” In 
Transforming School Leadership and Management to Support Student 
Learning and Development , edited by E. T. Joyner, J. P. Comer, and 
M. Ben-Avie, 15–23. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin. 
 Yu, C., and W. L. Taylor. 1997.  Difficult Choices: Do Magnet Schools Serve 
Children in Need? Washington, DC: Citizens’ Commission on Civil 
Rights.

This page intentionally left blank 

75
 S
ince the 1950s, advances in technology have brought about 
monumental changes throughout the world. Live satellite tele-
vision and real-time video have brought events and everyday 
life in other parts of the world into our homes when they are hap-
pening. The time it takes to travel long distances has decreased, 
resulting in much more international travel, and increases in inter-
national travel have reduced the cost of such travel, which in turn 
allows for more. Computer technology has greatly increased the 
speed and ease of global communication, creating opportunities 
for increased cross-cultural interaction and exchange of culture 
and making the world smaller and much more interconnected. 
According to John Engler and James Hunt (2004), “Globalization 
is a fact, not an ideology” (p. 199). 
 Economies also have become more interconnected; indeed, in 
the 21st century, national economies have been superseded by a 
global economy in which events in one region of the world affect 
the economic situation throughout the world. Multinational busi-
nesses and industries compete globally for skilled workers and 
for profits. Education is viewed by many as a factor in this eco-
nomic competition, and educational competition itself has taken 
on the stature of an Olympic event, making education reform an 
international enterprise. 
 The United States began to compare the quality of its educa-
tion system with that of other countries after the launch of Sput-
nik I in 1957, based on the judgment that the U.S.S.R. was ahead in 
the “space race” because of superior education in mathematics and 
science. Shortly after that, in 1959, the International Association for 
the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA), an international 
 3 
 Education Reform—A Global 
Enterprise 

76 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
group of scholars that included Benjamin Bloom, began the first 
study that compared the learning of students internationally. Data 
for this Pilot Twelve-Country Study were gathered between 1959 
and 1962 from 13-year-old students in the areas of reading com-
prehension, mathematics, science, geography, and nonverbal abil-
ity. Interestingly, the study found that the differences in academic 
achievement at that time were larger among students within each 
country studied than between the countries. More importantly 
for the researchers who conducted the study, the study demon-
strated that is was possible to evaluate educational outcomes 
across cultures and languages, setting the stage for regular inter-
national evaluations that compare student learning. 
 The IEA has gone on to conduct periodic studies that compare 
education internationally. The two latest studies are the Trends in 
International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) in 2003, and 
the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) in 
2006. In the TIMMS study of fourth grade students, the average 
score was 495; the average score of U.S. fourth graders was 518, 
significantly above the international average. The U.S. students 
scored better than the students from 13 of the other 24 countries in 
the study; students from 11 countries scored better than U.S. fourth 
graders. Compared to students in the other Organization for Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development (OECD) member countries 
in the study, U.S. fourth graders performed better than fourth grad-
ers in Australia, Italy, New Zealand, Norway, and Scotland, and 
were outperformed by fourth graders from Belgium-Flemish, En  -
gland, Hungary, Japan, and the Netherlands (Gonzales et al., 2004). 
Table 1 in Chapter 6 shows the rankings of the 24 countries in the 
study. The 2003 TIMMS also studied eighth grade mathematics 
achievement. U.S. eighth graders scored 504, again significantly 
higher than the average score of 466, performing better than their 
peers in 25 of the 44 countries participating in the study (Gonzales 
et al., 2004). See Table 2 in Chapter 6 for the average scores of eighth 
graders by country. 
 The 2006 PIRLS study of fourth grade reading achievement 
compares the reading comprehension of children in the United 
States with their peers in 44 other countries or jurisdictions around 
the world. The study found that the average score for U.S. fourth 
graders was 540, higher than students from 22 other countries or 
jurisdictions, and lower than students from 10 other countries 
or jurisdictions. The report of the study presents the data by back-
ground characteristics, finding that girls scored higher than boys in 

Education Reform—A Global Enterprise 77
the United States and all other countries, except for two where there 
was no difference in the average scores of girls and boys. 
 In considering racial and ethnic backgrounds of U.S. fourth 
graders, the study found that the scores for white, non-Hispanic 
students; Asian, non-Hispanic students; and non-Hispanic stu-
dents classified as “other” were significantly higher than scores 
for black, non-Hispanic; Hispanic; and American Indian/Alaskan 
Native, non-Hispanic students. In other words, the scores repre-
sented a significant gap in reading comprehension achievement 
between white and Asian students on the one hand and Black, 
Hispanic, and American Indian/Alaskan Native students on the 
other (Baer et al., 2007). 
 The report of the 2006 PIRLS study also compares the read-
ing comprehension of U.S. fourth graders in 2006 with that of U.S. 
fourth graders in 2001, finding no measurable difference between 
the 2001 and 2006 scores (Baer et al., 2007). In other words, in spite 
of all the effort to improve reading through No Child Left Behind, 
no such improvement was shown by the PIRLS. 
 In 2006, the latest Program in International Student Assess-
ment, or PISA, was conducted by the OECD. That study compared 
achievement of 15-year-old students in reading, mathematics, and 
science. The average score of students in the United States ranked 
21st of the 30 countries included in the assessment. In mathemat-
ics, U.S. students ranked 25th. (Scores for U.S. students in reading 
were not included in the report because of a problem with testing.) 
Table 5 in Chapter 6 shows the rankings of the scores for all of the 
countries that participated in the assessment. 
 The OECD also gathers data about a number of societal and 
economic factors related to educational achievement and compares 
them across the countries that participated in PISA. Interestingly, 
the data show that diversity is increasing in nearly all of the par-
ticipant countries. When comparing rates of poverty among the 
schoolchildren of countries participating in the study, the study 
found that 22 percent of the children enrolled in schools in the 
United States live in families whose income is below the poverty 
line, a rate higher than any other OECD country except Mexico. 
This is an especially important statistic to consider because the 
United States ranks 45th out of 55 countries in the PISA measure 
of equity. This means that students from different socioeconomic 
or racial backgrounds have large disparities in average scores. 
According to Linda Darling-Hammond and Wood George (2008), 
in the PISA reading, mathematics, and science assessments, “The 

78 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
distance between the average score for Asian and white students, 
on the one hand, and Hispanic and Latino students, on the other, 
is equal to the distance between the United States average and 
that of the highest scoring nations” (p. 8). 
 There is little agreement about what these comparisons of 
student achievement mean, but Gerald Bracey (2007) points out 
that there are students in the United States whose performance 
on these tests is  the highest in the world. His reanalysis of the 
PIRLS and TIMSS data at the fourth grade level shows that stu-
dents who attend the 13 percent of U.S. schools with fewer than 
10 percent of their students considered living in poverty have the 
highest average score on the PIRLS—589. Schools with  between 
10 and 25 percent of their populations living in poverty also 
scored higher than any other country, with an average score of 
567; 17 percent of U.S. fourth graders attend schools with such 
levels of poverty. Bracey’s reanalysis shows similar results in 
fourth grade science on the TIMSS, with the same groups of stu-
dents earning the highest scores. On the TIMSS mathematics test, 
these groups scored just below fourth graders from Singapore 
and Hong Kong. On the other hand, U.S. schools where 75 per-
cent or more of the students live in poverty scored significantly 
below the international average on all three measures; 20 percent 
of U.S. fourth grade students attend schools where 75 percent or 
more of their student populations live in poverty. In other words, 
socioeconomic status is not evenly distributed across schools in 
the United States, and how well U.S. students perform on the 
tests depends to a large extent on the percentage of children liv-
ing in poverty in their schools. 
 The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO) gathers and compares statistics about 
education around the world and reports those statistics in its 
annual Global Education Digest . The digest compares education 
funding as a percentage of GDP, the value of all goods and ser-
vices produced by a country in a given year. According to the 
International Monetary Fund database, the United States had the 
highest GDP of any country in the world in 2007—$13,843,825 
million—which also typically is used as a measure of standard 
of living. The per capita GDP for the United States in 2007 was 
$45,845.477 (International Monetary Fund 2008). The Global 
Education Digest (UNESCO 2007) reports that the United States 
spent public funds totaling 5.6 percent of the GDP on public edu-
cation in 2005. 

Education Reform in South Africa 79
 Since education has been so closely linked to economic 
growth and competition in the global marketplace, almost every 
country in the world is involved in some way in the reform of 
education. While every country has conditions that make its edu-
cation system unique, there is also much that can be learned from 
the strategies that are being used around the world to reform 
education systems and to increase student achievement. The next 
section of this chapter describes education reform and how it is 
progressing in South Africa, Finland, China, France, and Chile. 
These countries were selected because they represent developed 
and developing countries, different regions of the world, and 
widely varying cultures. They have addressed or are grappling 
with some of the same issues that schools and school districts in 
the United States face as they seek to reform education. 
 Education Reform in South Africa 
 The challenges facing South Africa in developing a system of edu-
cation that provides real opportunities for all children to learn are 
great. The obstacles to effective schools there are monumental, and 
in the short time since the beginning of the dismantling of legal 
racial segregation there, great strides have been made in policy, 
if not in practice. It is interesting to consider how the process of 
education reform is unfolding there. 
 In 1948, South Africa officially enacted apartheid, institu-
tionalizing the racial segregation that had characterized every 
aspect of South African society for 350 years. Apartheid officially 
assigned South Africans to one of four racial groups—Black (Afri-
cans), Colored (mixed race), White, and Indian/Asian. Apartheid 
relegated Black South Africans, the majority of the population, 
to tribally based “homelands,” areas with few resources and few 
opportunities to earn a living, or rural townships that grew up 
around cities to house Black workers who served as labor for 
White enterprises. (Black South Africans were not allowed to live 
in the cities.) Black South Africans were only allowed to vote in 
their tribal homelands, even if that was not where they resided. 
 Apartheid also affected education. During apartheid, pub-
lic education programs and schools in South Africa were admin-
istered through a network of 15 education departments, 14 of 
them divided along regional and racial lines, with the 15th a na-
tional department whose responsibility was to oversee the other 

80 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
14 departments. Education during apartheid in South Africa 
could only be characterized by the most extreme racial segrega-
tion, with students allowed to attend public schools as well as 
institutions of higher education that served only their own race. 
There was gross inequity in educational resources, including 
funding, school facilities, teacher quality, and class size. Schools 
for White children had far more resources and much higher lev-
els of funding—as much as three and a half times higher—than 
schools for Black children. 
 Schools in South Africa followed a national curriculum, out-
lined in the national exam system required of all students; need-
less to say, the national curriculum reflected the White majority’s 
interests (Kruse 1996). The language of education was primarily 
Afrikaans, and rarely did Black children experience education in 
their native languages. The White European-centered curriculum 
ensured that Black children learned “about how inferior they 
[were] because of studying battles where whites beat blacks” 
(Murphy 1992, 269). According to Edward Fiske and Helen Ladd 
(2005), public policy researchers, “The rationale for such inequity 
was a matter of public record. Blacks were given poor education 
so as to keep them out of the modern sector of the economy and to 
ensure a steady supply of cheap labor, particularly for the agricul-
tural, mining and domestic service sectors” (p. 2). In other words, 
the gross inequities in South African public education were inten-
tional and a matter of public policy. 
 To compound the intentional undereducation of Black chil-
dren, in the 1990s, Black schools were often sites of civil unrest. 
Many closed as students vandalized them. And many students 
went on strike, and eventually quit school, in support of the Afri-
can National Congress (ANC), the party of Nelson Mandela, who 
went on to be the first president of the Government of National 
Unity in 1994. 
 With the election of the Government of National Unity in 
1994, apartheid officially ended, and the new government began 
with a new understanding that declared all South Africans to be 
equal under the law and entitled to the same rights. One of those 
rights under the South African constitution is education. The 
Reconstruction and Development Programme (RDP) developed by 
the ANC to shape the transition from the former apartheid govern-
ment to a democracy included provisions for education under the 
heading of “Developing Our Human Resources.” This section of 
the RDP formed the basis for education reform in South Africa. 

Education Reform in South Africa 81
As part of undoing the legacy of apartheid, South Africa was chal-
lenged by the new government to create a system of education 
that both integrated the schools and provided a larger measure of 
equity. The RDP links improvement in education with economic 
development of the country. 
 The new government published a “White Paper on Edu-
cation and Training” in 1995 “which describes the first steps in 
policy formation by the Ministry of Education in the Govern-
ment of National Unity” (Department of Education). The white 
paper described the reorganization of education in South Africa 
into a single national system with a national Ministry of Educa-
tion responsible for setting policy and developing guidelines and 
structures that lead to the reform envisioned by the ANC and in 
the RDP, and nine new provincial education departments, all re-
sponsible for implementing education policy. Local school govern-
ing boards were to be elected and given the responsibility for 
running the local schools. In theory, the schools in each province 
would be racially integrated and provided with the resources to 
implement the learner-centered, culturally responsive, critical 
thinking curriculum envisioned in the white paper. 
 In 1995, the Ministry of Education adopted a National Quali-
fications Framework, a system of testing and certification of stu-
dent qualifications that is organized around three “bands” of 
education—General Education and Training, Further Education 
and Training, and Higher Education and Training—that extend 
from grade 0 through doctoral education. General Education and 
Training begins at grade 0, which is not mandatory, and goes 
through grade 9. The South African Schools Act of 1996 made 
education mandatory from grade 1 or the age of seven through 
grade 9 or the age of 15; successful completion of this band results 
in a general education certificate. 
 The South Africa Ministry of Education adopted outcome-
based education as a strategy for reforming its schools and 
 improving student learning to support the National Qualifica-
tions Framework. Outcome-based education was adopted in part 
because it represents equity and social change. (See Chapter 2 
for a description of outcome-based education.) Outcome-based 
education had been implemented with some success (and much 
controversy) in some schools in other countries, including the 
United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. William 
Spady, the self-proclaimed “father of outcome-based education,” 
traveled around South Africa in 1997, explaining outcome-based 

82 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
education to policy makers, teachers, school administrators, and 
the general public. 
 In South Africa, outcome-based education was, on the one 
hand, hailed as an opportunity for real change, and on the other, 
a tremendous challenge because it requires sophisticated instruc-
tional knowledge that many teachers did not have, as well as 
instructional materials that many schools did not have available. 
Another issue that has been raised is that the adoption process 
was antithetical to the democratic process that the new govern-
ment represented. Much of the value of outcome-based education 
lies in the participatory process of designing and determining 
outcomes that are significant and meaningful, as well as deter-
mining how learners would demonstrate that they had achieved 
the outcomes. However, most of that process was sidestepped in 
South Africa. When committees were convened, for example, to 
work on the design of outcomes and performance indicators, a 
specialist group from the Department of Education had already 
completed the work, and the committees were only invited to 
 respond rather than to be actively involved in the design process. 
 Crain Soudien (1997), University of Cape Town professor 
and researcher, identified a further criticism of the process of the 
adoption of outcome-based education. He argued that 
 Education was central to the discursive process of racial 
and cultural segregation in the “old” South Africa. What 
is called for in curriculum making in the new nation is a 
process that is more sensitive to the multiplicity of dif-
ferences that have animated South Africa’s 300-year long 
history and an interrogation of those differences. (p. 458) 
 In other words, when the Ministry of Education adopted 
outcome-based education, the implicit assumption was that one 
curriculum would be appropriate for all children in South Africa, 
regardless of their personal and cultural histories, at the same time 
that the new government was promoting a stance of recognizing 
and valuing diversity. 
 The Ministry of Education introduced a national curriculum 
framework in 1997 called Curriculum 2005 that explicitly described 
outcome-based education as the way the new curriculum would be 
implemented. Curriculum 2005 was begun in grade 1 in 1998, and 
in grade 7 in 2000. And in 2000, the Minister of Education appointed 
a committee to review and revise Curriculum 2005. Curriculum 

Education Reform in South Africa 83
2005 was revised to “streamline” the document and add specificity. 
The revised Curriculum 2005 provides outcomes and assessment 
standards by grade level, as well as examples of assessments and 
ways to organize learner data for teachers. What seems to be miss-
ing from the Curriculum 2005 document is a strong expectation for 
the professional development necessary for teachers to be able to 
organize their teaching to meet the learner outcomes and to design 
assessments that document the attainment of the outcomes. 
 William Spady himself criticized the South African imple-
mentation of outcome-based education. In a 2007 “letter” to the 
country published in the South African Journal for Science and Tech-
nology , Spady argued that there had been little understanding of 
or agreement with the basic notions of outcome-based education 
in South Africa. He asserted that little had happened to address 
the misunderstanding of outcome-based education between the 
time it was adopted in 1997 and 2007, and he called for South 
Africa to stop referring to outcome-based education. 
 South Africa faces a number of issues external to the schools 
that serve as barriers to ensuring high-quality education. Besides 
the social issues related to the ending of apartheid and official 
racial segregation, and to the beginning of a new, more inclu-
sive government, there continue to be high levels of violence in 
schools, particularly sexual violence against girls, and high num-
bers of children who either are infected with HIV/AIDS or are 
affected by HIV/AIDS in their families. 
 Human Rights Watch (2001) investigated alleged cases of 
rape, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment in South African 
schools in 2000, as well as the government’s response to gender 
violence in schools. The Human Rights Watch researchers found 
a high prevalence of sexual violence against girls in schools, 
both by other students and by teachers, and few efforts to ad-
dress this sexual violence or to punish the perpetrators. Indeed, 
girls who had been victims of such violence were often ridiculed 
at their schools, and administrators did very little to support 
them when they returned to school after reporting sexual vio-
lence. Human Rights Watch found that these girls’ experiences 
of sexual violence affected their school performance, up to and 
including leaving school, because of feeling unsafe there. The re-
searchers found that there was no national and little provincial 
or school policy that was aimed at addressing sexual violence, 
nor was there any systematic monitoring of sexual violence in 
schools. 

84 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
 South Africa also has the highest incidence of HIV and AIDS 
of any country in the world (Human Rights Watch 2001). Six mil-
lion of its 44 million people are infected with HIV, and according 
to a 2005 article in the Los Angeles Times , 40 percent of childhood 
deaths are the result of HIV and AIDS. At the Soweto primary 
school described in the article, one of every 10 children was 
orphaned due to their parents’ deaths from HIV/AIDS. Many 
of those orphans were also abandoned by their relatives to live 
on the street. Schools are left to deal with the affects of HIV and 
AIDs that include orphaned children living in extreme poverty, 
children who do not attend school because of the affects of HIV 
and AIDS, children who are gravely ill attending school, teachers 
who are infected with HIV and AIDS, and even having to take the 
responsibility for funerals of children or parents who die of HIV 
and AIDS. 
 Even though equity is one of the goals of the national educa-
tion system in South Africa, great disparity continues to character-
ize the schools. The majority of children attend schools that serve 
predominantly or exclusively one race, mainly because of tradi-
tional residential segregation. Because most of the schools levy 
fees, there is still great financial inequity. The poorest children, 
those whose families cannot afford to pay fees, attend schools that 
are underfunded, while the most affluent children attend schools 
where high fees support smaller class sizes, better teachers, and 
more resources for learning. 
 In 2006, the South African government instituted some 
“no-fee” schools, schools that were exempted by the Minister of 
Education from charging fees. In 2006, according to the South Af-
rican Department of Education, there were 7,800 “no-fee” schools 
that served about 2.5 million children; in 2007, the number of chil-
dren eligible for “no-fee” schools was increased to 5 million, and 
schools in more affluent areas were to be reimbursed for children 
whose families could not afford to pay the schools’ fees (Gabade 
2006).
 In 2007, Statistics South Africa estimated the population of 
the country to be 47.9 million. People in South Africa are tra-
ditionally divided into four racial groups—White, African, 
Colored (mixed race), and Indian/Asian. The majority of the 
population—79.6 percent—is African (Black); 9.1 percent of the 
population is White; 8.9 percent is Colored; and 2.5 percent is 
Indian/Asian. Currently, there are 11 official languages in South 
Africa—Afrikaans, English, IsiNdebele, IsiXhosa, IsiZulu, Sepedi,

Education Reform in Finland 85
Sesotho, Setswana, SiSwati, Tshivenda, and Xitsonga (South Af-
rica’s Population 2008). Statistics from the International Mone-
tary Fund list the 2007 GDP of South Africa at $282.630 million, 
and the per capita GDP at $5,906.491. In 2005, South Africa’s total 
spending of public funds on education was 5.3 percent of its GDP 
(UNESCO 2007). 
 While South Africa has been working since the end of apart-
heid to improve the quality of its schools and the learning of its 
students, international comparisons show that South African stu-
dents rank at the bottom of the countries included in both TIMSS 
and PIRLS. South African eighth grade students’ mathematics 
performance ranked 38th — last—of the 38 countries in the 1999 
TIMSS study, with an average score of 275; in 2003, they ranked 
45th of the 45 countries in the study, with an average score of 264, 
significantly below 1999. In the 2006 PIRLS, South African fourth 
grade students ranked last of the 45 countries included in the 
study; South Africa had not participated in the previous PIRLS 
study. 
 Education Reform in Finland 
 In all international comparisons of student achievement in read-
ing, mathematics, and science, student scores from Finland rank 
at the top. Ninety-nine percent of Finns are literate, and the school 
dropout rate in Finland is lower than 5 percent (Finkelstein 1995; 
Sahlberg 2006). Education is, according to many sources, a prior-
ity for the country, and Finland has by many accounts the finest 
school system in the world. 
 Finland’s history is one of control from outside—alternatively 
by Sweden and Russia—and for Finland, being totally indepen-
dent is a relatively recent development. But according to Andrew 
Hargreaves, Gábor Halász, and Beatriz Pont (2007), “Finns are 
driven by a common and articulately expressed social vision 
that connects a creative and prosperous future . . . to the people’s 
sense of themselves as having a creative history and social iden-
tity” (p. 12). The country has one of the strongest economies in the 
world, with a GDP in 2007 of $245,013 million and an estimated 
per capita income of $46,601.865. Finland’s public expenditures 
on education in 2005 totaled 6 percent of its GDP. The strength of 
the Finnish economy is notable particularly because it represents 
a recovery from near financial collapse in the 1990s. But Finland is 

86 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
not just about technology and making money; its social identity is 
also grounded in the arts and lifelong learning. 
 The Finnish education system today is the result of the tradi-
tion of free compulsory public education for all that was written 
into Finland’s 1919 constitution. Children in Finland begin that 
compulsory primary education at age seven (later than any other 
developed country), although most recently, nearly 95 percent of 
all six-year-olds attend a noncompulsory preschool year (Sahl-
berg 2006). Since the early 1980s, education in Finland has been 
required for all children through age 17 or the completion of com-
prehensive school. 
 Primary schools in Finland extend through grade six, and 
lower secondary school includes grades seven through nine, with 
an optional 10th year available to students who wish to improve 
their academic preparation for upper secondary school. At the end 
of lower secondary school, children have the option of attending 
upper secondary school in a general education program, generally 
about three years, or a three-year basic vocational education that 
includes both general education and vocational training. According 
to Sahlberg (2006), more than 95 percent of the students completing 
compulsory education continue their educations beyond the ninth 
grade, continuing on to upper secondary school or the optional 
10th year. The education options beyond compulsory education are 
designed to allow students to move from one to the other, should 
they desire to do so. Interestingly, even though upper secondary 
education is not compulsory, nearly all Finnish children complete 
one of the programs. 
 The upper secondary program is nongraded; that is, students 
do not attend classes organized by age-cohort. Rather, there is a 
great deal of choice for students when it comes to determining the 
content and the sequencing of their own educational programs. 
Completion of 75 courses in 18 subjects is needed to earn an 
upper secondary school diploma; only six of those courses are re-
quired subjects. Sahlberg (2006) noted that 90 percent of students 
who begin vocational education and 98 percent of students who 
begin upper general education stay in school to complete their 
programs. At the end of the upper secondary school, nearly all 
general education students take a National Matriculation Exami-
nation; it is a high-stakes examination in that the results are used 
to determine entrance into post-secondary education. The test is 
open to students from the vocational program as well, but accord-
ing to Sahlberg, few of them actually take the test. Students who 

Education Reform in Finland 87
complete either the general education program or the vocational 
education program are eligible to go on to university or other 
post-secondary education that includes polytechnical schools. 
 Finland has national goals and standards for education, but 
it is left to local municipalities and individual schools and teach-
ers to develop curriculum that helps students meet the goals and 
standards. According to Lea Houtsonen (2005), the curriculum is 
“based on a conception of learning which states that learning is a 
result of a pupil’s active and focused actions aimed to process and 
interpret received information in interaction with other pupils, 
teachers and the environment” (p. 190). In other words, the Finnish 
instructional process is viewed as an active one, and the teacher’s 
role in that process is as a facilitator and mentor, guiding students 
through experiences and interactions that shape learning. No stan-
dardized tests are administered to students during the compul-
sory education years in Finland; assessment and documentation of 
student learning is the responsibility of teachers. Student achieve-
ment is not viewed as competitive, and schools are not ranked or 
rated publicly in any way based on student achievement. 
 Finnish students spend much less time in school than their 
counterparts in other countries. According to Lawrence Baines 
(2007), the average number of hours students in developed coun-
tries spend in public school in a school year is 701. Finnish stu-
dents, on the other hand, spend about 600 hours a school year in 
school. Students in the United States spend almost twice as much 
time in school—1,100 hours—as students in Finland. 
 Visitors to schools in Finland find teachers committed to the 
learning of their students and students engaged in learning—
learning that is creative, requires high levels of thinking, and is 
relaxed and collaborative; teachers and students are on a first-
name basis. The curriculum in Finnish schools includes “native 
language and literature, other languages, environmental study, 
civics, religion or ethics, history, social studies, mathematics, phys-
ics, chemistry, biology, geography, physical education, music, art, 
handicrafts, and home economics” (Korpela 2008). All students 
have religious instruction in their family’s religion as part of their 
school curriculum; however, students who are not part of a reli-
gious group are exempted from this instruction. They study eth-
ics instead. Many students participate in project-based learning 
that involves problems and issues in the real world outside their 
classrooms. But many others in Finland experience what might be 
considered conservative teaching techniques and strategies. 

88 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
 The Finnish commitment to a free public education that pro-
vides equal opportunities for all children extends to schools provid-
ing all of the necessary materials that children need to learn. Classes, 
especially at the primary school level, are typically small; many 
classrooms have fewer than 20 students, and primary schools aver-
age less than 300 students. This enables teachers and other school 
personnel to know each student personally and to have the time to 
intervene, should any learning difficulty arise. 
 All children in public schools are provided with free hot 
meals, school-based health care, and transportation to school if 
they live too far away to walk to school. Children with special 
learning needs are provided the support that they need in speech, 
reading, and mathematics. Interestingly, according to Sahlberg 
(2006), 40 percent of the students with special needs have such 
learning problems identified and addressed in primary school; by 
the time they reach lower secondary school, that percentage drops 
to 13 percent. In other words, early interventions are successful 
in helping students overcome those problems and go on without 
learning support. 
 Finland is a bilingual country; both Finnish and Swedish are 
its official languages, and instruction is provided in both of them. 
Students begin the study of a foreign language in their third year 
in school; instruction in the second official language (either Finn-
ish or Swedish) begins in the seventh year of school. Instruction in 
Finnish as a second language is provided to immigrant students 
in Finland. These students participate in instruction in their own 
first language as well, because the Finns believe that proficiency 
in a child’s native language helps them to learn Finnish and Swed-
ish (Korpela 2008). 
 Teachers are highly respected in Finland, and they have high 
levels of autonomy and freedom in developing lessons and in 
teaching students. Korpela (2008) stated that “the Finnish system 
is based on a culture of trust, not on control, and teachers are ac-
tive in developing their own work. With their own work, they set 
an example of lifelong learning” (p. 3). Teachers select their own 
books and determine the lessons that will meet the needs of each 
student. They also work collaboratively, designing curriculum 
and planning instruction (Gamerman 2008). 
 The quality of the teaching force in Finland is no accident. 
“Public education is seen as vital to the country’s growth and secu-
rity, and the shared high regard for educators who are seen as cen-
tral to this generational mission, draws highly qualified candidates 

Education Reform in Finland 89
into the teaching profession” (Hargreaves, Halász, and Pont 2007, 
14). A master’s degree is required to enter the teaching profession, 
and teacher preparation programs are highly selective. According 
to W. Norton Grubb (2007), only about 10 percent of applicants 
are selected for teacher education. The curriculum of the teacher 
preparation program is standardized across the universities that 
provide it; in the four to five years it takes students to complete the 
program, they spend about half of each year in internships working 
with mentor teachers in classrooms. Pre-service teachers also learn 
how to develop curriculum so that they can participate actively in 
the curriculum process when they are working in schools (Hout-
sonen 2005). Finland invests in teacher candidates monetarily as 
well as in terms of high-quality preparation. University enrollment 
is free in Finland for students who qualify; teacher candidates are 
also paid while they are students. 
 The system of public education in Finland is decentralized, 
and decisions about individual schools are made locally. Prin-
cipals and teachers share governance of schools, and they view 
one another as colleagues and professionals. Principals must 
have been teachers before they become principals, and most 
principals continue to teach in classrooms even while they are 
principals. There is little hierarchy among the adults in Finnish 
schools (Korpela 2004). Students are also involved in governance 
and leadership, and they participate in developing action plans 
for reform at the school level. 
 Finland has been engaged in systemic reform of education 
since the 1970s, and, based on high levels of student achieve-
ment and participation in public education, that reform has been 
highly successful. Reform in Finland has progressed slowly and 
deliberately; it is integrally interwoven into the social and eco-
nomic fabric of the country. However, Finland is facing a number 
of challenges as a nation that have the potential to affect its edu-
cation system and the schools within it. One of these challenges 
is growth in diversity as membership in the European Union 
opens its borders to increased immigration; teachers and princi-
pals may need training to maintain the level of personal connec-
tion to students that characterizes their interaction with students 
when they work with a more diverse group of students. Another 
is the strain on the economy of Finland’s welfare state as baby 
boomers retire. Some schools are already beginning to feel the 
constraints of reduced resources. In their evaluation of Finland’s 
school leadership, Hargreaves, Halász, and Pont (2007) predict 

90 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
that the process that Finland has used to reform education since
the 1970s can serve the country well as its schools adjust to chang-
ing students and economic conditions, even as they make recom-
mendations for continued development of school leadership in 
Finland. 
 Probably the most important recommendation Hargreaves, 
Halász, and Pont (2007) make is not as much for Finland as it is 
for other countries working on education reform. The researchers 
suggest that Finland “articulate and share hitherto tacit knowl-
edge about Finland’s educational and economic success so that 
others can learn from it and it is organizationally more transfer-
able” (p. 33). 
 Education Reform in China 
 China is the world’s largest developing country, with a GDP in 
2007 of $3,250,827 million in U.S. dollars and a per capita GDP, 
according to the International Monetary Fund, of $2,460.786 (com-
pared to $45,845 in the United States), and it has the largest system 
of public education in the world. According to UNESCO (2007), in 
2005, there were 112,739,964 children enrolled in primary schools 
and 100,631,925 in secondary schools in China, not including 
Hong Kong and Macao (pp. 82, 102). No data are available regard-
ing the percentage of GDP that China spends on education. 
 The current system of education in China is the result of a 
series of reforms that have taken place over the last half-century 
as part of political and economic changes in China. Before 1949, 
education in China was available only to children of the elite; there 
was virtually no education for children of workers and peasants. 
By contrast, the UNESCO figures indicate that more than 99 per-
cent of primary school–age children are enrolled in school. 
 After China’s “Cultural Revolution,” which for all practical 
purposes dismantled the educational system from 1966 to 1976, 
education in China was redeveloped as a decentralized system. 
Since 1986, nine years of education has been compulsory in China. 
Although the law stipulated that the compulsory education be 
free for every citizen, funds were not allocated to support a free 
education. Funding for education was left up to local govern-
ments, and basic education, especially in rural areas, is funded 
by a mix of local revenues, donations, and income generated by 
tuition and commercial and industrial activities conducted by the 

Education Reform in China 91
schools (Cheng, 2004). The Chinese government announced in 
2006 that it intended to eliminate all fees for the nine years of com-
pulsory education for rural students by the end of 2007 (Xinhua 
News Agency 2006). 
 The decentralization of education funding, according to Iris 
Rotberg (2004), had positive and negative effects. On the posi-
tive side, the decentralization resulted in the generation of great 
local support for and ownership of education and schools, and 
enrollments increased greatly between the mid-1980s and mid-
1990s. On the negative side, the local funding of basic education 
resulted in great disparity in the levels of funding for schools, 
and great disparity in the quality of the schools and the educa-
tion children experienced in the schools. In 1988, the national 
government allowed local governments and schools to develop 
their own curricula and textbooks, creating even more diversity 
in Chinese schools. 
 Compulsory education in China is configured to include 
six years of primary school and three years of junior secondary 
school. Students can continue beyond the nine years of compul-
sory education to three years of senior secondary school if they 
qualify. To be able to attend senior secondary school, students 
must pass locally developed entrance examinations before they 
are admitted. Because of the decentralization, however, some 
regions have five years of primary school and three or four years 
of junior secondary school. There are also some urban schools that 
offer an additional year of senior secondary school to extend and 
enhance student learning at that level. 
 The latest reform in Chinese education began in the mid-
1990s and led to the publication of new guidelines for curricu-
lum, with the latest version completed in 2002. The reform has 
four purposes: further decentralization of the education system; 
a move from an “examination-oriented” education to what the 
Chinese Ministry of Education called a “quality education”; an 
increase in the amount of pre-service education required for new 
teachers and in the amount of education in teaching techniques; 
and more professional development for practicing teachers. 
 The decentralization, according to Betty Preus (2007), in-
cludes encouragement for local and state governments and 
teachers to develop and select textbooks. She reports, “China 
is also encouraging curriculum development at the state, local, 
and school levels and promoting a more flexible curriculum with 
choices for students” (p. 116). The Chinese reform agenda calls 

92 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
for local development of assessments that match and are aligned 
with locally developed curricula, rather than the standardized 
tests that have been used in the past. 
 Allowing choices for students also represents a shift in instruc-
tion. Chinese education has traditionally been teacher-directed, 
knowledge-based, and passive. Teachers make decisions about 
the knowledge children need, they provide that knowledge, and 
children “receive” and memorize that knowledge. The “quality 
education” promoted by the current reform is an effort to change 
instruction in schools from being teacher-directed to being learner-
centered, to teaching practices that develop the whole child; that 
offer opportunities for hands-on learning; and that foster creativ-
ity, choice, and practical knowledge. 
 The call for reform is comprehensive and includes signifi-
cant changes in teacher preparation. The new initiative requires 
that teacher preparation programs be increased in the short term 
to three years and eventually to four years. Teacher preparation 
programs have traditionally focused on developing the pre-
service teachers’ content knowledge—science, mathematics, or 
history, for example. That focus has shifted, and teacher prepara-
tion programs are including much more work on learning and 
practicing teaching strategies that support “quality education.” 
Teacher preparation programs are modeling the kinds of teaching 
that the reform is promoting. University programs are working 
to build connections between university programs and schools, 
and pre-service teachers are having opportunities to practice 
the new teaching strategies they are learning in classrooms with 
students.
 The reform initiative also includes changes in professional 
development for practicing teachers. Teachers in Chinese schools 
have traditionally been organized into teacher research groups 
that include both beginning and experienced teachers as well as 
pre-service teachers; the research groups have met on a regular 
basis to discuss ways to teach their subject areas. The focus of 
these research groups is changing from how to teach subjects to 
how to use new teaching strategies. 
 Chinese policy makers designed the “quality education” re-
form to reflect what they believe are the strengths of the educa-
tional system in the United States, the development of creativity 
and innovation. The Chinese authorities believe it is creativity 
and the ability to innovate that put and keeps the United States 
ahead in the global economy. Aibe Chen, associate professor 

Education Reform in China 93
and deputy director of the Department of Educational Admin-
istration at the Beijing Institute of Education, visited schools in 
the United States in 2001 to observe teachers and to learn about 
how U.S. children learn to be creative and to solve problems. In 
an interview with staffers of the Kappa Delta Pi Record, Chen 
acknowledged that while teachers and principals in China talk 
about “quality-oriented education,” what is going on in their 
schools is “exam-oriented education.” She said, “I know that we 
can find out what we need from schools in the United States and 
from your new education theory and practice. I want to intro-
duce them to China to help our reform efforts” (Kappa Delta Pi 
Record 2002). 
 While there are many reports on the success of China’s edu-
cational reform, China has not participated in TIMSS or PIRLS, 
and there are no data available that compare the academic per-
formance of Chinese students to that of the rest of the world. 
Not all observers of education reform in China agree that the 
reforms there are succeeding. Willy Lam, an education policy 
analyst, wondered about China’s real commitment to education 
reform as well as its ability to make it happen, arguing that in 
many of the western provinces of the country, there is not even a 
high-quality basic education available, much less opportunities 
for secondary education. According to Lam (2006), these schools 
depend on donations from foreign countries “to keep their 
poorly equipped schools running.” Schooling comes after and is 
often supported by agriculture in some of these provinces, and 
“it is not uncommon for administrators in poor remote areas 
to ask students to . . . [spend] several hours a week working 
in factories” (p. 7). Lam (2006) also noted that there are other 
economic and cultural factors that impede the implementation 
of reform. Qualified teachers are reluctant to teach in rural areas 
where schools are poorly equipped and where there are few 
other qualified teachers. There is also gender discrimination, 
evidenced by parents who often do not send their daughters to 
school. 
 It is interesting to note that the reforms promoted for educa-
tion in China and those in the United States are opposites. Accord-
ing to Preus (2007), as China has worked and is working toward 
learner-centered and decentralized education, the United States 
policy in No Child Left Behind is embracing the centralization 
and standardization that the Chinese believe is an impediment to 
their progress in the global economy. 

94 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
 Education Reform in France 
 France has a well-developed economy. According to the Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, France’s 2007 GDP was $2,252,108 million. 
That translates into a per capita GDP of $41,511.154, clearly among 
the highest in the world. In 2005, France spent public funds on 
education totaling 5.4 percent of its GDP. 
 The education system in France has historically been a cen-
tralized one, reflected in the concept of equality,  egalité, which 
has been a foundation of the country since the French Revolu-
tion. Even before the Revolution, “French” has not just been an 
indicator of national identity or citizenship. It also represents a 
cultural orientation, a legal identity, and a historical context. 
“French” under the law in France assumes that every citizen be 
treated identically, and “French” assumes a homogenous cultural 
perspective. Indeed, immigrants to France have been expected to 
assimilate and to adopt that cultural perspective, and schools his-
torically have been a key element in that assimilation. 
 The school system in France is administered from the cen-
tral Ministry of National Education, a cabinet-level agency in the 
national government, through a set of regional  académies , admin-
istrative units that oversee schools in their regions. The heads of 
the académies  are appointed by the Minister of Education, and the 
académies  are funded through contract with the Ministry of Edu-
cation. School development and reform are still “dominated” by 
national decisions, and an administrative reform of education in 
France has begun with the national government devolving some 
of the responsibility for oversight of education to the  academies
(Bonnet 2004). Most administrative responsibilities, however, are 
reserved for the national Ministry, including the hiring, adminis-
tration, evaluation, and dismissal of the teaching staff, typically 
managed through the  académies . 
 A national curriculum is used in all schools, both public and 
private. The curriculum specifies the subjects to be taught at each 
level of schooling, and teachers select textbooks from a list that 
has been approved by the Ministry of Education. In recent years, 
there has been some local adaptation of the national curriculum, 
according to Gerard Bonnet (2004), from the Department of As-
sessment and Forecasting in the French Ministry of Education, 
and teachers have considerable autonomy in determining how to 
teach.

Education Reform in France 95
 Children begin school as preschoolers; preschool education 
is provided free of charge to all children from age two to age six. 
(In practice, most children begin preschool at age three; there are 
not enough places in publicly funded preschools for all two-year-
olds.) Paul O’Brien (2007), an OECD staffer and the author of a 
working paper about the French education system, noted that 
by the 1990s, 100 percent of three-year-olds were enrolled in pre-
school. There has been a national curriculum for preschool since 
1995; that curriculum includes beginning reading instruction. 
Compulsory education in France, however, does not begin until 
age six, when children enter primary or elementary school for 
grades one through five. After elementary school, children attend 
the lower secondary school or collège  for four years, typically until 
age 15, although O’Brien (2007) noted that nearly one in three stu-
dents has repeated at least one year of schooling up to this point 
and is older than 15. Compulsory education continues through 
age 16, which means that many students who complete collège
must continue on for at least one year in the lycée . Students attend 
either a general and technological lycée  or a vocational  lycée , both 
of which provide a three-year program. 
 Traditionally in France, schools have been open six days a 
week, with no classes on Wednesday and Saturday classes meet-
ing only in the morning. Recently, some schools have adjusted 
their schedules to eliminate classes on Saturday. 
 While children are in elementary school, teachers have the re-
sponsibility of assessing their progress periodically and continu-
ously, but no high-stakes tests are administered. At the beginning 
of the school year, all eight-year-olds and 11-year-olds are admin-
istered national diagnostic tests to provide information for teach-
ers as a basis for planning instruction, and samples of students are 
selected to participate in end-of-the-year testing. Fifteen-year-olds 
take a national test, and their scores on the test along with their 
grades from the two previous years make up their  diplôme national 
du brevet.  The  brevet , once a credential required for continuing on 
into the lycée , is mostly a formality and no longer necessary for 
entrance into the lycée.
 Students sit for a high-stakes national examination at the end 
of the lycée.  This examination is the  baccalauréat , or  bac , as it is popu-
larly called. There are three different types of  baccalauréat . There is 
a general baccalauréat,  usually for students going on to higher edu-
cation; the baccalauréat technologique  and the  baccalauréat profession-
elle  can lead either to higher education or to employment. O’Brien 

96 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
(2007) noted that about 63 percent of French students have earned 
the bac  in recent years; according to the Web site of the French Min-
istry of Education, in 2007, 54 percent of the students who passed 
the bac  earned the general credential, 26 percent earned the tech-
nological, and 20 percent earned the professional. All three of the 
bacs  entitle students to enter public universities in France. Because 
the baccalauréats  are high-stakes tests, the curriculum in the  lycées
is geared toward preparing students for the tests. 
 There has been an effort in France to improve students’ per-
formance on the bac , and as in the United States, the press is eager 
to report on the tests. In July 2007,  le Figaro  reported that for the 
third year in a row, the percentage of students who passed the  bac
had increased. Of the 626,000 students who took the tests in 2007, 
83.3 percent or 521,000 earned the credential. According to the 
article, the increase in the numbers of students passing the  bac is 
an indication of the improving quality of French schools. 
 In France, besides the public schools, there are semiprivate 
schools, most of them parochial (Roman Catholic) schools. These 
schools also conform to the national regulations governing educa-
tion, and they are funded almost entirely with public funds. The 
schools are required to use the national curriculum, and most of 
the teachers, like their counterparts in public, secular schools, are 
civil servants paid by the national government. There are also a 
very small number of schools that are truly private. These schools, 
which operate without any public funding, are not required to 
conform to national education regulations. The roster of private 
schools in France also includes about 450 schools referred to as 
écoles hors contrat , literally schools outside the contract, which 
have been founded by parents or teachers to offer curriculums 
or teaching methods that are different from those offered by the 
public schools ( Le Figaro  2008a). The number of these small  écoles , 
according to the newspaper article, is growing. 
 Education reform in France has generally consisted of admin-
istrative reform in the form of decentralization. According to Bon-
net, the decentralization has not been very successful at the school 
level, since schools are not very strong as institutions. School per-
sonnel, especially in the elementary schools where there are no 
administrators on site, are not organized to make decisions or 
lead organizational or curricular changes. So even though the 
Ministry of Education has given the schools some authority to 
make changes, very little has changed in terms of the authority 
and autonomy of local schools. 

Education Reform in France 97
 School improvement efforts at the national level that began 
in 1982 identified education priority zones, Zones d’éducation pri-
oritaire  (ZEPs), geographic areas where schools show poor perfor-
mance. The policy was updated in 1998 when education priority 
networks, Réseaux d’éducation prioritaire  (REPs), were created to 
extend the benefits of such identification to additional schools. 
Schools identified as ZEPs and REPs are allocated more resources, 
including smaller class size; develop individual education plans 
for students; and offer incentives for teachers who are willing to 
teach in them, including higher pay and accelerated career devel-
opment (O’Brien 2007). According to O’Brien (2007), in 2004 about 
one in five students in lower secondary schools, the collèges , were 
enrolled in a school that was either in a ZEP or a REP. O’Brien also 
reported that being named to the status of either ZEP or REP has 
stigmatized schools, and the program has shown very little effect 
in raising student achievement. 
 In 2006, the Ministry of Education again revised school im-
provement efforts to identify, among schools considered to be 
performing poorly, three different levels of need for improve-
ment. Additional resources are allocated to these schools based on 
their levels of need for improvement. Along with some increased 
accountability for outcomes that are identified by the schools, the 
new policy allows schools to experiment with new teaching meth-
ods. The program, initiated during the 2006–2007 school year, 
has not been in force long enough to measure its effects (O’Brien 
2007).
 In recent years there have also been some efforts to improve 
student achievement in the form of helping struggling students to 
succeed at schools that are not part of ZEPs or REPs. Beginning in 
the 2006–2007 school year, for example, the Ministry of Education 
began the phase-in of an initiative called programmes personnaliseés 
de réussite éducative  (personal programs for education success) at 
the elementary and collège  levels. This program allows for the 
development of an individualized education plan for each child 
who is at risk (Ministre d’Education Nationale 2006). 
 All of this centralization results in a system of education that 
is standardized throughout the country, which clearly fits with 
the principle of equality traditionally espoused by the French 
and woven throughout the fabric of society in France. That tra-
ditional principle has been interpreted in public policy to mean 
that all people should be treated as if they were the same and had 
the same needs. “Cultural diversity,” according to Guy Tchibozo 

98 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
(2005), a professor at Louis Pasteur University in Strasbourg and 
educational researcher, “has long been ignored in public policies, 
especially in education policy” (p. 515). 
 Since 1993 and the establishment of the European Union, 
however, the population of France in general, and the school popu-
lation in particular, has become far more diverse. Public policy in 
France has been slow to recognize the diversity, and slower yet to 
promote any changes in national policy or in schools to account 
for the diversity. An example of France’s pace to address diversity 
is its response to the European Council’s recognition of the legiti-
macy of regional languages. In 1998, countries in the European 
Council ratified the European Council Charter for Regional or 
Minority Languages. Although France was a signer of the char-
ter, the French Constitution prohibited France from fully ratifying 
the charter or acting on it. It wasn’t until 10 years later that the 
French Constitution was revised (in July 2008), and a new article, 
Article 75–1, was added to recognize officially regional languages 
in France. 
 Further evidence of France’s position toward diversity is 
shown in its dealings with its increasing Muslim population. Ac-
cording to Patrick Simon (2003), from the French  Institut national 
d’études démographique,  the number of Muslims in France has tri-
pled since 1994, with currently about 6 percent of the population 
identifying themselves as Muslim. The visibility of Muslims in 
France has become a political and educational issue, brought to 
the fore by a controversy over girls wearing the traditional head-
scarf in schools. French law bans any outward symbols of religion 
in schools, as part of its efforts toward public secularism. In 1989, 
an exception to that ban was approved so that Muslim girls could 
attend school wearing headscarves. That exception had been 
debated for more than 10 years when, in 2004, France adopted 
a new law that reinstated the ban. Members of the commission 
that recommended the reinstatement of the ban did so based on 
the belief that “the French educational system should be a neutral 
environment where the principles of secularism, republicanism, 
and citizenship are taught and reflected” (Hamilton, Simon, and 
Veniard 2004). 
 France’s efforts at education reform have not produced sig-
nificant improvement. According to UNESCO (2007) figures, in 
2005 there were 4,015,490 children enrolled in primary schools 
in France, and 6,036,192 students enrolled in secondary schools. 
Data from the Program for International Student Assessment 

Education Reform in Chile 99
(PISA) conducted in 2006 rank French 15-year-olds 19th in sci-
ence and 17th in mathematics and reading of the 57 countries that 
participated in the test. (See Table 4 in Chapter 6 for more infor-
mation.) In the two latest PIRLS (Progress in International Read-
ing Literacy Study) conducted in 2001 and 2006, average scores of 
French fourth graders who took the test were 535 in 2001 and 522 
in 2006. The 2006 scores ranked 27th and significantly below the 
average of the countries that participated in the test. According to 
a report on the reading progress of French children reported in  le
Figaro  (2008b), 21.7 percent of French fourth graders had difficulty 
with the test, significantly more than in the previous administra-
tion of the same test. 
 Tchibozo (2005) speculated that France’s reluctance to address 
diversity in schools may be one of the reasons that there are schools 
and children who are not succeeding academically. He attributes 
that reluctance to the French perspective on equality. According to 
him, it is not that French teachers haven’t wanted to be bothered 
with accounting for cultural differences. He speculates that “taking 
into account cultural differences at school might have been per-
ceived as a sign of inequity among pupils and students” (p. 515). 
Thus, even though France has become and is continuing to become 
more diverse, schools have yet to respond either in terms of pro-
viding more culturally appropriate teaching or in terms of support-
ing learning in their first languages. 
 Education Reform in Chile 
 In Chile, education reform has been in process for a number 
of years, and other Latin American countries have looked to 
Chile’s reform as a model of what could be done to reform 
education. There have been two major education reform initia-
tives in Chile’s recent history, both of which are still influencing 
the schools, and both of which, according to Robert McMeekin 
(2004), a researcher at the Center for Education Research and 
Development in Santiago, Chile, have had significant effects 
on teaching and on children and their learning. Yet another 
wave of reform is on the horizon, as Chile’s new president Mi-
chelle Bachelet signed a new General Law of Education in 2007 
that replaced the 1990  Ley Orgánica Constitucional de Enseñanza
(L.O.C.E.) that codified education reforms enacted under Gen-
eral Augusto Pinochet. 

100 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
 The first wave of education reform in Chile took place dur-
ing Pinochet’s military government that was in power from 
1973 to 1990. The reform during this period, enacted in 1980, 
was part of the “modernization” imposed on Chile by the mili-
tary government that affected seven areas of Chile’s society, 
including education, labor policies, and decentralization. The 
education “modernization” included several major initiatives: 
(1) a decentralization of the administration of public schools 
from the country’s Ministry of Education to local authorities; 
(2) competition between private and public schools; (3) a na-
tionwide voucher system financed through grants to public and 
private schools based on attendance; (4) revocation of teachers’ 
civil service status; and (5) a national testing system to moni-
tor the quality of schools (McMeekin 2004; Delannoy 2000). The 
modernization, according to Francoise Delannoy (2000), edu-
cation specialist at the World Bank, was “driven by efficiency 
concerns: the search for greater responsiveness to local needs 
through market mechanisms,” but the reforms also served to 
“fragment” and limit the power of labor unions. 
 Andrea Arango (2008), a research associate of the Council 
on Hemispheric Affairs, reported that when the decentralization 
took place, the federal contribution to education was reduced 
by 18 percent, forcing local municipalities to allocate local funds 
for schools. Wealthier municipalities could afford to fund their 
schools at higher levels than poorer ones, and the level of inequity 
that resulted has never been alleviated. 
 Because the reforms were enacted in the context of the Pinochet 
dictatorship, there was no opportunity for public debate and little 
public opposition to them—public opposition and dissent were 
not allowed during this time. But Delannoy (2000) argued that the 
way the reforms were enforced created resistance among the very 
people who were required to implement them—the teachers. At 
the same time that they were being asked to serve as enactors of the 
reform efforts, teachers found their salaries declining in the decade 
between 1980 and 1990 to about one-half of what they had been, 
and their working conditions were also declining. The teachers’ 
salaries declined partly because Chile experienced an economic 
recession during this time, but also partly because of the reform. 
 Under the voucher system, still in force today, children are 
allowed to attend either public schools or private schools that are 
subsidized by the government. There is also the freedom to choose 
whether to attend a school in the children’s own neighborhood or 

Education Reform in Chile 101
a school in another location, although there are no subsidies for 
transportation. Poor children whose families cannot afford to pay 
for transportation are forced to attend the schools in their own 
neighborhoods, regardless of their quality. Voucher payments go 
directly to the schools, public or private. The payments cover the 
full cost of education and are based on monthly attendance at the 
schools. Opponents of voucher plans often predict the demise of 
public schools, but in Chile that has not been the case. According 
to McMeekin (2004), “Even though private voucher-paid education
provides 40 percent of voucher-supported primary and second-
ary education in Chile, municipally provided public education 
still accommodates over one-half of total enrollment” of primary 
and secondary school children (p. 88). 
 A democratic government was elected in 1990, and with that 
government came a new set of priorities for education that purport-
edly included equity and quality. The new government negotiated 
with the teachers, and in 1991, the labor policies of the Pinochet 
government that affected teachers were reversed. Teachers’ salaries 
and working conditions were once again negotiated at the national 
level and tenure was restored. 
 The new government also began investing in teachers’ pro-
fessional training and in classrooms. The World Bank, in col-
laboration with the Chilean government, supported programs 
that supplied textbooks and classroom libraries, and profes-
sional development was provided that helped teachers to learn 
new teaching methods and strategies to network with their col-
leagues. Part of the World Bank–funded initiative was a program 
of competitive grants for school improvement plans, and many 
of the schools took advantage of this opportunity to work toward 
school improvement. 
 According to Delannoy (2000), all of this work helped to cre-
ate a context of support among educators for the next round of 
reform, the “Full Day School” reform, which was enacted in 1996. 
This reform included four “pillars”—an extended school day, a 
new curriculum framework, teacher professionalism, and second-
ary school innovation. 
 Extending the school day meant that schools could no lon-
ger operate two shifts, and teachers would have to teach full time 
in one school rather than teach in different shifts at two or more 
schools. The reform initiative also included policy for developing 
the infrastructure necessary to eliminate double shifts—building 
new schools, for example. 

102 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
 The new curriculum includes objectives and minimum stan-
dards for primary and secondary schools; it was phased in and is 
now in place in Chile’s schools. According to McMeekin (2004), 
the curriculum was operational in all schools and all subject areas 
by 2003. The national assessment, SIMCE, was revised to align 
with the new curriculum. 
 The teacher professionalism provisions of the new reform 
extended the professional development initiated soon after the 
democratic government took office in 1990. This area of the re-
form provides improved teacher preparation as well as profes-
sional development for in-service teachers. As part of the reform, 
teacher salaries increased more than 100 percent in real value over 
what they were in 1990 (McMeekin 2004). 
 Since 2003, children in Chile have been required to attend 
primary and secondary school; education is compulsory from age 
five through age 18. Currently, children may attend preschool, but 
the law to guarantee fully funded preschool for children ages two 
to five will not take effect until the end of Bachelet’s presidency. 
Primary school begins at age five; it consists of eight grades. Sec-
ondary school is four years, and it is divided into two different for-
mats beginning in 11th grade. One format is a scientific-humanities 
curriculum; students in this program select an academic major in 
science or humanities, and their courses in 11th and 12th grades 
reflect that major. The other format is technical-professional educa-
tion; this program offers students the opportunity to take courses 
in trades such as mechanics and electricity to prepare them for 
work. 
 Ten percent of schoolchildren in Chile attend private schools 
that do not benefit from government funding. These schools are 
tuition-funded; they typically charge 10 times (or more) the per-
pupil grant that publicly funded schools receive, obviously result-
ing in a huge disparity between private schools and those funded 
by the government. According to the  Economist  (2007), the educa-
tion reform enacted and announced by President Bachelet includes 
a new superintendency at the national level; the person in that po-
sition will oversee the grants that fund the schools. “The superin-
tendency should shine light on how local governments spend their 
education grants, and whether these reach the poorest schools.” 
There has been considerable criticism of private, voucher-funded 
schools profiting from providing education, and the new reform 
requires that all government-funded private schools be operated 
by nonprofit organizations. As a further measure to address equity, 

Lessons to be Learned 103
this latest reform also prohibits schools that are publicly funded 
from selecting students by ability until they reach age 11; before 
this prohibition, publicly funded schools could set their own crite-
ria for entrance and often were not willing to enroll children per-
ceived to be slower learners. 
 In spite of the reform efforts to improve schools in Chile, the 
inequities of the education system have been documented in a wide 
variety of sources ( Economist  2007; Claude 2008; Delannoy 2000). 
Those sources attribute the inequities to the decentralization and 
the voucher system. Arango’s (2008) analysis of the current state of 
Chile’s schools was that “Chilean education offers inherently un-
equal opportunities for students from low-income families, who 
consistently experience sub-standard educational achievements 
as a result of an ongoing bias in favor of privatization measures.” 
Arango (2008) expresses concern that Bachelet’s reform falls short 
of providing the equity and quality that children in Chile deserve, 
and she recommends that Bachelet “reassess the structure of Chile’s 
education system and strive for a long-term overhaul of Pinochet-
era divisions between rich and poor families.” 
 The International Monetary Fund reported that Chile’s 2007 
GDP was $4,163,792 million; the per capita GDP for Chile was 
estimated to be $9,879.094. In 2005, Chile reported spending pub-
lic funds equal to 3.3 percent of its GDP on education. UNESCO 
reports the enrollment of primary students in Chile in 2005 to be 
1,720,951, and the enrollment of secondary students of 1,630,099, 
for a total of 3,351,050 students in Chile’s primary and second-
ary schools. In the 2003 Trends in International Mathematics and 
Science Study, eighth grade scores from Chile ranked 38th out of 
the 44 countries that participated in the study, and well below the 
average score. Only Morocco, the Philippines, Botswana, Saudi 
Arabia, Ghana, and South Africa scored lower than Chile (Gonza-
les et al. 2004). Chile has come a long way in terms of education 
policy and is working to develop the infrastructure for academic 
achievement, but the Chilean education system has a long way to 
go to ensure that all children in Chile have the high-quality educa-
tion that they deserve. 
 Lessons to be Learned 
 Each of the countries whose education reform efforts are described 
here faces very different economic and contextual issues, as well 

104 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
as different reform processes. Rotberg (2005a) argues that it is im-
portant to understand a country’s education reform efforts within 
that country’s economic and social context. According to her, “A 
country’s priorities, values, and economic status ultimately play 
a major role in determining whether reforms can be implemented 
as planned” (p. 611). 
 Merilee Grindle (2004) noted that it is also important to under-
stand the political context of reforms. She says, 
 The task of moving from a recognition of problems and 
solutions to a situation in which political decision mak-
ers are willing to consider taking action to resolve them 
is not simply a matter of demonstrating the nature of the 
problem. For reform to get on national political agendas 
for action, it must have political salience as an issue and 
influential voices to promote it. (p. 44) 
 In other words, without political involvement, education 
reform issues do not rise to the level of national action. Grindle 
speculates that economic, social, and political factors came to-
gether around the world relative to education as a factor in the 
global economy in the 1990s, and she cites as evidence the emer-
gence of education reform initiatives in every region of the world 
at that time. 
 In spite of the differences in social, economic, and political 
context among the countries involved in education reform, how-
ever, there is much that can be learned from the experiences of 
other countries. Rotberg (2005) says that there are “key trends” in 
global education reform, and how those trends are playing out in 
education reform can provide valuable lessons about how educa-
tion systems can be improved. The trends she identifies involve 
educational equity, control of education, accountability, learn-
ing environments, and access to education. Other issues that can 
provide lessons in education reform include the preparation and 
professional development of teachers and the capacity of teachers 
and school leaders to make and sustain changes. 
 Lesson 1. Educational Equity 
 Most countries work to address equity in their education systems 
as part of education reform. But social, economic, and political 
contexts define equity and influence how equity is planned for 

Lessons to be Learned 105
and achieved. In South Africa, equity is a basic premise of the post-
apartheid reform, not only for education but also for the govern-
ment and the society. To begin to undo the inequities of apartheid, 
the government redistributed public funding and other resources 
for education, taking them away from some schools and giving 
them to others. At the same time, in an effort to keep more affluent 
children from leaving the public schools, the new government has 
allowed parents to make contributions to their children’s schools. 
South Africa also has designated a large group of schools “fee 
free.” These schools may not charge their students fees, and the 
government provides a higher level of financial support to them 
to make up for the loss of student fees. 
 In France, the principle of  égalité  means treating all citizens 
as if they are the same. Public funding for education is the same 
for all children whether they attend public or semiprivate schools. 
But for schools that are at risk, France provides additional funds 
and resources through its ZEPs and REPs. 
 In China, increasing equity means, at least in part, ensuring 
that all children have access to education. This has not always 
been the case, and there are still areas of China where access is 
limited because of extreme poverty. China’s Ministry of Educa-
tion announced “fee free” schools for children in rural areas where 
parents cannot afford to pay to send their children to school. 
 Chile has a voucher system that allows parents to choose from 
among an array of public and private schools for their children; the 
government pays the schools directly based on attendance. This 
voucher system was designed to improve access to schools and 
increase equity. Current reforms are aimed at improving equity by 
restricting schools’ selective enrollment and requiring that schools 
be run by nonprofit organizations. 
 In the United States, the basic premise of the Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act has always been to provide compensa-
tory education to children in poverty—to provide more educa-
tion to them to help make up for the effects of poverty on their 
education. Some states have voucher systems, and all states have 
charter schools that allow for parent choice of schools for their 
children. 
 Finland’s schools provide interventions for children with 
learning difficulties in the early grades. The result is that many of 
their learning difficulties are addressed successfully, and children 
go on to lower secondary school with no need for additional sup-
port. Finnish schools are bilingual, with instruction in Finnish and 

106 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
Swedish, and there is also instruction in children’s first languages 
if they are not Finnish or Swedish. 
 Lesson 2. Governance of Education 
 Many countries view the governance of education as an impor-
tant issue in education reform. Governance and control of edu-
cation in most countries are decentralized or moving toward 
decentralization. Decentralization and local control are seen as 
means of responding to the diverse educational needs of local 
communities.
 Education in South Africa during apartheid, according to 
Jonathan Jansen (1999), was an “authoritarian and state-controlled 
system” (p. 43). With the end of apartheid, South Africa devel-
oped new policies and regulations for education; decentralization 
was part of the new platform. 
 In France, decentralization of the administration of education 
has been the centerpiece of education reform, with much of the 
administration of schools left to the académies . Individual teachers 
have autonomy in determining how to teach, but the curriculum 
is national, and the central Ministry of Education must approve 
textbooks.
 The administration of Finland’s schools is decentralized; 
school personnel make decisions about their own schools. Although
there are national standards, individual schools determine their 
own budgets, their curriculum, and how they will teach. There is 
very little central control of education. 
 Pinochet decentralized the governance of education in Chile 
as part of his military government’s “modernization.” With de-
centralization came the responsibility of governing and funding 
schools, and many local governments were neither equipped to 
operate schools nor wealthy enough to fund them. Observers of 
education in Chile credit the decentralization with worsening the 
inequity between children from families in poverty and children 
from more affluent families. 
 The current reform of China’s massive education system 
has decentralization as its centerpiece. Chinese officials are hop-
ing that decentralization will promote innovation. Local schools 
have autonomy to develop curriculum, create or select their own 
textbooks, and design assessments that are aligned with their 
curriculums. Local schools also have responsibility for their own 
governance. Decentralization in China, however, like in Chile, has 

Lessons to be Learned 107
widened the resource gap among schools, because decentraliza-
tion has meant that local communities have had to take a larger 
responsibility for funding the schools. 
 In contrast to these other countries, control of education in 
the United States is being centralized to a large extent through the 
accountability requirements of No Child Left Behind (NCLB) and 
other education legislation. Even though the majority of education 
funding in the United States comes from state and local revenues, 
school districts and schools are being required to enforce national 
standards and to have their results measured by standardized 
tests. At the same time, the U.S. government is decentralizing con-
trol for some by promoting school choice in the form of vouchers 
and charter schools that are exempt from much of the federal and 
state regulation governing schools. 
 Lesson 3. Accountability for Student Learning 
 Accountability and responsibility for student learning usually 
lie with teachers. In many countries, standardized testing of 
children is used as a way to hold teachers accountable, but “the 
United States has by far the most demanding test-based account-
ability requirements” (Rotberg 2005b). In the United States, No 
Child Left Behind mandates the use of standardized test scores 
to determine the quality of schools, and they are also used to 
sanction schools considered failing. Proponents of such account-
ability believe that it helps to increase equity, as all children are 
expected to learn to the same standards. But critics say that the 
testing does just the opposite, causing harm to the children who 
are most at risk. According to Yong Zhao (2007), University Dis-
tinguished Professor of Education at Michigan State University, 
“The clearly observed and indisputably identified effects are all 
undesirable: narrowing what students learn, teaching to tests, 
forcing teachers to cheat, and making schools find ‘creative’ ways 
to meet Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) requirements” (p. 5). 
 Chile uses a standardized test, the SIMCE, to measure stu-
dent progress toward meeting the goals of the national curricu-
lum. School level data are reported publicly, and it is possible to 
compare the performance of schools. But the purpose of the test is 
not to sanction schools, but to understand their progress toward 
meeting national standards. 
 In Finland and France, student learning is documented through 
assessments created by teachers. In Finland, no high-stakes tests 

108 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
are administered; in France, students take a high-stakes test at the 
end of secondary school. Students in South Africa also take a high-
stakes test, the Matric, at the end of secondary school. 
 China, on the other hand, according to Zhao (2007), is reform-
ing evaluation and assessment. China’s new policy “specifically 
forbids ranking school districts, schools, or individual students 
based on test results or making test results public” (p. 13). Instead, 
the Chinese policy calls for schools to develop alternatives to test-
ing to document student learning. 
 Lesson 4. Quality of Learning Environments 
 One of the most important education reforms is creating school 
and classroom environments that contribute to high levels of 
learning. Some countries, China among them, “are trying to create 
more flexible learning environments and to produce the less eas-
ily measured skills of creativity and problem-solving, which are 
considered important in a knowledge-intensive, high-tech, global 
environment” (Stewart and Kagan 2005, 243). They believe that it 
is the flexible learning environments that they have observed in 
Western countries that contribute to the development of creativity 
and innovation. 
 Teachers in Finland and France have the autonomy to design 
their classrooms to meet the learning needs of the children in 
them. The United States, however, seems to be moving away from 
flexible learning environments. According to Rotberg (2005a), 
“the increasing emphasis on testing, more pressure on schools to 
raise scores, and strong incentives to ‘teach to the test’” spur more 
teacher-directed, didactic methods of teaching (p. 615). The flex-
ibility that is admired by other countries is giving way to more 
rigidity and standardization in U.S. classrooms. 
 Lesson 5. Access to Education 
 The United Nations has declared education to be a basic human 
right. Access to education ensures that right. Many countries have 
made increased access to education a part of education reform. 
 China has worked to increase access to education, both to 
basic education and to lower secondary school. Providing a “fee 
free” education to children whose families cannot afford to pay for 
school opens the door to education for children who could not par-
ticipate in schooling. South Africa has also greatly increased access 

Lessons to be Learned 109
to education as a result of its reform. Under apartheid, there were 
many children who had no access to education or access only to a 
very poor-quality education. Integration, improving schools, en-
suring adequate funding, and establishing “fee free” schools have 
increased access to schooling, particularly for black children. 
 Chile’s voucher system has helped to increase access to 
schools of choice, and vouchers and charter schools in the United 
States have similarly increased access to higher-quality schools for 
some children. Desegregation in the United States also increased 
access to quality education for minority children. 
 The introduction of the vocational  baccalauréat  in France has 
increased the number of students earning the credential. Such dif-
ferentiation provides access to higher education for students who 
might not have earned the general baccalauréat.
 Lesson 6. Preparation and Professional 
Development of Teachers 
 Research has shown that the strongest influence on children’s 
learning is the quality of the teachers they have. Many countries 
have made teacher preparation and teacher professional develop-
ment priorities. 
 Teacher preparation in Finland is considered by many to be a 
model of excellence. Entrance into teacher preparation programs 
in Finland is highly selective. Finnish programs emphasize col-
laborative learning, and teacher candidates spend time working 
in classrooms with master teachers. 
 France, China, and South Africa have raised their standards 
for teacher preparation to increase the amount of coursework 
teachers must complete before they can begin teaching. China’s 
teacher preparation program previously focused on learning 
content; the curriculum of its teacher preparation programs has 
changed to include more work on teaching methods. The course-
work also provides opportunities for prospective teachers to ex-
perience the kinds of teaching strategies and methods they are 
expected to learn. 
 China’s reform efforts also include professional development 
for teachers. Time is provided for experienced and novice teach-
ers to collaborate and to work to improve their practice during the 
school day. Likewise, Chile has invested highly in teacher profes-
sional development as a means to educational reform. 

110 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
 In the United States, there are models of effective profes-
sional development that help teachers improve their practice. 
According to Ann Lieberman (2008), senior scholar at the Carne-
gie Foundation and professor emeritus from Columbia Univer-
sity, effective professional development has commonalities that 
include “opportunities to be engaged with a professional learn-
ing community of peers that expects, encourages, and supports 
continuous learning about teaching practice” (p. 215). Lieberman 
describes teacher networks and collaborative projects as creating 
the conditions for teacher learning. 
 Lesson 7. Capacity of Teachers and School 
Leaders to Change 
 Many education reformers believe that the extent to which reforms 
will be implemented and sustained depends on the capacity of 
teachers and school leaders to actually carry them out. Capacity 
involves the knowledge and skills necessary to put the reforms in 
place; it also involves believing in the potential of the reforms to lead 
to improvement. Chile’s plan for education reform after democracy 
was restored, for example, included professional development that 
gave teachers the opportunity to network, to learn new teaching 
methods, and to learn how to collaborate with their colleagues, all 
of which would be important in the next stage of education reform. 
 In Finland, teacher preparation programs include academic 
preparation in the development of curriculum as well as oppor-
tunities to work with mentor teachers on developing curriculum 
and conducting research so that they are prepared to participate 
in this work when they become teachers. 
 South Africa, on the other hand, attempted to adopt outcome-
based education without gaining the support of teachers or pro-
viding them with the professional development they would need 
to put it in place in their schools and classrooms. Outcome-based 
education is based on thinking about teaching and learning in an 
entirely new way, and it requires fairly sophisticated knowledge 
of instructional theory and skills in teaching that the majority of 
teachers did not have. Consequently, not only has outcome-based 
education not been implemented, but also teachers have actively 
resisted its implementation. 
 In the United States, No Child Left Behind was developed 
without the consensus of teachers and school leaders. Many edu-
cators, among them researchers and education theorists, believe 

Globalization and Education 111
that the mandates of NCLB run counter to the findings of research 
and to best practice. There have been few efforts to change those 
beliefs, and many teachers resist the mandates of NCLB. 
 Globalization and Education 
 So what does globalization mean for teaching and learning and 
the reform of education? Much of the discourse about globaliza-
tion is about economics and work. But Marcelo Suárez-Orozco 
(2005), professor of globalization and education at New York Uni-
versity, argues that globalization should be about “demographic 
and cultural transformations.” He says that such transformation 
calls for a different kind of education, “an education for lifelong 
cognitive, behavioral, and relational engagement with the world” 
(p. 212). 
 Some theorists predict that globalization will threaten our 
democratic society and our system of public education. Alan Reid, 
professor of education at the University of South Australia, thinks 
that public education will be even more important to democracy 
in a global society. According to Reid (2005), 
 The scale and urgency of the challenges to democracy 
point to an enlarged role for public schools in a global-
izing world. Public schools represent the only spaces in 
our society where young people from a wide range of 
cultures, experiences, and backgrounds can learn with 
and from one another on a systematic basis, developing 
the understanding, respect, and tolerance that is the life-
blood of a cosmopolitan democracy. (p. 291) 
 Classrooms then become laboratories where students experi-
ment with and hone their interpersonal, intercultural skills as 
they learn the knowledge and skills that they will need to create, 
live in, and be productive citizens in the cosmopolitan democ-
racy. 
 Joel Spring (2007) proposes that education be organized to 
achieve a new purpose in the global society. He argues that the 
purpose of education should be to prepare students to live a long 
and happy life, and that the goal of education reform in the global 
society should be to create equality of opportunity for all students 
to learn what they need to live a long and happy life. 

112 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
 Spring (2007) proposed a curriculum to prepare students to 
be active agents in creating a global society that values living long 
and happy lives. Similar to Reid (2005), Spring (2007) said that 
education should lead “students to understand that human so-
cial interactions create new knowledge and institutions, and that 
people have the power to bring about social change” (p. 83). The 
curriculum focuses on human rights and environmental educa-
tion, as well as seeing the world and society from and valuing 
many different perspectives. Spring envisions the classroom for 
this new kind of education as a biosphere that would allow stu-
dents to experience the environment even as they learn about it 
and learn to “live” in it with their peers. Spring’s proposal, like 
Reid’s, views education as a vehicle to a new society, one in which 
there is understanding, respect, and tolerance. 
 Educators in the global society will have to be facilitators of 
learning, learners along with their students, and models of learn-
ing. Their work “will henceforth be tending to the cognitive skills, 
interpersonal sensibilities, and cultural sophistication of young 
people whose lives will be engaged in local context yet suffused 
with larger transnational realities” (Suárez-Orozco 2005, 210). 
 Obviously, the development of such educational institutions 
will require change and reform and is not without risk. Ciaran 
Sugrue (2008) said that 
 Risk and uncertainty are a persistent presence, all the 
more real in a globalised world that hurtles headlong 
into the future at increasing velocity so that “going 
forward” can rapidly become a blind leap of faith that 
jettisons past and present, ignoring the “lessons” they 
proffer. (p. 220) 
 But we can’t afford to ignore the lessons of the past and pres-
ent reforms. Sugrue (2008) said that there are also important les-
sons to learn about the process  of reform. First, reform must be 
situated in society, society must be taken into account in any 
reform effort, and it might be society that should be changed. 
Second, it is individual and collective motivation to accomplish 
something, not mandates or external accountability, that leads to 
real change. Third, an expanded idea of research and creating new 
knowledge that includes communities not only builds a research 
base but also builds a base of support for change. Fourth, teachers 
are key to reform, and they must be respected as professionals. 

References 113
External forms of accountability interfere with teachers’ profes-
sionalism. And last, reform must lead to equity and social justice 
if it is to be sustained. 
 Education in the United States and in the world may very 
well be in crisis, but it is often a crisis that creates new opportu-
nities, new leaders, new ideas, and new solutions. How we deal 
with the crisis will depend on how well we have learned from the 
work of reformers before us. 
 References 
 Arango, A. 2008.  The Failings of Chile’s Education System: Institutionalized 
Inequality and a Preference for the Affluent . Washington, DC: Council on 
Hemispheric Affairs. 
 Baer, J., S. Baldo, K. Ayotte, and P. J. Green. 2007.  The Reading Literacy 
of U.S. Fourth-Grade Students in an International Context: Results from the 
2001 and 2006 Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS).
(NCES 2008–017). Washington, DC: National Center for Education 
Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. 
 Baines, L. 2007. “Learning from the World: Achieving More by Doing 
Less.” Phi Delta Kappan 89 (2): 98–104. 
 Bonnet, G. 2004. “France: Diverse Populations, Centralized 
Administration.” In Balancing Change and Tradition in Global Education 
Reform , edited by I. C. Rotberg, 127–152. New York: Rowman & 
Littlefield Education. 
 Bracey, G. W. 2007. “The First Time ‘Everything Changed.’”  Phi Delta 
Kappan 89 (2): 119–136. 
 Bracey, G. W. 2002. “Test Scores, Creativity, and Global 
Competitiveness.” Phi Delta Kappan 83 (10): 738–739. 
 Cheng, K. 2004. “China: Turning the Bad Master into a Good Servant.” 
In Balancing Change and Tradition in Global Education Reform , edited by 
I. C. Rotberg, 5–29. New York: Rowman & Littlefield Education. 
 Claude, M. 2006. “Educational Reform in Chile.”  Upside Down World,
June 14. http://upsidedownworld.org/main/content/view/322/34/. 
 Darling-Hammond, L., and G. Wood. 2008.  Democracy at Risk: The Need 
for a New Federal Policy in Education. Athens, OH: Forum for Education 
and Democracy. 
 Delannoy, F. 2000. “Education Reforms in Chile, 1980–98: A Lesson 
in Pragmatism.” Country Studies: Education Reform and Management 
Publication Series 1 (1). World Bank. 

114 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
 Department of Education. 1995. “White paper on Education and 
Training.” Cape Town: Parliament of the Republic of South Africa. 
The Economist . 2007. “Playground Harmony.” December 13. http://
www.economist.com/PrinterFriendly.cfm?story_id=10286281. 
 Engler, J. M., and J. B. Hunt, Jr. 2004. “Preparing Our Students for 
Work and Citizenship in the Global Age.”  Phi Delta Kappan 86 (3): 
197–199. 
 Finkelstein, L. B. 1995. “Finland’s Lessons.”  Education Week , October 18. 
http://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/1995/10/18/07finkel.h15.html. 
 Fiske, E. B., and H. F. Ladd. 2005. “Racial Equity in Education: How 
Far Has South Africa Come?” Working Paper Series SAN05–03, Terry 
Sanford Institute of Public Policy, Duke University, Durham, NC. 
 Gabade, T. 2006. “Free Schooling for Five Million.” http://www.
southafrica.info/about/education/schooling–231106.htm. 
 Gamerman, E. 2008. “What Makes Finnish Kids So Smart?” 
Wall Street Journal , February 28. http://online.wsj.com/article/
SB120425355065601997.html?mod=fpa_mostpop.
 Gardner, W. 2008. “Lessons from Finland: The Way to Education 
Excellence.” Providence Journal, February 27. http://www.
commondreams.org/archive/2008/02/27/7330/. 
 Gonzales, P., J. C. Guzman, L. Partelow, E. Pahlke, L. Jocelyn, D. Kastberg, 
and T. Williams. 2004.  Highlights from the Trends in International Mathematics 
and Science Study (TIMSS) 2003 (NCES 2005–005). U.S. Department of 
Education, National Center for Education Statistics. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office. 
 Grindle, M. S. 2004.  The Contentious Politics of Education Reform.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 Grubb, W. N. 2007. “Dynamic Inequality and Intervention: Lessons from 
a Small Country.”  Phi Delta Kappan 89 (2): 105–114. 
 Hamilton, K., P. Simon, and C. Veniard. 2004. “The Challenge 
of French Diversity.”  Migration Source, November. http://www.
migrationinformation.org/feature/print.cfm?ID=266. 
 Hargreaves, A., G. Halász, and B. Pont. 2007. “School Leadership 
for Systemic Improvement in Finland: A Case Study Report for the 
OECD Activity Improving School Leadership.” http://www.oecd.org/
dataoecd/43/17/39928629.pdf.
 Houtsonen, L. 2005. “Developments in Teacher Training in Finland: 
Emerging Models of Geography Education.”  International Research in 
Geographical and Environmental Education 13 (2): 190–196. 
 Human Rights Watch. 2001.  Scared at School: Sexual Violence against Girls 
in South African Schools. New York. 

References 115
 International Monetary Fund. 2008.  World Economic Outlook Database, 
April 2008: Nominal GDP List for the World and the European Union . 
Data for the year 2007. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/
weo/2008/01/weodata/index.aspx.
 Jansen, J. D. 1999. “Globalization, Curriculum and the Third World 
State: In Dialogue with Michael Apple.”  Current Issues in Comparative 
Education 1 (2): 42–47. 
 Jansen, J., and N. Taylor. 2003. “Educational Changes in South Africa 
1994–2003: Case Studies in Large-Scale Education Reform .” Education 
Reform and Management Publication Series II (1). World Bank. 
 Kagan, S. L., and V. Stewart. 2005. “Introduction: A New World View: 
Education in a Global Era.” Phi Delta Kappan 87 (3): 185–187. 
 Kappa Delta Pi Record. 2002. “Education Reform in China: An 
Interview with Aibe Chen.” Winter. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/
mi_qa4009/is_200201/ai_n9072424/print?tag=atBody.col1. 
 Korpela, S. 2004. “The Finnish School—A Source of Skills and Well-
being: A Day at the Strömberg Lower Comprehensive School.” http://
virtual.finland.fi/netcomm/news/showarticle.asp?intNWSAID=30625.
 Korpela, S. 2008. “Free Schooling for All: The Finnish School System 
Supports Lifelong Learning.” http://virtual.finland.fi/netcomm/news/
showarticle.asp?intNWSAID=41557.
 Kruse, D. 1996. “Fish Hoek Middle School: Issues of Education Reform 
in South Africa.” Paper presented at the annual conference of the 
National Middle School Association Annual Conference, Baltimore, 
Maryland.
 Lam, W. 2006. “Perpetual Challenges to China’s Education Reform.” 
China Brief VI (24): 6–8. 
Le Figaro . 2007. “Bac: la cuvée 2007 est encore meilleure.” July 11. 
Le Figaro . 2008a. “Quelque 450 établissements hors contrat scolarisent 
45,000 élèves.” January 8. 
Le Figaro . 2008b. “Les Européens peinent á apprendre a lire á l’école.” 
July 22. 
 Lieberman, A. 2008. “How Do Teachers Learn to Lead?” In  The Future 
of Educational Change: International Perspectives , edited by C. Sugrue, 
204–218. New York: Routledge. 
 McMeekin, R. W. 2004. “Chile: Vouchers and Beyond.” In  Balancing
Change and Tradition in Global Education Reform , edited by I. C. Rotberg, 
83–107. New York: Rowman & Littlefield Education. 
 Ministre d’education nationale. 2006. “Programmes personnalisés de 
réussite éducative.”  Bulletin Officiel . http://www.education.gouv.fr/
bo/2006/31/MENE0601969C.htm.

116 Education Reform—A Global Enterprise
 Mullis, I. V. S., M. O. Martin, A. M. Kennedy, and P. Foy. 2007.  IEA’s 
Progress in International Reading Literacy Study in Primary School in 40 
Countries . Chestnut Hill, MA: TIMSS & PIRLS International Study 
Center, Boston College. 
 Murphy, J. T. 1992. “Apartheid’s Legacy to Black Children.”  Phi Delta 
Kappan 73 (5): 367–374. 
 O’Brien, P. 2007. “Enhancing Incentives to Improve Performance in the 
Education System in France.” Economics Department Working Paper 
No. 570, Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
Paris.
 Preus, B. 2007. “Educational Trends in China and the United States: 
Proverbial Pendulum or Potential for Balance?”  Phi Delta Kappan 89 (2): 
115–118. 
 Reid, A. 2005. “Rethinking the Democratic Purposes of Public 
Schooling.” In Globalizing Education: Policies, Pedagogies, & Politics, edited 
by M. W. Apple, J. Kenway, and M. Singh, 281–296. New York: Peter 
Lang.
 Rotberg, I. C., ed. 2004.  Balancing Change and Tradition in Global Education 
Reform. New York: Rowman & Littlefield Education. 
 Rotberg, I. C. 2005a. “Tradeoffs, Societal Values, and School Reform.” 
Phi Delta Kappan 86 (8): 611–618. 
 Rotberg, I. C. 2005b. “The Bigger Picture.”  Education Week, February 9. 
http://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2005/02/09/22rotberg.h24.html. 
 Sahlberg, P. 2006. “Raising the Bar: How Finland Responds to the Twin 
Challenge of Secondary Education.” Profesorado. Revista de curriculum 
y formacíon del profesorado 10 (1): 1–24. http://www.see-educoop.net/
education_in/pdf/Raising%20the%20Bar%202006.pdf.
 Simon, P. 2003. “French Muslims, Government Grapple With 
Integration Pains.” Migration Information Source, August 1. http://www.
migrationinformation.org/feature/print.cfm?ID=153. 
 Singh, A. 2005. “Towards a Theory of National Consciousness: Values 
and Beliefs in Education as a Contribution to ‘Cultural Capital’ in 
Post-Apartheid South Africa.”  Journal of Asian and African Studies 40 (5): 
323–343.
 Soudien, C. 1997. “Transformation and Outcomes-based Education in 
South Africa: Opportunities and Challenges.”  Journal of Negro Education
66 (4): 449–459. 
 “South Africa’s Population.” 2008. South Africa.info. http://www.
southafrica.info/about/people/population.htm.
 Spady, W. 2007. “It’s Time to End the Decade of Confusion 
about OBE in South Africa.”  South African Journal for Science and 

References 117
Technology. http://edulibpretoria.files.wordpress.com/2008/08/
spadyobeconfusionpaper.pdf. 
 Spring, J. 2007.  A New Paradigm for Global School Systems: Education for a 
Long and Happy Life. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 Stewart, V., and S. L. Kagan. 2005. “Conclusion: A New World View: 
Education in a Global Era.” Phi Delta Kappan 87 (3): 241–245. 
 Suárez-Orozco, M. M. 2005. “Rethinking Education in the Global Era.” 
Phi Delta Kappan 89 (3): 209–212. 
 Sugrue, C. 2008.  The Future of Educational Change: International 
Perspectives. New York: Routledge. 
 Tchibozo, G. 2005. “The Recognition of Cultural Diversity in the French 
Educational Context: A Literature Review.” Paper presented at the 
annual meeting of the Association for Teacher Education in Europe, 
Amsterdam. http://www.atee2005.nl/download/papers/18_ab.pdf. 
 Tye, K. A. 2003. “Global Education as a Worldwide Movement.”  Phi
Delta Kappan 85 (2): 165–168. 
 UNESCO. 2007.  Global Education Digest: Comparing Education Statistics 
Across the World. Montreal. 
 Xinhua News Agency. 2006. “China Adopts Amendment to 
Compulsory Education Law.” June 30. http://china.org.cn/english/
MATERIAL/173281.htm. 
 Young, E. 2008. “Focus on Global Education.”  Phi Delta Kappan 89 (5): 
349–353.
 Zhao, Y. 2007. “Education in the Flat World.”  Edge 2 (4). 

This page intentionally left blank 

119
 4 
 Chronology 
 T
his chapter provides a timeline of events, court cases, legis-
lation, publications, public meetings, and public addresses 
that relate to the reform of education in the United States. 
The timeline begins with the Brown v. Board of Education Supreme 
Court decision and the launch of Sputnik I because they were in-
strumental in bringing about education reform on a national scale 
in the United States. 
 1954 
The United States Supreme Court rules in  Brown v. 
Topeka (KS) Board of Education  (347 U.S. 483) that pro-
viding separate schools for white and black children is 
not legal and orders that schools in the United States 
be desegregated. This decision effectively overturns 
Plessy v. Ferguson  (163 U.S. 537, 1896), which decreed 
that the provision of separate but equal schools was 
constitutional.
 1955 
The United States Supreme Court rules in  Brown v. 
Board of Education II (349 U.S. 294) that schools be de-
segregated “with all deliberate speed” in response to 
states having made little progress in dismantling sepa-
rate school systems and integrating schools. 
 1957 
The Soviet Union is successful in launching Sputnik I, 
a satellite, into orbit around the earth. The launch 
begins the space race and serves as the impetus for 
international comparisons of academic achievement 
and calls to reform U.S. education in science and 
mathematics.

120 Chronology
 1958 
The National Education Defense Act (NDEA), the first 
legislation to call for and support education reform in 
the United States at the federal government level, is en-
acted by Congress in response to the “crisis” in educa-
tion identified as a result of the launch of Sputnik I. The 
law provides funding for reform of mathematics and 
science teaching in schools, support for professional 
development for teachers, and funding for school 
 libraries. 
 1959 
The first international study of student achievement is 
begun by the International Association for the Evalu-
ation of Educational Achievement (IEA). The Pilot 
Twelve-Country Study samples the achievement of 
 13-year-olds in 12 countries in the areas of mathema-
tics, reading comprehension, geography, science, and 
nonverbal ability. The findings of the study are pub-
lished in 1962. More important than the findings, the 
IEA asserts, is that the study shows that international 
comparisons of student achievement is possible. 
 1964 
President Lyndon B. Johnson signs the Civil Rights 
Act into law. The law prohibits racial discrimination 
in public places and facilities and businesses in the 
United States, racial discrimination in employment and 
housing, and segregation of schools. The Civil Rights 
Act invalidates the Jim Crow laws in southern states, 
and although it was initially intended to aid African 
Americans, the law includes women and whites. The 
law also creates the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission, and it sets the stage for other legislation 
and court cases aimed at equality of opportunity. 
 1965 
Project Head Start begins under the auspices of the 
 Office of Economic Opportunity. This preschool 
 program, part of President Lyndon Johnson’s War on 
Poverty, is intended to help children in poverty develop 
the skills necessary to begin school academically on 
par with their more affluent peers. Project Head Start, 
later administered by the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services, provides services not only in 
education, but also in nutrition, parent involvement, 
and health to young children and their families. 
 1965 
The Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), 
P.L. 89–10, is signed into law. A part of President 

Chronology 121
 Johnson’s War on Poverty, ESEA is based on the prem-
ise that children from low-income families need more 
educational services to be successful in school. ESEA, 
designed by President Johnson’s commissioner of 
 education Francis Keppel, is the first federal legislation 
to provide funding for K-12 education. In addition to 
direct services to children, ESEA allocates funding for 
teacher professional development, instructional mate-
rials, and parent involvement in schools. 
 1966 
Recognizing the gaps that exist in the education of 
students who travel with their parents for work and 
the need for compensatory education for them, the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act is amended 
to include children of migrant farm workers. Funds 
are allocated specifically to provide education pro-
grams that help to fill the gaps in their educations as 
they move from school to school. 
 1966 
The Coleman Report, “Equality in Educational 
 Opportunity,” is issued. This report, developed by 
James Coleman, an educational sociologist, and oth-
ers, was commissioned by Congress to assess the state 
of K-12 education in the United States. The Coleman 
report is controversial in its finding that the effects of 
schooling are not as strong as socioeconomic status on 
the quality of children’s learning. The report also finds 
that African American children who attend integrated 
schools where the majority of children are white have 
higher academic achievement than African American 
children who attend schools that have a majority pop-
ulation of minority students. 
 1968 
The Elementary and Secondary Education Act adds 
Title VII, the Bilingual Education Act, to provide assis-
tance for school districts that serve children who have 
limited English-speaking ability (LESA). Funds under 
Title VII are provided to school districts in the form 
of grants. Interestingly, no appropriation is made for 
Title VII; funding will have to wait until 1969. 
 1970 
The Experimental Schools Program (ESP) is announced 
by President Richard Nixon. ESP is a program that 
promotes “comprehensive school reform.” Under the 
program, school districts can apply for grants to sup-
port their comprehensive school reform efforts. Nixon 

122 Chronology
also proposes an organization to conduct research 
about education, the National Institute of Education. 
 1972 
The National Institute of Education (NIE) begins 
 operation. NIE is to become the Office of Educational 
Research and Improvement (OERI) in 1979 under Sec-
retary of Education William Bennett. 
 1972 
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 is signed 
into law. Title IX states, “No person in the United States 
shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participa-
tion in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to dis-
crimination under any education program or activity 
receiving Federal financial assistance” (Section 1681a). 
Initially, Title IX is used to address high school and col-
lege or university sports for girls and women, although 
the law does not specifically address sports. 
 1974 
Women’s Educational Equity Act (WEEA) is signed 
into law as Title IVA of the Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act. WEEA awards grants and contracts to 
operate programs that promote educational equity for 
women and girls. WEEA also establishes the Women’s 
Equity Resource Center to provide technical assistance 
to grantees and to disseminate nationally the models it 
develops.
 1974 
P.L. 94–142, the Education of All Handicapped  Children 
Act, is enacted by Congress and signed into law by 
President Gerald Ford. This law requires that all chil-
dren and adults with disabilities, ages 3 to 21, be 
educated in “the least restrictive environment” to the 
maximum extent appropriate. This means that children 
and adults who have disabilities are to be educated in 
regular classrooms as much as is possible, given their 
disabilities. The law also requires a specific process be 
followed for identification and evaluation of children 
with disabilities. It includes provisions for notifying 
and involving parents in  decisions about special edu-
cation services to their children, and requires that an 
Individual Education Plan (IEP) be developed for each 
child who qualifies for special education services. The 
IEP outlines the specific services a child is entitled to, 
the objectives of the services provided, who will pro-
vide the services and the amount of time or propor-
tion of the school day the services will be provided, 

Chronology 123
accommodations required for the child in the regular 
classroom, and how the child’s progress toward meet-
ing the objectives will be measured. The IEP process 
includes provisions for annual review of the IEP. 
 1981 
The National Commission on Excellence in Edu-
cation is established by Congress to “review and 
synthesize the data and scholarly literature on the 
quality of learning and teaching in the nation’s 
schools, colleges, and universities, both public and 
private, with special concern for the educational ex-
perience of teen-age youth” (20 U.S.C. 1233a). The 
commission is further charged with comparing edu-
cation programs in the United States with those of 
other countries, to investigate programs that are 
recognized as leading to “uncommon success” in 
 preparing students for post-secondary education, 
and to hold hearings on what should be done to im-
prove schools in general. 
 1983 
The National Commission on Excellence in Educa-
tion releases its landmark report, “A Nation at Risk.” 
The report, in the form of a letter to the nation, de-
scribes the quality of U.S. education as jeopardizing 
our  national security. The report includes a list of 
reforms that should be put in place by schools and 
challenges the nation’s educators, parents, and stu-
dents to work together to improve education in the 
United States. 
 1985 
At its annual summer meeting in Boise, Idaho, the 
 National Governors’ Association sets seven educa-
tion reform tasks in response to concern about the 
economy and the role of education in supporting the 
work force and global competitiveness. The seven 
education  reform tasks are (1) creating a more highly 
professional teaching force; (2) strengthening school 
leadership and management; (3) promoting greater 
parent  involvement and choice in their children’s 
 education; (4) helping at-risk children and youth meet 
higher educational standards; (5) making better and 
more effective use of new technologies in education; 
(6) making better use of the resources invested in 
school facilities; and (7) strengthening the mission and 
effectiveness of colleges and universities. 

124 Chronology
Tennessee governor Lamar Alexander announces the 
formation of seven task forces, each to investigate one 
of the seven education reform tasks (Currence 1985). 
 1988 
The Jacob Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education 
Act is added to the reauthorization of ESEA  (Elementary 
and Secondary Education Act). The Jacob Javits Gifted 
and Talented Students Education Act is the only federal 
education legislation that addresses the education of 
gifted and talented students. The law does not provide 
direct aid to local gifted education programs. Instead, 
funding under this law supports research in gifted and 
talented education and the identification of innovative 
and demonstration programs for gifted and talented stu-
dents. The law is particularly aimed at serving students 
who might otherwise be underrepresented in gifted and 
talented programs, such as economically disadvantaged 
children, children who are limited English-proficient, 
and children who are disabled. The law also provides 
for the establishment and ongoing operations of the Na-
tional Research Center on the Gifted and Talented. 
 1989 
The state governors meet with President George  Herbert 
Walker Bush in the first National Education Summit 
to discuss education reform and set six national goals 
to improve education in the United States by the year 
2000. The goals, based on the premise that all children 
can learn, address school readiness, high school gradu-
ation rate, general student achievement and citizenship, 
achievement in science and mathematics, adult literacy 
and lifelong learning, and safe and drug-free schools. 
The president and governors challenge all Americans 
to participate in achieving the goals to maintain both a 
healthy economy and our democracy. 
 1990 
The six national education goals are announced by 
President Bush in his State of the Union address. The 
six goals are intended to serve as a framework for edu-
cation reform. The goals are 
 
Goal 1. Readiness for School: By the year 2000, all 
children in America will start school ready to learn. 
 
Goal 2. High School Completion: By the year 2000, 
the high school graduation rate will increase to at least 
90  percent. 

Chronology 125
Goal 3. Student Achievement and Citizenship: By the 
year 2000, American students will leave grades four, 
eight, and twelve having demonstrated competency 
in  challenging subject matter including English, math-
ematics, science, history, and geography; and every 
school in America will ensure that all students learn 
to use their minds well, so they may be prepared for 
responsible citizenship, further learning, and produc-
tive employment in our modern economy. 
Goal 4. Science and Mathematics: By the year 2000, 
U.S.  students will be first in the world in science and 
mathematics achievement. 
 
Goal 5. Adult Literacy and Lifelong Learning: By the 
year 2000, every adult American will be literate and 
will possess the knowledge and skills necessary to 
compete in a global economy and exercise the rights 
and responsibilities of citizenship. 
 
 Goal 6. Safe, Disciplined, and Drug-Free Schools: By 
the year 2000, every school in America will be free of 
drugs and violence and will offer a disciplined en-
vironment conducive to learning. Schools, families, 
and communities must work together to counteract 
negative social  influences and create safe and orderly 
schools (Vinovskis 1999). 
 1990 
Congress establishes a National Education Goals Panel 
as an independent agency in the executive branch of 
the federal government. The purposes of the panel 
are: (1) to build a national consensus for educational 
 improvement; (2) to report on progress toward achiev-
ing the national goals set forth by the president, the 
nation’s governors, and Congress; and (3) to review 
and certify the standards states develop for achiev-
ing the goals and the criteria states set for meeting 
the standards. The National Education Goals Panel is 
made up of governors, members of the Bush adminis-
tration, legislators, and members of Congress. 
 1990 
The Secretary of Labor appoints a commission, the 
Secretary’s Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills 
(SCANS), to identify skills needed for work. In partic-
ular, the Secretary charges SCANS to define the skills 
needed for employment; propose acceptable  levels of 

126 Chronology
proficiency; suggest ways to assess proficiency; and 
develop a strategy to disseminate that information to 
schools, businesses, and homes in the United States. 
 1990 
The New Standards Project (NSP) begins. The New 
Standards Project is a consortium of states and 
urban school districts chaired by Lauren Resnick 
of the  University of Pittsburg Learning, Research, 
and  Development Center and Marc Tucker from the 
 National Center on Education and the Economy in 
Washington, D.C. The purpose of NSP is to create a 
system of standards for student learning and to design 
performance assessments and portfolios that allow 
students to demonstrate that they meet those stan-
dards. During the years the NSP exists, thousands of 
educators around the country are involved in creating 
such assessments through the NSP. 
 1990 
The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) 
is signed into law. IDEA takes the place of P.L. 94–142, 
the Education of All Handicapped Children Act, and is 
seen both as an education and a civil rights law. Under 
the law, all children, ages 3 through 21, are entitled to 
a free, appropriate public education. IDEA provides 
funding for states whose special education policies 
and procedures meet at least the minimum outlined in 
the law. Although the law does not require that states 
participate, all states do. 
 1991 
The National Education Goals Panel releases its first 
report, “The National Education Goals Report: Build-
ing a Nation of Learners,” on progress toward meet-
ing the six national education goals. The report echoes 
calls for improved student achievement, but it also re-
ports that high school graduation rates are 83 percent, 
the highest ever in the history of the United States. The 
panel reports that it is difficult to evaluate progress to-
ward meeting the goals because data on many of the 
goals are not readily available and the data that are 
available may not be reliable for making such judg-
ments. To address this problem, the panel calls for 
more testing and the gathering of more data relative 
specifically to the goals. 
 1991 
President Bush announces “American 2000: A  National 
Strategy” aimed at reaching the national goals by 

Chronology 127
2000. The strategy has four parts: (1) improving the 
schools and making them accountable for their work 
through the setting of “world class standards” in five 
curriculum areas—English, mathematics, science, his-
tory, and geography; (2) creating a “new generation of 
American Schools,” schools that are invented to “meet 
the demands of a new century”; (3) creating a nation of 
life-long learners (adults who are no longer in school); 
and (4) creating communities that support learning 
and are committed to the success of their schools. 
American 2000 recommends the creation and use of an 
American Achievement Test that will be used to hold 
schools accountable for improved student learning. 
 1991 
Congress establishes the National Council on Educa-
tion Standards and Testing (NCEST) at the request 
of Education Secretary Lamar Alexander. NCEST 
is  established to, along with the National Educa-
tion Goals Panel, monitor the process of developing 
 national standards and a system of national testing. 
 1991 
The SCANS report, “What Work Requires of Schools: 
A SCANS Report for America 2000,” is released. The 
report identifies competencies and foundational skills 
needed for success in the workplace and proposes 
minimum skills that should be required of students in 
schools, with the intent of informing the development 
of learning standards. The SCANS report becomes a 
resource for many school districts for revising and 
 developing curriculum. 
 1992 
How Schools Shortchange Girls , the landmark study of 
gender equity in schools, is published by David and 
Myra Sadker. The book documents how schools and 
classrooms are organized and how teachers teach in 
ways that are detrimental to the learning of girls and 
to their self-esteem as learners. 
 1993 
The National Education Goals Panel calls for the 
 development and institution of national curriculum 
standards in its report, “Promises to Keep: Creating 
High Standards for American Students.” National cur-
riculum standards would include both content and 
performance standards. Content standards would 
define the knowledge and skills that children should 
learn in eight subject areas: English, mathematics, 

128 Chronology
science,  history, citizenship/civics, geography, for-
eign  languages, and fine arts. Performance standards 
would, according to the report, “provide tools to deter-
mine whether content standards are met.” They would 
determine “the evidence required and the  quality of 
student performance that would be considered ac-
ceptable to demonstrate that content standards had 
been met.” Such standards would create a curriculum 
that, if required, would be used by schools across the 
country, and children throughout the country would 
be expected to learn the same knowledge and skills 
and be held to the same expectations in terms of the 
quality of that learning. The idea of national curricu-
lum standards represents a huge departure from the 
control and  administration of education that had been 
reserved for the states in the U.S. Constitution. 
 1994 
President Bill Clinton signs the Goals 2000: Educate 
America Act (P.L. 103–227) into law. In addition to the 
original six goals set by the nation’s governors and 
President Bush, Goals 2000 includes two new goals. 
The new goals address teacher education and profes-
sional development and parental participation in ed-
ucation. Goals 2000 also adds foreign languages, the 
arts, economics, and civics and government to the five 
core subject areas in which students should demon-
strate competency. 
  Unlike American 2000, Goals 2000 provides re-
sources to states and communities for school improve-
ment; the law also provides grants for pre-service 
teacher education and professional development for 
practicing teachers. The Goals 2000: Educate Amer-
ica Act establishes the National Education Standards 
and Improvement Council to oversee the develop-
ment of and certify content, student performance, 
and  opportunity to learn standards, as well as assess-
ment systems submitted by states. (Opportunity to 
learn standards describe the educational resources— 
facilities and learning environment, quality of teachers, 
professional development for teachers, instructional 
materials, and so on, required for schools to ensure 
that students meet the content and performance stan-
dards.) To complement the School to Work Opportu-

Chronology 129
nity Act of 1994 (P.L. 103–239), Goals 2000 also creates 
a National Skill Standards Board to support the devel-
opment of occupational standards, assessments, and 
certification of skills in specific occupational areas. 
 1996 
Goals 2000: Educate America Act is amended in Presi-
dent Clinton’s budget bill to eliminate opportunity to 
learn standards. Opportunity to learn standards are 
eliminated because they are viewed by some legisla-
tors as intruding on the states’ and local school districts’ 
rights to administer education programs, and by  others 
as opportunities for particular political agendas to be 
promoted. Still others believe setting opportunity to 
learn standards at the federal level would  require the 
federal government to provide funding for all schools 
to be able to meet the opportunity to learn standards. 
The amendments also eliminate the  National Education 
Standards and Improvement Council, which has not yet 
been convened and is viewed as unnecessary because its 
purpose is nearly identical to work already being done 
by the National Education Goals Panel and the National 
Council on Education Standards and Testing. 
 1996 
The second National Education Summit is held in Pali-
sades, New York. Forty-one governors and business 
and community leaders meet, and most affirm their 
support for “new, world-class” academic standards 
in core subject areas, high-quality assessments, and 
 accountability for schools in meeting the standards. 
A few of the governors as well as some business lead-
ers, including the CEO of IBM, disagree with the idea 
of national standards, arguing instead that education 
standards should be set locally. Conference participants 
also call for increased and improved use of technology 
in meeting academic standards. Business leaders agree 
to consider academic standards in deciding where to 
locate new business facilities. While leaders of the Na-
tional Education Association and some other educators 
participate in the summit, only a few teachers are in-
vited. The National School Boards  Association and the 
National Parent Teacher Association complain because 
they are not invited to the summit and they believe 
that they should be included in the national discussion 
about standards and their implementation. 

130 Chronology
 1997 
IDEA (Individuals with Disabilities Education Act) 
is reauthorized with some important amendments. 
The new law, P.L. 105–17, expands the definition of 
children with disabilities to include children between 
the ages of three and nine who have developmental 
delays. It provides a process for mediating disputes 
between parents and schools and school districts, and 
requires that mediation occur. The law also provides 
for additional grants for programs for infants and 
toddlers with disabilities, and additional funding for 
technology, parent training, and professional develop-
ment for teachers. 
 1997 
In his State of the Union address, President Clinton 
calls for every state to adopt high national standards, 
“representing what all our students must know to suc-
ceed in the knowledge economy of the 21st  century,” 
and he asks that states “shape the curriculum to reflect 
these standards, and train teachers to lift students up 
to them” (Clinton 1997). He also argues for the de-
velopment of a national test to evaluate the progress 
of all fourth grade students in reading and all eighth 
grade students in mathematics every year. President 
Clinton, in effect, in arguing for a  national test, is 
calling for a national curriculum. This is significant 
because up until now, states have been mandated to 
develop their own standards and assessments to mea-
sure students’ progress toward meeting those state 
standards. 
 1999 
A third National Education Summit is held. Partici-
pants in the summit, including governors, educators, 
and business leaders, identify three challenges for 
U.S. education. The challenges are improving teacher 
quality, helping all students reach high standards, and 
holding all schools accountable. Participants agree to 
support their states in addressing the challenges. 
 2001 
The fourth National Education Summit, held in Pali-
sades, New York, again focuses on raising standards 
for student achievement. The business, government, 
and education leaders call for the improvement of 
teaching, the expansion of testing and accountability, 
and continuing public support as ways to increase stu-
dent achievement. 

Chronology 131
 2002 
President George W. Bush signs the latest reauthoriza-
tion of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
into law. This new authorization, named No Child 
Left Behind (NCLB; P.L. 107–110), requires states to 
hold all schools accountable for making progress to-
ward proficient performance of state curriculum stan-
dards through annual testing of all students grades 
three through eight in reading and mathematics by 
the 2005–2006 school year. Beginning in the 2007–2008 
school year, states must also test students in science. 
Students in grades 10 through 12 are to be tested 
once during that grade span. No Child Left Behind 
includes sanctions for schools whose students do not 
make what the law terms “adequate yearly progress” 
toward meeting the standards. The law also requires 
that teachers be “highly qualified” to teach the sub-
jects they teach; it includes a timeline for teachers not 
currently considered “highly qualified” under the law 
to become highly qualified. 
 2004 
IDEA is amended (P.L. 108–446) to align with NCLB. 
The amendments address the IEP (Individual Educa-
tion Plan) process as well as the content of the plans 
themselves, requiring that achievement standards for 
children in special education programs be aligned 
with state standards. P.L. 108–446 adds a number of 
provisions that relate to the discipline of special edu-
cation students and to due process for them. 
 2005 
The fifth National Educational Summit on High 
Schools takes place in Washington, D.C. Hosted by 
the National Governors Association and Achieve, Inc., 
with sponsorship from the Business Roundtable, the 
James B. Hunt Institute, and the Education Commis-
sion of the States, this summit specifically addresses 
the improvement of high schools in the United States. 
Participants discuss strategies for making high schools 
more rigorous, increasing the graduation rate, and en-
suring that students are prepared for college or work 
when they graduate from high school. 
 2005 
Jonathan Kozol, educational researcher, chronicler, and 
critic, publishes The Shame of the Nation: The Restoration 
of Apartheid Schooling in America.  Kozol bases his book 
on his observations and conversations with children 

132 Chronology
and adults during visits to 60 schools in 11 states. The 
book decries the segregation of black and Hispanic chil-
dren in schools in the United States that Kozol claims 
is worse than it has been since 1968, the regimen-
tation and the prison-like system of discipline that 
black and Hispanic children endure in many of these 
segregated schools, and the effects on the curriculum 
and the teaching because of high-stakes, standard-
ized testing. 
 2006 
The Rand Corporation publishes a study, “Evaluating 
Comprehensive School Reform Models at Scale.” The 
study, an investigation of how schools have imple-
mented four comprehensive school reform models, 
finds that very few schools that “adopt” comprehen-
sive school reform models actually fully implement 
them, and that there were few practices observed in 
schools implementing the models that were different 
from practices observed in schools not implement-
ing comprehensive school reform models. Accord-
ing to the authors of the study, “it is not surprising 
that research to date has found only modest effects 
of CSR [comprehensive school reform] models on 
student achievement” (Vernez, Karam, Mariano, and 
 DeMartini 2006, 135). 
 2007 
The United States Supreme Court, in a 5–4 ruling, de-
cides that school districts may not use race as a factor in 
determining how children are assigned to schools. The 
two cases brought together before the Court were from 
Seattle, Washington, and Louisville, Kentucky, where 
race-based assignment was part of voluntary integra-
tion plans; plaintiffs in the cases had argued that their 
children were not assigned to schools of their choice in 
the two school districts because they were white. The 
decision of the Supreme Court overturns rulings of 
lower courts that had upheld the school districts’ use 
of race in assigning children to schools to achieve ra-
cial integration. The decision has the potential to undo 
voluntary integration plans in school districts around 
the country and to erode further the school desegrega-
tion efforts of the past half-century. 
 2007 
NCLB, the current authorization of the Elemen-
tary and Secondary Education Act, is scheduled for 

Chronology 133
 reauthorization, and a plan for reauthorization is put 
forward by Secretary of Education Margaret Spellings. 
But due to disagreement in Congress and across the 
country about what such a reauthorization should 
include, no reauthorization bill is introduced in 
 Congress. It is likely that a reauthorization will not be 
debated until after the new administration takes office 
in 2009. 
 2008 
In his State of the Union address, President Bush de-
scribes progress in student achievement that he at-
tributes to NCLB. In particular, he asserts that test 
scores in mathematics of fourth- and eighth-graders 
and reading scores in general have increased. He chal-
lenges the nation to continue on the path of NCLB: 
“Now we must work together to increase accountabil-
ity, add flexibility for states and districts, reduce the 
number of high school dropouts, provide extra help 
for struggling schools” (Bush 2008). 
 2008 
Secretary of Education Margaret Spellings proposes 
a number of changes in NCLB regulations that she 
says will strengthen NCLB. The proposed regulations 
 address how schools report their students’ achieve-
ment publicly, the interventions that schools identi-
fied as needing restructuring have available to them, 
the creation of a National Technical Advisory Council, 
and ensuring that parents are notified in a timely man-
ner about their public school choices and options for 
supplementary services. Most importantly, Spellings 
calls for a uniform method of gathering data about 
graduation rates. Because states gather data in differ-
ent ways, it is difficult, if not impossible to calculate 
a national graduation rate. When a uniform method, 
such as the number of students entering ninth grade 
who complete high school in four years, is used, it will 
be possible to compare across states and to aggregate 
data nationally. 
 2008 
The Forum for Education and Democracy publishes 
“Democracy at Risk: The Need for a New Federal 
Policy in Education.” This report, authored by a group 
of distinguished educators headed by Linda Darling-
Hammond and George Wood, is based on the premise 
that the implementation of NCLB has not resulted in the 

134 Chronology
world-class education it promises. “Democracy at Risk” 
proposes a very different education policy at the fed-
eral government level that invests in equal educational 
 opportunity, supports the development of a world-class 
cadre of skilled teachers, supports educational research 
and innovation, and educates local communities about 
and engages local communities in creating schools that 
ensure that all children have opportunities for world-
class learning. The report, based on sound educational 
research, provides a strategic plan for implementing 
such a federal education policy. 
 2008 
In response to concerns raised by a number of states, 
Secretary of Education Margaret Spellings announces 
a pilot program that will allow states some flexibility 
in identifying schools for improvement, corrective ac-
tion, and restructuring. According to Spellings, this 
“differentiated accountability” allows states to allocate 
more resources to schools where the problems  require 
more intensive interventions. States must apply to be 
part of the pilot program of this differentiated account-
ability. 
 References 
 Bush, G. W. 2008. State of the Union address. http://www.whitehouse.
gov/news/releases/2008/01/20080128–13.html. 
 Clinton, W. J. 1997. State of the Union address. http://clinton2.nara.
gov/WH/SOU97.
 Currence, C. 1985. “Governors Study Toughest Issues Facing 
Schools.” Education Week, August 21. http://www.edweek.org/ew/
articles/1985/08/21/06180029.h04.html.
 National Education Goals Panel. November 1993. “Promises to Keep: 
Creating High Standards for American Students.” Washington, DC. 
http://www.ed.gov/legislation/GOALS2000/TheAct/sec102.html. 
 Vernez, G., R. Karam, L. T. Mariano, and C. DeMartini. 2006.  Evaluating
Comprehensive School Reform Models at Scale: Focus on Implementation.
Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation. 
 Vinovskis, M. A. 1998.  Overseeing the National Report Card: The Creation 
and Evolution of the National Assessment Governing Board. Washington, 
DC: The National Assessment Governing Board. 

135
 P
ublic education in the United States is just that, public, and 
many people have been influential in its reform. The list of 
educators, scholars, policy makers, politicians, and researchers
who are and have been involved in some way in improving edu-
cation in the United States is long, a testament to the historical 
commitment to public education as a vital part of our democratic 
way of life. Each of the people described in this chapter have 
made significant contributions to education reform in the United 
States. They are not only researchers and scholars, but also practi-
tioners of their research and scholarship; they have rolled up their 
sleeves and involved themselves in the work of school reform at 
the school, school district, state, and national level. 
 James A. Banks (1941–) 
 James A. Banks has worked throughout his career toward social 
justice in education in general, and in particular in social studies 
education. As a child in the segregated South, Banks experienced 
firsthand the effects of discrimination and an educational system 
that denied the realities of the lives of African Americans under 
segregation. He began his career as an elementary teacher, and he 
earned his master’s and doctoral degrees at Michigan State Uni-
versity. He joined the faculty of the University of Washington in 
1969. At the University of Washington, Banks founded the Center 
for Multicultural Education in 1992, and since that time, he has 
held the post of director of the center. Currently, he is Kerry and 
Linda Killinger Professor of Diversity Studies at the university. 
 5 
 Biographical Sketches 

136 Biographical Sketches
 Banks has written extensively about multicultural educa-
tion, including with his wife, Cherry A. McGee Banks,  The Hand-
book of Research on Multicultural Education  (1997; 2004). His other 
books address issues of multicultural curriculum and teaching 
strategies, citizenship education, and creating multicultural 
schools and classrooms. In the United States, Banks is often 
called the “father of multicultural education,” and in 2004, the 
American Educational Research Association awarded him with 
its first Social Justice in Education Award for his research that 
has advanced social justice. 
 Banks has been president of the American Educational Re-
search Association and the National Council for Social Studies 
(NCSS). As a member and officer of NCSS, Banks edited and 
authored the organization’s publications on multicultural edu-
cation. He has presented distinguished lectures throughout the 
United States about multicultural education and education in a 
diverse society. In 2000, Banks was elected to the National Academy
of Education. 
 David Berliner (1938–) 
 David Berliner, Regents Professor in Educational Leadership and 
Policy Studies at Arizona State University, is an educational psy-
chologist. With his fellow educational psychologist Bruce Biddle, 
Berliner challenged the popular notion that schools in the United 
States are failing. In their book,  The Manufactured Crisis: Myths, 
Fraud, and the Attack on America’s Public Schools  (1995), Berliner 
and Biddle argue that the idea that U.S. schools are failing is 
rhetoric intended to support the undoing of the universal, free 
public education that has been the cornerstone of our democratic 
society. They acknowledge that there are many problems facing 
education in the United States and around the world. However, 
they aver, the solutions that have been proposed, including choice 
and privatization, cannot adequately address the problems, and 
instead, may serve to dismantle our system of public education. 
Berliner’s book  Collateral Damage: The Effects of High-Stakes Testing 
on America’s Schools (2007), coauthored with Sharon L. Nichols, 
analyzes the effects of the high-stakes testing required in No Child 
Left Behind as harmful to children and schools. 
 Berliner has been president of the American Educational 
Research Association, as well as the Division of Educational 

Benjamin Bloom 137
Psychology of the American Psychological Association. He has 
received many awards and honors for his work. Among them are 
the Friends of Education Award from the National Education 
Association, the Brock International Prize for distinguished con-
tributions to education, the E. L. Thorndike award in educational 
psychology, and an award for distinguished contributions from 
the American Educational Research Association. 
 Berliner earned his PhD in educational psychology at Stanford 
University. His career has included teaching at the University of 
Massachusetts, the University of Oregon, and Stanford University. 
He also has taught in Australia, Israel, and Spain. He continues to 
advocate for public education in the United States, arguing that 
the onus for improving student achievement in schools should be 
not only on schools but also on society. Berliner argues that data 
that link educational outcomes with such factors as income and 
stability show that poverty is one of the biggest factors in chil-
dren’s learning. 
 Benjamin Bloom (1913–1999) 
 Benjamin Bloom (1913–1999), psychologist, was one of the found-
ers of the International Association for the Evaluation of Educa-
tional Achievement (IEA). His work with the IEA set the stage for 
the evaluations that enable international comparisons of student 
achievement. From the beginning of the international evaluations, 
according to Elliot Eisner (2000), Bloom cautioned that test scores 
cannot be interpreted or compared without considering the stu-
dents’ educational environments and contexts. 
Taxonomy of Educational Objectives: Handbook I, The Cognitive 
Domain  (1956) is probably the work that most people associate with 
Benjamin Bloom. Bloom and a group of his colleagues developed 
the taxonomy to classify test questions; for him, initially, the value 
of the taxonomy was to develop questions for examinations at the 
University of Chicago, where he earned his PhD in 1942 and where 
he was the university examiner from 1943 until 1959. (He began 
working as a staff member of the University of Chicago Board of 
Examinations in 1940.) Teachers associate Bloom’s name with the 
categories of the taxonomy: knowledge, comprehension, applica-
tion, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. When teachers talk about 
higher-level thinking skills, they typically refer to the higher levels 
of the taxonomy that has come to be known as Bloom’s Taxonomy. 

138 Biographical Sketches
 Bloom’s work extended to areas beyond the taxonomy. He 
believed, for example, that all students could learn, and his work 
laid the foundation for mastery learning and, later, outcome-based 
education, where the design of teaching requires teachers to vary 
the time for learning and the teaching strategies but to expect all 
students to be able to learn well. Bloom was instrumental in the 
development of the Head Start program, testifying in Congress 
about the importance of the first four years of a child’s life in cog-
nitive development. 
 Besides his work at the University of Chicago, where he 
earned his doctorate and spent his academic career, Bloom served 
as president of the American Educational Research Association. 
He also served as adviser to a number of governments outside the 
United States, including India and Israel. 
 Jerome Bruner (1915–) 
 Jerome Bruner, an American psychologist, has greatly influenced 
the way educators and psychologists view how people learn and 
think. Bruner’s research investigated how humans form concepts, 
and he argued that learning is a process of discovery, with mean-
ings shaped by culture and the environment. In other words, 
humans learn through making sense of their experiences, by 
categorizing the experiences rather than by memorizing knowl-
edge. Bruner proposed a three-level hierarchy of representing 
learning: enactive representation (in which the learner “acts out” 
the learning), iconic representation (in which the learner creates 
images of the learning), and symbolic representation (in which 
the learner uses language to represent the learning). He argued 
that symbolic representation is mediated by one’s culture, making 
learning a cultural product. 
 Bruner earned a PhD in psychology from Harvard in 1941. 
After serving in World War II, he taught at Harvard, beginning in 
1945. From 1960 to 1972, Bruner worked at the Center for Cognitive 
Studies at Harvard. He left Harvard in 1972 for Wolfson College 
at Oxford University, where he was appointed Watts Professor of 
Psychology and Fellow. Returning to the United States in 1980, he 
worked at Harvard until 1981, when he took a position at the New 
School for Social Research in New York and became director of the 
New York Institute for the Humanities. He is currently a senior 
research fellow at the School of Law at New York University. 

James P. Comer 139
 Bruner was involved in the wave of school reform that was 
generated by the launch of Sputnik. In 1959, he was asked to head 
a reform group of scientists and educators charged with develop-
ing a new science curriculum that would help to make the United 
States competitive. He also helped to develop a social science cur-
riculum, “Man: A Course of Study,” that generated controversy 
and whose funding was dropped by the federal government. 
 Bruner’s writings include many books, papers, and journal 
articles. Among them are  Acts of Meaning  (1991) and  The Culture 
of Education (1996), books that have been most important in influ-
encing how educators understand learning. 
 James P. Comer (1934–) 
 James P. Comer, MD, MPH, is the Maurice Falk Professor of 
Child Psychiatry at the Yale University School of Medicine 
Child Study Center. Comer has worked to improve schools for 
minority children for more than 40 years. His model of school 
reform, the School Development Program, is based on research 
about and an understanding of child development and a strong 
home-school-community connection. Comer has served on 
many national commissions and boards with the purpose of 
improving education. Among them are the Roundtable on Child 
and Adolescent Development Research and Teacher Education, 
organized by the National Association for the Accreditation of 
Teacher Education (NCATE) and the National Institute of Child 
Health and Human Development (NICHD). 
 Comer has written extensively about education for black chil-
dren, and, in addition to many papers and articles, he has pub-
lished nine books. These include Beyond Black and White (1972), 
School Power: Implications of an Intervention Project (1980), and 
Leave No Child Behind: Preparing Today’s Youth for Tomorrow’s World
(2004).
 Comer’s work has influenced schools across the United 
States. Schools in many cities have used the School Development 
Program model as a basis for their reform efforts, empowering 
parents and building strong connections among families, schools, 
and communities. The Comer School Development Program at 
the Child Study Center at Yale University continues to provide 
professional development and support to schools that are imple-
menting the program. 

140 Biographical Sketches
 Linda Darling-Hammond (1951–) 
 Linda Darling-Hammond was named one of the 10 most influen-
tial people affecting education policy over the decade 1996–2006 by 
the Editorial Projects in Education Research Center. She earned her 
doctoral degree at Temple University, and she has been involved 
in education reform throughout her distinguished career, champi-
oning excellence and equity in public education and working to 
improve teacher education and public policy. Darling-Hammond 
is professor of education at Stanford University and co-executive 
director of the School Redesign Network and the Stanford Edu-
cational Leadership Institute. She is also one of the founders and 
conveners of the Forum for Education and Democracy. 
 Darling-Hammond was professor of education foundations 
at Teachers College, Columbia University before moving to Stan-
ford. Her work in school reform at Teachers College included 
serving the National Center for Restructuring Education, Schools, 
and Teaching (NCREST) as codirector. Other school reform posts 
Darling-Hammond has held include senior social scientist and 
director of the Education and Human Resources Program at the 
RAND Corporation and director of the Excellence in Education 
Program of the National Urban Coalition. 
 Working to improve teacher preparation and teaching 
standards, Darling-Hammond has served as a member of the 
National Board for Professional Teaching Standards and as 
chair of the Model Standards Committee of the Interstate New 
Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium, a committee that 
developed licensing standards for new teachers. She is a mem-
ber of the National Academy of Education, and she has served 
on many national advisory boards and panels. She is currently 
serving as a director of the National Commission on Teaching 
and America’s Future. 
 Darling-Hammond’s research focuses on education reform, 
and she has published many books, research reports, and journal 
articles. Darling-Hammond’s vision for reforming schools can be 
found in her book The Right to Learn: A Blueprint for Creating Schools 
that Work  (1997). Her current work focuses on teacher quality and 
the development and improvement of teacher education and 
preparation. Two of her books— Preparing Teachers for a Changing 
World: What Teachers Should Learn and Be Able to Do (2005) with 
John Bransford, Pamela LePage, Karen Hammerness, and Helen 

Lisa Delpit 141
Duffy, and  Powerful Learning: What We Know about Teaching for 
Understanding  (2008) with Brigid Barron, P. David Pearson, and 
Alan H. Schoenfeld—focus on what effective teachers do that re-
sults in high levels of learning and how teacher preparation pro-
grams can develop those effective teaching practices. 
 Lisa Delpit (1952–) 
 Lisa Delpit is the Knight Eminent Scholar and the director of the 
Center for Urban Education and Innovation at Florida Interna-
tional University. Delpit has devoted her career to understanding 
and helping teachers and prospective teachers to understand the 
importance of valuing and honoring children’s culture in deter-
mining how and what to teach. She began her career as an urban 
elementary teacher, and during that time, Delpit began to ques-
tion the effectiveness of the teaching methods she had learned in 
her teacher preparation program for urban children of color. 
 Delpit has conducted research on teaching in Alaska, New 
Guinea, Fiji, and urban and rural areas in the United States. She 
has written and spoken about how to teach children of color and 
particularly African American children. Delpit was awarded a 
MacArthur “genius” fellowship in 1990 for her work on school-
community relations and cross-cultural communication. Her first 
book, Other People’s Children: Cultural Conflict in the Classroom
(1995), shows how teachers fail to understand that children come 
to school with cultural strengths that must be acknowledged, and 
that by valuing and honoring these cultural strengths, teachers 
can be more effective. Understanding the culture that children 
bring with them into the classroom is key to being able to com-
municate with and teach them. In the book, Delpit is critical of 
such teaching methods as whole language and process writing for 
African American children; instead, she believes, children should 
be taught specific skills and strategies for navigating the domi-
nant society. 
 Formerly the Benjamin E. Mays Chair of Urban Educational 
Excellence at Georgia State University in Atlanta, Delpit was also 
director of the Center for Urban Educational Excellence at Georgia 
State. The work of the center focused on education and race. Del-
pit is the coeditor of two books that focus on issues of language 
and race in education. She coedited The Real Ebonics Debate: Power, 

142 Biographical Sketches
Language and the Education of African-American Children  (1998) with 
Theresa Perry. This book deals with the issues surrounding the 
debate sparked by the Oakland, California, school board when it 
applied for funds to teach standard English as a second language 
for children whose first language was Ebonics. The essays in  The
Skin That We Speak: Thoughts on Language and Culture in the Class-
room  (2002), coedited with Joanne Kilgour Dowdy, explore the use 
of dialects in the classroom. 
 Delpit has received many accolades and awards, among 
them awards from her two alma maters. In 1993, the Harvard 
University Graduate School of Education, where Delpit earned 
both her master’s and doctoral degrees, honored her with their 
Alumni Award for Outstanding Contribution to Education. Del-
pit earned her undergraduate degree at Antioch College, where 
she was given the Horace Mann Award for winning “some vic-
tory for humanity” in 2003. 
 Chester Finn (1944–) 
 Chester Finn recently published his autobiography,  Troublemaker: 
A Personal History of School Reform Since Sputnik  (2008), the account 
of his career-long involvement with school reform and improve-
ment in the United States. His work, his voice, and his writing 
have focused on raising educational standards, offering high-
quality choices for parents of school children, and improving the 
quality of public school teachers. Currently, he is the president of 
the Thomas B. Fordham Foundation, a senior fellow and chair of 
the Koret Task Force on K-12 Education at the Hoover Institution, 
an adjunct fellow at the Hudson Institute, and a Fellow of the 
International Academy of Education. 
 Finn earned his doctorate at Harvard University. He was a 
professor of education and public policy at Vanderbilt University 
from 1981 to 2002. He served as assistant secretary for research 
and improvement and counselor to the U.S. secretary of educa-
tion from 1985 to 1988. In addition, he has held positions at a 
number of foundations and several advisory positions in govern-
ment, among them staff assistant to the president of the United 
States, counsel to the U.S. ambassador to India, and legislative 
director for Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan. From 1992 to 1994, 
Finn was one of the founding partners and a senior scholar of the 
Edison Project, which organizes and manages schools, including 

Michael Fullan 143
charter schools and schools operated under contract with school 
districts.
 Paolo Freire (1921–1997) 
 Paolo Freire (1921–1997), Brazilian educator and educational phi-
losopher, believed that people could be empowered through edu-
cation. As director of the Department of Education and Culture 
of the Social Service of his state in Brazil (from 1946) and later as 
director of the Department of Cultural Extension of Recife Uni-
versity (1961–1963), Freire’s work focused on teaching literacy to 
the poor. 
 At that time in Brazil, people had to be literate to be allowed 
to vote, and Freire’s work was seen as upsetting the social order. 
After a coup d’état imposed military rule, Freire was imprisoned 
and eventually exiled from Brazil for nearly 16 years, which he 
spent in Chile, the United States (where he was invited to Harvard 
as a visiting professor), and Geneva, Switzerland. In Geneva, Freire 
worked for the World Council of Churches, promoting literacy in 
Third World countries. Freire returned to Brazil in 1980 and served 
as professor at the Catholic University of São Paulo and the State 
University of Campinas, and in 1988 he became municipal secre-
tary of education in São Paolo, a position he held for two years. In 
1990, he went back to full-time teaching and writing. 
 Among Paolo Freire’s many publications are the books  Peda-
gogy of the Oppressed  (1970),  Pedagogy of Freedom: Ethics, Democracy, 
and Civic Courage  (1998), and  Teachers as Cultural Workers: Letters to 
those Who Dare Teach  (1998). All of these books challenge educators 
to learn with and from their students, to help students connect the 
curriculum with their lives and worlds outside their classrooms, 
and to model democracy in their classrooms. 
 Michael Fullan (1940–) 
 Michael Fullan is professor emeritus and former dean of the 
Ontario Institute for Studies in Education. His book  The New 
Meaning of Educational Change , is in its fourth edition and is consid-
ered a classic text in education reform. Fullan believes that educa-
tion reform is not about mandates and policy; instead, he argues 
that real change that has the potential to last is about building 

144 Biographical Sketches
 relationships and changing the culture of the school. This recul-
turing requires skills and habits of mind that include collabora-
tion, reflective practice, and informed decision making. 
 Fullan believes that reform is systemic, and he has worked 
with schools and communities, school districts, and governments 
around the world to facilitate education reform. He has worked 
on large-scale reform efforts in Ontario, Canada; England; Wales; 
Australia; and the Netherlands, as well as in the United States. 
These reform efforts have all been focused on the improvement 
of learning for all students. He has been particularly interested in 
helping schools and school personnel form a deep commitment to 
closing the achievement gap and develop the knowledge and the 
skills to realize that commitment. 
 Fullan’s many publications include  Breakthrough  (2006) with 
Peter Hill and Carmel Crévola,  Turnaround Leadership  (2006),  The
Six Secrets of Change: What the Best Leaders Do to Help Their Orga-
nizations Survive and Thrive (2008), and a second edition of  What’s 
Worth Fighting for in the Principalship  (2008). All of Fullan’s books 
are based on his work with schools and organizations around the 
world; they are both theoretical and practical, and they represent 
Fullan’s stance as both consultant and learner. 
 Since his retirement, Fullan has served as special adviser in 
education to the premier of Canada and the Canadian minister of 
education. He has developed a course, Learning to Lead Change, 
through Microsoft’s Partners in Learning global initiative to build 
and support effective school leadership in countries in Latin 
America, Asia, and Europe. 
 Mary Hatwood Futrell (1940–) 
 Mary Hatwood Futrell is dean of the Graduate School of Educa-
tion and Human Development at George Washington University 
in Washington, D.C. In 1983, when Futrell was elected president 
of the National Education Association,  People  magazine called her 
“one of the most powerful black women in America.” Prior to that 
election, she worked as a teacher and officer of the Virginia Edu-
cation Association, an affiliate of the National Education Associa-
tion. Futrell has dedicated her career to advocating for teachers, 
for improving their working conditions, and for raising public 
awareness of the difficulties of their work, and at the same time, 
helping to improve the quality of teacher preparation. 

Howard Gardner 145
 Futrell led the National Education Association in its re-
sponse to “A Nation at Risk,” when many blamed teachers for 
what the report described as the “rising tide of mediocrity” in 
the public schools in the United States. She defended teachers, 
arguing that teachers were not responsible for the economic and 
social problems that made teaching so difficult. When President 
Ronald Reagan tried to abolish the U.S. Department of Educa-
tion, Futrell fought hard to maintain it as part of the president’s 
cabinet. 
 Futrell was reelected twice to the presidency of the National 
Education Association. A strong advocate for teachers, Futrell was 
invited to join the Carnegie Forum on Education and the Economy. 
The Forum issued a report in 1986 that called for higher teacher 
salaries; it also recommended significant changes to teacher cer-
tification in the United States. As president of the National Edu-
cation Association, Futrell also was instrumental in joining with 
the American Federation of Teachers, the second-largest teachers’ 
union in the United States, to form the National Board for Pro-
fessional Teaching Standards, the organization that now awards 
national teaching certification to master teachers. 
 In 1989, Futrell stepped down from the presidency of the 
National Education Association to become associate director of 
the Center for the Study of Education and National Development 
at George Washington University until 1992, and then director of 
the Center for Curriculum Studies and Technology, a post that 
she held until accepting the position of dean in 1995. In this posi-
tion, she has continued to advocate for teachers even as she has 
helped to redesign the teacher preparation curriculum at George 
Washington University. That teacher preparation curriculum has 
become a model for other colleges and universities. 
 Howard Gardner (1943–) 
 Howard Gardner is a Harvard psychologist and educator whose 
theory of multiple intelligences challenges traditional theories of 
how intelligence is defined, evaluated, and supported. Gardner’s 
notion of multiple intelligences differs from the traditional theory 
in that it proposes that intelligence is developed rather than inher-
ited, and that there are many different ways of being intelligent. 
Instead of asking how smart someone is, the question for those 
espousing Gardner’s theory is how someone is smart. 

146 Biographical Sketches
 Gardner worked with Jerome Bruner on his “Man: A Course 
of Study” project and began his work with Project Zero at Harvard 
even before he completed his doctorate there. He has worked with 
Project Zero since that time, now serving as codirector. His work 
at Project Zero allowed him to study how people learn, which led 
him to the theory of multiple intelligences. Gardner originally 
identified seven intelligences and later, three more. The original 
seven intelligences include linguistic, logical-mathematical, spa-
tial, bodily-kinesthetic, musical, interpersonal, intrapersonal. The 
additional three are naturalistic, existential, and moral intelli-
gences.
 Not only does Gardner’s theory challenge definitions of 
intelligence, it also challenges teaching strategies. According to 
Gardner, if there are multiple intelligences, then there must be 
multiple corresponding ways to teach. His publications explore 
his theory in depth, as well as document how the theory has 
developed. Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences
(1983; 1993), The Unschooled Mind: How Children Think and How 
Schools Should Teach  (1991),  Intelligence Reframed: Multiple Intel-
ligences for the 21st Century  (1999), and  The Disciplined Mind: Be-
yond Facts and Standardized Tests  (1999) progress from Gardner’s 
initial theory of seven intelligences to the identification of the 
eighth intelligence and the proposal for the ninth, and how the 
theory can be applied in schools so that children have opportu-
nities to develop the whole range of intelligences. 
 A number of schools across the United States have used 
multiple intelligence theory to guide their curriculums and their 
teaching. The Key School in Indianapolis is one that uses multiple 
intelligence theory as the basis of all of their work with children. 
 John Goodlad (1920–) 
 John Goodlad is professor emeritus of education at the University 
of Washington and president of the Center for Educational Re-
newal, which he founded at the University of Washington in 1985 
with Kenneth Sirotnik and Roger Soder. Goodlad’s and the center’s 
work has focused on teaching and learning in a democracy, the 
moral and political issues involved in teaching and learning, and 
the quality of and important role of teachers in schools and school 
renewal. Goodlad is considered one of the most influential educa-
tors and educational theorists of the last half of the 20th century. 

Ken Goodman 147
 Goodlad was born in Canada, and he taught in a one-room 
rural school there before coming to the United States and earning 
his doctoral degree at the University of Chicago. His 1984 book, 
A Place Called School , is considered a landmark study of educa-
tion and schools in the United States. Since that time, Goodlad 
has conducted numerous studies on educational change and pub-
lished many other books and articles about U.S. schooling. He 
held university posts in teacher education at a number of colleges 
and universities, among them Emory University, Agnes Scott Col-
lege, and the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). 
 At UCLA, Goodlad was the director of the Laboratory School 
and dean of the Graduate School of Education. One of the fac-
tors that distinguished Goodlad’s work is the strong connection 
between theory and practice that it represents, and Goodlad’s 
appointment at UCLA represented his commitment to ground-
ing theory in practice and also provided him with the laboratory 
needed to build that connection. 
 Ken Goodman (1927–) 
 Ken Goodman is an educational researcher whose work forms the 
basis of the psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic theory of read-
ing called whole language. For Goodman and other proponents of 
whole language, reading is a process of “actively but tentatively 
constructing meaning, making predictions and inferences that 
were used in sampling the text to get meaning” that parallels the 
development of language (Goodman 2000). Goodman’s theory 
and his work are controversial, and they have fueled a continuing 
debate about the nature of reading and language and about how 
teachers should teach reading. 
 Goodman earned his doctorate at UCLA as the first doctoral 
student of John Goodlad. He began his research on the reading 
process as an assistant professor at Wayne State University in De-
troit, and his first book,  The Psycholinguistic Nature of the Reading 
Process  (1968), was the result of a conference by the same name 
that brought together a group of researchers to discuss using lin-
guistics in the research of reading. From his continuing research, 
Goodman developed the notion that readers’ mistakes, or as he 
calls them, “miscues,” give insight into the strategies that read-
ers use to make sense of the text. Yetta Goodman, Ken’s wife and 
a researcher in her own right, developed the Reading Miscue 

148 Biographical Sketches
Inventory with Carolyn Burke and Dorothy Watson, based on the 
notion that analysis of learners’ miscues can provide insight to 
teachers about what parts of the reading process the learners are 
controlling and what they are ready to learn. 
 Goodman’s research led him to develop an increasingly so-
phisticated theory of reading as a linguistic process, and although 
his work has been controversial in the United States, it has been 
accepted in other places around the world, including Canada, Aus-
tralia, New Zealand, and England. His book, What’s Whole in Whole 
Language  (1986), was published first in Canada. It has been trans-
lated into French, Spanish, Portuguese, Japanese, and Chinese. In 
1993, as a response to a push in the United States to teach phonics, 
Goodman published his book Phonics Phacts  about the relationship 
between sound systems and written language, based on his obser-
vation of miscues over years of research. 
 Goodman has been active professionally in the National 
Council of Teachers of English, and he has served as president 
of the International Reading Association, the National Confer-
ence on Research in Language and Literacy, and the Center for 
the Expansion of Language and Thinking. His articles have been 
published in many professional journals, and he has presented 
at literally hundreds of professional conferences and meetings. 
Goodman retired in 1998 from the University of Arizona, but he 
continues to write and speak about and work toward “freedom to 
learn, freedom to teach, and social justice” (Goodman 2000). 
 E. D. Hirsch, Jr. (1928–) 
 E. D. Hirsch, Jr., PhD, Yale University, is an educator retired 
from his position as professor of education and humanities and 
the Linden Kent Memorial Professor of English Emeritus at the 
University of Virginia. In the education arena, Hirsch is best 
known for promoting cultural literacy as the basis for curricu-
lum and teaching. 
 Hirsch’s own research led him to discover that students’ back-
ground knowledge or lack of it affects how they understand what 
they read, and he founded the Core Knowledge Foundation in 
1986 to promote the idea of cultural literacy as the basis of reading. 
The Core Knowledge Foundation has developed a school reform 
movement around a curriculum that identifies “core knowledge” 
to be learned at each grade level, pre-kindergarten through grade 

Madeline Cheek Hunter 149
eight. According to the Core Knowledge Foundation, core knowl-
edge is “solid”; that is, it is knowledge that doesn’t change, like 
essential concepts in mathematics or “stories passed down from 
generation to generation.” Core knowledge is sequenced, building 
carefully from one grade to the next. Core knowledge is specific, 
defining explicitly what children should learn at each grade level. 
And core knowledge is shared—it is the knowledge that is gener-
ally assumed in our culture. Hirsch himself published a series of 
books about what a child should know at each grade level. 
 Hirsch’s ideas are controversial, but the Core Knowledge 
Foundation Web site includes a link to publications that report on 
the success of “core knowledge” in improving student learning 
and closing the achievement gap. In 2006, Hirsch published his 
book The Knowledge Deficit , again promoting the idea that back-
ground knowledge is critical to reading comprehension. 
 Madeline Cheek Hunter (1916–1994) 
 Madeline Cheek Hunter (1916–1994) was a teacher, school psy-
chologist, school administrator, and UCLA lecturer. Her work 
focused on translating educational research and theory into teach-
ing practice. Hunter viewed teaching as a process of making deci-
sions, and she categorized those decisions in three ways—what 
should be taught (content), how it should be taught (instruction), 
and what students should know and be able to do (learning). 
 Hunter developed several models of instruction. Her lesson 
design for teaching knowledge and skills was adopted by 16 states 
and used in many more as the official model of lesson planning. 
It was also often used to evaluate teaching. Sadly, that model was 
used out of context; some states and school districts required that 
every lesson plan match each of the steps in that model, ignor-
ing the fact that Hunter proposed and promoted more than one 
model of teaching. The instructional component of mastery learn-
ing, one of the pillars of outcome-based education, was based on 
Madeline Hunter’s models of teaching. 
 Among Hunter’s many publications was a series of books 
that translated “psychological principles into the language of the 
classroom.” Some of the books in the series were  Reinforcement 
Theory for Teachers (1967),  Motivation Theory for Teachers (1969), 
Teach More—Faster  (1969),  Teach for Transfer  (1971), and  Mastery
Teaching (1982). 

150 Biographical Sketches
 Jonathan Kozol (1936–) 
 Jonathan Kozol is an activist for social justice in public schools. He 
has devoted his life to bringing to the public eye the plight of poor 
and minority children and their families in the United States. He 
has fought against the inequality that he identified early on, and 
he continues to fight, most recently even going on a fast to protest 
the effects of No Child Left Behind. 
 Kozol began his career in education as a fourth grade teacher 
in an inner city school in the Boston Public Schools; during his first 
year at the school, he was fired for teaching Langston Hughes’s 
poetry to his students. His first book, Death at an Early Age: The 
Destruction of the Hearts and Minds of Negro Children in the Boston 
Public Schools  (1967), documents that year of teaching, and it won 
a National Book Award. Kozol’s experience teaching in the inner 
city led him to the civil rights movement. He taught several more 
years in Newton, Massachusetts, before devoting his life full time 
to social activism and writing. 
 Kozol’s book  Savage Inequalities: Children in America’s Schools
(1991) analyzed and described the huge disparities he observed 
between schools that serve poor, minority children and schools 
that serve children from more affluent families.  Amazing Grace: 
The Lives of Children and the Conscience of a Nation  (1995) takes a 
closer look at how the disparities in society and in education 
affect children. Based on his observations of and interactions with 
children in the South Bronx in New York City, the book tells about 
the lives of real children living in poverty and attending schools 
that serve poor and minority children. Kozol’s books  Ordinary
Resurrections: Children in the Years of Hope  (1992) and  The Shame of 
the Nation: The Restoration of Apartheid Schooling in America (2005) 
describe the resegregation of schools in the United States. 
 Gloria Ladson-Billings (1947–) 
 Gloria Ladson-Billings, PhD, Stanford University, is the Kellner 
Family Professor of Urban Education in the Department of Cur-
riculum and Instruction at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. 
Ladson-Billings’s work has focused on developing and promot-
ing culturally relevant classrooms and schools as a way to ensure 
high-quality learning for minority children. Her critique of public 

Deborah Meier 151
education in the United States is based on her social justice per-
spective, and she calls for educational systems to address the soci-
etal, historical, moral, political, and ethical issues that have served 
to hinder the academic success of minority children. 
 Ladson-Billings has carried her social justice perspective into 
her writing. Her book The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of Afri-
can American Children  (1997) describes how these teachers interact 
with African American children, how they teach, and how they 
communicate expectations for the children to be successful. In 
Beyond the Big House: African American Educators on Teacher Educa-
tion  (2005), Ladson-Billings describes the experiences of African 
American teacher educators as they work to foreground race and 
racial issues in teacher education and to prepare new teachers to 
create classrooms that are racially and culturally relevant. (Cul-
turally relevant classrooms are those where children’s cultural 
knowledge and background are included in the curriculum, where 
teachers actively communicate that the children’s backgrounds 
and knowledge are valued, and where multicultural literature 
provides a variety of perspectives. All of this is so that children 
see themselves in the curriculum and work of the classroom.) 
Ladson-Billings has also worked to change the face of educational 
research. She has developed critical race theory into a research 
perspective and methodology, and she has conducted studies of 
schools, teachers, and classrooms from that perspective. 
 Ladson-Billings is a past president of the American Educa-
tional Research Association, and she has won several awards for 
her work. Among them are an honorary doctorate from Umea 
University in Sweden, the Palmer O. Johnson Outstanding Re-
search Award, and the George and Louise Spindler Award for her 
work in educational anthropology. 
 Deborah Meier (1931–) 
 Deborah Meier, MA, University of Chicago, knows and un-
derstands education reform firsthand. She has not only taught 
in public schools, but she has also founded and directed both 
elementary and high schools that were innovative and extraor-
dinarily successful. She began her career as a kindergarten and 
Head Start classroom teacher in the urban schools of Chicago, 
Philadelphia, and New York. After founding a network of suc-
cessful elementary schools in East Harlem, she founded Central 

152 Biographical Sketches
Park East Secondary School, a New York public high school, 
where more than 90 percent of the entering students went on 
to graduate and attend college. Later, Meier founded the Mis-
sion Hill School in the Roxbury community in the Boston Public 
Schools.
 The schools Meier founded were “coalition” schools, mem-
ber schools of the Coalition for Essential Schools, and she founded 
a local center for the Coalition for Essential Schools while she was 
working at Central Park East Secondary School. From 1992 to 
1996, Deborah Meier served as the director of the Coalition Cam-
pus Project, which successfully redesigned two formerly failing 
New York City high schools; the project also started a number of 
new Coalition schools. And from 1995 to 1997, Meier worked as 
an adviser to the Annenberg Challenge in New York City, as well 
as senior fellow at the Annenberg Institute for School Reform at 
Brown University. 
 Meier documented her work in her book  The Power of Their 
Ideas: Lessons to America from a Small School in Harlem (1995). She 
has also written several other books and numerous journal articles 
about education reform. Currently, Meier is a faculty member at 
New York University; she is the director and adviser to the Forum 
for Democracy and Education, and she serves on the board of the 
Coalition for Essential Schools. 
 Sonia Nieto (1943–) 
 Sonia Nieto is professor emerita of language, literacy, and cul-
ture in the School of Education at the University of Massachu-
setts, Amherst, where she earned her PhD. During Nieto’s career 
she has taught at every level, from elementary through graduate 
school, and she has worked toward helping teachers understand 
how to create multicultural classrooms that affirm and celebrate 
the diversity of the students in them. 
 Nieto’s work, focusing on improving the education of Lati-
nos and other linguistically diverse students, has informed her 
teaching and writing. Her text, Affirming Diversity: The Socio-
political Context of Multicultural Education  with co-author Patty 
Bode (fifth edition, 2008), is considered a seminal text in the 
field of multicultural education and is used in teacher prepara-
tion programs and teacher professional development programs 
across the United States and in other countries. Nieto has  written 

Nel Noddings 153
and edited several other books as well as chapters in other books 
and articles in professional journals, all focused on equity and 
social justice. 
 An activist for equity and social justice in education, Nieto’s 
advocacy has been recognized at the local, state, and national 
level. She has served on boards and panels whose work mirrors 
her own, including the Center for Applied Linguistics, Facing 
Ourselves and History, and Educators for Social Responsibility. 
Nieto has won many awards for her advocacy and her scholar-
ship, including the Human and Civil Rights Award from the Mas-
sachusetts Teachers Association, the Multicultural Educator of the 
Year Award from the National Association for Multicultural Edu-
cation, and the Criticas Journal Hall of Fame Spanish Language 
Community Advocate of the Year Award. She has won numerous 
awards from the American Educational Research Association, 
including the 2008 Social Justice in Education Award. 
 Although Nieto is retired from the University of Massachu-
setts, she continues to write, to speak, and to advocate for social 
justice and equity and for the development of classrooms that 
honor and value the cultural, ethnic, and linguistic backgrounds 
of all of the children in them. 
 Nel Noddings (1929–) 
 Nel Noddings is a feminist educator and philosopher; she has 
also worked in the area of mathematics education. Her contribu-
tions to the education reform conversation have been many, but 
she is best known for her work about the ethics of care. Noddings 
earned her PhD in education at Stanford University. Prior to 
Noddings’s retirement, she held academic positions at Stanford 
University, Columbia University, and Colgate University. Since 
her retirement in 1998, she has been the Lee L. Jacks Professor of 
Education, Emerita, at Stanford University. 
 Noddings applied her ideas of caring to education in a num-
ber of journal articles and books on the topic. Among her many 
publications, the books The Challenge to Care in Schools: An Alter-
native Approach to Education  (1992),  Educating Moral People (2002), 
and Happiness and Education  (2003) challenge educators to create 
nurturing schools where children are cared about and cared for, 
so that they learn to care for and about others. In 2007, Noddings 
published When School Reform Goes Wrong , a critique of No Child 

154 Biographical Sketches
Left Behind that calls for society and schools to address children’s 
physical and social needs, as well as nurturing and caring for chil-
dren, as prerequisites for learning. 
 Rod Paige (1933–) 
 Rod Paige was confirmed as the seventh United States Secre-
tary of Education in 2001. As secretary of education for four 
years, Paige worked first to pass No Child Left Behind and then 
was responsible for partnering with states, school districts, and 
schools to implement the reforms the No Child Left Behind leg-
islation called for. 
 Paige came to the office of U.S. secretary of education as the 
first school superintendent to be appointed to that position. 
Before his appointment, Paige was superintendent of the Houston 
(Texas) Independent School District (ISD), where he had overseen 
reforms that included incentive pay for teachers and increased ac-
countability. His tenure in the Houston Independent School Dis-
trict also included the development of a system of charter schools 
and “the Houston miracle”—claims of vastly improved student 
achievement and increased high school graduation, claims which 
have been challenged by subsequent research and analysis of the 
Houston data. 
 Paige brought with him to the superintendency of the Houston
ISD and the U.S. Department of Education experience as a college 
teacher and coach. He served as dean of the College of Education 
at Texas Southern University for 10 years, and in that position, 
he established the Center for Excellence in Urban Education at 
Texas Southern. From 1989 to 1994, Paige served as a trustee of the 
Houston Independent School District Board of Education before 
becoming superintendent in 1994. 
 Paige grew up in segregated Mississippi with parents who 
were both educators. He earned his undergraduate degree from 
Jackson State University and master’s and doctoral degrees from 
Indiana University. He has won several awards for his service, in-
cluding the Richard R. Green Award as outstanding urban educa-
tor from the Council of Great City Schools, the National Alliance 
of Black School Educators’ Superintendent of the Year award, 
and the National Superintendent of the Year award by the Ameri-
can Association of School Administrators. Currently Paige is the 
chairman of Chartwell Education Group. 

Lauren B. Resnick 155
 Diane Ravitch (1938–) 
 Diane Ravitch led the U.S. Department of Education’s effort to 
develop national and state curriculum standards when she served 
as assistant secretary of education for educational research and 
improvement and counselor to Secretary of Education Lamar 
Alexander from 1991 to 1993. 
 Ravitch, who earned a PhD from Columbia University, is 
currently a research professor at Steinhardt School of Education 
at New York University. She is a historian of education, a policy 
analyst, and a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and the 
Hoover Institution, where she also serves as a member of the 
Koret Task Force on K-12 Education. 
 Ravitch has held several positions that involved her di-
rectly in education reform or that provided her the opportu-
nity to critique education reform efforts. She was appointed 
by then secretary of education Richard Riley to the National 
 Assessment Governing Board, a post she held from 1997 to 
2004. She edited Brookings Papers on Education and held the 
Brown Chair in Education Studies at the Brookings Institution 
from 1995 to 2005. 
 She has received many awards for her work throughout 
her career, among them the John Dewey Award from the New 
York City United Federation of Teachers in 2005, the Gaudium 
Award from the Breukelein Institute in 2005, and the Lead-
ership Award of the New York City Council of Supervisors 
and Administrators in 2004. Her many publications include 
Left Back: A Century of Battles Over School Reform  (2000) and 
The Language Police: How Pressure Groups Restrict What Students 
Learn  (2003). 
 Lauren B. Resnick (1936–) 
 Lauren B. Resnick has been a leader of the standards movement 
since its beginning in the United States. Resnick’s research in the 
cognitive science of learning and teaching has informed her work 
with teachers, schools, and school districts; her work with panels 
and boards on the national level; and her work in the development 
of the Institute for Learning, which she directs at the University of 
Pittsburgh. Professor of psychology at the University of Pittsburgh 

156 Biographical Sketches
with a doctoral degree from Harvard University, Resnick also 
directs the Learning Research and Development Center there. 
 Resnick was cofounder and codirector with Marc Tucker of 
the New Standards Project, whose work is described in more 
detail in earlier chapters. The New Standards Project involved 
educators across the country in the development of standards 
and assessments; that work continues to influence the educa-
tion reform of states, school districts, and schools. She also 
served as adviser to the first chair of the National Goals Panel, 
and she was a member of the National Council on Education 
Standards and Testing; her work with the panel and the council 
helped to initiate the standards movement in the United States. 
As part of the standards movement, Resnick also served on the 
national Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce, 
as chair of the assessment committee of the SCANS Commis-
sion, as chair of the Resource Group on Student Achievement 
of the National Education Goals Panel, on the Commission 
on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, and on the 
Mathematical Sciences Education Board of the National Re-
search Council. 
 Based on her research and that of many others, Resnick 
and her colleagues at the University of Pittsburgh developed a 
set of nine Principles of Learning, principles that describe the 
kinds of school and classroom conditions, teacher behaviors 
and attitudes, and student behaviors that lead to high levels 
of learning for all students. Resnick and her colleagues have 
used the Principles of Learning in their support of and work 
with urban school districts across the country in the process of 
reform. The Principles of Learning are (1) organizing for effort; 
(2) clear expectations; (3) fair and credible evaluations; (4) rec-
ognition of accomplishment; (5) academic rigor in a thinking 
curriculum; (6) accountable talk; (7) socializing intelligence; 
(8) self- management of learning; and (9) learning as apprentice 
(Principles of Learning 2007). 
 Resnick is the editor of “Research Points,” a policy brief pub-
lished by the American Educational Research Association that 
connects research with policy, and she has had numerous publica-
tions about the learning and thinking processes. Resnick’s work 
has been recognized in the United States by the American Psycho-
logical Association’s E. L. Thorndike Award and in Europe with 
the Oeuvre Award of the European Association for Research on 
Learning and Instruction. 

Mark Tucker 157
 Theodore Sizer (1932–) 
 Theodore Sizer has been a leader in the reform of schools in the 
United States throughout his career. Retired in 1996 from Brown 
University, where he was a professor of education, Sizer’s career 
included several teaching positions in addition to his position at 
Brown. Among them are dean of the Harvard Graduate School 
of Education (where he had earlier earned a PhD), headmaster of 
Philips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts, and coprincipal with 
his wife, Nancy Sizer, of the Frances W. Parker Charter Essential 
School, a school that serves students in grades 7 through 12 in 
Devens, Massachusetts. 
 Sizer’s area of research and the focus of his school reform 
efforts has been the design of American education, and in par-
ticular, the American high school. Based on his work with high 
schools since the late 1970s and a large-scale study of the Ameri-
can high school that he conducted with several other research-
ers, Sizer published three books that focused on the state of the 
American high school and the possibilities that he sees for 
redesigning the high school. His book  Horace’s Compromise: The 
Dilemma of the American High School  (1984) described the state 
of the high school, while two of his later books, Horace’s School: 
Redesigning the American High School  (1992) and  Horace’s Hope: 
What Works for the American High School  (1997), describe how the 
high school can be redesigned to improve student engagement, 
achievement, and ultimately, high school completion. 
 Sizer founded the Coalition of Essential Schools at Brown 
University in 1984 around a set of 10 common principles critical 
to a high performing school. Initially, 11 schools were part of the 
coalition; today it has grown to include hundreds of schools and 
several affiliate centers around the country. Sizer was also the 
founding director of the Annenberg Institute for School Reform, 
begun in 1993. 
 Mark Tucker (?–) 
 Marc Tucker has been a major force in the development of the 
standards movement in education in the United States. He cre-
ated the National Center on Education and the Economy (NCEE) 
in 1988, and he is currently its president and CEO. The mission of 

158 Biographical Sketches
NCEE from its inception has been to develop and adopt world-
class standards for education in the United States so that students 
would leave school with the skills and knowledge to compete in 
a global economy. 
 Tucker initiated the Commission on the Skills of the Ameri-
can Workforce in 1989, and he was the author of  America’s Choice: 
High Skills or Low Wages , released in 1990, that was based on re-
search in Europe and Asia conducted by the commission. This 
report, according to the NCEE, “made the case for standards-
driven reform in American Education” and influenced the Goals 
2000 legislation, the National Skills Standards Act, the School to 
Work Act, and the Workforce Investment Act, as well as school 
reform legislation in a number of states (NCEE 2005). Presi-
dent Bill Clinton appointed Tucker to the National Skills Stan-
dards Board, and Tucker collaborated with Lauren Resnick to 
design and chair the New Standards Project. Tucker is also one 
of the creators of America’s Choice, a comprehensive school re-
form model that is aimed at helping school districts implement 
 standards-based reform. 
 Tucker was a professor of education in the graduate school 
at the University of Rochester and a senior staff member at Car-
negie Corporation, where he wrote the report “A Nation Prepared: 
Teacher for the 21st Century,” which proposed the creation of 
the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards. Tucker 
served as the first president of that board. 
 Grant Wiggins (1950–) 
 Grant Wiggins is a leader in educational reform, particularly in 
the areas of curriculum change and authentic assessment. He is 
the president of Grant Wiggins & Associates and Authentic 
Education, a New Jersey-based firm that provides consulting, 
professional development, workshops, and training throughout 
the United States on the redesign of education. Wiggins earned 
his doctoral degree in education at Harvard University. 
 Wiggins works with schools, school districts, and state edu-
cation agencies on school reform, and he has worked with some of 
the biggest and most important assessment projects in the country. 
He was a teacher of English and philosophy at a boarding school 
for a number of years. According to Wiggins, living, working, and 
eating with his students, he came to know each student as talented 

References 159
and having individual interests. His work with teachers, schools, 
and school districts is grounded in that practical experience. 
 Wiggins was involved in the development of the Vermont 
portfolio system, the first large-scale portfolio assessment to be 
used statewide. He has established statewide consortia for assess-
ment reform in the states of New Jersey and North Carolina, and he 
helped to design performance-based portfolio assessment systems 
in those states. He has worked with Ted Sizer and the Coalition for 
Essential Schools as the first director of research for the Coalition. 
Understanding by Design  and its accompanying  The Understand-
ing by Design Handbook , both of which Wiggins coauthored with 
Jay McTighe, are two of his best-known publications. Both of these 
books describe and lead readers through the process of backward 
design of curriculum that begins with determining learning goals 
and then developing learning activities and assessments that align 
with the goals. Wiggins promotes the design of assessments that 
are “educative,” part of the learning process rather than separate 
from it, as well as key elements of an authentic curriculum. Wig-
gins has also published Educative Assessment  and  Assessing Student 
Performance , as well as many journal articles about curriculum and 
assessment design. 
 In addition to his work with K-12 education, Wiggins has 
worked with colleges and universities on educational design, and 
he was appointed scholar in residence at the College of New 
Jersey. Wiggins’s work has been supported by the Pew Charitable 
Trust, the Geraldine R. Dodge Foundation, the National Science 
Foundation, and the Education Commission of the States. 
 References 
 Eisner, E. W. 2000. “Benjamin Bloom.”  Prospects: The Quarterly Review of 
Comparative Education 30 (30). Paris: UNESCO. 
 Goodman, K. S. 2000. “Ken Goodman on his Life in Reading.”  History
of Reading News 23 (2). http://www.historyliteracy.org/scripts/search_
display.php?Article_ID=173. 
 National Center on Education and the Economy. 2005. “Marc 
Tucker.” http://www.ncee.org/ncee/leadership/marc_tucker.
jsp?setProtocol=true. 
 Principles of Learning. 2007. Pittsburgh, PA: Learning Research and 
Development Center, University of Pittsburgh. http://ifl.lrdc.pitt.edu/
ifl/index.php?section=pol.

This page intentionally left blank 

161
6
Data and Documents
T
his chapter includes a set of primary documents pertinent to 
education reform and its direction in the United States, as well 
as some sets of data about students’ academic achievement in 
the United States. These documents demonstrate reform efforts 
aimed at both achieving equity in education and improving the 
quality of education in our nation’s public schools.
Brown v. Board of Education
The Supreme Court case, Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 
483 (1954), barred states and school districts from segregating schools 
by race. This landmark case began the push for equity in public educa-
tion at the national level in the United States. The text of the decision 
follows.
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954) (USSC+)
347 U.S. 483
Argued December 9, 1952
Reargued December 8, 1953
Decided May 17, 1954
APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR 
THE DISTRICT OF KANSAS*
Syllabus
Segregation of white and Negro children in the public schools of 
a State solely on the basis of race, pursuant to state laws permitting 
or requiring such segregation, denies to Negro children the equal pro-
tection of the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment—even 

162 Data and Documents
though the physical facilities and other “tangible” factors of white and 
Negro schools may be equal.
(a) The history of the Fourteenth Amendment is inconclusive as to 
its intended effect on public education.
(b) The question presented in these cases must be determined not 
on the basis of conditions existing when the Fourteenth Amendment 
was adopted, but in the light of the full development of public 
education and its present place in American life throughout the Nation.
(c) Where a State has undertaken to provide an opportunity for an 
education in its public schools, such an opportunity is a right which 
must be made available to all on equal terms.
(d) Segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of 
race deprives children of the minority group of equal educational op-
portunities, even though the physical facilities and other “tangible” fac-
tors may be equal.
(e) The “separate but equal” doctrine adopted in Plessy v. Fergu-
son, 163 U.S. 537, has no place in the field of public education.
(f) The cases are restored to the docket for further argument on 
specified questions relating to the forms of the decrees.
Opinion
WARREN
MR. CHIEF JUSTICE WARREN delivered the opinion of the Court.
These cases come to us from the States of Kansas, South Caro-
lina, Virginia, and Delaware. They are premised on different facts 
and different local conditions, but a common legal question justi-
fies their consideration together in this consolidated opinion.
In each of the cases, minors of the Negro race, through their 
legal representatives, seek the aid of the courts in obtaining ad-
mission to the public schools of their community on a nonseg-
regated basis. In each instance, they had been denied admission 
to schools attended by white children under laws requiring or 
permitting segregation according to race. This segregation was al-
leged to deprive the plaintiffs of the equal protection of the laws 
under the Fourteenth Amendment. In each of the cases other than 
the Delaware case, a three-judge federal district court denied re-
lief to the plaintiffs on the so-called “separate but equal” doctrine 
announced by this Court in Plessy v. Fergson, 163 U.S. 537. Under 
that doctrine, equality of treatment is accorded when the races are 
provided substantially equal facilities, even though these facilities 
be separate. In the Delaware case, the Supreme Court of Delaware 
adhered to that doctrine, but ordered that the plaintiffs be admit-
ted to the white schools because of their superiority to the Negro 
schools.

Brown v. Board of Education 163
The plaintiffs contend that segregated public schools are 
not “equal” and cannot be made “equal,” and that hence they 
are deprived of the equal protection of the laws. Because of the 
obvious importance of the question presented, the Court took 
jurisdiction. Argument was heard in the 1952 Term, and reargu-
ment was heard this Term on certain questions propounded by 
the Court.
Reargument was largely devoted to the circumstances sur-
rounding the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868. It 
covered exhaustive consideration of the Amendment in Con-
gress, ratification by the states, then-existing practices in racial 
segregation, and the views of proponents and opponents of the 
Amendment. This discussion and our own investigation convince 
us that, although these sources cast some light, it is not enough 
to resolve the problem with which we are faced. At best, they are 
inconclusive. The most avid proponents of the post-War Amend-
ments undoubtedly intended them to remove all legal distinctions 
among “all persons born or naturalized in the United States.” 
Their opponents, just as certainly, were antagonistic to both the 
letter and the spirit of the Amendments and wished them to have 
the most limited effect. What others in Congress and the state leg-
islatures had in mind cannot be determined with any degree of 
certainty.
An additional reason for the inconclusive nature of the 
Amendment’s history with respect to segregated schools is the 
status of public education at that time. In the South, the movement 
toward free common schools, supported by general taxation, had 
not yet taken hold. Education of white children was largely in the 
hands of private groups. Education of Negroes was almost non-
existent, and practically all of the race were illiterate. In fact, any 
education of Negroes was forbidden by law in some states. Today, 
in contrast, many Negroes have achieved outstanding success in 
the arts and sciences, as well as in the business and professional 
world. It is true that public school education at the time of the 
Amendment had advanced further in the North, but the effect of 
the Amendment on Northern States was generally ignored in the 
congressional debates. Even in the North, the conditions of public 
education did not approximate those existing today. The curricu-
lum was usually rudimentary; ungraded schools were common 
in rural areas; the school term was but three months a year in 
many states, and compulsory school attendance was virtually un-
known. As a consequence, it is not surprising that there should be 

164 Data and Documents
so little in the history of the Fourteenth Amendment relating to its 
intended effect on public education.
In the first cases in this Court construing the Fourteenth 
Amendment, decided shortly after its adoption, the Court inter-
preted it as proscribing all state-imposed discriminations against 
the Negro race. The doctrine of “separate but equal” did not 
make its appearance in this Court until 1896 in the case of Plessy
v. Ferguson, supra, involving not education but transportation. 
American courts have since labored with the doctrine for over 
half a century. In this Court, there have been six cases involving 
the “separate but equal” doctrine in the field of public educa-
tion. In Cumming v. County Board of Education, 175 U.S. 528,
and Gong Lum v. Rice, 275 U.S. 78, the validity of the doctrine 
itself was not challenged. In more recent cases, all on the gradu-
ate school level, inequality was found in that specific benefits 
enjoyed by white students were denied to Negro students of 
the same educational qualifications. Missouri ex rel. Gaines v. 
Canada, 305 U.S. 337; Sipuel v. Oklahoma, 332 U.S. 631; Sweatt 
v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629; McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents, 
339 U.S. 637. In none of these cases was it necessary to reexamine 
the doctrine to grant relief to the Negro plaintiff. And in Sweatt
v. Painter, supra, the Court expressly reserved decision on the 
question whether Plessy v. Ferguson should be held inapplicable 
to public education.
In the instant cases, that question is directly presented. Here, 
unlike Sweatt v. Painter, there are findings below that the Negro 
and white schools involved have been equalized, or are being 
equalized, with respect to buildings, curricula, qualifications and 
salaries of teachers, and other “tangible” factors. Our decision, 
therefore, cannot turn on merely a comparison of these tangible 
factors in the Negro and white schools involved in each of the 
cases. We must look instead to the effect of segregation itself on 
public education.
In approaching this problem, we cannot turn the clock back 
to 1868, when the Amendment was adopted, or even to 1896, 
when Plessy v. Ferguson was written. We must consider public 
education in the light of its full development and its present place 
in American life throughout the Nation. Only in this way can it 
be determined if segregation in public schools deprives these 
plaintiffs of the equal protection of the laws.
Today, education is perhaps the most important function of 
state and local governments. Compulsory school attendance laws 

Brown v. Board of Education 165
and the great expenditures for education both demonstrate our 
recognition of the importance of education to our democratic so-
ciety. It is required in the performance of our most basic public 
responsibilities, even service in the armed forces. It is the very 
foundation of good citizenship. Today it is a principal instrument 
in awakening the child to cultural values, in preparing him for 
later professional training, and in helping him to adjust normally 
to his environment. In these days, it is doubtful that any child may 
reasonably be expected to succeed in life if he is denied the oppor-
tunity of an education. Such an opportunity, where the state has 
undertaken to provide it, is a right which must be made available 
to all on equal terms.
We come then to the question presented: Does segregation of 
children in public schools solely on the basis of race, even though 
the physical facilities and other “tangible” factors may be equal, 
deprive the children of the minority group of equal educational 
opportunities? We believe that it does.
In Sweatt v. Painter, supra, in finding that a segregated law 
school for Negroes could not provide them equal educational 
opportunities, this Court relied in large part on “those qualities 
which are incapable of objective measurement but which make 
for greatness in a law school.” In McLaurin v. Oklahoma State 
Regents, supra, the Court, in requiring that a Negro admitted to 
a white graduate school be treated like all other students, again 
resorted to intangible considerations: “. . . his ability to study, to 
engage in discussions and exchange views with other students, 
and, in general, to learn his profession.” Such considerations 
apply with added force to children in grade and high schools. To 
separate them from others of similar age and qualifications solely 
because of their race generates a feeling of inferiority as to their 
status in the community that may affect their hearts and minds in 
a way unlikely ever to be undone. The effect of this separation on 
their educational opportunities was well stated by a finding in the 
Kansas case by a court which nevertheless felt compelled to rule 
against the Negro plaintiffs:
Segregation of white and colored children in public schools 
has a detrimental effect upon the colored children. The impact is 
greater when it has the sanction of the law, for the policy of sepa-
rating the races is usually interpreted as denoting the inferiority of 
the negro group. A sense of inferiority affects the motivation of a 
child to learn. Segregation with the sanction of law, therefore, has 
a tendency to [retard] the educational and mental development of 

166 Data and Documents
negro children and to deprive them of some of the benefits they 
would receive in a racial[ly] integrated school system.
Whatever may have been the extent of psychological knowl-
edge at the time of Plessy v. Ferguson, this finding is amply sup-
ported by modern authority. Any language in Plessy v. Ferguson
contrary to this finding is rejected.
We conclude that, in the field of public education, the doc-
trine of “separate but equal” has no place. Separate educational 
facilities are inherently unequal. Therefore, we hold that the plain-
tiffs and others similarly situated for whom the actions have been 
brought are, by reason of the segregation complained of, deprived 
of the equal protection of the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth 
Amendment. This disposition makes unnecessary any discussion 
whether such segregation also violates the Due Process Clause of 
the Fourteenth Amendment.
Because these are class actions, because of the wide applicabil-
ity of this decision, and because of the great variety of local condi-
tions, the formulation of decrees in these cases presents problems 
of considerable complexity. On reargument, the consideration of 
appropriate relief was necessarily subordinated to the primary 
question—the constitutionality of segregation in public educa-
tion. We have now announced that such segregation is a denial 
of the equal protection of the laws. In order that we may have the 
full assistance of the parties in formulating decrees, the cases will 
be restored to the docket, and the parties are requested to present 
further argument on Questions 4 and 5 previously propounded 
by the Court for the reargument this Term The Attorney General 
of the United States is again invited to participate. The Attorneys 
General of the states requiring or permitting segregation in public 
education will also be permitted to appear as amici curiae upon 
request to do so by September 15, 1954, and submission of briefs 
by October 1, 1954.
It is so ordered.
*Together with No. 2, Briggs et al. v. Elliott et al., on appeal 
from the United States District Court for the Eastern District of 
South Carolina, argued December 9–10, 1952, reargued December 
7–8, 1953; No. 4, Davis et al. v. County School Board of Prince 
Edward County, Virginia, et al., on appeal from the United States 
District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, argued Decem-
ber 10, 1952, reargued December 7–8, 1953, and No. 10, Gebhart 
et al. v. Belton et al., on certiorari to the Supreme Court of Dela-
ware, argued December 11, 1952, reargued December 9, 1953.

Brown v. Board of Education II 167
Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954) (USSC+). The National 
Center for Public Policy Research. http://www.nationalcenter.org/
brown.html.
Brown v. Board of Education II
The Brown v. Board of Education case was returned to the U.S. Su-
preme Court in 1955 because there had been very little movement to 
dismantle segregation in schools. The Brown II decision of the U.S. Su-
preme Court underscored the court’s original decree, and demanded that 
the school districts involved in the case act “with all deliberate speed.” 
The entire text of the decision follows.
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Brown v. Board of Education, 349 U.S. 294 (1955) (USSC+)
349 U.S. 294
Reargued on the question of relief April 11–14, 1955
Opinion and judgments announced May 31, 1955
APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR 
THE DISTRICT OF KANSAS.
Syllabus
1. Racial discrimination in public education is unconstitutional, 347 
U.S. 483, 497, and all provisions of federal, state or local law requiring or 
permitting such discrimination must yield to this principle.
2. The judgments below (except that in the Delaware case) are 
reversed and the cases are remanded to the District Courts to take such 
proceedings and enter such orders and decrees consistent with this 
opinion as are necessary and proper to admit the parties to these 
cases to public schools on a racially nondiscriminatory basis with all 
deliberate speed.
(a) School authorities have the primary responsibility for elucidat-
ing, assessing and solving the varied local school problems which may 
require solution in fully implementing the governing constitutional 
principles.
(b) Courts will have to consider whether the action of school 
authorities constitutes good faith implementation of the governing 
constitutional principles.
(c) Because of their proximity to local conditions and the possible 
need for further hearings, the courts which originally heard these cases 
can best perform this judicial appraisal.
(d) In fashioning and effectuating the decrees, the courts will be 
guided by equitable principles—characterized by a practical flexibility 
in shaping remedies and a facility for adjusting and reconciling public 
and private needs.

168 Data and Documents
(e) At stake is the personal interest of the plaintiffs in admission to 
public schools as soon as practicable on a nondiscriminatory basis.
(f ) Courts of equity may properly take into account the public 
interest in the elimination in a systematic and effective manner of a 
variety of obstacles in making the transition to school systems 
operated in accordance with the constitutional principles enunciated 
in 347 U.S. 483, 497; but the vitality of these constitutional principles 
cannot be allowed to yield simply because of disagreement with 
them.
(g) While giving weight to these public and private considerations, 
the courts will require that the defendants make a prompt and reason-
able start toward full compliance with the ruling of this Court.
(h) Once such a start has been made, the courts may find that 
additional time is necessary to carry out the ruling in an effective 
manner.
(i) The burden rests on the defendants to establish that additional 
time is necessary in the public interest and is consistent with good faith 
compliance at the earliest practicable date.
(j) The courts may consider problems related to administration, 
arising from the physical condition of the school plant, the school 
transportation system, personnel, revision of school districts and 
attendance areas into compact units to achieve a system of determin-
ing admission to the public schools on a nonracial basis, and revision 
of local laws and regulations which may be necessary in solving the 
foregoing problems.
(k) The courts will also consider the adequacy of any plans the 
defendants may propose to meet these problems and to effectuate a 
transition to a racially nondiscriminatory school system.
(l) During the period of transition, the courts will retain jurisdiction 
of these cases.
3. The judgment in the Delaware case, ordering the immediate 
admission of the plaintiffs to schools previously attended only by 
white children, is affirmed on the basis of the principles stated by 
this Court in its opinion, 347 U.S. 483, but the case is remanded to the 
Supreme Court of Delaware for such further proceedings as that Court 
may deem necessary in the light of this opinion.
98 F.Supp. 797, 103 F.Supp. 920, 103 F.Supp. 337 and judgment in 
No. 4, reversed and remanded.
91 A.2d 137, affirmed and remanded.
Opinion
MR. CHIEF JUSTICE WARREN delivered the opinion of the Court.
These cases were decided on May 17, 1954. The opinions of 
that date, declaring the fundamental principle that racial discrim-
ination in public education is unconstitutional, are incorporated 

Brown v. Board of Education II 169
herein by reference. All provisions of federal, state, or local law 
requiring or permitting such discrimination must yield to this 
principle. There remains for consideration the manner in which 
relief is to be accorded.
Because these cases arose under different local conditions 
and their disposition will involve a variety of local problems, we 
requested further argument on the question of relief. In view of 
the nationwide importance of the decision, we invited the Attor-
ney General of the United States and the Attorneys General of 
all states requiring or permitting racial discrimination in public 
education to present their views on that question. The parties, the 
United States, and the States of Florida, North Carolina, Arkansas, 
Oklahoma, Maryland, and Texas filed briefs and participated in 
the oral argument.
These presentations were informative and helpful to the 
Court in its consideration of the complexities arising from the 
transition to a system of public education freed of racial discrimi-
nation. The presentations also demonstrated that substantial steps 
to eliminate racial discrimination in public schools have already 
been taken, not only in some of the communities in which these 
cases arose, but in some of the states appearing as amici curiae, 
and in other states as well. Substantial progress has been made in 
the District of Columbia and in the communities in Kansas and 
Delaware involved in this litigation. The defendants in the cases 
coming to us from South Carolina and Virginia are awaiting the 
decision of this Court concerning relief.
Full implementation of these constitutional principles may 
require solution of varied local school problems. School authori-
ties have the primary responsibility for elucidating, assessing, 
and solving these problems; courts will have to consider whether 
the action of school authorities constitutes good faith implemen-
tation of the governing constitutional principles. Because of their 
proximity to local conditions and the possible need for further 
hearings, the courts which originally heard these cases can best 
perform this judicial appraisal. Accordingly, we believe it appro-
priate to remand the cases to those courts.
In fashioning and effectuating the decrees, the courts will 
be guided by equitable principles. Traditionally, equity has been 
characterized by a practical flexibility in shaping its remedies 
and by a facility for adjusting and reconciling public and pri-
vate needs. These cases call for the exercise of these traditional 
attributes of equity power. At stake is the personal interest of the 

170 Data and Documents
plaintiffs in admission to public schools as soon as practicable on 
a nondiscriminatory basis. To effectuate this interest may call for 
elimination of a variety of obstacles in making the transition to 
school systems operated in accordance with the constitutional 
principles set forth in our May 17, 1954, decision. Courts of equity 
may properly take into account the public interest in the elimina-
tion of such obstacles in a systematic and effective manner. But it 
should go without saying that the vitality of these constitutional 
principles cannot be allowed to yield simply because of disagree-
ment with them.
While giving weight to these public and private consider-
ations, the courts will require that the defendants make a prompt 
and reasonable start toward full compliance with our May 17, 
1954, ruling. Once such a start has been made, the courts may find 
that additional time is necessary to carry out the ruling in an ef-
fective manner. The burden rests upon the defendants to establish 
that such time is necessary in the public interest and is consistent 
with good faith compliance at the earliest practicable date. To that 
end, the courts may consider problems related to administration, 
arising from the physical condition of the school plant, the school 
transportation system, personnel, revision of school districts and 
attendance areas into compact units to achieve a system of deter-
mining admission to the public schools on a nonracial basis, and 
revision of local laws and regulations which may be necessary in 
solving the foregoing problems. They will also consider the ad-
equacy of any plans the defendants may propose to meet these 
problems and to effectuate a transition to a racially nondiscrimi-
natory school system. During this period of transition, the courts 
will retain jurisdiction of these cases.
The judgments below, except that, in the Delaware case, are 
accordingly reversed, and the cases are remanded to the District 
Courts to take such proceedings and enter such orders and de-
crees consistent with this opinion as are necessary and proper to 
admit to public schools on a racially nondiscriminatory basis with 
all deliberate speed the parties to these cases. The judgment in the 
Delaware case—ordering the immediate admission of the plain-
tiffs to schools previously attended only by white children—is af-
firmed on the basis of the principles stated in our May 17, 1954, 
opinion, but the case is remanded to the Supreme Court of Dela-
ware for such further proceedings as that Court may deem neces-
sary in light of this opinion.
It is so ordered.

National Defense Education Act, P.L. 85–864 171
Brown v. Board of Education, 349 U.S. 294 (1955) (USSC+). The National 
Center for Public Policy Research. http://www.nationalcenter.org/
cc0725.htm.
National Defense Education Act, 
P.L. 85–864
The National Defense Education Act (NDEA), P.L. 85–864, was the 
first federal legislation that provided support to reform public education. 
NDEA was enacted in response to the fear that the Soviet Union’s edu-
cational system was producing better outcomes than that of the United 
States, particularly in the areas of mathematics and science. NDEA pro-
moted the notion that education was a part of the national defense. The 
introduction to Title I of the NDEA follows.
TITLE I—GENERAL PROVISIONS
FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY
SEC. 101. The Congress hereby finds and declares that the security 
of the Nation requires the fullest development of the mental resources 
and technical skills of its young men and women. The present emer-
gency demands that additional and more adequate educational oppor-
tunities be made available. The defense of this Nation depends upon 
the mastery of modern techniques developed from complex scientific 
principles. It depends as well upon the discovery and development of 
new principles, new techniques, and new knowledge. We must increase 
our efforts to identify and educate more of the talent of our Nation. This 
requires programs that will give assurance that no student of ability 
will be denied an opportunity for higher education because of financial 
need; will correct as rapidly as possible the existing imbalances in our 
educational programs which have led to an insufficient proportion of 
our population educated in science, mathematics, and modern foreign 
languages and trained in technology. The Congress reaffirms the prin-
ciple and declares that the States and local communities have and must 
retain control over and primary responsibility for public education. 
The national interest requires, however, that the Federal Government 
give assistance to education for programs which are important to our 
defense. To meet the present educational emergency requires additional 
effort at all levels of government. It is therefore the purpose of this Act 
to provide substantial assistance in various forms to individuals, and to 
States and their subdivisions, in order to insure trained manpower of 
sufficient quality and quantity to meet the national defense needs of the 
United States.

172 Data and Documents
National Defense Education Act, P.L. 85–864, September 2, 1958. United
States Statutes at Large 72, 1580–1605.
A Nation at Risk: The Imperative 
for Educational Reform
In 1983, the Commission on Excellence and Education issued a report 
on the state of education in the United States. That report, “A Nation 
at Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform,” was both a serious 
indictment against the quality of public education in the United States, 
and a call for reform. The report, subtitled, “An Open Letter to the 
American People,” was based on the notion that the quality of public 
education in the United States was responsible for the nation’s “being 
overtaken by competitors throughout the world.” The introduction to 
the report follows.
A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform
Introduction
All, regardless of race or class or economic status, are entitled to a fair 
chance and to the tools for developing their individual powers of mind and spirit 
to the utmost. This promise means that all children by virtue of their own efforts, 
competently guided, can hope to attain the mature and informed judgement 
needed to secure gainful employment, and to manage their own lives, thereby 
serving not only their own interests but also the progress of society itself.
Our Nation is at risk. Our once unchallenged preeminence in com-
merce, industry, science, and technological innovation is being over-
taken by competitors throughout the world. This report is concerned 
with only one of the many causes and dimensions of the problem, but it 
is the one that undergirds American prosperity, security, and civility. We 
report to the American people that while we can take justifiable pride 
in what our schools and colleges have historically accomplished and 
contributed to the United States and the well-being of its people, the 
educational foundations of our society are presently being eroded by a 
rising tide of mediocrity that threatens our very future as a Nation and a 
people. What was unimaginable a generation ago has begun to occur—
others are matching and surpassing our educational attainments.
If an unfriendly foreign power had attempted to impose on Amer-
ica the mediocre educational performance that exists today, we might 
well have viewed it as an act of war. As it stands, we have allowed this 
to happen to ourselves. We have even squandered the gains in student 
achievement made in the wake of the Sputnik challenge. Moreover, we 
have dismantled essential support systems which helped make those 

A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform 173
gains possible. We have, in effect, been committing an act of unthinking, 
unilateral educational disarmament.
Our society and its educational institutions seem to have lost sight 
of the basic purposes of schooling, and of the high expectations and 
disciplined effort needed to attain them. This report, the result of 18 
months of study, seeks to generate reform of our educational system in 
fundamental ways and to renew the Nation’s commitment to schools 
and colleges of high quality throughout the length and breadth of our 
land.
That we have compromised this commitment is, upon reflection, 
hardly surprising, given the multitude of often conflicting demands we 
have placed on our Nation’s schools and colleges. They are routinely 
called on to provide solutions to personal, social, and political problems 
that the home and other institutions either will not or cannot resolve. 
We must understand that these demands on our schools and colleges 
often exact an educational cost as well as a financial one.
On the occasion of the Commission’s first meeting, President Rea-
gan noted the central importance of education in American life when he 
said: “Certainly there are few areas of American life as important to our 
society, to our people, and to our families as our schools and colleges.” 
This report, therefore, is as much an open letter to the American people 
as it is a report to the Secretary of Education. We are confident that the 
American people, properly informed, will do what is right for their chil-
dren and for the generations to come.
The Risk
History is not kind to idlers. The time is long past when Ameri-
can’s destiny was assured simply by an abundance of natural 
resources and inexhaustible human enthusiasm, and by our rela-
tive isolation from the malignant problems of older civilizations. 
The world is indeed one global village. We live among deter-
mined, well-educated, and strongly motivated competitors. We 
compete with them for international standing and markets, not 
only with products but also with the ideas of our laboratories and 
neighborhood workshops. America’s position in the world may 
once have been reasonably secure with only a few exceptionally 
well-trained men and women. It is no longer.
The risk is not only that the Japanese make automobiles 
more efficiently than Americans and have government subsidies 
for development and export. It is not just that the South Koreans 
recently built the world’s most efficient steel mill, or that Ameri-
can machine tools, once the pride of the world, are being dis-
placed by German products. It is also that these  developments 

174 Data and Documents
signify a redistribution of trained capability throughout the 
globe. Knowledge, learning, information, and skilled intelli-
gence are the new raw materials of international commerce and 
are today spreading throughout the world as vigorously as mir-
acle drugs, synthetic fertilizers, and blue jeans did earlier. If only 
to keep and improve on the slim competitive edge we still re-
tain in world markets, we must dedicate ourselves to the reform 
of our educational system for the benefit of all—old and young 
alike, affluent and poor, majority and minority. Learning is the 
indispensable investment required for success in the “informa-
tion age” we are entering.
Our concern, however, goes well beyond matters such as in-
dustry and commerce. It also includes the intellectual, moral, and 
spiritual strengths of our people which knit together the very fab-
ric of our society. The people of the United States need to know 
that individuals in our society who do not possess the levels of 
skill, literacy, and training essential to this new era will be effec-
tively disenfranchised, not simply from the material rewards that 
accompany competent performance, but also from the chance to 
participate fully in our national life. A high level of shared educa-
tion is essential to a free, democratic society and to the fostering 
of a common culture, especially in a country that prides itself on 
pluralism and individual freedom.
For our country to function, citizens must be able to reach 
some common understandings on complex issues, often on short 
notice and on the basis of conflicting or incomplete evidence.
Education helps form these common understandings, a point 
Thomas Jefferson made long ago in his justly famous dictum:
I know no safe depository of the ultimate powers of the so-
ciety but the people themselves; and if we think them not en-
lightened enough to exercise their control with a wholesome 
discretion, the remedy is not to take it from them but to inform 
their discretion.
Part of what is at risk is the promise first made on this conti-
nent: All, regardless of race or class or economic status, are entitled 
to a fair chance and to the tools for developing their individual 
powers of mind and spirit to the utmost. This promise means that 
all children by virtue of their own efforts, competently guided, 
can hope to attain the mature and informed judgment needed 
to secure gainful employment, and to manage their own lives, 
thereby serving not only their own interests but also the progress 
of society itself.

A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform 175
Indicators of the Risk
The educational dimensions of the risk before us have been amply 
documented in testimony received by the Commission. For ex-
ample:
International comparisons of student achievement, 
•
completed a decade ago, reveal that on 19 academic tests 
American students were never first or second and, in 
comparison with other industrialized nations, were last 
seven times.
Some 23 million American adults are functionally 
•
illiterate by the simplest tests of everyday reading, 
writing, and comprehension.
About 13 percent of all 17-year-olds in the United States 
•
can be considered functionally illiterate. Functional 
illiteracy among minority youth may run as high as 
40 percent.
Average achievement of high school students on most 
•
standardized tests is now lower than 26 years ago when 
Sputnik was launched.
Over half the population of gifted students do not match 
•
their tested ability with comparable achievement in school.
The College Board’s Scholastic Aptitude Tests (SAT) 
•
demonstrate a virtually unbroken decline from 1963 
to 1980. Average verbal scores fell over 50 points and 
average mathematics scores dropped nearly 40 points.
College Board achievement tests also reveal consistent de-
•
clines in recent years in such subjects as physics and English.
Both the number and proportion of students 
•
demonstrating superior achievement on the SATs 
(i.e., those with scores of 650 or higher) have also 
dramatically declined.
Many 17-year-olds do not possess the “higher order” 
•
intellectual skills we should expect of them. Nearly 40 
percent cannot draw inferences from written material; 
only one-fifth can write a persuasive essay; and only 
one-third can solve a mathematics problem requiring 
several steps.
There was a steady decline in science achievement scores 
•
of U.S. 17-year-olds as measured by national assessments 
of science in 1969, 1973, and 1977.

176 Data and Documents
Between 1975 and 1980, remedial mathematics courses in 
•
public 4-year colleges increased by 72 percent and now 
constitute one-quarter of all mathematics courses taught 
in those institutions.
Average tested achievement of students graduating from 
•
college is also lower.
Business and military leaders complain that they 
•
are required to spend millions of dollars on costly 
remedial education and training programs in such basic 
skills as reading, writing, spelling, and computation. 
The Department of the Navy, for example, reported 
to the Commission that one-quarter of its recent 
recruits cannot read at the ninth grade level, the 
minimum needed simply to understand written safety 
instructions. Without remedial work they cannot even 
begin, much less complete, the sophisticated training 
essential in much of the modern military.
These deficiencies come at a time when the demand for 
highly skilled workers in new fields is accelerating rapidly. For 
example:
Computers and computer-controlled equipment are 
•
penetrating every aspect of our lives—homes, factories, 
and offices.
One estimate indicates that by the turn of the century 
•
millions of jobs will involve laser technology and 
robotics.
Technology is radically transforming a host of other 
•
occupations. They include health care, medical science, 
energy production, food processing, construction, and 
the building, repair, and maintenance of sophisticated 
scientific, educational, military, and industrial 
equipment.
Analysts examining these indicators of student performance
and the demands for new skills have made some chilling ob-
servations. Educational researcher Paul Hurd concluded at the 
end of a thorough national survey of student achievement that 
within the context of the modern scientific revolution, “We are 
raising a new generation of Americans that is scientifically and 
technologically illiterate.” In a similar vein, John Slaughter, a 

A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform 177
former Director of the National Science Foundation, warned of 
“a growing chasm between a small scientific and technological 
elite and a citizenry ill-informed, indeed uninformed, on issues 
with a science component.”
But the problem does not stop there, nor do all observers see 
it the same way. Some worry that schools may emphasize such 
rudiments as reading and computation at the expense of other es-
sential skills such as comprehension, analysis, solving problems, 
and drawing conclusions. Still others are concerned that an over-
emphasis on technical and occupational skills will leave little time 
for studying the arts and humanities that so enrich daily life, help 
maintain civility, and develop a sense of community. Knowledge 
of the humanities, they maintain, must be harnessed to science 
and technology if the latter are to remain creative and humane, 
just as the humanities need to be informed by science and tech-
nology if they are to remain relevant to the human condition. An-
other analyst, Paul Copperman, has drawn a sobering conclusion. 
Until now, he has noted:
Each generation of Americans has outstripped its parents 
in education, in literacy, and in economic attainment. For the 
first time in the history of our country, the educational skills of 
one generation will not surpass, will not equal, will not even 
approach, those of their parents.
It is important, of course, to recognize that the average citizen
today is better educated and more knowledgeable than the average 
citizen of a generation ago—more literate, and exposed to more 
mathematics, literature, and science. The positive impact of this fact 
on the well-being of our country and the lives of our people cannot 
be overstated. Nevertheless, the average graduate of our schools and 
colleges today is not as well-educated as the average graduate of 25 
or 35 years ago, when a much smaller proportion of our population 
completed high school and college. The negative impact of this fact 
likewise cannot be overstated.
Hope and Frustration
Statistics and their interpretation by experts show only the surface 
dimension of the difficulties we face. Beneath them lies a tension 
between hope and frustration that characterizes current attitudes 
about education at every level.
We have heard the voices of high school and college students, 
school board members, and teachers; of leaders of industry, mi-

178 Data and Documents
nority groups, and higher education; of parents and State officials. 
We could hear the hope evident in their commitment to quality 
education and in their descriptions of outstanding programs and 
schools. We could also hear the intensity of their frustration, a 
growing impatience with shoddiness in many walks of American 
life, and the complaint that this shoddiness is too often reflected 
in our schools and colleges. Their frustration threatens to over-
whelm their hope.
What lies behind this emerging national sense of frustration 
can be described as both a dimming of personal expectations and 
the fear of losing a shared vision for America.
On the personal level the student, the parent, and the caring 
teacher all perceive that a basic promise is not being kept. More 
and more young people emerge from high school ready neither 
for college nor for work. This predicament becomes more acute 
as the knowledge base continues its rapid expansion, the num-
ber of traditional jobs shrinks, and new jobs demand greater 
sophistication and preparation.
On a broader scale, we sense that this undertone of frustra-
tion has significant political implications, for it cuts across ages, 
generations, races, and political and economic groups. We have 
come to understand that the public will demand that educational 
and political leaders act forcefully and effectively on these issues. 
Indeed, such demands have already appeared and could well 
become a unifying national preoccupation. This unity, however, 
can be achieved only if we avoid the unproductive tendency of 
some to search for scapegoats among the victims, such as the be-
leaguered teachers.
On the positive side is the significant movement by political 
and educational leaders to search for solutions—so far centering 
largely on the nearly desperate need for increased support for the 
teaching of mathematics and science. This movement is but a start 
on what we believe is a larger and more educationally encom-
passing need to improve teaching and learning in fields such as 
English, history, geography, economics, and foreign languages. 
We believe this movement must be broadened and directed to-
ward reform and excellence throughout education.
Excellence in Education
We define “excellence” to mean several related things. At the level 
of the individual learner, it means performing on the boundary of 

A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform 179
individual ability in ways that test and push back personal limits, 
in school and in the workplace. Excellence characterizes a school or 
college that sets high expectations and goals for all learners, then 
tries in every way possible to help students reach them. Excel-
lence characterizes a society that has adopted these policies, for it 
will then be prepared through the education and skill of its people 
to respond to the challenges of a rapidly changing world. Our Na-
tion’s people and its schools and colleges must be committed to 
achieving excellence in all these senses.
We do not believe that a public commitment to excellence 
and educational reform must be made at the expense of a strong 
public commitment to the equitable treatment of our diverse pop-
ulation. The twin goals of equity and high-quality schooling have 
profound and practical meaning for our economy and society, 
and we cannot permit one to yield to the other either in principle 
or in practice. To do so would deny young people their chance to 
learn and live according to their aspirations and abilities. It also 
would lead to a generalized accommodation to mediocrity in our 
society on the one hand or the creation of an undemocratic elitism 
on the other.
Our goal must be to develop the talents of all to their fullest. 
Attaining that goal requires that we expect and assist all students 
to work to the limits of their capabilities. We should expect schools 
to have genuinely high standards rather than minimum ones, and 
parents to support and encourage their children to make the most 
of their talents and abilities.
The search for solutions to our educational problems must 
also include a commitment to life-long learning. The task of re-
building our system of learning is enormous and must be prop-
erly understood and taken seriously. Although a million and a 
half new workers enter the economy each year from our schools 
and colleges, the adults working today will still make up about 75 
percent of the workforce in the year 2000. These workers, and new 
entrants into the workforce, will need further education and re-
training if they—and we as a Nation—are to thrive and  prosper.
The Learning Society
In a world of ever-accelerating competition and change in the con-
ditions of the workplace, of ever-greater danger, and of ever-larger 
opportunities for those prepared to meet them, educational reform 
should focus on the goal of creating a Learning Society. At the 

180 Data and Documents
heart of such a society is the commitment to a set of values and to 
a system of education that affords all members the opportunity to 
stretch their minds to full capacity, from early childhood through 
adulthood, learning more as the world itself changes. Such a soci-
ety has as a basic foundation the idea that education is important 
not only because of what it contributes to one’s career goals but 
also because of the value it adds to the general quality of one’s life. 
Also at the heart of the Learning Society are educational opportu-
nities extending far beyond the traditional institutions of learning, 
our schools and colleges. They extend into homes and workplaces; 
into libraries, art galleries, museums, and science centers; indeed, 
into every place where the individual can develop and mature in 
work and life. In our view, formal schooling in youth is the es-
sential foundation for learning throughout one’s life. But without 
life-long learning, one’s skills will become rapidly dated.
In contrast to the ideal of the Learning Society, however, we 
find that for too many people education means doing the mini-
mum work necessary for the moment, then coasting through life 
on what may have been learned in its first quarter. But this should 
not surprise us because we tend to express our educational stan-
dards and expectations largely in terms of “minimum require-
ments.” And where there should be a coherent continuum of 
learning, we have none, but instead an often incoherent, outdated 
patchwork quilt. Many individual, sometimes heroic, examples 
of schools and colleges of great merit do exist. Our findings and 
testimony confirm the vitality of a number of notable schools and 
programs, but their very distinction stands out against a vast mass 
shaped by tensions and pressures that inhibit systematic academic 
and vocational achievement for the majority of students. In some 
metropolitan areas basic literacy has become the goal rather than 
the starting point. In some colleges maintaining enrollments is of 
greater day-to-day concern than maintaining rigorous academic 
standards. And the ideal of academic excellence as the primary 
goal of schooling seems to be fading across the board in American 
education.
Thus, we issue this call to all who care about America and its 
future: to parents and students; to teachers, administrators, and 
school board members; to colleges and industry; to union mem-
bers and military leaders; to governors and State legislators; to 
the President; to members of Congress and other public officials; 
to members of learned and scientific societies; to the print and 

A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform 181
electronic media; to concerned citizens everywhere. America is at 
risk.
We are confident that America can address this risk. If the 
tasks we set forth are initiated now and our recommendations are 
fully realized over the next several years, we can expect reform 
of our Nation’s schools, colleges, and universities. This would 
also reverse the current declining trend—a trend that stems more 
from weakness of purpose, confusion of vision, underuse of tal-
ent, and lack of leadership, than from conditions beyond our 
control.
The Tools at Hand
It is our conviction that the essential raw materials needed to re-
form our educational system are waiting to be mobilized through 
effective leadership:
the natural abilities of the young that cry out to be 
•
developed and the undiminished concern of parents for 
the well-being of their children;
the commitment of the Nation to high retention rates 
•
in schools and colleges and to full access to education 
for all;
the persistent and authentic American dream that 
•
superior performance can raise one’s state in life and 
shape one’s own future;
the dedication, against all odds, that keeps teachers 
•
serving in schools and colleges, even as the rewards 
diminish;
our better understanding of learning and teaching and 
•
the implications of this knowledge for school practice, 
and the numerous examples of local success as a result of 
superior effort and effective dissemination;
the ingenuity of our policymakers, scientists, State and 
•
local educators, and scholars in formulating solutions 
once problems are better understood;
the traditional belief that paying for education is an 
•
investment in ever-renewable human resources that 
are more durable and flexible than capital plant and 
equipment, and the availability in this country of 
sufficient financial means to invest in education;

182 Data and Documents
the equally sound tradition, from the Northwest 
•
Ordinance of 1787 until today, that the Federal 
Government should supplement State, local, and other 
resources to foster key national educational goals; and
the voluntary efforts of individuals, businesses, and 
•
parent and civic groups to cooperate in strengthening 
educational programs.
These raw materials, combined with the unparalleled array 
of educational organizations in America, offer us the possibility 
to create a Learning Society, in which public, private, and paro-
chial schools; colleges and universities; vocational and technical 
schools and institutes; libraries; science centers, museums, and 
other cultural institutions; and corporate training and retraining 
programs offer opportunities and choices for all to learn through-
out life.
The Public’s Commitment
Of all the tools at hand, the public’s support for education is the 
most powerful. In a message to a National Academy of Sciences 
meeting in May 1982, President Reagan commented on this fact 
when he said:
This public awareness—and I hope public action—is long 
overdue. . . . This country was built on American respect for edu-
cation . . . Our challenge now is to create a resurgence of that thirst 
for education that typifies our Nation’s history.
The most recent (1982) Gallup Poll of the Public’s Attitudes 
Toward the Public Schools strongly supported a theme heard dur-
ing our hearings: People are steadfast in their belief that edu-
cation is the major foundation for the future strength of this 
country. They even considered education more important than 
developing the best industrial system or the strongest military 
force, perhaps because they understood education as the cor-
nerstone of both. They also held that education is “extremely 
important” to one’s future success, and that public education 
should be the top priority for additional Federal funds. Educa-
tion occupied first place among 12 funding categories considered 
in the survey—above health care, welfare, and military defense, 
with 55 percent selecting public education as one of their first 
three choices. Very clearly, the public understands the primary 
importance of education as the foundation for a satisfying life, 

A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform 183
an enlightened and civil society, a strong economy, and a secure 
Nation.
At the same time, the public has no patience with undemand-
ing and superfluous high school offerings. In another survey, 
more than 75 percent of all those questioned believed every stu-
dent planning to go to college should take 4 years of mathematics, 
English, history/U.S. government, and science, with more than 
50 percent adding 2 years each of a foreign language and eco-
nomics or business. The public even supports requiring much of 
this curriculum for students who do not plan to go to college. 
These standards far exceed the strictest high school graduation 
requirements of any State today, and they also exceed the admis-
sion standards of all but a handful of our most selective colleges 
and universities.
Another dimension of the public’s support offers the pros-
pect of constructive reform. The best term to characterize it may 
simply be the honorable word “patriotism.” Citizens know in-
tuitively what some of the best economists have shown in their 
research, that education is one of the chief engines of a society’s 
material well-being. They know, too, that education is the com-
mon bond of a pluralistic society and helps tie us to other cul-
tures around the globe. Citizens also know in their bones that the 
safety of the United States depends principally on the wit, skill, 
and spirit of a self-confident people, today and tomorrow. It is, 
therefore, essential—especially in a period of long-term decline in 
educational achievement—for government at all levels to affirm 
its responsibility for nurturing the Nation’s intellectual capital.
And perhaps most important, citizens know and believe that 
the meaning of America to the rest of the world must be something 
better than it seems to many today. Americans like to think of this 
Nation as the preeminent country for generating the great ideas 
and material benefits for all mankind. The citizen is dismayed at 
a steady 15-year decline in industrial productivity, as one great 
American industry after another falls to world competition. The 
citizen wants the country to act on the belief, expressed in our 
hearings and by the large majority in the Gallup Poll, that educa-
tion should be at the top of the Nation’s agenda.
April 1983
National Commission on Excellence in Education. 1983. “A Nation at 
Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform. http://www.ed.gov/
pubs/NatAtRisk/risk.html.

184 Data and Documents
Effective Schools Correlates
Based on analysis of many years of research about what makes schools ef-
fective, Larry Lezotte and Ronald Edmonds formulated a set of correlates 
that describe schools that result in high levels of learning for all children. 
The Effective Schools movement has promoted the correlates as a basis 
for education reform for more than 30 years. The correlates, as well as 
a description of them enacted in schools, are listed below. The “second 
generation” of each correlate represents continued analysis of data from 
schools and refinement from those data. The text is drawn from a 1991 
document by Larry Lezotte, director of Effective Schools.
Correlates of Effective Schools
1. Safe and Orderly Environment
The First Generation: In the effective school there is an orderly, 
purposeful, businesslike atmosphere which is free from the threat of 
physical harm. The school climate is not oppressive and is conducive to 
teaching and learning. The Second Generation: In the first generation, 
the safe and orderly environment correlate was defined in terms of the 
absence of undesirable student behavior (e.g., students fighting). In 
the second generation, the concept of a school environment conducive 
to Learning for All must move beyond the elimination of undesirable 
behavior. The second generation will place increased emphasis on the 
presence of certain desirable behaviors (e.g., cooperative team learning). 
These second generation schools will be places where students actually 
help one another. . . . 
2. Climate of High Expectations for Success 
The First Generation: In the effective school there is a climate of 
expectation in which the staff believe and demonstrate that all students 
can attain mastery of the essential school skills, and the staff also be-
lieve that they have the capability to help all students achieve that mas-
tery. The Second Generation: In the second generation, the emphasis 
placed on high expectations for success will be broadened significantly. 
In the first generation, expectations were described in terms of atti-
tudes and beliefs that suggested how the teacher should behave in the 
teaching-learning situation. Those descriptions sought to tell teachers 
how they should initially deliver the lesson. High expectations meant, 
for example, that the teacher should evenly distribute questions asked 
among all students and should provide each student with an equal 
opportunity to participate in the learning process. Unfortunately, this 
“equalization of opportunity,” though beneficial, proved to be insuffi-
cient to assure mastery for many learners. Teachers found themselves in 

Effective Schools Correlates 185
the difficult position of having had high expectations and having acted 
upon them—yet some students still did not learn. In the second genera-
tion, the teachers will anticipate this and they will develop a broader 
array of responses. . . . to assure that all students do achieve mastery. 
Implementing this expanded concept of high expectations will require 
the school as an organization to reflect high expectations. . . . High ex-
pectations for success will be judged, not only by the initial staff beliefs 
and behaviors, but also by the organization’s response when some stu-
dents do not learn.
3. Instructional Leadership
The First Generation: In the effective school the principal acts as 
an instructional leader and effectively and persistently communicates 
that mission to the staff, parents, and students. The principal under-
stands and applies the characteristics of instructional effectiveness in 
the management of the instructional program. The Second Genera-
tion: In the first generation, the standards for instructional leadership 
focused primarily on the principal and the administrative staff of the 
school. In the second generation, instructional leadership will remain 
important; however, the concept will be broadened and leadership 
will be viewed as a dispersed concept that includes all adults, espe-
cially the teachers. This is in keeping with the teacher empowerment 
concept; it recognizes that a principal cannot be the only leader in a 
complex organization like a school. With the democratization of or-
ganizations, especially schools, the leadership function becomes one 
of creating a “community of shared values.” The mission will remain 
critical because it will serve to give the community of shared values a 
shared sense of “magnetic north,” an identification of what this school 
community cares most about. The role of the principal will be changed 
to that of “a leader of leaders,” rather than a leader of followers. Spe-
cifically, the principal will have to develop his/her skills as coach, 
partner and cheerleader. The broader concept of leadership recognizes 
that leadership is always delegated from the followership in any or-
ganization. It also recognizes what teachers have known for a long 
time and what good schools have capitalized on since the beginning of 
time: namely, expertise is generally distributed among many, not con-
centrated in a single person.
4. Clear and Focused Mission
The First Generation: In the effective school there is a clearly 
articulated school mission through which the staff shares an under-
standing of and commitment to the instructional goals, priorities, 
assessment procedures and accountability. Staff accept responsibility 
for students’ learning of the school’s essential curricular goals. The 
Second Generation: In the first generation the effective school mission 

186 Data and Documents
emphasized teaching for Learning for All. The two issues that surfaced 
were: Did this really mean all students or just those with whom the 
schools had a history of reasonable success? When it became clear 
that this mission was inclusive of all students especially the children 
of the poor (minority and non-minority), the second issue surfaced. It 
centered itself around the question: Learn what? Partially because of 
the accountability movement and partially because of the belief that 
disadvantaged students could not learn higher-level curricula, the 
focus was on mastery of mostly low-level skills. In the second genera-
tion, the focus will shift toward a more appropriate balance between 
higher-level learning and those more basic skills that are truly pre-
requisite to their mastery. Designing and delivering a curriculum that 
responds to the demands of accountability, and is responsive to the 
need for higher levels of learning, will require substantial staff devel-
opment. Teachers will have to be better trained to develop curricula 
and lessons with the “end in mind.” They will have to know and be 
comfortable with the concept of “backward mapping,” and they will 
need to know “task analysis.” These “tools of the trade” are essential 
for an efficient and effective “results-oriented” school that successfully 
serves all students. Finally, a subtle but significant change in the con-
cept of school mission deserves notice. Throughout the first genera-
tion, effective schools proponents advocated the mission of teaching 
for Learning for All. In the second generation the advocated mission 
will be Learning for All. The rationale for this change is that the “teach-
ing for” portion of the old statement created ambiguity (although this 
was unintended) and kept too much of the focus on “teaching” rather 
than “learning.” This allowed people to discount school learnings that 
were not the result of direct teaching. Finally, the new formulation of 
Learning for All opens the door to the continued learning of the educa-
tors as well as the students.
5. Opportunity to Learn and Student Time on Task
The First Generation: In the effective school teachers allocate a 
significant amount of classroom time to instruction in the essential 
skills. For a high percentage of this time students are engaged in whole 
class or large group, teacher-directed, planned learning activities. The 
Second Generation: In the second generation, time will continue to 
be a difficult problem for the teacher. In all likelihood, the problems 
that arise from too much to teach and not enough time to teach it will 
intensify. In the past, when the teachers were oriented toward “cover-
ing curricular content” and more content was added, they knew their 
response should be to “speed-up.” Now teachers are being asked to 
stress the mission that assures that the students master the content that 
is covered. How are they to respond? In the next generation, teach-
ers will have to become more skilled at interdisciplinary curriculum 

Effective Schools Correlates 187
and they will need to learn how to comfortably practice “organized 
abandonment.” They will have to be able to ask the question, “What 
goes and what stays?” One of the reasons that many of the mandated 
approaches to school reform have failed is that, in every case, the local 
school was asked to do more! One of the characteristics of the most ef-
fective schools is their willingness to declare that some things are more 
important than others; they are willing to abandon some less important 
content so as to be able to have enough time dedicated to those areas 
that are valued the most. The only alternative to abandonment would 
be to adjust the available time that students spend in school, so that 
those who need more time to reach mastery would be given it. The nec-
essary time must be provided in a quality program that is not perceived 
as punitive by those in it, or as excessive, by those who will have to 
fund it. These conditions will be a real challenge indeed! If the Ameri-
can dream and the democratic ideal of educating everyone is going to 
move forward, we must explore several important policies and prac-
tices from the past. Regarding the issue of time to learn, for example, if 
the children of the disadvantaged present a “larger educational task” 
to the teachers and if it can be demonstrated that this “larger task” will 
require more time, then our notions of limited compulsory schooling 
may need to be changed. The current system of compulsory schooling 
makes little allowance for the fact that some students need more time to 
achieve mastery. If we could get the system to be more mastery-based 
and more humane at the same time, our nation and its students would 
benefit immensely.
6. Frequent Monitoring of Student Progress
The First Generation: In the effective school student academic 
progress is measured frequently through a variety of assessment 
procedures. The results of these assessments are used to improve in-
dividual student performance and also to improve the instructional 
program. The Second Generation: In the first generation, the correlate 
was interpreted to mean that the teachers should frequently moni-
tor their students’ learning and, where necessary, the teacher should 
adjust his/her behavior. Several major changes can be anticipated in 
the second generation. First, the use of technology will permit teachers 
to do a better job of monitoring their students’ progress. Second, this 
same technology will allow students to monitor their own learning 
and, where necessary, adjust their own behavior. The use of computer-
ized practice tests, the ability to get immediate results on homework, 
and the ability to see correct solutions developed on the screen are a 
few of the available “tools for assuring student learning.” A second 
major change that will become more apparent in the second generation 
is already under way. In the area of assessment the emphasis will con-
tinue to shift away from standardized norm-referenced paper-pencil 

188 Data and Documents
tests and toward curricular-based, criterion-referenced measures of 
student mastery. In the second generation, the monitoring of student 
learning will emphasize “more authentic assessments” of curriculum 
mastery. This generally means that there will be less emphasis on the 
paper pencil, multiple-choice tests, and more emphasis on assessments 
of products of student work, including performances and  portfolios. 
Teachers will pay much more attention to the alignment that must 
exist between the intended, taught, and tested curriculum. Two new 
questions are being stimulated by the reform movement and will dom-
inate much of the  professional educators’ discourse in the second gen-
eration: “What’s worth knowing?” and “How will we know when they 
know it?” In all likelihood, the answer to the first question will become 
clear relatively quickly, because we can reach agreement that we want 
our students to be self-disciplined, socially responsible, and just. The 
problem comes with the second question, “How will we know when 
they know it?” Educators and citizens are going to have to come to 
terms with that question. The bad news is that it demands our best 
thinking and will require patience if we are going to reach consensus. 
The good news is that once we begin to reach consensus, the schools 
will be able to deliver significant progress toward these agreed-upon 
outcomes.
7. Home-School Relations
The First Generation: In the effective school parents understand 
and support the school’s basic mission and are given the opportunity 
to play an important role in helping the school to achieve this mission. 
The Second Generation: During the first generation, the role of par-
ents in the education of their children was always somewhat unclear. 
Schools often gave “lip service” to having parents more actively in-
volved in the schooling of their children. Unfortunately, when pressed, 
many educators were willing to admit that they really did not know 
how to deal effectively with increased levels of parent involvement in 
the schools. In the second generation, the relationship between parents 
and the school must be an authentic partnership between the school 
and home. In the past when teachers said they wanted more parent 
involvement, more often than not they were looking for unqualified 
support from parents. Many teachers believed that parents, if they 
truly valued education, knew how to get their children to behave in 
the ways that the school desired. It is now clear to both teachers and 
parents that the parent involvement issue is not that simple. Parents 
are often as perplexed as the teachers about the best way to inspire 
students to learn what the school teaches. The best hope for effectively 
confronting the problem—and not each other—is to build enough 
trust and enough communication to realize that both teachers and 
parents have the same goal—an effective school and home for all chil-
dren!

National Education Goals 189
Excerpt from Lezotte, Lawrence W. 1991. Correlates of Effective Schools: 
The First and Second Generation. Okemos, MI: Effective Schools Products, 
Ltd.
National Education Goals
By 2002, when No Child Left Behind was enacted, the United States had 
its third set of national goals for education. The first list of six national 
goals for education were set by the nation’s governors and President 
George Herbert Walker Bush. He announced them in 1990. The sec-
ond set of national goals were the centerpiece of Goals 2000: Educate 
America Act. In Goals 2000, Congress added two goals to the original 
six in the first list. No Child Left Behind is driven by five goals. Each of 
these sets of goals is listed below.
National Goals for Education (1990)
Goal 1—Readiness for School: By the year 2000, all children in 
America will start school ready to learn.
Goal 2—High School Completion: By the year 2000, the high school 
graduation rate will increase to at least 90 percent.
Goal 3—Student Achievement and Citizenship: By the year 2000, 
American students will leave grades four, eight, and twelve having 
demonstrated competency in challenging subject matter including En-
glish, mathematics, science, history, and geography; and every school 
in America will ensure that all students learn to use their minds well, so 
they may be prepared for responsible citizenship, further learning, and 
productive employment in our modern economy.
Goal 4—Science and Mathematics: By the year 2000, U.S. students 
will be first in the world in science and mathematics achievement.
Goal 5—Adult Literacy and Lifelong Learning: By the year 2000, 
every adult American will be literate and will possess the knowledge 
and skills necessary to compete in a global economy and exercise the 
rights and responsibilities of citizenship.
Goal 6—Safe, Disciplined, and Drug-Free Schools: By the year 2000, 
every school in America will be free of drugs and violence and will offer 
a disciplined environment conducive to learning. Schools, families, and 
communities must work together to counteract negative social influ-
ences and create safe and orderly schools.
Excerpt from Swenson, B. B. 1991. “The National Education Goals: 
Questions and Answers.” ERIC Digest. ERIC Document Number 
ED334715.

190 Data and Documents
National Education Goals from Goals 
2000: Educate America Act (1996)
SEC. 102. NATIONAL EDUCATION GOALS.
The Congress declares that the National Education Goals are the 
following:
(1) SCHOOL READINESS.
(A)  By the year 2000, all children in America will start school 
ready to learn.
 
(B) The objectives for this goal are that—
 
(i)  all children will have access to high-quality and 
developmentally appropriate preschool programs 
that help prepare children for school;
 
(ii)  every parent in the United States will be a child’s first 
teacher and devote time each day to helping such parent’s 
preschool child learn, and parents will have access to the 
training and support parents need; and
 
(iii)  children will receive the nutrition, physical activity expe-
riences, and health care needed to arrive at school with 
healthy minds and bodies, and to maintain the mental 
alertness necessary to be prepared to learn, and the num-
ber of low-birthweight babies will be significantly reduced 
through enhanced prenatal health systems.
(2) SCHOOL COMPLETION.
 
(A)  By the year 2000, the high school graduation rate will increase 
to at least 90 percent.
 
(B) The objectives for this goal are that—
 
(i)  the Nation must dramatically reduce its school dropout 
rate, and 75 percent of the students who do drop out will 
successfully complete a high school degree or its equiva-
lent; and
 
(ii)  the gap in high school graduation rates between 
American students from minority backgrounds and 
their non-minority counterparts will be eliminated.
(3) STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT AND CITIZENSHIP.
 
(A)  By the year 2000, all students will leave grades 4, 8, and 12 
having demonstrated competency over challenging subject 
matter including English, mathematics, science, foreign 
languages, civics and government, economics, arts, history, 
and geography, and every school in America will ensure that 
all students learn to use their minds well, so they may be 

National Education Goals from Goals 2000 191
 prepared for responsible citizenship, further learning, and 
productive employment in our Nation’s modern  economy.
 
(B) The objectives for this goal are that—
 
(i)  the academic performance of all students at the elementary 
and secondary level will increase significantly in every 
quartile, and the distribution of minority students in each 
quartile will more closely reflect the student population as 
a whole;
 
(ii)  the percentage of all students who demonstrate the ability 
to reason, solve problems, apply knowledge, and write and 
communicate effectively will increase substantially;
 
(iii)  all students will be involved in activities that promote and 
demonstrate good citizenship, good health, community ser-
vice, and personal responsibility;
 
(iv)  all students will have access to physical education and 
health education to ensure they are healthy and fit;
 
(v)  the percentage of all students who are competent in more 
than one language will substantially increase; and
 
(vi)  all students will be knowledgeable about the diverse cul-
tural heritage of this Nation and about the world 
community.
(4)  TEACHER EDUCATION AND PROFESSIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT.
 
(A)  By the year 2000, the Nation’s teaching force will have 
access to programs for the continued improvement of their 
professional skills and the opportunity to acquire the knowl-
edge and skills needed to instruct and prepare all American 
students for the next century.
 
(B) The objectives for this goal are that—
 
(i)  all teachers will have access to preservice teacher educa-
tion and continuing professional development activities 
that will provide such teachers with the knowledge and 
skills needed to teach to an increasingly diverse student 
population with a variety of educational, social, and health 
needs;
 
(ii)  all teachers will have continuing opportunities to acquire 
additional knowledge and skills needed to teach chal-
lenging subject matter and to use emerging new methods, 
forms of assessment, and technologies;
 
(iii)  States and school districts will create integrated strategies 
to attract, recruit, prepare, retrain, and support the contin-
ued professional development of teachers, administrators, 
and other educators, so that there is a highly talented work 
force of professional educators to teach challenging subject 
matter; and

192 Data and Documents
 
(iv)  partnerships will be established, whenever possible, 
among local educational agencies, institutions of higher 
education, parents, and local labor, business, and profes-
sional associations to provide and support programs for 
the professional development of educators.
(5) MATHEMATICS AND SCIENCE.
 
(A)  By the year 2000, United States students will be first in the 
world in mathematics and science achievement.
 
(B) The objectives for this goal are that—
 
(i)  mathematics and science education, including the metric 
system of measurement, will be strengthened throughout 
the system, especially in the early grades;
 
(ii)  the number of teachers with a substantive background in 
mathematics and science, including the metric system of 
measurement, will increase by 50 percent; and
 
(iii)  the number of United States undergraduate and graduate 
students, especially women and minorities, who complete 
degrees in mathematics, science, and engineering will in-
crease significantly.
(6) ADULT LITERACY AND LIFELONG LEARNING.
 
(A)  By the year 2000, every adult American will be literate 
and will possess the knowledge and skills necessary to com-
pete in a global economy and exercise the rights and respon-
sibilities of citizenship.
 
(B) The objectives for this goal are that—
 
(i)  every major American business will be involved in 
strengthening the connection between education and 
work;
 
(ii)  all workers will have the opportunity to acquire the knowl-
edge and skills, from basic to highly technical, needed to 
adapt to emerging new technologies, work methods, and 
markets through public and private educational, voca-
tional, technical, workplace, or other programs;
 
(iii)  the number of quality programs, including those at 
libraries, that are designed to serve more effectively the 
needs of the growing number of part-time and midcareer 
students will increase substantially;
 
(iv)  the proportion of the qualified students, especially minori-
ties, who enter college, who complete at least two years, 
and who complete their degree programs will increase sub-
stantially;
 
(v)  the proportion of college graduates who demonstrate an 
advanced ability to think critically, communicate effec-
tively, and solve problems will increase substantially; and

National Education Goals from Goals 2000 193
 
(vi)  schools, in implementing comprehensive parent involve-
ment programs, will offer more adult literacy, parent train-
ing and life-long learning opportunities to improve the ties 
between home and school, and enhance parents’ work and 
home lives.
(7)  SAFE, DISCIPLINED, AND ALCOHOL- AND 
DRUG-FREE SCHOOLS.
 
(A)  By the year 2000, every school in the United States will be free 
of drugs, violence, and the unauthorized presence of firearms 
and alcohol and will offer a disciplined environment condu-
cive to learning.
 
(B) The objectives for this goal are that—
 
(i)  every school will implement a firm and fair policy on use, 
possession, and distribution of drugs and alcohol;
 
(ii)  parents, businesses, governmental and community organi-
zations will work together to ensure the rights of students 
to study in a safe and secure environment that is free of 
drugs and crime, and that schools provide a healthy envi-
ronment and are a safe haven for all children;
 
(iii)  every local educational agency will develop and imple-
ment a policy to ensure that all schools are free of violence 
and the unauthorized presence of weapons;
 
(iv)  every local educational agency will develop a sequential, 
comprehensive kindergarten through twelfth grade drug 
and alcohol prevention education program;
 
(v)  drug and alcohol curriculum should be taught as an inte-
gral part of sequential, comprehensive health education;
 
(vi)  community-based teams should be organized to provide 
students and teachers with needed support; and
 
(vii)  every school should work to eliminate sexual 
 harassment.
(8) PARENTAL PARTICIPATION.
 
(A)  By the year 2000, every school will promote partnerships 
that will increase parental involvement and participation in 
promoting the social, emotional, and academic growth of 
children.
 
(B) The objectives for this Goal are that—
 
(i)  every State will develop policies to assist local schools and 
local educational agencies to establish programs for in-
creasing partnerships that respond to the varying needs of 
parents and the home, including parents of children who 
are disadvantaged or bilingual, or parents of children with 
disabilities;

194 Data and Documents
 
(ii)  every school will actively engage parents and families 
in a partnership which supports the academic work of 
children at home and shared educational decisionmaking 
at school; and
 
(iii)  parents and families will help to ensure that schools are 
adequately supported and will hold schools and teachers 
to high standards of accountability.
Goals 2000: Educate America Act. 1994. P.L. 103–227. http://www.
ed.gov/legislation/GOALS2000/TheAct/sec102.html.
Goals in “No Child Left Behind” (2002)
1. By 2013–2014, all students will reach high standards, at a minimum 
attaining proficiency or better in reading/language arts and mathematics.
2. All limited English proficient students will become proficient in 
English and reach high academic standards, at a minimum attaining 
proficiency or better in reading/language arts and mathematics.
3. By 2005–2006, all students will be taught by highly qualified 
teachers.
4. All students will be educated in learning environments that are 
safe, drug-free, and conducive to learning.
5. All students will graduate from high school.
No Child Left Behind: Reauthorization 
of the Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act
In 2002, President George W. Bush signed into law the latest reauthori-
zation of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), named 
No Child Left Behind (NCLB). NCLB put into place the largest federal 
intervention in public education in the history of the United States, af-
fecting nearly every program in every school. Interestingly, the provi-
sions of NCLB mirror the correlates of effective schools listed above. The 
purpose (Sec. 1001) of Title I of NCLB is included here.
Title I—Improving The Academic Achievement Of The Disad-
vantaged
SEC. 101. IMPROVING THE ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT OF 
THE DISADVANTAGED.
Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 6301 et seq.) is amended to read as follows:

No Child Left Behind 195
TITLE I—IMPROVING THE ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT OF 
THE DISADVANTAGED
SEC. 1001. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
The purpose of this title is to ensure that all children have a fair, 
equal, and significant opportunity to obtain a high-quality education 
and reach, at a minimum, proficiency on challenging State academic 
achievement standards and state academic assessments. This purpose 
can be accomplished by—
(1) ensuring that high-quality academic assessments, accountabil-
ity systems, teacher preparation and training, curriculum, and instruc-
tional materials are aligned with challenging State academic standards 
so that students, teachers, parents, and administrators can measure 
progress against common expectations for student academic achieve-
ment;
(2) meeting the educational needs of low-achieving children in our 
Nation’s highest-poverty schools, limited English proficient children, mi-
gratory children, children with disabilities, Indian children, neglected or 
delinquent children, and young children in need of reading assistance;
(3) closing the achievement gap between high- and low-performing 
children, especially the achievement gaps between minority and non-
minority students, and between disadvantaged children and their more 
advantaged peers;
(4) holding schools, local educational agencies, and States account-
able for improving the academic achievement of all students, and iden-
tifying and turning around low-performing schools that have failed 
to provide a high-quality education to their students, while providing 
alternatives to students in such schools to enable the students to receive 
a high-quality education;
(5) distributing and targeting resources sufficiently to make a 
 difference to local educational agencies and schools where needs are 
greatest;
(6) improving and strengthening accountability, teaching, and 
learning by using State assessment systems designed to ensure that stu-
dents are meeting challenging State academic achievement and content 
standards and increasing achievement overall, but especially for the 
disadvantaged;
(7) providing greater decision making authority and flexibility to 
schools and teachers in exchange for greater responsibility for student 
performance;
(8) providing children an enriched and accelerated educational pro-
gram, including the use of schoolwide programs or additional services 
that increase the amount and quality of instructional time;
 
(9) promoting schoolwide reform and ensuring the access of chil-
dren to effective, scientifically based instructional strategies and chal-
lenging academic content;

196 Data and Documents
 
(10) significantly elevating the quality of instruction by providing 
staff in participating schools with substantial opportunities for profes-
sional development;
 
(11) coordinating services under all parts of this title with each 
other, with other educational services, and, to the extent feasible, 
with other agencies providing services to youth, children, and 
families; and
 
(12) affording parents substantial and meaningful opportunities to 
participate in the education of their children.
The Elementary and Secondary Education Act (The No Child Left 
Behind Act of 2001), P.L. 107–110. 2002. http://www.ed.gov/policy/
elsec/leg/esea02/index.html.
The Dangerous Consequences 
of High-Stakes Standardized Testing
One of the provisions of No Child Left Behind is a protocol of stan-
dardized testing on a scale that greatly expanded standardized testing 
and at the same time, elevated the results of the testing to what many 
educators call “high stakes.” Tests become “high stakes” when decisions 
based on scores from them affect the lives of children, their teachers, or 
their schools in serious ways. Under NCLB, schools can be labeled fail-
ing, and even closed, based on standardized test scores of the children 
they serve. FairTest, a watchdog organization for testing in education, 
has issued a statement that warns against such use of standardized 
testing.
The Dangerous Consequences of High-Stakes Standardized 
Testing
Tests are called “high-stakes” when they are used to make major 
decisions about a student, such as high school graduation or grade pro-
motion. To be high stakes, a test has to be very important in the decision 
process or be able to override other information (for example, a student 
does not graduate if s/he does not pass the test regardless of how well 
s/he did in school). Currently, 17 states require students to pass a test to 
graduate, and 7 more are planning such tests.
Tests are called “standardized” when all students answer the same 
questions under similar conditions and their responses are scored in the 
same way. This includes commercial norm-referenced tests as well as 
state criterion-referenced or standards-based exams. They can include 
multiple-choice or open-ended (constructed) responses.

The Dangerous Consequences of High-Stakes Standardized Testing 197
Research has shown that high-stakes testing causes damage to 
individual students and education. It is not a reasonable method for 
improving schools. Here are a few of the many reasons why:
1) High-stakes tests are unfair to many students.
Some students simply do not test well. Many students are affected 
by test anxiety or do not show their learning well on a standardized test, 
resulting in inaccurately lower scores.
Many students do not have a fair opportunity to learn the material 
on the test because they attend poorly-funded schools with large class 
sizes, too many teachers without subject area certification, and inade-
quate books, libraries, laboratories, computers and other facilities. These 
students are usually from low-income families, and many also suffer 
problems with housing, nutrition or health care. High-stakes tests punish 
them for things they cannot control.
Students with learning disabilities, whose first language is not En-
glish, or who attend vocational schools fail high-stakes tests far more fre-
quently than do mainstream students.
Some people say that it is unfair to students to graduate them if 
they have not been adequately educated. But if students do not have 
access to an adequate and equitable education, they end up being held 
accountable while the system is not. States must take responsibility 
and be held accountable for providing a strong educational opportu-
nity for all.
2) High-stakes testing leads to increased grade retention 
and dropping out.
Grade retention has repeatedly been proven to be counterproductive: 
students who are retained do not improve academically, are emotionally 
damaged by retention, suffer a loss of interest in school and self-esteem, 
and are more likely to drop out of school.
The most comprehensive national study finds that graduation 
tests lead to a higher dropout rate for students who are relatively low-
achievers in school, while they do not produce improved learning for 
those who stay in school.
3) High-stakes testing produces teaching to the test.
The higher the stakes, the more schools focus instruction on the 
tests. As a result, what is not tested often is not taught. Whole subjects 
may be dropped; e.g., science, social studies, art or physical education 
may be eliminated if only language arts and math are tested. Important 
topics or skills that cannot be tested with paper-and-pencil tests—such 
as writing research papers or conducting laboratory experiments—are 
not taught.
Instruction starts to look like the tests. For example, reading is 
reduced to short passages followed by multiple-choice questions, 
a kind of “reading” that does not exist in the real world. Writing 

198 Data and Documents
 becomes the “five-paragraph essay” that is useless except on stan-
dardized tests.
Narrowing of curriculum and instruction happens most to low-
 income students. In schools serving wealthier areas, teachers and parents 
make sure most students gain the skills and knowledge they need to suc-
ceed in college and life. Too often, poor kids in under-funded schools get 
little more than test coaching that does not adequately prepare them for 
further learning. In some schools, the library budget is spent on test prep 
materials, and professional development is reduced to training teachers 
to be better test coaches. All this further limits educational opportunities 
for low-income children.
Some people say that teaching to the test is fine if test content is im-
portant. However:
- Most tests include many topics that are not important, while many 
important areas are not included on standardized tests because they 
cannot be measured by such tests.
- Teaching to the test produces a classroom climate and 
style of teaching that is ineffective and turns many students 
off to learning.
- Teaching to the test does not produce real and sustained gains on 
independent learning measures. Teaching to the test does not work if 
the goal is high-quality learning.
4) High-stakes testing drives out good teachers.
As learning largely depends on teacher quality, real improvements 
in schools can only come through teachers. Good teachers are often dis-
couraged, even disgusted, by the overemphasis on testing. Many excel-
lent teachers leave. It is absurd to believe that the “best and brightest” 
will want to become teachers when teaching is reduced to test prep and 
when schools are continually attacked by politicians, business leaders 
and the media. When narrow tests are used to hold schools account-
able, teachers also leave low-performing schools where they are needed 
most.
5) High-stakes testing misinforms the public.
People have a right to know how well schools are doing. However, 
tests fail to provide sufficient information. The new federal requirement 
that only assessment scores be used to determine whether schools are 
improving will make the situation worse.
Teaching to the test causes score inflation (score gains that don’t rep-
resent actual improvements in learning) which misleads the public into 
thinking schools are improving, when they may not be better—and due 
to teaching to the test, may even be worse.
Most tests are secret, so the public cannot know what students are 
expected to know. State academic content standards typically are too 
long, often too obscure, and much of what is in them is not tested.

Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study 199
Tests are a narrow slice of what parents and the public need to know 
about schools. They don’t include non-academic areas and they are weak 
measures of academics.
Test results don’t take into account non-school factors that affect 
learning, such as poverty, hunger, student mobility, lack of medical care, 
safety, community resources, parents’ education—all of which must be 
addressed if “no children are to be left behind.”
Conclusion: High-stakes testing does not improve education.
Test standards and major research groups such as the National 
Academy of Sciences clearly state that major educational decisions 
should not be based solely on a test score. High-stakes testing pun-
ishes students, and often teachers, for things they cannot control. It 
drives students and teachers away from learning, and at times from 
school. It narrows, distorts, weakens and impoverishes the curricu-
lum while fostering forms of instruction that fail to engage students 
or support high-quality learning. In a high-stakes testing environ-
ment, the limit to educational improvement is largely dictated by the 
tests—but the tests are a poor measure of high-quality curriculum 
and learning. In particular, the emphasis on testing hurts low-income 
students and students from minority groups. Testing cannot provide 
adequate information about school quality or progress. High-stakes 
testing actively hurts, rather than helps, genuine educational im-
provement.
FairTest: The National Center for Fair and Open Testing. 2007. 
“The Dangerous Consequences of High-stakes Standardized Testing.” 
http://www.fairtest.org/dangerous-consequences-highstakes-
standardized-tes.
Trends in International Mathematics 
and Science Study
The Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study 
(TIMSS) gathers data periodically to compare the achievement of 
U.S. students with that of their peers in other countries. Students 
in the countries that participate are sampled; that is, not all stu-
dents take the tests. The tests are translated, both literally and cul-
turally, so that items are comparable in all the languages in which 
the test is administered.
The data in Tables 6.1 and 6.2 below represent scale scores, 
scores that have been converted from raw scores to allow for com-
parison between versions of the test and across test years. They 

200 Data and Documents
are presented here to show how the performance of students in 
the United States ranks with students in the other countries that 
participated in the 2003 TIMSS.
Scores of fourth grade students in the United States ranked 
12th of the 25 countries participating in the 2003 TIMSS. Eighth 
grade students’ scores ranked 15th of the 44 countries whose 
eighth graders participated in the study.
The scores in Tables 6.1 and 6.2 are drawn from tables in 
Gonzales, P., J. C. Guzman, L. Partelow, E. Pahlke, L. Jocelyn, 
D. Kastberg, and T. Williams. Highlights from the Trends in In-
ternational Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) 2003 (NCES 
2005–005). U.S. Department of Education, National Center for 
Education Statistics. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing 
Office, 2004.
TABLE 6.1
Average 2003 TIMSS Mathematics Scores of Fourth Grade Students, by Country
Country
Average Fourth Grade Score
Singapore
594
Hong Kong SAR
575
Japan
565
Chinese Taipei
564
Belgium–Flemish
551
Netherlands
540
Latvia
536
Lithuania
534
Russian Federation
532
England
531
Hungary
529
United States
518
Cyprus
510
Republic of Moldova
504
Italy
503
Australia
499
New Zealand
493
Scotland
490
Slovenia
479
Armenia
456
Norway
451
Iran
389
Philippines
358
Morocco
347
Tunisia
339
Source: Gonzales et al., 2004, 4.

Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study 201
TABLE 6. 2
Average 2003 TIMSS Mathematics Scores of Eighth Grade Students, by Country
Country
2003
Singapore
605
Republic of Korea
589
Hong Kong SAR
586
Chinese Taipei
585
Japan
570
Belgium–Flemish
537
Netherlands
536
Estonia
531
Hungary
529
Malaysia
508
Latvia
508
Russian Federation
508
Slovak Republic
508
Australia
508
United States
504
Lithuania
502
Sweden
499
Scotland
498
Israel
496
New Zealand
494
Slovenia
493
Italy
484
Armenia
478
Serbia
477
Bulgaria
476
Romania
475
Norway
461
Republic of Moldova
460
Cyprus
459
Republic of Macedonia
435
Lebanon
433
Jordan
424
Iran
411
Indonesia
411
Tunisia
410
Egypt
406
Palestinian National Authority
401
Chile
390
Morocco
387
Philippines
378
Botswana
366
Saudi Arabia
332
Ghana
276
South Africa
264
Source: Gonzales et al., 2004, 5.

202 Data and Documents
The Progress in International Reading 
Literacy Study
The Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) is 
an international study that compares the reading literacy of fourth 
grade students in the United States with their fourth grade peers 
from other countries. The PIRLS was first administered in 2001, 
with the most recent administration in 2006. The data reported 
in Table 6.3 below are scale scores that come from a report that 
compares the outcomes of the 2001 PIRLS with those of the 2006 
PIRLS. Note that scores missing from 2001 indicates that those 
TABLE 6.3
Average PIRLS Reading Scores of Fourth Grade Students by Country, 2001 and 2006, in Order 
of their 2006 Rankings (from highest to lowest)
Country
2001 Scores
2006 Scores
Russian Federation
528
565
Hong Kong SAR
528
564
Canada, Alberta
560
Singapore
528
558
Canada, British Columbia
558
Luxembourg
557
Canada, Ontario
548
555
Italy
541
551
Hungary
543
551
Sweden
561
549
Germany
539
548
Netherlands
554
547
Belgium–Flemish
547
Bulgaria
550
547
Denmark
546
Canada, Nova Scotia
542
Latvia
545
541
United States
542
540
England
553
539
Austria
538
Lithuania
543
537
Chinese Taipei
535
Canada, Quebec
537
533
New Zealand
529
532
Slovak Republic
518
531
Scotland
528
527
France
535
522

The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 203
TABLE 6.3
Average PIRLS Reading Scores of Fourth Grade Students by Country, 2001 and 2006, in Order of their 
2006 Rankings (from highest to lowest) (Continued )
Country
2001 Scores
2006 Scores
Slovenia
502
522
Poland
519
Spain
513
Israel
509
512
Iceland
512
511
Republic of Moldova
492
500
Belgium–French
500
Norway
498
Romania
489
Georgia
471
Macedonia
442
Trinidad and Tobago
436
Iran
421
Indonesia
405
Qatar
353
Kuwait
330
Morocco
323
South Africa
302
Source: Baer, J., S. Baldi, K. Ayotte, and P. Green. 2007. The Reading Literacy of U.S. Fourth-Grade Students in an 
International Context: Results From the 2001 and 2006 Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) 
(NCES 2008–017). National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of 
Education. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
countries did not participant in the 2001 PIRLS. The scores are 
listed from highest to lowest of the 2006 scores.
On the 2001 administration of the PIRLS, U.S. fourth grade 
students’ scores ranked eighth of the 23 countries whose students 
participated. In 2006, U.S. fourth graders’ scores ranked 18th of 
the 45 participating countries.
The Programme for International 
Student Assessment (PISA)
The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 
is a survey that is conducted every three years of 15-year-olds’ 

204 Data and Documents
TABLE 6.4
Program in International Student Assessment (PISA) Scores, 2006
Country
Mean Score
Science
Country Rank 
in Science
Mean Score
Math
Country Rank 
in Math
Mean Score 
Reading
Country Rank 
in Reading
Finland
563
1
548
1
547
2
Canada
534
2
527
5
527
3
Japan
531
3
523
6
498
12
New Zealand
530
4
522
7
521
4
Australia
527
5
520
9
513
6
Netherlands
525
5
531
3
507
9
Korea
522
7
547
2
556
1
Germany
516
8
504
14
495
13
United Kingdom
515
9
495
18
495
13
Czech Republic
513
10
510
11
483
20
Switzerland
512
11
530
4
499
11
Austria
511
12
505
13
490
16
Belgium
510
13
520
8
510
7
Ireland
508
14
501
16
517
5
Hungary
504
15
491
21
482
21
Sweden
503
16
502
15
507
9
OECD average
500
—
498
—
500
—
Poland
498
17
495
19
508
8
Denmark
496
18
513
10
494
15
France
495
19
496
17
488
17
Iceland
491
20
506
12
484
18
United States
489
21
474
25
*
*
Slovak Republic
488
22
492
20
466
25
Spain
488
23
480
24
461
26
Norway
487
24
490
22
484
18
Luxembourg
486
25
490
23
479
22
Italy
475
26
462
27
469
24
Portugal
474
27
466
26
472
23
Greece
473
28
459
28
460
27
Turkey
424
29
424
29
447
28
Mexico
410
30
406
30
410
29
*Reading data for the United States were withdrawn.
knowledge and skills. The survey is conducted through the 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD). In 2006, students from 57 countries participated in 
the survey that gathered data about science, mathematics, and 
reading achievement. Table 6.4 below shows the average (mean) 
scale score for each country, as well as that country’s ranking for 
science, mathematics, and reading. There are no reading data 
available for the United States. The data in the table are from 

Data from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) 205
OECD. 2007. “Executive Summary.” PISA 2006: Science Compe-
tencies for Tomorrow’s World. Paris: Author.
Data in this table are drawn from the OECD. Executive Sum-
mary of the 2007 PISA report. PISA 2006: Science Competencies for 
Tomorrow’s World. Paris: Author, 2007, pp. 22, 47, 53.
Data from the National Assessment of 
Educational Progress (NAEP)
The National Assessment of Education Progress (NAEP) is ad-
ministered periodically to students in fourth, eighth, and 12th 
grades across the country. The tables below (Tables 6.5, 6.6, 6.7, 
6.8, 6.9, and 6.10) summarize average scores from the various ad-
ministrations (1992–2007) of the test. Data in the tables are scale 
scores drawn from reports issued by the U.S. Department of Edu-
cation, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Educa-
tion Statistics, National Assessment of Education Progress. Scale 
scores allow for comparison across years and across tests. In other 
words, the use of scale scores allows for a representation of real 
growth that is not corrupted by differences in raw scores or differ-
ent tests. Additional data, as well as more in-depth analysis of the 
data in a series of publications titled “The Nation’s Report Card” 
can be found at http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/.
Data in Table 6.5 show average reading scores for students in 
fourth and eighth grades for each of the administrations of NAEP 
TABLE 6.5
Average Reading Scores for Fourth and Eighth Grades
Year
Average Fourth Grade Score
Average Eighth Grade Score
1992
217
260
1994
214
260
1998
217/215*
264/263*
2000
213
2002
219
264
2003
218
263
2005
219
262
2007
221
263
*The first score represents testing without accommodations, the second with accommodations.
Source: National Center for Education Statistics. 2008. The Nation’s Report Card: Reading 2007. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Education.

206 Data and Documents
between 1992 and 2007. During that time period, those scores 
have risen only slightly.
Table 6.6 shows the average fourth and eighth grade scores 
in mathematics from 1990 to 2007. Scores at both the fourth and 
eighth grade levels have increased significantly and consistently 
during that time period.
TABLE 6.7
Average Science Scores for Fourth, Eighth, and Twelfth Grades
Year
Average Fourth Grade Scores
Average Eighth Grade Scores
Average Twelfth Grade Scores
1996
147
149
150
2000
147
149
146
2005
151
149
147
Source: National Center for Education Statistics. 2006. The Nation’s Report Card: Mathematics 2005. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Education.
TABLE 6.6 
Average Mathematics Scores for Fourth and Eighth Grades
Year
Average Fourth Grade Score
Average Eighth Grade Score
1990
213
263
1992
220
268
1996
224/224*
272/270*
2000
226
273
2003
235
278
2005
238
279
2007
240
281
Source: National Center for Education Statistics. 2008. The Nation’s Report Card: Mathematics 2007. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Education.
Table 6.7 presents average scores for fourth, eighth, and 12th 
grade students in science over the three years science has been 
tested by the NAEP. The average scores of fourth grade students 
have risen slightly, while those of eighth grade students have re-
mained the same, and 12th grade students’ scores have decreased 
slightly.

Data from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) 207
TABLE 6.8
Average Civics Scores for Fourth, Eighth, and Twelfth Grades
Year
Average Fourth Grade Scores
Average Eighth Grade Scores
Average Twelfth Grade Scores
1998
150
150
150
2006
154
150
151
Source: National Center for Education Statistics. 2007. The Nation’s Report Card: Civics 2006. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Education.
Civics scores for fourth, eighth, and 12th grade students on 
the NAEP are presented in Table 6.8. The scores show that be-
tween the two years that civics was included on the test, fourth 
grade students’ scores increased, eighth grade students’ scores 
remained the same, and 12th grade students’ scores increased 
slightly.
TABLE 6.9
Average U.S. History Scores for Fourth, Eighth, and Twelfth Grades
Year
Average Fourth Grade Scores
Average Eighth Grade Scores
Average Twelfth Grade Scores
1994
205
259
286
2001
208/209*
260/262*
287/287*
2006
211
263
290
* The first score represents testing without accommodations, the second with accommodations.
Source: National Center for Education Statistics. 2007. The Nation’s Report Card: Civics 2006. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Education.
The NAEP has measured students’ U.S. history knowledge 
three times—1994, 2001, and 2006. Data for those three years 
are presented in Table 6.9. They show that the scores of all three 
grade levels tested, fourth, eighth, and 12th, have risen consis-
tently.
Fourth, eighth, and 12th grade students’ knowledge of geog-
raphy has been assessed on the NAEP twice, in 1994 and in 2001. 
Table 6.10 shows the average scores of fourth, eighth, and 12th 

208 Data and Documents
TABLE 6.10
Average Geography Scores for Fourth, Eighth, and Twelfth Grades
Year
Average Fourth Grade Score
Average Eighth Grade Score
Average Twelfth Grade Score
1994
206
260
285
2001
209
262
285
Source: National Center for Education Statistics. 2002. The Nation’s Report Card: Geography 2001. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Education.
grade students during those years. Fourth and eighth grade stu-
dents’ scores rose slightly between the two administrations of the 
test; 12th grade students’ scores remained the same.

209
 7 
 Directory of Organizations 
 T
here are many, many organizations involved in the reform 
of education in the United States. The organizations listed 
in this chapter are intended to represent the types of orga-
nizations working toward school reform. Each of the organiza-
tions listed here has a mission that involves education reform or 
school improvement, and each has a perspective or philosophi-
cal base that can be seen throughout the organization’s work 
and publications. 
 This list is not intended to be exclusive or exhaustive. The 
 organizations listed below are representative of the myriad groups 
working toward education reform. 
 The directory begins with governmental agencies. These 
 include the U.S. Department of Education, as well as the networks 
of support agencies created by and funded through the No Child 
Left Behind legislation. Included in the governmental agencies 
are some of the state education agencies’ school improvement 
or education reform support Web sites. Next, there are agencies 
whose primary focus is conducting and disseminating research 
about education reform. The organizations in the third category 
are those that are issue-focused; they provide information and 
professional development about a clearly defined issue related to 
education reform. The last category includes membership organi-
zations that provide information, publications, and other services 
in support of education  reform. 

210 Directory of Organizations
 Governmental Agencies 
 U.S. Department of Education 
 www.ed.gov 
 The U.S. Department of Education provides a wealth of informa-
tion and support for students, parents, teachers, administrators, 
schools, school districts, and states about the reform of education, 
including a wide range of data and statistics that describe the state 
of education in the United States. The Web site links to myriad 
online resources that include lesson plans and activities, informa-
tion about grants, and information about how to comply with No 
Child Left Behind. In addition, under No Child Left Behind, the 
U.S. Department of Education funds a network of 10 regional edu-
cational laboratories, a network of 16 comprehensive regional and 
5 content centers, and 62 parent information and  resource centers, 
all of which provide information, guidance, and technical assis-
tance to support education reform. 
 Regional Educational Laboratories 
 REL 
 555 New Jersey Ave, NW 
 Washington, DC 20208 
 800-USA-LEARN 
 http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/edlabs/
 The Regional Educational Laboratory (REL) program is a network 
of 10 laboratories that provide research-based technical assistance 
to schools, school districts, and states in their regions. Each of the 
laboratories conducts and disseminates research and works with 
schools, school districts, and states to apply the research in their 
education reform efforts. In addition, REL has a number of publi-
cations available on the Web that are intended to support educa-
tion reform. 
 The 10 laboratories, the states they serve, and their  contact 
 information are listed below. Each of the laboratories has a num-
ber of partner agencies that provide more targeted assistance. 
That information is available on the individual REL Web sites. 
 REL Appalachia at CNA 
 4825 Mark Center Drive 
 Alexandria, VA 22311 

Governmental Agencies 211
 703-824-2828 or 800-344-0007 ext. 2828 
 RELAppalachia@cna.org 
 http://www.RELAppalachia.org/ 
 REL Appalachia serves the states of Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia, 
and West Virginia. 
 REL Mid-Atlantic 
 Pennsylvania State University 
 277 Chambers Building 
 University Park, PA 16802 
 866-RELMAFYI 
 info@relmid-atlantic.org 
 REL Mid-Atlantic serves Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, 
Pennsylvania, and Washington, D.C. 
 REL Mid-Continent Research for Education and Learning 
 4601 DTC Boulevard, Suite 500 
 Denver, CO 80237 
 303-337-0990 
 relcentral@mcrel.org 
 http://mcrel.org/ 
 REL Central serves Colorado, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, North 
Dakota, South Dakota, and Wyoming. 
 REL Midwest at Learning Point Associates 
 1120 East Diehl Road 
 Naperville, IL 60563 
 866-730-6735 
 relmidwest@learningpt.org 
 http://www.learningpt.org 
 REL Midwest serves Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, 
Ohio, and Wisconsin. 
 REL Northeast & Islands at Education Development 
Center, Inc. 
 55 Chapel Street 
 Newton, MA 02458 
 617-618-2747 
 jweber@edc.org 
 http://www.edc.org 

212 Directory of Organizations
 REL Northeast and Islands serves Connecticut, Maine, Massa-
chusetts, New Hampshire, New York, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, 
Vermont, and the Virgin Islands. 
 REL Northwest at Northwest Regional Educational 
Laboratory 
 101 SW Main, Suite 500 
 Portland, OR 97204 
 800-547-6339 ext. 486 or 454 
 info@NWREL.org 
 http://www.nwrel.org 
 REL Northwest serves Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Oregon, and 
Washington. 
 REL Pacific at Pacific Resources for Education and 
Learning 
 900 Fort Street Mall, Suite 1300 
 Honolulu, HI 96813 
 800-377-4773 
 burniskj@prel.org 
 http://www.prel.org 
 REL Pacific serves the state of Hawaii and the territories of 
American Samoa, the Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, the 
Northern Mariana Islands, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, 
and the Republic of Palau. 
 REL Southeast at SERVE Center 
 University of North Carolina at Greensboro 
 Gateway University Research Park 
 5900 Summit Ave. 
 Browns Summit, NC 27214 
 800-755-3277 
 RELSoutheast@serve.org 
 http://www.serve.org/ 
 REL Southeast serves Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, 
North Carolina, and South Carolina. 
 REL Southwest at Edvance Research, Inc. 
 9901 1H-10 West, Suite 700 
 San Antonio, TX 78230 
 877-EDVANCE (338-2623) 

Governmental Agencies 213
 RELinfo@edvanceresearch.com 
 http://www.edvanceresearch.com 
 REL Southwest serves Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, 
Oklahoma, and Texas. 
 REL West at WestEd 
 730 Harrison Street 
 San Francisco, CA 94107 
 866-853-1831 
 relwest@wested.org 
 http://www.wested.org/ 
 REL West serves Arizona, California, Nevada, and Utah. 
 Comprehensive Centers 
 Each of the 16 regional comprehensive centers provides research-
based technical assistance to assist in implementing No Child Left 
Behind and reforming and improving educational programs and 
schools. The comprehensive centers provide information, publica-
tions, and professional development to schools in the states they 
serve. Many of them also provide such tools as school improve-
ment planning guides, podcasts, and webinars for the clients in 
their states. The 16 centers, the states they serve, and their contact 
information are listed below. 
 The  Alaska Comprehensive Center serves Alaska. 
 1016 W. 6th Avenue, Suite 401 
 Anchorage, AK 99501 
 907-349-0651 
 210 Ferry Way 
 Juneau, AK 99801 
 907-586-6806 
 http://www.alaskacc.org/contact 
 The  Appalachia Regional Comprehensive Center serves
Kentucky, North Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and West 
Virginia. 
 P.O. Box 1348 
 Charleston, WV 25325-1348 
 800-624-9120 
 304-347-0461 

214 Directory of Organizations
 304-347-1847 (fax) 
 http://www.arcc.edvantia.org/ 
 The  California Comprehensive Center serves California. 
 1107 9th Street–4th Floor 
 Sacramento, CA 95814-3607 
 916-492-4053 
 http://www.cacompcenter.org/cs/cacc/print/htdocs/cacc/
home.htm
 The  Florida and the Islands Regional Comprehensive 
Center serves Florida, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin 
Islands. 
 1000 North Ashley Drive, Suite 312 
 Tampa, FL 33602 
 800-756-9003 
 813-228-0632 
 http://www.ets.org/flicc/ 
 The  Great Lakes East Regional Comprehensive Center serves
Indiana, Michigan, and Ohio. 
 Learning Point Associates 
 1120 East Diehl Road, Suite 200 
 Naperville, IL 60563-1486 
 800-356-2735 
 630-649-6700 (fax) 
 http://www.learningpt.org/greatlakeseast/ 
 The  Great Lakes West Regional Comprehensive Center serves
Illinois and Wisconsin. 
 Learning Point Associates 
 1120 East Diehl Road, Suite 200 
 Naperville, IL 60563-1486 
 800-356-2735 
 630-649-6700 (fax) 
 http://www.learningpt.org/greatlakeswest/ 
 The  Mid-Atlantic Region Comprehensive Center serves
Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, and the 
District of Columbia. 
 George Washington University 
 Center for Equity and Excellence in Education (GW-CEEE) 
 1555 Wilson Blvd., Suite 515 

Governmental Agencies 215
 Arlington, Virginia 22209-2004 
 703-528-3588 or 800-925-3223 
 703-528-5973 (fax) 
 maccinfo@ceee.gwu.edu 
 http://www.macc.ceee.gwu.edu/ 
 The  Mid-Continent Comprehensive Center serves Arkansas, 
Kansas, Missouri, and Oklahoma.
 555 E. Constitution 
 Norman, OK 73072 
 405-325-1729 or 800-228-1766 
 405-325-1824 (fax) 
 http://www.mc3edsupport.org/ 
 The New England Region Comprehensive Center  serves 
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode 
Island, and Vermont. 
 RMC Research Corporation 
 1000 Market Street 
 Portsmouth, NH 03801 
 603-422-8888 
 800-258-0802 
 http://www.necomprehensivecenter.org/ 
 The  New York Comprehensive Center serves New York. 
 RMC Research Corporation 
 60 East 42nd Street, Suite 1345 
 New York, NY 10165-1345 
 212-972-4762 
 212-972-4763 (fax) 
 http://www.nycomprehensivecenter.org/ 
 The  North Central Region Comprehensive Center serves 
Iowa, Minnesota, Nebraska, North Dakota, and South 
Dakota. 
 North Central Comprehensive Center 
 Hamline University 
 1536 Hewitt Avenue, MS C-1924 
 St. Paul, MN 55104 
 651-523-2079 
 http://www.mcrel.org/nccc/ 

216 Directory of Organizations
 The Northwest Region Comprehensive Center serves Idaho, 
Montana, Oregon, Washington, and Wyoming. 
 Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory 
 101 SW Main Street, Suite 500 
 Portland, OR 97204-3297 
 503-275-9500 
 http://www.nwrel.org/nwrcc/ 
 The  Pacific Region Comprehensive Center serves Hawaii, 
American Samoa, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands, Federated States of Micronesia (Chuuk, Kosrae, 
Pohnpei, and Yap), Guam, Republic of the Marshall Islands, 
and the Republic of Palau. 
 http://www.pacificcompcenter.org/ 
 The  Southeast Region Comprehensive Center serves Alabama, 
Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, and South Carolina.
 3501 N. Causeway Blvd., Suite 700 
 Metairie, LA 70002 
 800-644-8671 
 http://secc.sedl.org/ 
 The  Texas Comprehensive Center serves Texas.
 SEDL 
 4700 Mueller Blvd. 
 Austin, TX 78723 
 512-476-6861 
 http://txcc.sedl.org/ 
 The  West/Southwest Region Comprehensive Center serves
Arizona, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, and Utah. 
 Southwest Comprehensive Center 
 2020 N. Central Avenue, Suite 660 
 Phoenix, AZ 85004-4598 
 866-979-7322 
 info@swcompcenter.org 
 http://www.swcompcenter.org/cs/swcc/print/htdocs/swcc/
home.htm
 National Content Centers 
 Five national content centers provide assistance targeted at specific 
content needs for educational reform. They address assessment 

Governmental Agencies 217
and accountability, high schools, innovation and improvement, 
instruction, and teacher quality. The centers, the focus of their 
work, and their contact information are listed below. 
 Assessment and Accountability Comprehensive Center 
 http://www.aacompcenter.org/cs/aacc/print/htdocs/aacc/
home.htm
 No Child Left Behind has rigorous requirements for assessment of 
students and programs and for accountability for student learn-
ing. The Assessment and Accountability Comprehensive Center 
is a collaboration between WestEd and the National Center for Re-
search on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing (CRESST) 
that provides support, research, and technical assistance to 
states, school districts, and comprehensive centers in meeting the 
 responsibilities for assessment and accountability under No Child 
Left Behind. 
 National High School Center 
 http://www.betterhighschools.org/ 
The National High School Center, housed  at the American 
 Institutes of Research, serves as a central source of information 
and research on high school improvement for the regional com-
prehensive centers and states, and center staff collaborate with 
regional comprehensive center staff to offer technical assistance 
to state and school districts. The Web site of the National High 
School Center offers a wealth of online resources for improvement 
and reform of high schools and high school programs, including 
links to a wide range of research and reports. 
 Center on Improvement and Innovation 
 http://www.centerii.org/ 
 The Center on Improvement and Innovation provides sup-
port and technical assistance to comprehensive centers on school 
 restructuring, innovation, and outreach to parents. Like the other 
content centers, staff members collaborate with comprehensive 
center staff to provide assistance to states and school districts. On 
its Web site, the Center on Improvement and Innovation has several 
tools for developing plans for school improvement and sustaining 
school improvement that are available online. With the Council 
of Chief State School Officers, the center publishes a “support for 

218 Directory of Organizations
school improvement” e-newsletter that describes successful efforts 
for school reform and improvement, innovation, and outreach to 
parents, also available through the center’s Web site. 
 Center on Instruction 
 http://www.centeroninstruction.org/ 
 The  Center on Instruction  serves as a conduit for research on, 
 information about, and descriptions of best practices in K-12 in-
struction in the areas of mathematics, science, reading,  English 
language learning, and special education, aimed primarily at sup-
porting the work of the comprehensive centers; the  resources, 
however, are publicly available and may be accessed by  teachers, 
school administrators, and others interested in the improvement 
of instruction. The center’s Web site has links to research briefs 
about instruction in each of the areas, and a center newsletter dis-
seminates additional information, research briefs, and  research 
news on instruction. 
 National Comprehensive Center on Teacher Quality 
 http://www.tqsource.org/ 
 The  National Comprehensive Center on Teacher Quality  is a 
clearinghouse of information about highly qualified teachers—
identifying, recruiting, evaluating, and keeping them. While the 
information at this site would be most valuable for school admin-
istrators, there is also information about the progress of states in 
ensuring that all students have highly qualified teachers. 
 Parent Information and Resource Centers 
 Funded also under No Child Left Behind, the network of 62 
 Parent Information and Resource Centers (PIRCs) provides tech-
nical assistance and support for designing and developing pa-
rental  involvement programs that lead to improved student 
achievement and strengthened partnerships between parents 
and  families on the one hand and schools, teachers, school 
 administrators, and other school personnel on the other. The 
PIRCs are funded through grants from the United States Depart-
ment of Education. Each of the PIRCs has a local board of direc-
tors, a mission statement, and specific objectives for their work. 
The PIRCs provide a wide variety of services to parents and 
school and school district personnel; those services are  described 

Governmental Agencies 219
on their individual Web sites. The PIRCs and their contact infor-
mation are listed below. 
 Alabama State PIRC 
 10520 U.S. Highway 231 
 Wetumpka, AL 36092 
 334-567-2252 
 http://www.alabamaparentcenter.com/ 
 Alaska State PIRC 
 AKPIRC 
 210 Ferry Way 
 Juneau, AK 99801 
 http://www.akpirc.org 
 American Samoa PIRC 
 5770 Fagatogo 
 Pago Pago, AS 96799 
 684-633-6094 
 http://www.aspirc.org 
 Arizona State PIRC 
 2600 W. Knox Road 
 Chandler, AZ 85224 
 480-224-2060 
 http://www.azpirc.com 
 Arkansas State PIRC 
 Jones Family Resource Center, Suite 113 
 614 E. Emma 
 Springdale, AR 72764 
 501-364-7580 
 http://www.parenting-ed.org 
 California PIRC 
 16033 E. San Bernardino Road 
 Covina, CA 91722 
 626-814-4441 ext. 103 
 http://www.bilingualeducation.org 
 California PIRC 
 4300 Sisk Road, Suite D 

220 Directory of Organizations
 Modesto, CA 95356 
 209-545-9766 
 http://www.calpirc.org 
 Colorado PIRC 
 3607 Martin Luther King Blvd. 
 Denver, CO 80205 
 303-355-5387 ext. 327 
 http://www.cpirc.org 
 Colorado PIRC 
 7150 Hooker Street, Suite B 
 Westminster, CO 80030 
 720-890-0123 
 http://www.ctpirc.org 
 Connecticut State PIRC 
 SERC 25 Industrial Park Road 
 Middletown, CT 06457 
 860-632-1485 
 http://www.coparentcoalition.org 
 Delaware PIRC 
 5570 Kirkwood Highway 
 Orchard Commons Business Center 
 Wilmington, DE 19808 
 302-999-7394 
 http://www.DEPIRC.org 
 District of Columbia PIRC 
 Multicultural Community Service at the Josephine Butler Parks 
Center
 2437 15th Street NW 
 Washington, DC 20009 
 202-238-9385 
 http://www.mcsdc.org 
 Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) PIRC 
 900 Fort St. Mall, Suite 1300 
 Honolulu, HI 96813 
 808-441-1316 
 http://www.prel.org/programs/clt/pirc-fsm.aspx 

Governmental Agencies 221
 Florida PIRC 
 2735 Whitney Road 
 Clearwater, FL 33760 
 727-523-1130 
 http://www.floridapirc.org 
 Florida PIRC 
 3500 East Fletcher Avenue, Suite 301 
 Tampa, FL 33613 
 813-974-2673 
 http://www.floridapirc.usf.edu 
 Georgia State PIRC 
 600 West Peachtree Street, Suite 1200 
 Atlanta, GA 30308 
 404-881-3292 
 http://www.cisga.org 
 Guam PIRC 
 Suite 101-C, J & G Commercial Center 
 138 E. Marine Corps Drive 
 Hagatna, GU 96910 
 671-477-7472 
 http://www.guampirc.org 
 Hawaii State PIRC 
 1485 Linapuni Street, Suite 105 
 Honolulu, HI 96819 
 808-841-6177 
 http://www.hawaiipirc.org 
 Idaho State PIRC 
 3010 W. State, Suite 104 
 Boise, ID 83703 
 208-345-3344 ext. 1005 
 http://www.idahopirc.org 
 Illinois State PIRC 
 600 S. Michigan Avenue 
 Chicago, IL 60605 
 312-369-8824 
 http://www.colum.edu/CCAP/Programs/Illinois_PIRC.php 

222 Directory of Organizations
 Indiana State PIRC 
 921 E. 86th Street, Suite 108 
 Indianapolis, IN 46240 
 317-205-2595 
 http://www.fscp.org 
 Iowa State PIRC 
 12199 Stratford Drive 
 Clive, IA 50325 
 641-751-4010 
 http://www.iowaparents.org 
 Kansas State PIRC 
 3500 SW 10th Avenue 
 Topeka, KS 66604 
 866-711-6711 
 http://www.kpirc.org 
 Kentucky State PIRC 
 100 Alpine Drive 
 P.O. Box 1249 
 Shelbyville, KY 40066 
 502-647-3533 ext. 210 or 800-251-4676 ext. 210 
 http://www.kypirc.org 
 Louisiana State PIRC 
 520 Olive Street, Suite C04 
 Shreveport, LA 71104 
 318-429-6958 
 http://www.LPIRC.org 
 Maine State PIRC 
 12 Shuman Avenue 
 P.O. Box 2067 
 Augusta, ME 04330 
 207-623-2145 
 http://www.mpf.org 
 Maryland State PIRC 
 5272 River Road, Suite 340 
 Mid-Atlantic Equity Consortium, Inc. 
 Bethesda, MD 20816 

Governmental Agencies 223
 301-657-7741 ext. 118 
 http://www.mdpirc.org/ 
 Massachusetts State PIRC 
 1135 Tremont Street, Suite 420 
 Boston, MA 02120 
 617-399-8344 
 http://www.pplace.org 
 Michigan State PIRC 
 11172 Adams Street 
 Holland, MI 49423 
 616-396-7566 ext. 116 
 http://www.lifeservicessystem.org 
 Minnesota State PIRC 
 8161 Normandale Blvd. 
 Bloomington, MN 55437 
 952-838-9000 
 http://www.pacer.org/mpc/ 
 Mississippi State PIRC 
 333 Yazoo Street 
 Lexington, MS 39095 
 662-834-0905 
 http://www.mississippipirc.org 
 Missouri PIRC 
 1300 E. Bradford Parkway 
 Springfield, MO 65804 
 417-269-7245 
 Missouri PIRC 
 815 Olive Street, Suite 22 
 St. Louis, MO 63101 
 816-926-4278 
 http://www.missouri-pirc.org 
 Montana State PIRC 
 2525 Palmer Street, Suite 1 
 Missoula, MT 59808 
 406-543-3550 
 http://www.montanapirc.com 

224 Directory of Organizations
 Nebraska State PIRC 
 215 Centennial Mall South, Suite 200 
 Lincoln, NE 68508 
 877-843-6651 
http://www.nebraskapirc.org
 Nevada State PIRC 
 380 Edison Way 
 Reno, NV 89502 
 775-353-5533 
 http://www.nevadapirc.org 
 New Hampshire State PIRC 
 P.O. Box 2405 
 Concord, NH 03302 
 603-224-7005 
 http://www.parentinformationcenter.org 
 New Jersey State PIRC 
 103 Church Street, Suite 210 
 New Brunswick, NJ 08901 
 732-246-8060 ext. 110 
 http://www.njpirc.org 
 New Mexico State PIRC 
 1920B Columbia Drive SE 
 Albuquerque, NM 87106 
 505-247-0192 
 http://www.parentsreachingout.org 
 New York PIRC 
 1000 Main Street 
 Buffalo, NY 14202 
 716-332-4140 
 http://Epicforchildren.org 
 New York PIRC 
 203 N. Hamilton Street 
 Watertown, NY 13601 
 315-788-8450 
 http://www.nyspirc.org/ 
 North Carolina State PIRC 
 907 Barra Row, Suite 102/103 

Governmental Agencies 225
 Davidson, NC 28036 
 800-962-6817 
 http://www.ecac-parentcenter.org 
 North Dakota State PIRC 
 North Dakota Parent Assistance & Supportive Schools (NDPASS) 
 1600 2nd Avenue SW, Suite #29 
 Minot, ND 58701 
 701-837-7511 
 http://www.ndstatepirc.org 
 Ohio State PIRC 
 2400 Reading Road 
 Cincinnati, OH 45202 
 888-OHPIRC9 or 513-762-7118 
 Oklahoma State PIRC 
 Eagle Ridge Institute 
 4801 North Classen Blvd., Suite 212 
 Oklahoma City, OK 73118 
 405-478-4078 
 http://www.okpirc.org 
 Oregon State PIRC 
 101 SW Main, Suite 500 
 Portland, OR 97204 
 503-275-9500 ext. 552 
 http://www.nwrel.org/pirc/index.php 
 Pennsylvania State PIRC 
 275 Grandview Avenue, Suite 200 
 Camp Hill, PA 17011 
 717-763-1661 
 http://www.center-school.org/pa-pirc/ 
 Puerto Rico PIRC 
 13 Jose Fernandez St. 
 San Juan, PR 00928 
 787-763-4665 
 http://www.apnipr.org 
 Republic of Marshall Islands (RMI) PIRC 
 900 Fort St. Mall, Suite 1300 

226 Directory of Organizations
 Honolulu, HI 96813 
 692-625-2343 
 http://www.prel.org/centers/clt.asp 
 Rhode Island State PIRC 
 175 Main Street 
 Pawtucket, RI 02860 
 401-724-0867 ext. 156 
 http://www.ristatepirc.org 
 South Carolina State PIRC 
 1634 Main St. Suite 100 
 Columbia, SC 29201 
 803-744-4029 
 http://www.scparentwise.org 
 South Dakota State PIRC 
 P.O. Box 218 
 Sturgis, SD 57785 
 605-347-6260 
 http://www.sdpirc.org 
 Tennessee State PIRC 
 701 Bradford Ave. 
 Nashville, TN 37204 
 615-269-7751 ext. 212 
 http://www.tnvoices.org 
 Texas State PIRC 
 5835 Callaghan, Suite 350 
 San Antonio, TX 78228 
 210-444-1710 
 http://www.idra.org 
 Utah State PIRC 
 2500 S. State Street, RM D120 
 Salt Lake City, UT 84115 
 801-646-4608 
 http://www.ufpn.org 
 Vermont State PIRC 
 600 Blair Park, Suite 301 

Governmental Agencies 227
 Williston, VT 05495 
 802-876-5315 
 http://www.pircvermont.org 
 Virgin Islands PIRC 
 51 Golden Grove, Box 913 
 Kingshill, St. Croix, VI 00821 
 340-643-9888 
 Virginia State PIRC 
 100 N. Washington St., Suite 234 
 Falls Church, VA 22046 
 800-869-6782 
 http://www.peatc.org 
 Washington State PIRC 
 ESD-123, 3918 West Court Street 
 Pasco, WA 99301 
 509-544-5770 
 West Virginia State PIRC 
 P.O. Box 1348 
 Charleston, WV 25325 
 304-347-0478 
 http://wvpc.edvantia.org 
 Wisconsin State PIRC 
 660 E. Mason Street, Suite 100 
 Milwaukee, WI 53202 
 414-755-8702 
 http://www.parentspluswi.org 
 Wyoming State PIRC 
 5 N. Lobban Avenue 
 Buffalo, WY 82834 
 307-684-7441 
 http://www.wpen.net 
 In addition to federal and federally funded agencies and orga-
nizations that support education reform, many states also have 
their own offices of education reform and school improvement. 
Information about these offices can be found at the individual 
states’ education Web sites. 

228 Directory of Organizations
 Research Organizations and Institutes 
 In the United States, there are many research organizations and 
institutes that conduct and disseminate research about education 
in general, and about education reform. Public funding supports 
some of them, but many others are privately funded or funded 
through foundations and other granting agencies. Some of the 
research organizations represent partisan positions. They work 
to conduct research from a particular perspective or to support 
a particular point of view, while others are nonpartisan. The re-
search organizations and institutes listed below are representative 
of the many such organizations in the United States. 
 Brown Center on Education Policy 
 Brookings Institution 
 1775 Massachusetts Ave., NW 
 Washington, DC 20036 
 202-797-6000 
 www.brookings.edu/brown.aspx 
 The Brown Center on Education Policy at the Brookings Insti-
tution has as its goal to improve the quality of education in the 
United States. The center’s research is focused on understanding 
the problems of the education system in the United States and 
proposing practical solutions to those problems. The research 
 reports produced by the center are intended, not only for use by 
researchers and academics, but also for informing policy makers 
and the public. The Web site includes many papers and research 
that are available to download. 
 Institute of Education Sciences 
 555 New Jersey Ave., NW 
 Washington, DC 20208 
 800-USA-LEARN 
 http://ies.ed.gov
 The Institute of Education Sciences (IES) was established by Con-
gress in the Education Sciences Reform Act of 2002, P.L. 107–179, as 
part of the U.S. Department of Education. IES reports present data, 
statistics, and evaluations about education in the United States. In 
IES, there are four research centers: the National Center for Edu-
cation Research (http://ies.ed.gov/ncer/) supports rigorous, sci-
entifically based research to improve educational  outcomes and 

Governmental Agencies 229
educational quality; the National Center for Education  Statistics 
(http://nces.ed.gov/) provides statistics on education in the 
United States, including data that compare U.S. education with 
that of other countries; the National Center for Education Evalu-
ation and Regional Assistance (http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/) conducts 
evaluations of federal education programs and disseminates the 
analyses and the results of those evaluations; and the National 
Center for Special Education Research (http://ies.ed.gov/ncser/)
sponsors a program of research that seeks to expand knowledge 
and understanding of children with disabilities. 
 SRI International 
 333 Ravenswood Avenue 
 Menlo Park, CA 94025-3493 
 650-859-2000 
 http://sri.com
 SRI International is an independent, nonprofit, client-sponsored 
research institute. SRI is the parent organization of many smaller 
research institutes that include the Center for Education and 
Human Services, whose topics of research and reports include 
community services, disability policy, early childhood educa-
tion, and school partnerships (http://policyweb.sri.com/cehs/
publications/publications.jsp); the Center for Science, Technology, 
and Economic Development, whose topics of research and reports 
include economic development, science and technology policy 
analysis, research and training program evaluations, centers of 
excellence program evaluations, and Fulbright program outcome 
assessments (http://www.sri.com/policy/csted/reports/); the 
Center for Technology in Learning, whose research topics and 
reports include program assessments, learning environments, 
teacher learning, and technology development (http://ctl.sri.
com/publications/publications.jsp); and the Center for Education 
Policy, whose research topics and reports include school  reform, 
teaching and learning, and transitions to college and beyond 
(http://policyweb.sri.com/cep/publications/publications.jsp).
 What Works Clearinghouse 
 P.O. Box 2393 
 Princeton, NJ 08543-2393 
 866-503-6114 
 http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/

230 Directory of Organizations
 The What Works Clearinghouse is, according to its Web site, “a 
central and trusted source of scientific evidence for what works 
in education.” The research presented on the Web site addresses 
early childhood education, reading instruction, mathematics in-
struction, character education, English language learning, and 
dropout prevention. In each of these areas, there is a searchable 
database of research about interventions, programs, and products 
appropriate to that area. 
 Issues-Focused Education 
Reform Organizations 
 The organizations listed below are focused on specific issues in 
or areas of education reform. While there are many more such 
organizations, the ones included here are intended to be represen-
tative of the wide array of such organizations. 
 Academic Achievement 
 Achieve, Inc. 
 1775 Eye Street NW, Suite 410 
 Washington, DC 20006 
 202-419-1540 
 http://www.achieve.org 
 Achieve, Inc., was established in 1995 by governors and business 
leaders to help states raise academic standards and student achieve-
ment, with the goal of preparing all students to graduate and be 
ready for college, careers, and citizenship. Among the action initia-
tives of Achieve, Inc., is the American Diploma Project Network, a 
project to align high school assessments and graduation require-
ments with the expectations of higher education and of prospective 
employers. Achieve, Inc., provides a number of “outreach tools,” 
including a toolkit that provides examples, planning materials, fact 
sheets, and other information to assist states in school reform. 
 Education Trust 
 1250 H St. NW, Suite 700 
 Washington, DC 20005 
 202-293-1217 
 202-293-2605 (fax) 

Issues-Focused Education Reform Organizations 231
 Education Trust-West 
 155 Grand Avenue, Suite 1025 
 Oakland, CA 94612 
 510-465-6444 
 510-465-0859 (fax) 
 http://www2.edtrust.org/edtrust/ 
 The Education Trust is an organization committed to high aca-
demic achievement for all students at all levels of education. The 
trust works toward this commitment through advocacy and sup-
port of schools and communities in their own advocacy, through 
testimony before Congress and other policy-making bodies, 
through research and dissemination of research, and through 
assistance to school districts, colleges, and community-based orga-
nizations, all with a focus on raising academic achievement of all 
students, and particularly of minority students and students in 
poverty. The Education Trust provides professional development 
for teachers and school leaders through a  model—Standards 
in Practice—that has been developed by Education Trust staff 
members. The Education Trust produces a series of “actorvist 
productions,” theater for the education reform movement. Infor-
mation about all of these activities is found on the Education Trust 
Web site. 
 Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
 P.O. Box 23350 
 Seattle, WA 98102 
 206-709-3100 (Reception) 
 206-709-3140 (Grant Inquiries) 
 http://gatesfoundation.org/unitedstates/education 
 info@gatesfoundation.org 
 The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has a vision of all 
 students graduating from high school ready to go to college, 
for a career, and for life. The foundation supports education 
 reform efforts in the areas of early childhood education and 
high school graduation and college readiness through the de-
velopment of model schools and initiatives at the school  district 
and state levels. The foundation also provides scholarships 
through a variety of scholarship programs for capable students 
with limited finances, as well as sponsoring research designed 
to identify practices that lead to the realization of the founda-
tion’s vision. 

232 Directory of Organizations
 Standards Work 
 1001 Connecticut Ave. NW, Suite 640 
 Washington, DC 20036 
 202-835-2000 
 http://www.standardswork.org 
 info@standardswork.org 
 Standards Work is a consulting agency that works with parents, 
communities, businesses and civic organizations, schools, school 
districts, and states to improve student achievement through the 
development of higher standards. Standards Work offers a number 
of publications about educational standards and designing edu-
cational programs to align with standards, as well as publications 
designed specifically for parents. These are available through the 
Standards Work Web site. 
 Inclusion 
 Inclusive Schools Network 
 Education Development Center, Inc. 
 55 Chapel Street 
 Newton, MA 02458-1060 
 877-332-2870 
 617-964-5448 (TTY) 
 617-969-3440 (Fax) 
 http://www.inclusiveschools.org/ 
 The Inclusive Schools Network is an organization that provides 
information about developing schools and programs that in-
clude all children, organizes meetings and conferences about 
various aspects of inclusion, and serves as a connecting point for 
students, parents, teachers, and school administrators who are 
committed to inclusive schools. The Web site describes tips for 
inclusion, differentiating instruction, and transition for children 
with disabilities. 
 National Institute for Urban School Improvement 
 NCCRESt, NUISI AND NUISI-LeadScape 
 Mary Lou Fulton College of Education 
 P.O. Box 872011 
 Farmer Bldg #316 
 Tempe, AZ 85287-2011 
 480-965-0391 or 480-965-8378 

Issues-Focused Education Reform Organizations 233
 480-727-7012 (fax) 
 http://www.urbanschools.org/ 
 The National Institute for Urban School Improvement (NIUSI) 
has as its mission to work with urban schools, communities, and 
families to “develop powerful networks of urban districts and 
schools that embrace and implement a data-based, continuous 
improvement approach for inclusive practices” that are  culturally 
relevant for students who have disabilities. NIUSI provides net-
working for such urban schools and school districts, as well as 
professional development and a wide range of online resources 
for school personnel, families, and communities involved in edu-
cation reform, not only of special education, but also of regular 
education programs. 
 Gender Issues in Education 
 American Association of University Women 
 1111 Sixteenth Street NW 
 Washington, DC 20036 
 800-326-AAUW 
 http://www.aauw.org/ 
 The American Association of University Women (AAUW) has 
worked since 1881, when it was founded, for education and  equity 
for women and girls. AAUW has funded numerous studies of 
 equity in education, among them the landmark study by Myra 
Sadker and David Sadker,  How Schools Shortchange Girls  (1995), and 
Beyond the Gender Wars: A Conversation about Girls, Boys, and Educa-
tion  (2001). AAUW is a membership organization, and it supports 
students, researchers, and organizations whose work aligns with 
the AAUW mission through fellowship and grant programs. 
 National Association for Single Sex Public Education 
(NASSPE)
 19710 Fisher Avenue, Suite J 
 P. O. Box 108 
 Poolesville, MD 20837 
 301-461-5065 
 http://www.singlesexschools.org/ 
 The National Association for Single Sex Public Education (NASSPE) 
was founded to provide information about the advantages, the 

234 Directory of Organizations
 legality, and the implementation of single sex education. The Web 
site includes research reports, transcripts and explanations of fed-
eral legislation and regulations that govern or relate to single sex 
education, and links to information from other sources. NASSPE 
provides professional development for school districts and schools 
interested in or involved in implementing single-sex education, 
and the organization also sponsors an online forum and an annual 
conference about single-sex education. 
 Comprehensive Education Reform Models 
 Center for Comprehensive School Reform 
and Improvement (CSRI) 
 1100 17th St. NW, Suite 500 
 Washington, DC 20036 
 202-223-6690 
 http://www.centerforcsri.org/ 
 The Center for Comprehensive School Reform and Improve-
ment (CSRI) is funded by the U.S. Department of Education to 
help schools organize, plan for, and implement school reform 
and improvement. CSRI promotes research-based strategies for 
school reform by providing technical assistance and support to 
schools planning or implementing school reform. CSRI publishes 
a newsletter, policy and research briefs, and other publications 
that address such issues as No Child Left Behind. The Web site of 
CSRI also includes a number of Webcasts and podcasts of training 
and professional development for parents, teachers, and school 
administrators, as well as an opportunity to “ask an expert” by 
e-mailing questions to center personnel. 
 Coalition of Essential Schools (CES) National 
 1330 Broadway, Suite 600 
 Oakland, CA 94612 
 510-433-1451 
 http://www.essentialschools.org/ 
 The Coalition of Essential Schools (CES) promotes an education 
reform model that is based on “five common beliefs” about the 
purposes and practices of education. The Coalition sponsors 
a network of schools that subscribe to its principles and have 
 either redesigned their schools to align with the five principles 
or are in the process of doing so. The Coalition provides support, 

Issues-Focused Education Reform Organizations 235
 professional development, and feedback for schools both through 
its national Center and through its Affiliate Centers. Ted Sizer, a 
leader in school reform, particularly at the high-school level, was 
the founder of the Coalition for Essential Schools and remains its 
chair emeritus. 
 Comer School Development Program 
 55 College Street 
 New Haven, CT 06510 
 203-737-1020 
 http://www.med.yale.edu/comer/ 
 The Comer School Development Program (SDP) claims to be 
unique in promoting the idea that development of the whole child 
is the key to school improvement, and in their work, SDP program 
staff assist schools in making decisions based on the six areas of 
development identified through James Comer’s research. SDP of-
fers training, professional development, and ongoing support to 
educators, parents, and community members, as well as a variety 
of materials for schools that affiliate with the SDP. 
 Effective Schools 
 Dept. AO 
 2199 Jolly Road, Suite 160 
 Okemos, MI 48864 
 800-827-8041 
 http://www.effectiveschools.com 
 Effective Schools is an organization that is committed to providing 
support to educators, schools, and school districts in their efforts 
to implement the principles of effective schools, principles that 
were identified through research more than 30 years ago by such 
researchers as Ronald Edmonds and Larry Lezotte. Through pub-
lications, training, and consultations, Effective Schools works with 
urban, suburban, and rural schools and school districts and state 
departments of education throughout the United States. Effective 
Schools publishes and maintains an extensive “library” of research 
and research briefs about education reform and the implementa-
tion of the effective schools principles. 
 Institute for Research and Reform in Education 
 303 Glendale Drive 
 Toms River, NJ 08753 

236 Directory of Organizations
 732-557-0200 
 http://www.irre.org 
 The Institute for Research and Reform in Education (IRRE) is the 
developer of an education reform initiative, First Things First, 
that works with middle schools and high schools in school dis-
tricts in the process of systemic school reform. First Things First 
is research based, and IRRE works with schools and school dis-
tricts to gather, analyze, and use data about teaching and learning 
in their schools as the basis of their school reform efforts. IRRE 
provides technical assistance through consultations and publica-
tions termed as “tools” for implementation of First Things First. 
A longitudinal study released in 2006 of First Things First in the 
Kansas City,  Kansas, school district showed “district-wide reduc-
tion of ethnic and economic achievement gaps in reading” (http://
www.irre.org/about/). IRRE also works with state departments 
of education, foundations that support education, and education 
professionals. 
 Just for the Kids 
 National Center for Educational Achievement 
 4030–2 West Braker Lane 
 Austin, TX 78759 
 800-762-4645 
 jftk@just4kids.org 
 http://www.just4kids.org/en/jftk/ 
 Just for the Kids is an organization sponsored by the National 
Center for Educational Achievement. Just for the Kids promotes a 
school reform process that consists of three steps: inform  (analyzing 
school achievement potential); inspire (learning from practices 
of consistently high performers); and improve (intentional and 
targeted improvement planning). Just for the Kids supports the 
process with training and professional development at the school 
district and school levels, as well as “tools” and materials for 
school improvement based on the National Center for Educational 
Achievement’s framework for best practice. Just for the Kids pro-
vides services through affiliates in state departments of education, 
universities, and businesses in the 18 states that are its members. 
 Modern Red SchoolHouse Institute 
 1901 21st Ave., S. 
 Nashville, TN 37212 

Issues-Focused Education Reform Organizations 237
 888-275-6774 ext. 10 
 http://www.mrsh.org/ 
 The Modern Red SchoolHouse Institute is an organization that 
works toward reforming schools to improve children’s academic 
achievement through professional development and other techni-
cal assistance focused on the particular needs of a school or school 
district. The Modern Red SchoolHouse practices, according to its 
Web site, are research based and results of their work have been 
evaluated, both internally and externally. Reports of the evalua-
tions and case studies of schools that have been or are part of the 
Modern Red SchoolHouse Initiative are included on the Web site. 
 Small Schools Workshop 
 1608 North Milwaukee Avenue, Suite 912 
 Chicago, IL 60647 
 773-384-1030 
 http://www.smallschoolsworkshop.org/ 
 The Small Schools Workshop is an organization that promotes 
and supports the development of small learning communities in 
public schools, based on research that shows that small schools 
offer opportunities for more intimate and personal learning en-
vironments that more closely meet the needs of the children and 
teachers in them. The members of the Workshop provide profes-
sional development and technical assistance in all aspects of school 
restructuring and comprehensive school reform at the elementary, 
middle, and high-school levels. In addition, consultants from the 
Workshop work with clients to develop grant applications, gather 
and analyze data about the feasibility of change, and offer confer-
ences and workshops on small schools. 
 Curriculum and Assessment Reform 
 AIMS Education Foundation 
 P.O. Box 8120 
 Fresno, CA 93747-8120 
 888-733-2467 or 559-255-4094 
 559-255-6396 (fax) 
 http://www.aimsedu.org/ 
 The AIMS Education Foundation is a nonprofit organization 
dedicated to the improvement of the teaching and learning of 

238 Directory of Organizations
mathematics and science. Their work, which is research based 
and built on best practice, as well as brain research, is focused on 
helping children build a solid understanding of mathematics and 
science. The AIMS Education Foundation Web site provides in-
formation about teaching mathematics and science, a searchable 
database of lesson plans and activities for teaching mathematics 
and science, and many curriculum materials. The AIMS Educa-
tion Foundation has several publications, including a monthly 
e-newsletter that is available free of charge. 
 Authentic Education 
 P.O. Box 148 
 Hopewell, NJ 08525-0148 
 609-466-8080 
 http://www.grantwiggins.org 
 Authentic Education, whose motto is “exploring the essential 
questions of education,” is an organization that works directly 
with schools and school districts on issues of curriculum design, 
teaching for understanding, designing assessments that support 
understanding, and “thoughtful school change.” The work that 
Authentic Education consultants do with schools is based on the 
belief that education and schools should be designed locally; they 
plan professional development and other support services for each 
school they work with around a framework called Understanding 
by Design, that is aimed at improving student learning. Authentic 
Education publishes a newsletter,  Big Ideas , and a database titled 
good ideas , both available through its Web site. Authentic Educa-
tion also sponsors workshops and conferences for educators. 
 FairTest: The National Center for Fair & Open Testing 
 342 Broadway 
 Cambridge, MA 02139 
 617-864-4810 
 http://www.fairtest.org 
 The work of FairTest: The National Center for Fair & Open Test-
ing is aimed at improving education through the use of tests and 
assessments that are fair, open, valid, and educationally ben-
eficial to students, teachers, and schools, as well as promoting 
the appropriate use of tests and pointing out inappropriate use 
or misuse. FairTest also works to uncover bias in standardized 
tests or in the way that they are administered. The organization 

Issues-Focused Education Reform Organizations 239
provides research and other information for students, educators, 
parents, and policy makers about appropriate and fair testing 
and evaluation in the form of publications that include a set of 
“fact sheets” and a newsletter,  The Examiner , that are available 
through the Web site. 
 The National Forum to Accelerate Middle-Grades Reform 
 P.O. Box 11346 
 Champaign, IL 61826-1346 
 http://www.mgforum.org/ 
 The National Forum to Accelerate Middle-Grades Reform has as 
its mission to support the development of middle schools that are 
academically excellent, developmentally responsive, and socially 
equitable. The National Forum has developed a set of criteria 
that describe exemplary middle schools, and each year it identi-
fies a number of “Schools to Watch” that meet those criteria. In 
2008, 47 middle schools in 16 states were identified as “Schools 
to Watch.” The Forum has developed a curriculum for develop-
ing leaders for middle grades education, as well as a resource 
directory of publications about middle grades education that are 
linked to the Web site. 
 Teacher Quality 
 Center for Teaching Quality 
 500 Millstone Drive, Suite 102 
 Hillsborough, NC 27278 
 919-241-1575 
 ContactUS@teachingquality.org 
 http://www.teachingquality.org/ 
 The Center for Teaching Quality focuses its work on how  teachers 
can be key to educational reform. Its mission is to improve 
“ student learning through developing teacher leadership, con-
ducting practical research, and engaging various communities.” 
The center sponsors a virtual network, the Teacher Leaders Net-
work, that links teacher leaders, as well as an initiative called 
TeacherSolutions that brings together teachers from around the 
country to design solutions to problems with public education. 
The center publishes an electronic journal,  Teaching Quality: Best 
Practices & Policies , that is available free of charge at the center’s 
Web site. 

240 Directory of Organizations
 National Commission on Teaching and America’s Future 
 2100 M Street NW, Suite 660 
 Washington, DC 20037 
 202-429-2570 
 dkincaid@nctaf.org 
 http://www.nctaf.org 
 The National Commission on Teaching and America’s Future is 
a nonprofit organization dedicated to ensuring that all children 
learn with competent, caring, and qualified teachers. To enact their 
mission, the commission’s work centers on three strategies: (1) cre-
ating strong learning communities in schools; (2) assuring quality 
teacher preparation programs; and (3) supporting professionally 
rewarding teaching careers. The organization supports research, 
demonstration projects, and a state coalition network to further its 
mission and strategies. The National Commission on Teaching and 
America’s Future also sponsors roundtable discussions, forums, 
symposia, and conferences for policy makers and educators. 
 School Choice 
 Center for Education Reform 
 910 17th Street NW, Suite 1120 
 Washington, DC 20006 
 800-521-2118 
 cer@edreform.com 
 http://www.edreform.com 
 The Center for Education Reform was founded in 1993, and 
 according to its Web site, “creates opportunities for and chal-
lenges obstacles to better education for America’s communities.” 
The focus of the center is educational choice; the center serves as a 
clearinghouse for information about school choice in general, and 
more specifically, about charter schools. The Center for Education 
Reform Web site includes information about laws and regulations 
that govern charter schools across the country. 
 Center for Civic Innovation 
 The Manhattan Institute 
 52 Vanderbilt Avenue 
 New York, NY 10017 
 212-599-7000 
 http://www.manhattan-institute.org/html/cci.htm#02 

Issues-Focused Education Reform Organizations 241
 The Center for Civic Innovation, part of the Manhattan Insti-
tute, works to reform education mainly in the areas of school 
choice and accountability. The center promotes school choice 
to improve the options, such as charter schools and vouchers, 
available to parents of children in public schools. The center’s 
work on  accountability focuses on improving educational 
achievement by making all  stakeholders—students, teachers, and 
 administrators—accountable for students’ and schools’ success or 
failure. The center provides scholars and experts to assist policy mak-
ers and schools and school districts in their education reform efforts. 
 Urban Education 
 Annenberg Institute for School Reform 
 Brown University 
 Box 1985 
 Providence, RI 02919 
 401-863-7990 
 http://www.annenberginstitute.org/ 
 The work of the Annenberg Institute for School Reform is guided 
by a vision of transforming school systems into “smart education 
systems” that link schools with community organizations and ser-
vices to provide “high quality learning opportunities in all areas 
of students’ lives.” The institute works particularly with urban 
school systems and schools that serve disadvantaged children. 
The institute conducts research, works through partners with 
school districts and communities, and develops publications that 
document reform efforts. Publications of the Annenberg Institute 
include a series of “tools” for planning for school improvement; 
these are available at http://www.annenberginstitute.org/tools/
index.php.
 Council of the Great City Schools 
 1301 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Suite 702 
 Washington, DC 20004 
 202-393-2427 
 http://www.cgcs.org/ 
 The Council of the Great City Schools is a coalition of the public 
school districts of 66 of the largest cities in the United States. The 
mission of the council is to advocate for and to help children in 
urban public schools to achieve high standards, to improve the 

242 Directory of Organizations
public perception of urban school districts, and to foster relation-
ships between urban parents and the schools that serve their chil-
dren. The council has conducted research on a variety of topics 
related to urban education and publishes reports and briefs about 
that research. The council also publishes a monthly journal,  Urban
Educator , that presents news about its member districts, upcoming 
urban education meetings and conferences, and issues of interest 
to urban educators. All of these publications are available through 
the council Web site. 
 National Center for Urban School Transformation 
 4238 El Cajon Blvd., Suite 100 
 San Diego, CA 92105 
 619-592-7905 
 ncust@mail.sdsul.edu 
 http://ncust.org 
 The National Center for Urban School Transformation, located 
at San Diego (CA) State University, works to help urban schools 
transform themselves into places where children learn well, where 
they love learning, and where they graduate prepared to succeed 
in post-secondary education, in a career, and in their  communities. 
The National Center’s work is funded by an endowment begun 
by QUALCOMM, which allows them to work directly with urban 
schools in need of improvement. Besides providing professional 
development for planning and implementing reform, the National 
Center also evaluates schools and conducts research on effective 
urban schools. 
 Equity and Civil Rights 
 Center for Law and Education 
 1875 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 510 
 Washington, DC 20009 
 202-986-3000 
 pweckstein@cleweb.org 
 http://www.cleweb.org/ 
 The Center for Law and Education aims to ensure that all children 
have access to the quality education to which they are entitled. 
They do this through organizing parents, community members, 
teachers, and other school personnel to maximize the benefits 
of federal legislation, including Title I of the Elementary and 

Issues-Focused Education Reform Organizations 243
 Secondary Education Act (No Child Left Behind), special edu-
cation, vocational education, and schools-to-work programs. The 
 center addresses standards-based reform, high school  restructuring, 
implementation and enforcement of the rights of students with dis-
abilities, and parent and community involvement in education. 
They provide consulting, advocacy, capacity building, and publica-
tions about education reform. Besides serving schools and school 
personnel directly, the center also provides consulting and assis-
tance to attorneys advocating for the educational rights of children, 
assistance in the development of educational policy, and access to 
networks of resources throughout the country. 
 Citizens’ Commission on Civil Rights 
 2000 M St. NW, Suite 400 
 Washington, DC 20036 
 202-659-5565 
 202-223-5302 (fax) 
 http://www.cccr.org/ 
 Achievement Alliance 
 1250 H Street NW, Suite 700 
 Washington, DC 20005 
 202-293-1217 ext. 402 
 http://www.achievementalliance.org/contact/ 
 The Citizens’ Commission on Civil Rights is a bipartisan organiza-
tion that monitors civil rights policies and practices of the federal 
government. The commission is committed to a progressive civil 
rights agenda, and it has worked to ensure equity in the reform 
of education at the national level. The commission has conducted 
numerous studies about education and equity; the reports can 
be downloaded from the Web site. The Citizens’ Commission on 
Civil Rights also sponsors the Achievement Alliance, an organiza-
tion that is committed to the success of No Child Left Behind. The 
Achievement Alliance has published a number of reports that seek 
to dispel myths and to provide accurate information about NCLB. 
 Forum for Democracy and Education 
 P.O. Box 216 
 Amesville, OH 45711 
 740-662-0503 
 1307 New York Avenue NW, Suite 300 

244 Directory of Organizations
 Washington, DC 20005-4701 
 202-478-4572 
 http://www.forumforeducation.org/ 
 The Forum for Democracy and Education was convened by a 
group of prominent educators and school reformers to advocate 
for and promote public schooling in the United States. Based on 
their belief in the role of education as a critical factor in a strong 
democratic society, the Forum stands for public education that is 
both high quality and equitable, and that is controlled democrati-
cally. The Web site of the Forum describes its work primarily as 
organizing and advocacy. The report “Democracy at Work: The 
Need for a New Federal Policy in Education” is available at the 
Forum’s Web site. It summarizes the positions of the Forum and 
proposes new ways for the federal government to support educa-
tion reform when the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
is reauthorized. 
 Education Policy 
 Center on Education Policy (CEP) 
 1001 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 522 
 Washington, DC 20036 
 202-822-8065 
 www.cep-dc.org 
 The Center on Education Policy (CEP) is a private, nonprofit 
 organization committed to the improvement of public education 
in the United States and to helping people understand the role of 
public education in our democracy. The center publishes reports, 
holds meetings and conferences, and makes presentations at the 
national, state, and local level. Rather than representing a particu-
lar political point of view of special interest, the center’s work is 
focused on presenting information that helps to make sense of 
conflicting opinions and positions about the improvement of edu-
cation. The center’s Web site includes links to many papers and 
research reports about public education and its improvement. 
 Education Commission of the States 
 700 Broadway, #810 
 Denver, CO 80203-3442 
 303-299-3600 
 http://www.ecs.org/ 

Issues-Focused Education Reform Organizations 245
 The Education Commission of the States was organized in 1965 
as an organization that would help state policy makers and 
education leaders “build partnerships, share information, and 
promote the development of policy based on available research 
and strategies” (http://www.ecs.org/ecsmain.asp?page=/html/
aboutECS/home_aboutECS.htm). Each of the 49 member states, 
three territories, and the District of Columbia is represented by a 
set of commissioners that include the governor and six legislators 
or education leaders. The Education Commission of the States 
disseminates information about current educational policy and 
research, organizes workshops and conferences for its member 
commissioners and educators to exchange information and col-
laborate, and provides customized technical assistance to support 
states’ development of educational policy and other initiatives. 
The Commission publishes a quarterly report, “The Progress of 
Education Reform.” Recent reports address such topics as same 
sex schooling, dropout prevention, and science and mathematics 
education.
 Parent and Community Partnerships 
 Home and School Institute 
 1500 Massachusetts Ave. NW 
 Washington, DC 20005 
 202-292-2400 (fax) 
 edstaff@megaskills.org 
 http://www.megaskillshsi.org/ 
 The Home and School Institute is an organization that was founded 
in 1964 to promote improved student achievement through its 
online MegaSkills Education Center. MegaSkills is a program that 
develops motivation, effort, and responsibility throughout the 
academic curriculum. The Home and School Institute offers train-
ing for teachers and community members, as well as print and 
online materials. President and founder of the Home and School 
Institute Dorothy Rich is well known for her work that connects 
schools and families. 
 Partnership for 21st Century Skills 
 177 N. Church Avenue, Suite 305 
 Tucson, AZ 85701 
 520-623-2466 
 http://www.21stcenturyskills.org/ 

246 Directory of Organizations
 The Partnership for 21st Century Skills has among its  founding 
partners the U.S. Department of Education, the National Edu-
cation Association, Apple Computer, Inc., AOL Time Warner, 
Dell Computer, Cable in the Classroom, and a number of other 
 organizations. The Partnership’s mission is to “position 21st 
 century skills at the center of K-12 education” through partnerships 
with education, community, business, and government  leaders. 
The Partnership provides support for states, school districts, and 
schools in developing such partnerships, and it hosts Route 21, an 
online “shop” for resources for school improvement. 
 Project Appleseed 
 520 Melville 
 St. Louis, MO 63130 
 615-686-2195 
 headquarters@projectappleseed.org 
 http://www.projectappleseed.org 
 Project Appleseed, the National Campaign for School Improve-
ment, works through parent and community involvement, to raise 
student achievement, improve children’s nutrition and physical 
fitness, and create “green” learning environments through involv-
ing alumni and communities in fundraising to improve the envi-
ronmental impact of schools. The Web site provides information 
for parents and parent organizers about organizing, finding infor-
mation about the quality of schools, and selecting schools. Project 
Appleseed has a “toolbox” for improving parental involvement in 
schools, as well as training both for parents and for schools inter-
ested in building stronger relationships with parents and includ-
ing them in education reform efforts. 
 Membership Organizations 
 The organizations listed below are but a few of the myriad profes-
sional education organizations whose missions address issues of 
education reform. These organizations all provide materials and 
services to their members; most of the materials and services are 
also available to nonmembers at a nominal cost. 
 Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development 
(ASCD)
 1703 N. Beauregard St. 

Membership Organizations 247
 Alexandria, VA 22311-1714 
 800-933-2723 
 http://www.ascd.org 
 The Association for Supervision and Curriculum  Development  
(ASCD) is a membership organization of more than 175,000 edu-
cators from around the United States and around the world. The 
mission of ASCD is to facilitate a community of educators com-
mitted to advocacy and best practice with the goal of the success 
of every learner. ASCD publishes a journal,  Educational Leader-
ship , and a newsletter,  Education Update,  as well as many books 
and videos, all focused on improving education. A blog for the 
ASCD community,  inservice , provides for conversation and re-
sources for educators. ASCD advocates for the development of 
policy that supports high quality teaching and learning. The or-
ganization also provides professional development and training, 
as well as national and regional conferences and meetings for 
educators. 
 Center for School Improvement 
 American Federation of Teachers 
 555 New Jersey Ave. NW 
 Washington, DC 20001 
 http://www.aft.org/topics/csi/index.htm 
 The Center for School Improvement, sponsored by the American 
Federation of Teachers, provides technical assistance, professional 
development, and information about education reform for edu-
cators and parents. The Web site includes information about the 
school improvement process, profiles of school districts that have 
been successful in reforming their schools, strategies for inclusive 
school improvement processes, and links to other organizations 
and resources for reform. 
 International Reading Association (IRA) 
 800 Barksdale Road 
 P.O. Box 8139 
 Newark, DE 19714-8139 
 800-336-READ (800-336-7323), U.S. and Canada 
 302-731-1600, elsewhere 
 302-731-1057 (fax) 
 http://www.reading.org 

248 Directory of Organizations
 The International Reading Association (IRA) has been committed 
to the improvement of the teaching of reading since its beginning 
in 1956. IRA also works to conduct and disseminate research about 
reading and to encourage reading as a lifelong habit. IRA advocates 
for the reform of education in general and more particularly read-
ing education, for policy, and for curriculum in the United States 
and around the world; it has numerous affiliate organizations and 
councils, as well as a network of special interest groups that study 
particular aspects of reading and reading instruction. IRA provides 
grants for professional development and research, and recognizes 
exemplary teaching, service, authorship of children’s books, and 
media coverage of reading with annual awards. The IRA Web site 
includes information about the numerous publications of the orga-
nization, and it provides a wealth of online resources for teachers, 
including lesson plans, booklists, and resources for working with 
parents. IRA also sponsors online discussion groups that allow 
group members to ask and respond to questions and discuss 
issues and problems related to teaching reading. 
 National Council for the Social Studies (NCSS) 
 8555 Sixteenth Street, Suite 500 
 Silver Spring, MD 20910 
 301-588-1800 
 301-588-2049 (fax) 
 http://www.socialstudies.org/ 
 The National Council for the Social Studies (NCSS) is a mem-
bership organization that, along with its 110 affiliate organiza-
tions, focuses its work on the teaching of social studies—history, 
geography, economics, political science, sociology, psychology, 
anthropology, and law-related education. NCSS has published 
curriculum standards for social studies K-12, continuously revis-
ing them to reflect research and new understandings of both what 
to teach and how to teach in the social studies. NCSS provides sup-
port and advocacy for the improvement of social studies teaching 
through its presence at national meetings and forums, its journals 
and other publications, professional development, and teaching 
resources that include lesson plans and learning activities. 
 National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE) 
 1111 W. Kenyon Road 
 Urbana, IL 61801-1096 

Membership Organizations 249
 217-328-3870 or 877-369-6283 
 http://www.ncte.org/ 
 The National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE) works to 
improve the teaching of literacy and English language arts for 
all children through professional development and research. 
NCTE publishes 12 journals and periodicals that address  issues 
specific to teaching reading and English language arts; NCTE 
also developed and publishes standards for English language 
arts K-12. Through its research foundation, NCTE supports re-
search and awards grants for research. NCTE has many affiliate 
organizations, some national and some regional, as well as such 
curriculum-specific organizations as the Whole Language Um-
brella. The Web site of NCTE includes resources for teachers, for 
parents, and for students; it also provides  information for policy 
makers about literacy and English language arts. 
 National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) 
 906 Association Drive 
 Reston, VA 20191-1502 
 703-620-9840 
 703-476-2970 (fax) 
 http://www.nctm.org/ 
 The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) brings 
together teachers, administrators, and other school personnel 
around a mission of high-quality and equitable mathematics edu-
cation for all children. NCTM has been involved in the standards 
movement from its beginning, having developed standards for 
K-12 mathematics as one of the first comprehensive sets of curric-
ulum standards. NCTM provides many resources for the improve-
ment of mathematics education—journals and books, workshops, 
and lesson plans. NCTM also advocates for high-quality math-
ematics education on a national level. 
 National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) 
 1840 Wilson Blvd. 
 Arlington, VA 22201 
 703-243-7100 
 703-243-7177 (fax) 
 http://www.nsta.org/ 
 The National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) is a membership 
organization that works to help science teachers throughout the 

250 Directory of Organizations
country network to improve the teaching and learning of science 
for all students. NSTA publishes journals about teaching science 
and supports research about science education; the organization 
also has developed standards for quality science teaching that are 
available through the NSTA Web site. NSTA has an online men-
toring program, e-mentoring, that is available to science teachers; 
the organization also provides grants for teachers for developing 
exemplary teaching tools and projects. 
 Phi Delta Kappa International (PDK) 
 408 N. Union Street 
 Bloomington, IN 47405-3800 
 800-766-1156 
 812-339-0018 
 http://www.pdkintl.org/ 
 Phi Delta Kappa International (PDK) is one of the oldest profes-
sional organizations for educators in the United States; it cele-
brated its 100th anniversary in 2006. It has a network of chapters 
throughout the United States, Canada, Europe, and Asia. The 
mission of PDK is to promote high-quality public education as a 
critical part of a democratic way of life. PDK supports practicing 
educators and helps to prepare new teachers through research, 
the development of strong leadership, and service to the teaching 
profession. PDK hosts an annual Summit on Education as part of 
its advocacy for public education, and it publishes books, jour-
nals, and newsletters that are research based and responsive to 
the needs of practicing educators. The Web site includes an ar-
chive of publications, many of which are available through the 
Web site, as well as teaching tips and information about current 
trends and issues in education. 

251
 Print Resources 
 History of Education Reform 
 Books 
  The Editors of Black Issues in Higher Education. 2004.  The Un-
finished Agenda of Brown v. Board of Education (Landmarks in 
Civil Rights History). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
 This collection of essays explores the legacy of  Brown v. Board of 
Education , how far we have come, and how far we have to go to 
realize the promise of  Brown . 
  Finn, C. E., Jr. 2008.  Troublemaker: A Personal History of School 
Reform Since Sputnik . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.  
 As Finn tells his personal story of his involvement in education 
reform, he tells the story of education reform in the United States. 
He has been involved in education reform from the perspective of 
a teacher, a professor, an aide to politicians, an undersecretary of 
the Department of Education, a writer, a foundation president, and 
more. Besides telling the story of education reform, Finn shares 
what he has learned along the way about reforming education. 
  Frankenberg, E., and G. Orfield, eds. 2007.  Lessons in Integra-
tion: Realizing the Promise of Racial Diversity in American 
Schools. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.  
 This book contains a series of essays about school integration 
and the lessons that can be learned, from both successful and 
8
Resources

252 Resources
not-so-successful integration efforts of schools and school dis-
tricts in the United States. The essays are based on the premise 
that integration benefits both minority and majority children, 
and that the lessons are valuable for all schools and school com-
munities as communities in the United States become increas-
ingly diverse. 
   The Jossey-Bass Reader on School Reform . 2001. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass.
The Jossey-Bass Reader on School Reform  brings together a wide va-
riety of perspectives and voices on school reform. The chapters 
describe and discuss models of school reform and issues that have 
been addressed, or, in the opinions of the authors should be ad-
dressed, by school reform. There is also a chapter that includes 
primary documents related to school reform. 
 Kozol, J. 2005.  The Shame of the Nation: The Restoration of 
Apartheid Schooling in America . New York: Crown. 
 In this book, Jonathan Kozol describes the resegregation of 
inner city schools in the United States. Poor African American 
and Hispanic children attend schools that are as segregated as 
they were, according to Kozol, in 1968. It is not only the racial 
segregation that Kozol finds disturbing; it is also the demeaning 
and militaristic discipline that characterizes the schools and the 
effects of standardized testing that have narrowed the curricu-
lum and reduced instruction to rote memorization and mean-
ingless drill. Kozol challenges the United States to do better for 
our children. 
  Ravitch, D., and M. Vinovskis, eds. 1995.  Learning from the Past: 
What History Teaches Us about School Reform . Baltimore, MD: 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 Based on the premise that everything that happens has a basis in 
history, the authors of the 14 essays in this book trace the histori-
cal backgrounds of issues that have been raised in the conversa-
tion about the reform of education in the United States. 
  Spring, J. 2004.  Deculturalization and the Struggle for Equity: 
A Brief History of the Education of Dominated Cultures in the 
United States . Boston: McGraw Hill. 

Print Resources 253
 Spring shows how the dominant culture in the United States has 
exercised power and control in schools to marginalize, segre-
gate, and dominate other cultures. That domination is evident 
in the history of education in the United States, and Spring tells 
about how practices in U.S. schools have served to continue the 
domination. 
 Street, P. 2005.  Segregated Schools: Educational Apartheid 
in Post-Civil Rights America. New York: Routledge.  
 Street describes the state of education in the United States as 
educational apartheid and the disparities of the schools that he 
attributes to that apartheid—school funding, teacher quality, 
class size, curriculum, opportunities for learning, and more. He 
argues that the United States is not committed to equity or to the 
full implementation of the Brown v. Board of Education  U.S. Su-
preme Court decision, and he analyzes public policy that allows 
segregation and inequity to continue. 
  Thernstrom, A., and S. Thernstrom. 2003.  No Excuses: Closing 
the Racial Gap in Learning . New York: Simon and Schuster. 
 Manhattan Institute for Policy Research Senior Fellows Abigail 
Thernstrom and Stephan Thernstrom describe the racial gap in 
student achievement in the United States and analyze and critique 
school reform efforts that have been aimed at closing the achieve-
ment gap. The Thernstroms call for radical change to education to 
address the achievement gap, focusing on choice and the devel-
opment of independent schools as a means to closing it, based on 
their assumption that the politics of public school systems impede 
real reform. 
 Journals and Journal Articles 
  Education Commission of the States.  The Progress of Education 
Reform . http://www.ecs.org/html/educationIssues/ProgressofRe 
form.asp
The Progress of Education Reform  is a bimonthly publication avail-
able in pdf. Each issue addresses one aspect of education re-
form, with recent issues having addressed college counseling, 
developmental education, early care and education, and school 
improvement. The issues document progress made relative to 
the aspects of reform addressed, and they include review and 

254 Resources
analysis of research pertinent to the topic of the issue, policy im-
plications of the issues, and links to other resources related to 
the issue. 
  Hanna, J. 2005. “The Elementary and Secondary Education Act: 
40 Years Later.”  News Features & Releases.  Harvard Graduate 
School of Education. http://www.gse.harvard.edu/news_events/
features/2005/08/esea0819.html
 In this article, Julie Hanna describes the history of the Elementary 
and Secondary Education Act from its conception in the 1960s 
through all of its reauthorizations. Hanna’s article provides in-
sight into the debates and issues that have shaped ESEA into the 
law we have today, No Child Left Behind. 
  Hunt, T. C. 2005. “Education Reforms—Lessons from History.” 
Phi Delta Kappan  87 (1): 84–89. 
 T. C. Hunt describes the education reform process in the United 
States as a search for a panacea. Educators and policy makers 
alike propose “sure-fire remedies” and pursue them with total 
confidence, only to be disappointed when they don’t prove to be 
the  answer. Hunt views this as a cycle, and he argues that until we 
are willing to analyze and learn from these experiences, the cycle 
will continue. 
  Lowe, R. 2004. “The Strange History of School Desegregation.”  Re-
thinking Schools  18 (3). http://www.rethinkingschools.org/archive/ 
18_03/stra183.shtml 
 Robert Lowe traces the history of school desegregation beginning 
with Brown v. Board of Education , and he argues that not only has 
the promise of Brown not been realized but also the real beneficia-
ries of desegregation have been middle-class whites, not African 
Americans.
  Mace-Matluck, B. 1987.  The Effective Schools Movement: Its 
History and Context.  Austin, TX: Southwest Educational 
Development Lab. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED304781). 
 It is important to understand the Effective Schools movement be-
cause its correlates undergird nearly every education reform effort 
and initiative in the United States. Betty Mace-Matluck provides 

Print Resources 255
insight into how the correlates were developed and the research 
behind them. 
  Valentin, I. 1997. “Title IX: A Brief History.”  25 Years of Title 
IX Digest.  Newton, MA: Women’s Educational Equity Act 
(WEEA) Resource Center at EDC. http://www2.edc.org/GDI/
publications_SR/t9digest.pdf  
 This article describes how Title IX came about, the context of the 
original legislation, and the original intent of the legislation. It 
also describes the process of developing regulations for Title IX 
and how Title IX shaped the women’s movement in the United 
States.
 Reports 
  Center for Public Education. 2007. “At-a-Glance: Changing 
Demographics.”  Practical Information and Analysis about Pub-
lic Education . http://www.centerforpubliceducation.org/site/c.
kjJXJ5MPIwE/b.3633965/Demographics 
  Center for Public Education. 2007. “School Context: What is the 
Racial and Ethnic Make-up of our Schools?”  Practical Informa-
tion and Analysis about Public Education . http://www.center
forpubliceducation.org/site/c.kjJXJ5MPIwE/b.3523701/k.5B61/
School_context_What_is_the_racial_and_ethnic_make_up_of_
our_schools.htm#national  
 These two reports and others available at the Web site of the 
Center for Public Education provide extensive demographic and 
background information about education in the United States. 
 Loveless, T. 2007.  The 2007 Brown Center Report on American 
Education: How Well are American Students Learning? Washing-
ton, DC: Brookings Institution. 
 This report, the seventh in the Brown Center series of such reports, 
analyzes and discusses data from the 2007 National Assessment 
of Educational Progress (NAEP), looks at enrollment patterns in 
public and private schools in the United States, and analyzes in-
ternational mathematics test data to see if there is a relationship 
between the amount of time students spend learning mathemat-
ics in different countries and how well they learn mathematics. 
The report can be ordered or downloaded from the Web site of the 
Brookings Institution. 

256 Resources
  U.S. Department of Education. 2008.  A Nation Accountable: 
Twenty-five Years After A Nation at Risk.  Washington, DC. 
http://www.ed.gov/rschstat/research/pubs/accountable/ 
 This report takes a critical look at the outcomes of public educa-
tion in the United States, comparing them to outcomes described 
in the landmark report, “A Nation at Risk,” that called for reform-
ing U.S. education in 1983. The new report argues that we remain 
“a nation at risk,” with schools not keeping up with the demands 
of the global economy, and with most of the same risk factors still 
not resolved. 
 Modern Issues in Education Reform 
 Books 
 Brouillette, L. 2002.  Charter Schools: Lessons in School Reform . 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  
 Brouillette uses case studies of seven charter schools in three states 
to explain the ins and outs of charter schools—what they are and 
how they differ from other public schools, how charter schools are 
initiated and operated, and the lessons that can be learned from 
these seven schools about charter schools. 
  Carr, J. F., and D. E. Harris. 2001.  Succeeding with Standards: 
Linking Curriculum, Assessment, and Action Planning. Alex-
andria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
 Development.  
 Teachers often struggle with implementing standards in their 
schools and classrooms. In this book Carr and Harris share their 
experience with the standards-linking process. They provide 
strategies for teachers in schools or school districts to determine 
who is to teach and assess each standard, to create a curriculum 
and assessment plan, to define effective practice, to create a com-
prehensive assessment system, and to map out a path to success 
through action planning. The book includes a “Learning Oppor-
tunities Survey” for teachers that could be used as a needs as-
sessment for professional development and a glossary of terms 
related to the implementation of standards. 
  Chenoweth, K. 2007.  “It’s Being Done”: Academic Success in Un-
expected Schools . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press. 

Print Resources 257
 In  “It’s Being Done,”  Chenoweth describes examples of schools and 
classrooms where teaching and learning have been transformed 
and where children excel despite their difficult social and eco-
nomic circumstances. The models in this book show that despite 
the odds, teachers who hold high expectations for their students, 
who understand their students and their learning needs, and who 
teach in ways that meet those learning needs are being effective. 
There is much that teachers, schools, and communities can learn 
from the schools and classrooms described in the book. 
  Clewell, B. C., P. B. Campbell, and L. Perlman. 2007.  Good 
Schools in Poor Neighborhoods: Defying Demographics, Achiev-
ing Success . Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press. 
 This book describes how two urban schools, one serving pre-
dominantly African American children and the other serving 
predominantly Latino children, are “beating the odds” and pro-
viding a high-quality education that results in academic success 
for the children. The two schools can serve as models for how 
urban schools can be good schools, in spite of their demographics 
that might suggest otherwise. 
  Darling-Hammond, L., B. Barron, P. D. Pearson, A. H. Schoen-
feld, E. K. Stage, T. D. Zimmerman, G. N. Cervetti, and J. L. Til-
son. 2008.  Powerful Learning: What We Know about Teaching for 
Understanding. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Powerful Learning: What We Know about Teaching for Understanding
is a compendium of effective K-12 teaching practices that include 
project-based learning, cooperative learning, performance-based 
assessment, and teaching strategies for literacy, mathematics, 
and science. The authors of the book use rich classroom stories to 
explain how these practices lead to deep understanding, critical 
thinking, and effective problem solving. The book is accompanied 
by a series of videos of effective and innovative teaching; they can 
be found on the Edutopia Web site (www.edutopia.org). 
  David, J. L., and L. Cuban. 2006.  Cutting Through the Hype: A 
Taxpayer’s Guide to School Reforms. Bethesda, MD: Education 
Week Press. 
 In this book, Jane David and Larry Cuban ask, “What does it 
take to make school reforms actually work?” Their answer is a 

258 Resources
review of 20 of the most popular education reforms. The authors 
explain each of the reforms, describing them in plain language 
and taking a critical look at their claims for success. This guide of-
fers common-sense information to help educators, policy makers, 
parents, and community members cut through the jargon that is 
often used to describe the reforms and make informed decisions 
about reform efforts. 
  Dingerson, L., B. Miner, B. Peterson, and S. Walters, eds., 2008. 
Keeping the Promise? The Debate Over Charter Schools . Milwau-
kee, WI: Rethinking Schools. 
 The essays in this book, including those written by such well-
known education reformers as Ted Sizer and Linda Darling-
Hammond, analyze the charter school movement from the 
perspective of commitment to public education as part of the 
democratic process in the United States. 
 Fullan, M. 2007.  The New Meaning of Educational Change,  4th 
ed. New York: Teachers College Press. 
 Since the first edition of this book in 1982, Michael Fullan has 
chronicled the processes and the progress of education reform. 
The fourth edition takes a comprehensive look at education re-
form, drawing on current research about school reform, leader-
ship, organization, and teaching, and describing how education, 
school districts, and schools must change to improve education. 
Fullan asserts, as he has in earlier editions, that the process of 
educational change must be meaningful, and educators must 
find meaning in it for the changes to become institutionalized 
and to result in improvement. 
 Fullan, M. 2007.  Turnaround Leadership . San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass.
 In this book, Michael Fullan looks at the critical role of leadership 
in general, and in particular, how a leader can use even the most 
difficult and seemingly negative circumstances as opportunities 
to “turn around” a school. Fullan approaches leadership from a 
systems perspective as he explains how a “turnaround” leader 
can motivate a school staff to transform the entire system—the 
school—using the strategies described and illustrated in the 
book.

Print Resources 259
  Gill, B. P., P. M. Timpane, and D. J. Brewer. 2007.  Rhetoric Versus 
Reality: What We Know and What We Need to Know About Vouch-
ers and Charter Schools.  Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation. 
 This book is a critical examination of the improvement of edu-
cation through parental choice in the forms of charter schools 
and vouchers. The authors argue and provide evidence to sup-
port their argument for the effectiveness of charter schools and 
vouchers. They also offer guidance for the development of charter 
schools and voucher policies. 
  Glass, G. V. 2008.  Fertilizers, Pills, and Magnetic Strips: The Fate 
of Public Education in America.  Charlotte, NC: Information Age 
Publishing.  
 Gene Glass, an educational psychologist and analyst, argues in 
this book that the American public’s obsession with competi-
tion and accountability have worked not to bring about school 
reform, but against it. He describes problems with test design 
and statistical sampling, with how the data have been analyzed 
and reported, and with how those problems have been “glossed 
over” in reporting the results of national and international com-
parisons of student achievement. While he believes that ac-
countability is important, he also argues that test scores do not 
represent, in and of themselves, the state of education or the 
state of education reform. 
  Goodman, K., P. Shannon, Y. Goodman, and R. Rapoport, eds. 
2004. Saving Our Schools: The Case for Public Education: Saying 
No to “No Child Left Behind.”  Berkeley, CA: RDR Books. 
 In  Saving Our Schools , the authors, all leading educators and re-
searchers, decry the effects of No Child Left Behind on children, 
teachers, schools, and the system of public education in the 
United States. The essays in the book address the marginalization 
of effective teaching practices, curriculum, professional develop-
ment, and teacher education programs inherent in No Child Left 
Behind, as well as the inordinate amount of money NCLB spends 
on testing rather than on instruction. The authors call for action to 
save public education. 
 Hargreaves, A., and D. Fink. 2006.  Sustainable Leadership . San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

260 Resources
 In  Sustainable Leadership , Andy Hargreaves and Dean Fink identify 
a framework for sustainable leadership. The framework consists 
of seven principles—depth, length, breadth, justice, diversity, re-
sourcefulness, and conservation—that characterize leadership 
that is effective in the long term. Leaders whose leadership is sus-
tainable have energy to continue to lead and are able to build on 
the history of their leadership to be even more effective. 
  Hess, F. M. 2008.  Common Sense School Reform.  New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
 In  Common Sense School Reform , Frederick Hess proposes a new 
agenda for school reform, one based on accountability and flex-
ibility. Rather than promote any specific reform agenda, Hess 
argues that there are many ways to reform education, but that 
any successful reform effort must begin with creating a culture of 
competence, where excellence is rewarded and failure is not toler-
ated. He also promotes the notion that schools and school systems 
must be flexible enough to allow teachers and administrators to 
be innovative and creative in doing their jobs. Hess provides a 
number of recommendations for accountability, competition, cre-
ating an educated workforce, and effective leadership. 
Izumi, L. T., and W. M. Evers. 2002.  Teacher Quality. Stanford, 
CA: Hoover Press. 
 Lance Izumi and Williamson Evers identify characteristics of good 
teachers and good teaching, dispel some common myths about 
teaching and teacher credentialing, and assert that the quality of a 
student’s teacher is the most important influence on that student’s 
learning.
  Kaplan, L. S., and W. A. Owings. 2002.  Teacher Quality, Teaching 
Quality, and School Improvement . Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta 
Kappa Educational Foundation. 
 This book reviews and presents research on teacher and teaching 
quality and the necessity of both for school improvement that re-
sults in high academic achievement for all children. 
  Kimmelman, P. L. 2006.  Implementing NCLB—Creating a Knowl-
edge Framework to Support School Improvement. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Corwin. 

Print Resources 261
 Paul Kimmelman provides a framework for leading schools to 
meet the requirements of No Child Left Behind through school 
improvement. The book includes examples of how other schools 
have been successful using a knowledge framework for continu-
ous school improvement, processes and activities for putting a 
knowledge framework in place, and recommended resources and 
products that can support such an implementation. 
  Lambert, L. 2003.  Leadership Capacity for Lasting School Im-
provement.  Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and 
Curriculum Development. 
 In  Leadership Capacity for Lasting School Improvement , Linda Lam-
bert provides a process for schools to follow in building high 
leadership capacity among principals and teachers. She begins 
with five important strategies that leaders with high capacity 
for leading use: (1) skillful participation in the work of leader-
ship; (2) inquiry-based use of data to inform decision and prac-
tice; (3) broad involvement in and collective responsibility for 
student learning; (4) reflective practice that leads to innovation; 
and (5) high or steadily improving student achievement. The 
book includes exercises to develop high-capacity leadership 
and real-life examples of high-capacity leadership in action. 
  Lipman, P. 2004.  High Stakes Education: Inequality, Globaliza-
tion, and Urban School Reform. New York: RoutledgeFalmer. 
 Pauline Lipman’s book takes a critical look at how globalization and 
gentrification are serving to preserve the inequities of both the re-
sources for and the learning outcomes of urban schooling. She uses 
the Chicago Public Schools policies and practices as examples of how 
those inequities are perpetuated by economic and social policies. 
According to Lipman, education will not be truly reformed until we 
have addressed the inequities of economics and social policies and 
have schools that “create new people for a new way of life.” 
 Littky, D. 2004.  The Big Picture: Education is Everyone’s Busi-
ness. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curricu-
lum Development. 
 In his book, Dennis Littky describes his work supporting education 
reform at a number of schools, among them an urban high school in 
Providence, Rhode Island. He also writes about the lessons he has 

262 Resources
learned from that work, and how other educators can learn from 
those lessons. Littky’s book points out that standardized education 
measured by standardized tests—a one-size-fits-all approach—in 
reality fits no one, and that schools and teachers should be looking 
for what works for each child. 
  Marzano, R. J., T. Waters, and B. A. McNulty. 2005.  School 
Leadership that Works: From Research to Results . Aurora, CO: 
Mid-Continent Research for Education and Learning.  
 In this book, Robert Marzano, Timothy Waters, and Brian McNulty 
review research about school-level, teacher-level, and student-level 
factors that characterize effective schools. The authors translate 
the factors into specific actions that schools can take to improve 
their practice and raise student achievement. The book includes a 
“Snapshot Survey” of the factors that research shows characterize 
effective schools. The survey can be used by school improvement 
teams, teachers, and school leaders to assess their own practice as a 
basis for planning for taking action to improve their schools. 
  Meier, D., and G. Wood, eds. 2004.  Many Children Left Behind: 
How the No Child Left Behind Act Is Damaging Our Children and 
Our Schools.  Boston: Beacon Press. 
 The authors of this book contend that No Child Left Behind can 
never fulfill its promise to ensure that all children will learn well 
for many reasons, not the least of which that it is underfunded, 
that the standards for students with disabilities and who are 
English language learners set them up for failure, and that the re-
quirements for highly qualified teachers are not practical in many 
areas. 
  Nichols, S. L., and D. C. Berliner. 2007.  Collateral Damage: How 
High Stakes Testing Corrupts America’s Schools . Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
 In this book, Sharon Nichols and David Berliner discuss how 
standardized testing is being used and misused under No Child 
Left Behind. According to the authors, the use of standardized 
testing as the only measure of accountability not only uses the 
tests for a purpose for which they were never intended; that 
use also narrows the curriculum as schools and teachers focus 
instruction on the content of the test and creates pressures that 

Print Resources 263
undermine the validity of the test data. Nichols and Berliner pro-
vide accounts of adults who cheat to raise test scores of children, 
schools that push children out of school so that their potential 
low test scores are not included in the school’s data, and schools 
and classrooms where inordinate amounts of time, some as many 
as several months of the school year, are spent on test preparation 
rather than on engaging children in a rich curriculum. 
 Noddings, N. 2007.  When School Reform Goes Wrong.  New York: 
Teachers College Press. 
 Nel Noddings critiques nearly every aspect of No Child Left Be-
hind, based on the assertion that much of school reform fails to 
begin with asking the right questions. Indeed, she describes how 
schools, as well as the NCLB legislation, impose and adopt reforms 
without considering what even needs reforming. In the book, she 
argues that a moral and ethical approach to school reform requires 
addressing the inherent inequities in our educational system, and 
she proposes a set of strategies that she believes can lead to equity 
and improved academic achievement. 
  Noguera, P. A. 2007.  City Schools and the American Dream: Re-
claiming the Promise of Public Education.  New York: Teachers 
College Press. 
 In this book, Pedro Noguera explains why urban schools and 
school districts are not successful in their reform efforts. He be-
lieves that policy makers and school administrators do not un-
derstand the conditions of urban schooling and urban life that 
prevent academic success for urban students. He proposes strate-
gies for confronting those social and economic conditions to re-
solve the inequities and design schools that address the issues 
these children face. Unless the social and economic supports are 
provided, argues Noguera, urban children will not be able to at-
tain higher standards, and schools will not be able to close the 
achievement gap. 
  O’Shea, M. R. 2005.  From Standards to Success: A Guide for School 
Leaders.  Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curricu-
lum Development. 
 Mark O’Shea’s book describes a process, the Standards Achieve-
ment Planning Cycle, that school leaders can use to help their 

264 Resources
schools meet educational standards. The book describes the pro-
cess step-by-step, with examples of how the steps look when they 
are in place in a school. This book is an excellent resource for 
teachers and schools in the process of aligning their practice with 
standards. 
 Popham, W. J. 2008.  Transformative Assessment . Alexandria, VA: 
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
 Formative assessment is an assessment process that both students 
and teachers can engage in during the instructional process to un-
derstand how the students’ learning is forming, with the purpose 
of informing instruction. Formative assessment can also be used 
at the school level to determine how a school-wide initiative is 
forming. In this book W. James Popham explains why formative 
assessment is critical to the improvement of teaching and learn-
ing, as well as school improvement processes. He also shows how 
to analyze data from formative assessment and how to feed it 
back into the system for continuous improvement. 
  Popham, W. J. 2001.  The Truth about Testing: An Educator’s Call 
to Action . Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Cur-
riculum Development. 
 W. James Popham explains how the misuse of standardized 
tests to determine whether schools are succeeding is damaging 
to schools and to teachers. More importantly, Popham explains 
what the tests really measure and why they shouldn’t be used to 
determine school success or failure. He proposes alternative mea-
sures teachers and administrators can use to be accountable, and 
he suggests ways that teachers and school leaders can take action 
against the misuse of standardized testing. 
 Pressley, M. 2006.  Reading Instruction That Works: The Case for 
Balanced Teaching, 3rd ed. New York: Guilford Press. 
 Michael Pressley’s book presents research-based best practices for 
teaching literacy in a balanced approach that combines a skills-
based approach with whole-language strategies that together 
help children to become good readers. Pressley presents strate-
gies and techniques for teaching reading, explains the theory and 
research that support each of them, and shows how good teachers 
actually use the strategies and techniques in their classrooms. 

Print Resources 265
  Price, H. B. 2008.  Mobilizing the Community to Help Students 
Succeed. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Cur-
riculum Development. 
 In this book, Hugh Price builds a case for using the entire com-
munity to improve education. He argues that the community has 
many resources that are valuable to the reform process, and that 
the commitment of the community to education reform is critical 
to the process. 
  Rathvon, N. 2008.  Effective School Interventions: Evidence-Based 
Strategies for Improving Student Outcomes,  2nd ed. New York: 
Guilford Press. 
 In this book, Natalie Rathvon provides 70 interventions that can 
be used to improve the classroom learning environment, student 
achievement, and student behavior. The research-based interven-
tions can be used in pre-K through grade 12 classrooms on an 
individual, class, or school-wide level. The array of interventions 
include teaching strategies for specific curriculum areas, strate-
gies for classroom management, and strategies for dealing with 
individual children. The interventions are explained in detail and 
include step-by-step procedures for using them with children, as 
well as combining them into a comprehensive program. 
  Reeves, D. B. 2004.  Accountability for Learning: How Teachers 
and School Leaders Can Take Charge.  Alexandria, VA: Associa-
tion for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
 In this book, Douglas Reeves calls for teachers to take the lead-
ership in accountability and to transform accountability into a 
constructive decision-making process that leads to improvement 
of teaching, leadership, and student achievement. It is possible, 
according to Reeves, to develop accountability systems that are 
learner centered, that increase teacher motivation, and that lead 
to improved student learning, and the book outlines a process for 
doing so. 
  Rice, J. K. 2003.  Teacher Quality: Understanding the Effectiveness of 
Teacher Attributes . Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute. 
 Jennifer King Rice’s book analyzes research on teacher quality and 
calls for using multiple measures that consider a number of dimen-
sions when determining policies and procedures for determining 

266 Resources
credentialing and hiring teachers to build the kind of teacher work-
force needed to improve teaching and learning. 
 Rothstein-Fisch, C., and E. Trumbull. 2008.  Managing Diverse 
Classrooms: How to Build on Students’ Cultural Strengths. Al-
exandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development.  
 Carrie Rothstein-Fisch and Elise Trumbull draw on teachers’ expe-
riences in classrooms with high numbers of immigrant children as 
they create a framework for understanding the cultural strengths 
children bring to their classrooms. The book describes that frame-
work, and it also describes teaching strategies for enacting that 
framework in classrooms as part of school reform. 
  Salomone, R. C. 2003.  Same, Different, Equal: Rethinking Single-
Sex Schooling . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
 Rosemary Salomone argues in this book that single-sex schooling 
has the potential for both academic and social benefits to children, 
particularly disadvantaged and minority children, when the pro-
grams are thoughtfully planned and implemented. 
  Saltman, K. J. 2007.  Capitalizing on Disaster: Taking and Break-
ing Public Schools. Boulder, CO: Paradigm. 
 In this book, Kenneth Saltman argues that the goals of much of 
the current school reform relate not to improved educational 
outcomes for children, but to dismantling public education and 
creating opportunities for privatization and profit for businesses. 
He also argues that public education should be a democratic en-
terprise, with public oversight, and that current reform efforts 
undermine the involvement of the public in education. 
  Schlechty, P. C. 2001.  Inventing Better Schools: An Action Plan 
for Educational Reform. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
 Phillip Schlechty argues that schools will never be truly re-
formed until our focus changes from teacher and student test 
scores and mandated policy. Real improvement, according to 
Schlechty, will come only when the focus is on what he terms 
“knowledge work,” work in schools that provides intellectual 
challenge and daily creative engagement for both teachers and 
students. 

Print Resources 267
 Schmoker, M. 2006.  Results Now: How We Can Achieve Unprec-
edented Improvements in Teaching and Learning . Alexandria, VA: 
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
 In this book, Michael Schmoker asserts that teaching must change 
and improve if student achievement is to improve, and he argues 
that the development of professional learning communities in 
schools has the potential to improve instruction. Schmoker writes 
for school leaders, and he provides a set of leadership practices, 
grounded in the research on professional learning communities, for 
teachers and leaders to use as they work collaboratively to improve 
teaching. He also makes recommendations for the involvement in 
professional learning communities of school district administra-
tors, state departments of education, and policy makers. 
  Taylor, B. M., and P. D. Pearson. 2002.  Teaching Reading: Effec-
tive Schools, Accomplished Teachers . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
 Erlbaum Associates. 
 Barbara Taylor and P. David Pearson explore how reading is 
taught in schools and classrooms where at-risk students are learn-
ing to read well. The authors compare practices across schools 
and classrooms, and they also provide in-depth descriptions of 
teaching strategies in context in individual classrooms. Taylor and 
Pearson show in this book that effective teaching of reading is not 
just classroom practice; indeed, there are organizational factors 
that contribute to teachers’ success in classrooms. 
  Tucker, P. D., and J. H. Stronge. 2005.  Linking Teacher Evaluation 
and Student Learning.  Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervi-
sion and Curriculum Development. 
 Pamela Tucker and James Stronge assert that including measures 
of student learning in evaluations of teachers can help schools im-
prove student achievement. The authors describe how four school 
districts are doing just that. In their analysis of the four districts’ 
teacher evaluation systems, the authors found four strategies for 
linking student learning with teacher evaluations. These include 
documenting how desired outcomes lead to student learning, track-
ing learners’ progress on standards, setting annual goals for student 
achievement, and analyzing student test scores to look for signifi-
cant changes. The book includes samples of teacher evaluation tools 
that include student learning as a factor of the quality of teaching. 

268 Resources
  Wehling, R. L., ed. 2008.  Building a 21st Century U.S. Education 
System.  Washington, DC: National Commission on Teaching 
and America’s Future. http://www.nctaf.org/resources/research_
and_reports/nctaf_research_reports/documents/Bldg21stCen
 turyUSEducationSystem_final.pdf 
 This book brings together a wide range of authors, among them 
practitioners, researchers, policy makers, and business leaders, 
who think outside the box about the issues and problems faced by 
the U.S. education system. Each of the authors has been involved 
in the reform of education, and each chapter proposes ideas and 
solutions from that author’s particular perspective. 
 Whitman, D. 2008.  Sweating the Small Stuff: Inner-City Schools 
and the New Paternalism.  Washington, DC: Thomas B. Fordham 
Institute. 
 In this book, David Whitman provides descriptions of six highly 
effective inner-city secondary schools where disadvantaged youth 
make gains in academic achievement that are much larger than 
what would be expected. Whitman attributes much of this suc-
cess to the paternalistic practices of the schools. They are warm 
and caring, and adults in these schools form strong paternalistic 
bonds with students as they communicate high expectations for 
learning and behavior. 
  Zmuda, A., R. Kuklis, and E. Kline. 2004.  Transforming Schools: 
Creating a Culture of Continuous Improvement.  Alexandria, VA: 
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
 This book describes a set of “operating principles” for trans-
forming a school district or school that use systems thinking as a 
means to school reform. The chapters explain the principles and 
proven examples of how those principles serve to create the cul-
ture of continuous analysis of the school district or school and 
how to use the data generated for improvement. The authors 
contend that the book can help school leaders “chart the course” 
for improving their school districts or schools. 
 Journal Articles 
  Bailey, J. 2000. “The Case for Small Schools.”  Center for Rural 
Affairs Newsletter.  January. http://www.cfra.org/files/casefor 
smallschools.pdf  

Print Resources 269
 The Center for Rural Affairs in Walthill, Nebraska, publishes a 
newsletter that provides its constituents with information that 
will help them to be agents on behalf of issues that face rural 
communities. This article, however, provides statistics and other 
information about the value of small schools for children’s learn-
ing that can be used in any community. The article summarizes 
a number of other papers and studies that build a case for the 
development of small, personalized education programs as a way 
to engage children effectively. 
  Darling-Hammond, L. 2005. “Teaching as a Profession: Lessons 
in Teacher Preparation and Professional Development.”  Phi 
Delta Kappan  87 (3): 237–240. 
 In this article, Darling-Hammond proposes that the United States 
has much to learn about teacher preparation and professional 
development from what other countries do to prepare teachers 
and to provide support to them during their careers. As other 
countries have reformed their education systems, they have taken 
more systematic approaches to improving teacher preparation, be-
ginning teacher induction, and teacher professional development, 
all of which have the potential to increase student learning and 
achievement. Darling-Hammond argues that such improvement 
can come only when there is a policy infrastructure that supports 
it, and when schools and school districts reallocate their resources 
to provide for it. 
  Hadderman, M. 2000. “Educational Vouchers.”  ERIC Digest, 
Number 137. Eugene, OR: ERIC Clearinghouse on Educational 
Management.
 This ERIC digest provides information about educational 
vouchers, how they are being used in the United States, and 
where they are being used. It also discusses the political issues 
surrounding them. 
  Kunkel, C. 2007. “The Power of Key: Celebrating 20 Years of In-
novation at the Key Learning Community.”  Phi Delta Kappan  89 
(3): 204–209. http://www.616.ips.k12.in.us 
 The Key Learning Community is a school that is organized around 
Howard Gardner’s theory of multiple intelligences. Believing 
that all children have the potential to develop intelligences, the 

270 Resources
school’s curriculum and learning experiences are designed to pro-
vide experiences that lead to the development and refinement of 
the intelligences identified by Gardner. The Web site of the school 
provides a wealth of information about how that is done. 
  Sadker, D., and K. Zittleman. 2004. “Single-sex Schools: A Good 
Idea Gone Wrong?”  Christian Science Monitor, April 8, 9. 
 In their response to the Bush administration’s proposed changes 
to Title IX to allow for the development of single-sex schools, 
David Sadker and Karen Zittleman argue that these changes do 
not represent sound education policy, nor are they based in re-
search. There is very little research on the benefits of single-sex 
public schools, and the authors assert that the conditions they 
found in their studies of private girls’ schools that were critical 
to the students’ success there—smaller class size, supportive par-
ents, teachers trained to work in single-sex classrooms, and strong 
academic focus—are often missing in public schools. 
   Voices in Urban Education.  http://www.annenberginstitute.
org/VUE/   
Voices in Urban Education  is a journal published monthly by the 
Annenberg Institute for School Reform. The articles in the jour-
nal address issues related to school reform in general, and more 
specifically, urban school reform. A recent issue, for example, had 
as its theme school environments, and the articles, authored by 
teachers, school administrators, and researchers, addressed such 
issues as democratic school architecture and peaceful schools. In-
formation about ordering paper copies of the journal, as well as 
online access to it, can be found at the Web site above. 
 Reports 
American Association of University Women. 2008. “Sepa-
rated by Sex: Title IX and Single-Sex Education.” Position 
paper. Washington, DC. http://www.aauw.org/advocacy/issue_
advocacy/actionpages/upload/SingleSexEducation.pdf
 In this position paper, the American Association of University 
Women (AAUW) expresses its concern that new regulations 
that change Title IX to allow for single-sex education under No 
Child Left Behind have the potential to “strip girls of civil rights 
protections,” since the words used in the new regulations are 

Print Resources 271
“substantially equal.” AAUW believes that the purpose of Title 
IX is to ensure that the educational opportunities for girls and 
boys are equal, not substantially equal. 
 Berry, B., D. Montgomery, R. Curtis, M. Hernandez, J. Wurtzel, and 
J. Snyder. 2008.  Creating and Sustaining Urban Teacher Residen-
cies: A New Way to Recruit, Prepare, and Retain Effective Teachers 
in High-Needs Districts.  Hillsborough, NC: Center for Teaching 
Quality. http://www.teachingquality.org/pdfs/AspenUTR.pdf 
 One of the challenges that many urban school districts face is recruit-
ing and retaining effective teachers. This study, conducted jointly 
by the Aspen Institute and the Center for Teaching Quality, found 
Urban Teacher Residencies to be effective. The researchers describe 
the conditions that make Urban Teacher Residencies attractive both 
to prospective teachers and to school districts, as well as the costs 
involved in operating Urban Teacher Residency programs. 
  Corbett, C., C. Hill, and A. St. Rose. 2008.  Where the Girls Are: 
The Facts About Gender Equity in Education.  Washington, DC: 
AAUW Educational Foundation. http://www.aauw.org/research/
upload/whereGirlsAre.pdf
 In their analysis of 35 years of student achievement data by gen-
der, race, and ethnicity, the authors of this report found girls to 
have made significant gains. Interestingly, though, the authors 
conclude that girls’ gains have not been at the expense of boys’ 
gains—both girls and boys have made substantial gains in aca-
demic achievement. The analysis does show that there are gen-
der differences that may be accounted for by race and ethnicity, 
and that these differences must be addressed if there is to be real 
gender equity in our nation’s schools. 
  Darling-Hammond, L., et al. 2008.  Democracy at Risk: The Need for 
a New Federal Policy in Education . Athens, OH: Forum for Democ-
racy and Education. http://www.forumforeducation.org /node/378
 This report describes the state of public education in the United 
States and makes recommendations for reforming public edu-
cation both to improve the quality of teaching and learning and 
to ensure that quality teaching and learning are available to all 
children. The report underscores the importance of free and 
public education to a strong democracy. 

272 Resources
 Education Trust. 2005.  Gaining Traction: How Some High Schools 
Accelerate Learning for Struggling Students . Washington, DC. 
http://www2.edtrust.org/NR/rdonlyres/6226B581–83C3–4447– 
9CE7–31C5694B9EF6/0/GainingTractionGainingGround.pdf 
 This report is the result of a study that compared a group of “high-
impact” high schools—schools that produced unusually large 
growth among students who began significantly behind 
academically—with “medium-impact” high schools to determine 
the factors that contributed to their success. The study identified the 
culture of the school, the academic core, the supports for students, 
the teachers and their assignment to classes, and time and other re-
sources in the students’ growth. The report identifies and describes 
the practices of the “high-impact” schools in each of those areas. 
  Forum on Educational Accountability. 2007.  Assessment and 
Accountability for Improving Schools and Learning: Principles 
and Recommendations for Federal Law and State and Local 
Systems . Cambridge, MA. http://www.edaccountability.org/
AssessmentFullReportJUNE07.pdf  
 The report  Assessment and Accountability for Improving Schools and 
Learning: Principles and Recommendations for Federal Law and State 
and Local Systems,  written by a panel of education and assessment 
experts, makes a set of recommendations for changes to the El-
ementary and Secondary Education Act. When No Child Left Be-
hind, the current version of the law is reauthorized, the report 
calls for the law to “ensure that all children have a fair, equal, 
and significant opportunity to obtain a high-quality education” 
(Section 1001 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, No 
Child Left Behind). The changes the panel recommends are based 
on a set of six principles that, according to the panel, provide a vi-
sion for an assessment and accountability system that is fair and 
equitable.
  Hoxby, C. 2004.  A Straightforward Comparison of Charter 
Schools and Regular Public Schools in the US . Cambridge, MA: 
National Bureau of Economic Research.  
  Hoxby, C. 2004.  Achievement in Charter Schools and Regular 
Public Schools in the US: Understanding the Differences. Cam-
bridge, MA: Taubman Center for State and Local Government, 
Kennedy School of Government. 

Print Resources 273
 In these two reports, Caroline Hoxby provides an evaluation of 
charter schools in the United States. The reports give an account-
ing of the number of charter schools in the United States and how 
student achievement in charter schools compares with student 
achievement in regular public schools. According to Hoxby’s 
analysis, children in charter schools in nearly every state outper-
form their peers in regular public schools. 
  James, D. W., S. Jurich, and S. Estes. 2001.  Raising Minority 
Academic Achievement: A Compendium of Education Programs 
and Practices . Washington, DC: American Youth Policy Forum. 
http://www.aypf.org/publications/rmaa/pdfs/Book.pdf  
 This report describes programs that have been shown to be success-
ful in raising minority student academic achievement. The research-
ers analyzed published evaluations of the programs to determine a 
set of factors common to the programs, and they recommend that 
new programs designed for minority students include the factors. 
  Mead, J. F. 2008.  Charter Schools Designed for Children with 
Disabilities: An Initial Examination of Issues and Questions 
Raised . Madison: University of Wisconsin. http://www.uschar 
terschools.org/cs/spedp/print/uscs_docs/spedp/reports.htm  
 This report, funded by the U.S. Department of Education, pro-
vides a wealth of information about charter schools designed spe-
cifically for children with disabilities. The report is in the form of 
questions and answers about the nature of such charter schools 
and how they implement the regulations of IDEA and provide 
services to children with disabilities. 
  Moats, L. C. 1999.  Teaching Reading Is Rocket Science: What Ex-
pert Teachers of Reading Should Know and Be Able to Do. New 
York: American Federation of Teachers. 
 Moats’s report examines research on teaching reading and proposes 
changes to teacher preparation programs and teacher professional 
development to ensure that teachers are prepared to implement 
teaching practices that will help all children learn to read well. 
Moats calls for action for developing high-quality teaching of 
reading, writing, and spelling rather than criticism of teachers; she 
argues for teacher preparation programs, and for professional de-
velopment to be revised in light of the research in reading. 

274 Resources
  New Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce. 2007. 
 Tough Choices or Tough Times: The Report of the New Commission 
on the Skills of the American Workforce . San Francisco: Wiley. 
 This report updates the earlier report of the Commission on the 
Skills of the American Workforce. It analyzes the needs of the 
workforce that will be required for the United States to be com-
petitive in the global economy and translates those needs into 
expectations for the nation’s schools. 
  “Quality Counts: Tapping into Teaching.”  Education Week 27, 
no. 18 (January 10, 2008). http://www.edweek.org/ew/toc/2008/01/ 
10/index.html 
 Quality Counts, published annually by  Education Week , provides 
statistics about education in the United States by state. The publi-
cation “grades” education in several areas; in 2008, those areas in-
cluded students’ chances for success; student achievement; state 
standards, assessment, and accountability, transitions and align-
ment between levels of schooling; the quality of teachers; and 
school finance. The publication also includes a series of articles 
about each of the factors analyzed. In 2008, many of the articles 
focused on teaching quality. 
  Reeves, T. C. 2006. “Single-Sex Schools.”  WPRI Commentary .
Thiensville, WI: Wisconsin Policy Research Institute. 
 While Thomas Reeves seems not to support a position relative 
to single-sex schools, his commentary does provide information 
about a number of issues, including the American Civil Liber-
ties Union’s litigation against single-sex schooling. He also dis-
cusses Leonard Sax’s argument that the differences between 
boys’ and girls’ brains and brain function warrant single-sex 
classrooms. 
  Roy, J., and L. Mishel. 2005.  Advantage None: Reexamining 
Hoxby’s Findings of Charter School Benefits. Washington, DC: 
Economic Policy Institute.  
 In this report, Joydeep Roy and Lawrence Mishel reanalyze 
the data presented in Caroline Hoxby’s evaluations of char-
ter schools, and they use Hoxby’s data to refute her findings. 
It is interesting to look at the reports side-by-side to compare 
them. 

Print Resources 275
 Stiggins, R. 2008.  Assessment Manifesto: A Call for the Devel-
opment of Balanced Assessment Systems.  Portland, OR: ETS 
Assessment Training Institute. http://www.ets.org/Media/
Conferences_and_Events/pdf/Stiggins/pdf  
 Rick Stiggins, an expert in designing assessments and assess-
ment systems, calls for rethinking the purpose of assessment in 
schools. He argues that schools can no longer just use assess-
ment to determine which students have learned; instead, they 
must use assessment to understand how students are learning 
so that they can intervene to ensure that all students learn well 
and meet standards. The manifesto calls for revision of crite-
ria used to determine the quality of assessments to include the 
evaluation of the impact of assessment and assessment scores 
on student learning. Stiggins proposes a process, outlined in the 
manifesto, for selecting and designing assessments that are balanced, 
that lead to continued learning, and that provide information 
that helps educators plan for appropriate instruction for each 
student. 
 International Perspectives on Education Reform 
 Books 
  Apple, M. W., J. Kenway, and M. Singh, eds. 2005.  Globalizing Ed-
ucation: Policies, Pedagogies, & Politics . New York: Peter Lang. 
 The authors of the essays in this book explore issues related to 
educational change and reform from the perspective of a global 
society. What will education mean when there is truly a global 
society? How can democracy be preserved? How can the voices of 
all be heard? How can public schools be globalized? In discussing 
these issues, the authors propose innovative and transformative 
educational policies, pedagogies, and politics. 
 Grindle, M. S. 2004.  Despite the Odds: The Contentious Politics 
of Education Reform. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 Merilee Grindle analyzes education reform in Latin American 
countries through the lens of the political movements and per-
spectives that they represent. She shows how reformers have been 
strategic in choosing reforms so that they can be sustained, and 
staying the course, even against the odds. Education reformers 
can learn from the examples set by these reformers. 

276 Resources
Klooster, D. J., J. Steele, and P. L. Bloem, eds.  Ideas Without 
Boundaries: International Education Reform Through Reading 
and Writing for Critical Thinking.  Newark, DE: International 
Reading Association.  
 This book presents the stories of teaching and changing, written 
by educators from central and eastern Europe and central Asia 
who have participated in the Reading and Writing for Critical 
Thinking school improvement project. The stories they tell show 
how these teachers have worked together to change their class-
room practice and how they have been changed in the process. 
  Levin, B. 2001.  Reforming Education: From Origins to Outcomes . 
London: RoutledgeFalmer. 
 In this book, Benjamin Levin describes large-scale education re-
form efforts in England, New Zealand, the Canada provinces of 
Alberta and Manitoba, and the state of Minnesota. Levin reviews 
the reforms and their results through the perspectives of their po-
litical origins, the laws that mandate or support them, and the 
processes that have led to the results. Through his analysis, Levin 
shows that there are many lessons to be learned from the experi-
ences of others involved in education reform. 
  Rotberg, I. C., ed. 2004.  Balancing Change and Tradition in 
Global Education Reform.  New York: Rowman and Littlefield 
Education.
 This book presents a series of case studies of education reform 
from countries that are involved in the process of reform. Iris Rot-
berg selected the countries because of what can be learned from 
each of the education reform processes of these countries, as well 
as their perspectives. She describes the reform process as one that 
involves a delicate balance between tradition, what has always 
been done, and change. 
  Spring, J. 2004.  How Educational Ideologies Are Shaping Global 
Society: Intergovernmental Organizations, NGOs, and the De-
cline of the Nation-State . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
 Joel Spring argues that there are conflicting ideologies at play in 
global education and education reform. He identifies the ideolo-
gies and analyzes their effects on the future of education as an 

Print Resources 277
institution of a global society. He concludes by exploring the fu-
ture of global education policy and global school organizations. 
  Spring, J. 2007.  A New Paradigm for Global School Systems: 
Education for a Long and Happy Life.  Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.  
 In his book  A New Paradigm for Global School Systems: Education for 
a Long and Happy Life , Joel Spring proposes to reform education by 
changing its very purpose. Instead of expecting education to lead 
to jobs that support the global economy, Spring suggests that the 
purpose of education should be to prepare people to lead long, 
happy lives. In addition to a strong argument for his proposition, 
Spring shows how education with such a purpose could be orga-
nized, how the curriculum could be designed, and how teaching 
and learning could look. 
  Sugrue, C., ed. 2008.  The Future of Educational Change: Interna-
tional Perspectives . London: Routledge. 
 This book takes a look at educational change in several countries 
and a wide range of contexts to show, despite claims to the contrary, 
that much has changed and is changing in schools and educational 
systems worldwide. Ciaran Sugrue says her intent is that each ef-
fort at change “contributes toward the identification of some sign-
posts and compass readings that become the rudder of educational 
change, a tiller that gives direction to the future” (p. 3). In other 
words, even if a change effort doesn’t result in the change hoped for, 
at least something can be learned that can help with the next effort. 
 Journals and Journal Articles 
  Baines, L. 2007. “Learning from the World: Achieving More by 
Doing Less.” Phi Delta Kappan  89 (2): 98–100. 
 In this article, Lawrence Baines compares practices of U.S. schools 
with the practices of schools in other countries. He suggests that there 
are many practices U.S. educators can borrow from our international 
colleagues that might help U.S. schools improve students’ learning, 
including shortening the school day and requiring less homework. 
  Darling-Hammond, L. 2008. How They Do It Abroad.  Time , 
February 14. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171, 
1713557,00.html

278 Resources
 This article compares teaching conditions in the United States 
with those of teachers in Finland, Singapore, Sweden, Ireland, 
the Netherlands, Hong Kong, South Korea, Japan, Australia, New 
Zealand, and Canada—the highest achieving countries on inter-
national comparisons of student learning. Darling-Hammond 
argues that these countries all “prepare their teachers more exten-
sively, pay them well in relation to competing occupations, and 
give them lots of time for professional learning.” The result of 
providing such resources for teachers is that all children in these 
countries have well-trained teachers. 
  Grubb, W. N. 2007. “Dynamic Inequality and Intervention: Les-
sons from a Small Country.”  Phi Delta Kappan 89 (2): 105–114. 
 Finland’s student achievement ranks at the top of international 
comparisons. W. Norton Grubb takes a look at how schools in Fin-
land foster equity and argues that U.S. schools have much to learn 
from Finnish schools. 
   International Journal of Educational Reform . http://www.row 
maneducation.com/Journals/IJER/Index.shtml
 The  International Journal of Educational Reform , published quar-
terly, provides information about political and educational issues 
related to education reform. The international perspective allows 
for insight into how education reform is taking place in countries 
around the world. 
  Levin, B., and M. Fullan. 2008. Learning about System Renewal. 
Educational Management Administration & Leadership 36 (2): 
289–303.  
 In this article, Benjamin Levin and Michael Fullan draw on the les-
sons they have learned about change from their experiences with 
education reform throughout the world. Based on that experience, 
they believe that the most important lesson they have learned is 
that improvement in student learning is the result of sustained 
effort to change teaching practices on a large scale. They list a 
number of factors involved in supporting change on the scale that 
is required, and they caution that the work of doing so is difficult. 
Rethinking Schools,  1001 E. Keefe Avenue, Milwaukee, WI 
53212; 414-964-9646. http://www.rethinkingschools.org 

Print Resources 279
Rethinking Schools  is a quarterly journal that was begun in 1986 
to promote education reform in general, and more specifically, 
equity in schools, and to critique educational policy, theory, and 
classroom practice in urban education through the lens of equity. 
All of the articles in Rethinking Schools  are edited by classroom 
teachers. The journal is available online. 
  Rotberg, I. C. 2005. “Tradeoffs, Societal Values, and School Re-
form.” Phi Delta Kappan  86 (8): 611–618. 
 In this article, Iris Rotberg describes school reforms from several 
countries from the perspective of what the countries had to give 
up in order to adopt the reforms. She describes the processes these 
countries used to make the choices they did about reform. 
  Stewart, V. 2005. “A World Transformed: How Other Countries 
Are Preparing Students for the Interconnected World Of the 
21st Century.”  Phi Delta Kappan 87 (3): 229–232. 
 Vivien Stewart describes how other countries are preparing their 
children for life in the global era, and she compares what they are 
doing with what is happening in the United States. According to 
Stewart, efforts in the United States are local and small in scale; to 
be effective, funding must be allocated for teaching foreign lan-
guages and the international education that is needed to prepare 
students for the global era. 
  Zhao, Y. 2005. “Increasing Math and Science Achievement: The 
Best and Worst of the East and West.”  Phi Delta Kappan  87 (3): 
219–222.
 Yong Zhao analyzes the mathematics and science teaching prac-
tices of the United States and compares them with teaching 
practices in China, Chinese Taipei, Hong Kong, Japan, Korea, 
and Singapore. He concludes that although students from these 
countries score higher than U.S. students on international stan-
dardized tests, there are strengths of U.S. teaching practices that 
should not be exchanged for Asian teaching practices. 
 Reports 
  Cuadra, E., J. M. Moreno, L. Crouch, Y. Nagashima, Y. Koda, 
D. Bundy, G. J. Kim, T. Welsh, I. Psifidou, Y. Wang, S. Sosale, 
and D. Abu-Ghaida. 2005.  Expanding Opportunities and 

280 Resources
Building Competencies for Young People: A New Agenda for Sec-
ondary Education.  Washington, DC: The World Bank. http://
siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/Resources/278200-
1099079877269/547664-1099079967208/Expanding_Opportuni 
ties_Secondary.pdf 
 This paper, published by the World Bank, argues that second-
ary education plays a critical role in global development, and it 
proposes policy alternatives and options for reforming and trans-
forming secondary education. While the paper is aimed at educa-
tors and policy makers in developing countries where secondary 
education is not universal, the reforms suggested can also inform 
educators and policy makers in the United States. 
 Levin, B., and J. Young. 1998. International Education Reform: 
A Canadian Perspective. Paper presented at the annual meeting 
of the American Educational Research Association, San Diego, 
California. ERIC Document No. ED424642. 
 Benjamin Levin and Jonathan Young compare education reform 
in Canada with mandated reforms in several other countries. 
The authors analyze the reforms in terms of the legislation that 
mandates them, the process of implementing the reforms, and the 
evidence of student outcomes related to the reforms. The article 
identifies commonalities and differences among the reforms and 
with reform in Canada. 
 Nonprint Resources 
AAUW Title IX 35th Anniversary Resource Kit.  http://www.
aauw.org/advocacy/issue_advocacy/actionpages/upload/title 
ixResourceKit.pdf
 The AAUW Title IX 35th Anniversary Resource Kit provides back-
ground information on Title IX, as well as resources to support 
advocacy for continued enforcement of Title IX. In particular, the 
kit includes a rationale for Title IX implementation in schools as 
well as a list of ways to ensure gender equity. 
ASCD SmartBrief.  http://www.smartbrief.com/ascd/ 
 The  ASCD SmartBrief  is a daily electronic newsletter for educators. 
The SmartBrief  contains reports and articles about a wide variety 

Nonprint Resources  281
of topics, many related to education reform and improvement. 
Recent issues have included a report of research on the achieve-
ment of students who used vouchers to attend schools of choice, a 
report on the effectiveness of tutoring provided through No Child 
Left Behind, and a number of resources available on education 
reform. 
  Annenberg Institute for School Reform. 2006.  Tools for School-
Improvement Planning.  Providence, RI. http://www.annenberg 
institute.org/tools/index.php
 This Web site provides a database of tools for school improvement 
gleaned from successful school improvement projects throughout 
the country. Besides the tools themselves, the Web site includes 
descriptions of successful schools and promising practices of 
those schools, a guide for school improvement, and resources for 
using data to drive school improvement. There is also a list of 
resources to support school improvement efforts. 
   Asking the Right Questions: A School Change Toolkit . http://
www.mcrel.org/toolkit/ 
 The toolkit includes information about a systems approach to 
schools as well as a process of needs assessment and reflective in-
quiry in designing reform plans. The toolkit addresses the factors 
shown by research to have the biggest impact on student achieve-
ment. It is intended to be used by school leaders and teams of 
teachers involved in school improvement and reform. 
  Center for Earth and Space Science Education. http://cesse.terc 
.edu/
 This center, funded by the National Science Foundation and the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, has as its purpose 
“transforming science education from ‘reading about science’ to 
highly engaging and exploratory experiences in which students 
‘do science’ by investigating and exploring the Earth around them 
and the universe beyond.” The Web site has links to information, 
maps, books, posters, and listservs about Earth and Mars. 
  Center on Innovation and Improvement Information on the 
Need for and State of Education Reform. http://www.centerii.
org/centerIIPublic/criteria.aspx

282 Resources
 The Web site of the Center on Innovation and Improvement 
provides the opportunity to generate reports of data on edu-
cation reform by state. Reports can be generated across states 
on supplemental educational services, on restructuring, and on 
school and school district improvement. Reports can also be 
generated by state; state reports may include information about 
standards and assessments, state regulations governing educa-
tion reform, and education reform resources available in that 
state. 
 Education Reform Networks. http://www.edreform.net/ 
 This is an electronic library of information about education re-
form organized and searchable by topic—instruction, classroom 
management, data-driven reform, digital equity, early literacy, 
equity, mathematics education, professional development school 
partnerships, pre-service technology infusion, professional devel-
opment, teacher retention, and urban teacher education. 
 Edutopia. George Lucas Educational Foundation. http://www.
edutopia.org/
 The George Lucas Educational Foundation supports the develop-
ment of interactive classroom environments, project-based learn-
ing, and the integration of technology as means to school reform. 
Three publications of the foundation—Edutopia.org,  Edutopia
magazine, and Edutopia  video—provide information and support 
for developing schools and classrooms where learning is interac-
tive and project based and where technology resources are used to 
support learning. Edutopia.org is an interactive site that includes 
an archive of examples of research and best practices;  Edutopia
magazine is a bimonthly publication available online; and Eduto-
pia  video offers video examples of the vision of the foundation in 
practice. These resources are all offered free of charge. 
 FairTest Examiner . Newsletter published by FairTest, the Na-
tional Center for Fair and Open Testing. http://www.fairtest.org/
resources/publications
 This quarterly newsletter published by FairTest provides infor-
mation about testing reform and best practice in assessment and 
evaluation. It also reports on federal and state legislation on test-
ing, and it critiques the misuse of tests and evaluation data. The 

Nonprint Resources  283
newsletter is free, and the FairTest Web site provides access to the 
full archive of the  FairTest Examiner . 
Federal Resources for Educational Excellence . http://www.free.ed.gov  
 This Web site networks teaching and learning resources from fed-
eral government agencies. The resources are indexed by subject 
area (Arts & Music; Health and Phys Ed; History and Soc Studies; 
and so on), and they include links to information and primary 
sources in repositories like the Library of Congress, the Institute 
of Museum and Library Services, the National Science Founda-
tion, the Endowment for the Humanities, and the National Insti-
tutes of Health. All of the materials available through the site may 
be accessed and used free of charge. 
 www.ed.gov/free/what.html 
 This Web site is a searchable database of teaching and learning re-
sources from federal agencies. The database includes curriculum 
materials such as background information, facsimiles of primary 
documents, photos, and music, as well as lesson plans and teach-
ing activities for every curriculum area. 
Grants and Fellowships for Education Reform . http://www.
edreform.com/index.cfm?fuseAction=document&document 
ID=2905 
 The Grants and Fellowships page of the Center for Education 
Reform Web site offers a list of grants and fellowships available 
for education reformers, teachers, and school programs. The list 
of grants and fellowships includes descriptions of each grant-
ing agency or foundation, the types of projects they support, the 
deadlines for applications, and the monetary amounts of grants 
or fellowships available from each agency. Each entry is linked 
directly to the granting agency for more information about that 
particular grant or fellowship. 
   IBM Reinventing Education Change Toolkit.  2007. http://www.
reinventingeducation.org/RE3Web/ 
 The Reinventing Education Change Toolkit, based on the work of 
Harvard professor and change expert Rosabeth Moss Kanter, was 
designed to help lead and implement change in schools and school 
districts. Part of IBM’s Reinventing Education grant program, the 

284 Resources
toolkit was developed as a collaborative effort among IBM, the Coun-
cil of Chief State School Officers, the National Association of Second-
ary School Principals, and the National Association of Elementary 
School Principals. The toolkit is free of charge from the Web site. 
  Just for Parents. http://www.uscharterschools.org/pub/uscs_docs/ 
o/parents.htm 
 Just for Parents is a page on the Web site of U.S. Charter Schools. 
The Web page includes basic information about charter schools, 
information about finding and choosing appropriate charter 
schools, and information about how parents can support their 
children’s learning. 
  LEA (Local Education Agency) and School Improvement Guidance. 
 www.ed.gov/policy/elsec/guid/schoolimprovementguid.pdf 
 This 2006 document, published by the U.S. Department of Educa-
tion, provides the latest guidance to schools and school districts 
in implementing the school restructuring provisions of No Child 
Left Behind. The information, in the form of questions and an-
swers, is organized by areas of the law and the questions that have 
been asked frequently. 
 Math Forum@Drexel. http://mathforum.org/mathed/index.html 
 The Math Forum@Drexel is an Internet mathematics library. The 
library links to information resources for the reform of mathemat-
ics. In addition to links to information pages and sites, there are 
also links to research and to mathematics journals. 
  National Institute for Urban School Improvement Online Li-
brary. http://niusi.ed.greenriver.org/ 
 This online library has links to annotated citations for journal ar-
ticles and research about many aspects of school improvement 
and education reform. 
No Child Left Behind . http://www.ed.gov/nclb/landing.jhtml 
 The U.S. Department of Education has a Web site that links to in-
formation about and resources for implementing No Child Left 
Behind. The site includes pages specifically for students, par-
ents, teachers, and administrators. The pages link to research, 

Nonprint Resources  285
descriptions of innovative programs, and a number of other Web 
sites that address the various aspects of No Child Left Behind, as 
well as education in general. 
 Pathways to School Improvement. http://www.ncrel.org/sdrs/ 
 Pathways to School Improvement is a Web site that “synthesizes 
research, policy, and best practices” on a number of issues im-
portant to education reform. The specific issues addressed are 
assessment, at-risk students, family and community, instruction, 
leadership, literacy, mathematics and science, policy, professional 
development, and technology. The site provides links to a wealth 
of papers, essays, and audio files related to each topic. Visitors to 
the site can also request information about a specific topic. Path-
ways to School Improvement is a project of the North Central 
Regional Educational Laboratory. 
  Public School Insights: What is Working in Our Public Schools. 
Learning First Alliance . http://www.publicschoolinsights.org 
 The Web site of the Learning First Alliance, a partnership of edu-
cation associations, includes descriptions of successful school 
programs, a “toolkit” of resources for teaching mathematics and 
reading, and a framework for recruiting and hiring good teachers 
for high-needs schools. The school district success stories include 
contact information for the school districts described. 
 SETDA Toolkit . http://www.setda.org/toolkit/nlitoolkit2006/down 
loads.htm 
 The SETDA (State Educational Technology Directors Association) 
Toolkit is a set of “tools,” processes, and research associated with 
them for addressing several aspects of education reform. They 
include “Showing Evidence of Educational Technology Effective-
ness,” “Using Data for School Reform,” “Technology’s Role in 
Math Curriculum,” and “Standards & Curriculum Alignment.” 
Each of these sets of “tools” includes information for educators or 
policy makers and strategies for using that information. 

This page intentionally left blank 

287
accountability  Accountability can be defined as the responsibility of 
states, school districts, schools, and teachers to report and justify their 
efforts to meet the requirements of state and federal government regula-
tions regarding the quality of their education programs and their stu-
dents’ progress toward meeting curriculum standards. Accountability is 
a key component of the No Child Left Behind legislation; that legislation 
requires states to set standards for student progress toward becoming 
proficient in reading and mathematics. The legislation also enforces 
sanctions for schools that fail to meet the standards. 
achievement gap  In the United States, students considered to be part 
of an ethnic or racial minority group have historically performed lower 
as a group on tests of student achievement than their white peers. This 
disparity in student test scores is called an achievement gap. 
adequate yearly progress The standard that schools are expected to 
meet annually in terms of student achievement is called adequate yearly 
progress. Each state must set standards for student achievement that 
increase annually so that all students reach proficiency in reading and 
mathematics by the school year 2013–2014. Adequate yearly progress is 
determined by students’ scores on standardized tests. Schools with fewer 
than 95 percent of their students meeting state standards for adequate 
yearly progress are identified by their states as needing improvement. 
bilingual education  Students experience bilingual education when 
teaching is done in more than one language, for example, classrooms 
where teachers use both English and Spanish as the languages for in-
struction. There are many models of bilingual education, two of which 
are transitional bilingual education, in which students are taught initially 
primarily in their first language with a gradual transition to English, 
and dual language programs, in which all children are taught in two 
languages with the goal of all of the children becoming bilingual. 
charter school  A charter school is an elementary or secondary school 
that receives public funding but is generally governed outside the public 
 Glossary 

288 Glossary
school district in which it is located. Charter schools are chartered differ-
ently in different states. In some states the charters, or contracts to oper-
ate, are administered directly by the state, while in others the charters are 
administered by universities, and in a few, the charters are administered 
by the local school districts. Charter schools are usually not held to the 
same regulations as other public schools; their charters determine how 
and to whom the schools will be accountable. 
compensatory education  Compensatory education is defined as edu-
cational services provided to children in addition to the services nor-
mally provided by public schools. Compensatory education is usually 
provided to children to compensate for the effects of poverty or disabil-
ity. An example of compensatory education is the service provided to 
children under Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, 
No Child Left Behind. For schools where a significant proportion of stu-
dents are considered living in poverty, Title I provides funding for edu-
cational services—additional instructional time, smaller class size, and 
so on—that is in addition to the basic educational services provided by 
the school district. 
comprehensive school reform  Comprehensive school reform is an ap-
proach to improving schools that involves every aspect of schooling. It is 
based on the idea that a school is a system, and that changing one aspect 
of schooling will necessarily affect every other aspect of that school sys-
tem. In comprehensive school reform, schools are explicit about examin-
ing every aspect of schooling to improve and revitalize the entire school. 
Schools involved in comprehensive school reform believe that strate-
gies to improve the entire school result in more significant improvement 
than adopting new programs or improving one aspect of schooling at a 
time. 
content standards  Content standards describe what children should 
learn and be able to do as a result of an educational program. 
curriculum  Curriculum is what children learn in school. Curriculum 
theorists believe that there are several different curricula in every school—a 
stated curriculum, which is what the school claims to teach and includes 
in its written curriculum guides or textbooks; a hidden curriculum, things 
that students learn that are not included in curriculum guides; and a null 
curriculum, things that are intentionally not taught in that school. 
differentiated instruction  Differentiated instruction is teaching that 
acknowledges that students learn in different ways and are ready to 
learn and demonstrate that they have learned in different ways. The 
promoters of differentiated instruction believe that teaching should be 
differentiated in terms of content—how students are taught; in terms 
of process—the activities that students do to learn the content; and in 
terms of product—how students demonstrate or are assessed on what 
they have learned. 

Glossary 289
dual school systems  Before schools were racially integrated, several 
states in the United States required dual school systems. School districts 
in those states included one set of schools for white children and a second 
set of schools for black and other minority children. Until the U.S. Su-
preme Court ruled in  Brown v. Board of Education  that dual school systems 
were not legal, the doctrine of “separate but equal” set forth in  Plessy v. 
Ferguson was used to justify the dual school systems. 
effective schools  Beginning in the 1970s, a number of researchers in 
the United States examined schools that were considered to be effective. 
Based on their research, a set of characteristics of effective schools was 
developed. Those characteristics, a list of which can be found in Chapter 
6 of this book, have come to shape most of the education reform efforts 
in the United States. 
free appropriate public education  In the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 
Congress determined that every child in the United States, regardless 
of disability, is entitled to a free appropriate public education (FAPE). 
What this means is that public school districts are required under the 
law to provide every child with an education, free of cost, that addresses 
that child’s specific learning needs. A free appropriate public educa-
tion also means that no child may be excluded from nonacademic or 
extracurricular activities by virtue of having a disability. 
inclusion  When there is inclusion for children with disabilities, those 
children are included in regular classrooms for most of their instruction; 
they may leave the regular classroom for special education services that 
specifically address their disabilities. Full inclusion extends the concept of 
inclusion in that children with disabilities in full inclusion programs re-
main in the regular classroom for all of their instruction; any special edu-
cation services they require are provided in the regular classroom setting. 
least restrictive environment  PL 94–142 required that all children en-
titled to special education services be provided those services in the 
least restrictive environment. This meant that children with disabilities 
should be educated with and allowed to interact with their peers with-
out disabilities to the fullest extent possible. In other words, children 
with disabilities should be educated in regular classrooms as much as their 
disabilities allow. 
opportunity to learn standards  Opportunity to learn standards are 
standards that describe the facilities, teachers, curriculum, learning expe-
riences, instructional materials, and quality of education required to pro-
vide equity for all children in schools and classrooms. When standards 
were first proposed by the United States federal government, opportu-
nity to learn standards were included; they were later omitted from the 
national discussion about standards. Proponents of opportunity to learn 
standards argue that unless students have equal opportunities to learn, 
they should not be held to the same standards of learning. 

290 Glossary
performance assessment  Performance assessments are assessments 
that require students to apply their learning in the context of a task or 
activity. The student performances are rated or judged based on rubrics, 
or criteria that are agreed upon in advance, that represent the quality 
of learning expected. In a performance assessment, for example, stu-
dents might be asked to solve a mathematics problem and explain both 
the solution and why they selected the particular solutions they used. 
Through such assessment, teachers can determine both whether stu-
dents know how to apply mathematical concepts and algorithms and 
whether students use problem-solving strategies. 
performance standards  Performance standards are standards that ac-
company content standards. While content standards describe what stu-
dents are expected to know and be able to do, performance standards 
describe what students must do to demonstrate what they know and can 
do. In other words, performance standards describe how well a student 
is expected to learn. 
portfolio  A portfolio is a collection of student work that can be used as 
an assessment tool. The portfolio includes samples of student work that 
show how that student’s learning has developed over time. A number of 
school districts and states require student portfolios that show how stu-
dents’ writing skills progress, for example. When used as assessments, 
portfolios are typically judged or rated through the use of specific criteria 
called rubrics. 
scripted direct instruction  Scripted direct instruction is a method of 
teaching that involves teachers reading commercially produced scripts of 
lessons rather than developing lessons of their own. In such direct instruc-
tion lessons, children are the passive receivers of instruction, and their 
responses to such lessons are also often scripted, with teachers prompt-
ing the children’s responses as part of their scripts. Critics of scripted 
direct instruction argue that children must be actively engaged in learn-
ing experiences to learn, that appropriate instruction must acknowledge 
children’s differing learning styles and needs, and that teachers are in the 
best position to design lessons to meet the needs of the children in their 
classes.
standardized test  A standardized test is a test that can be used to com-
pare student performance across classrooms, schools, school districts, 
states, and so on. To be considered standardized, a test must be admin-
istered under standard conditions—for example, the same test items or 
questions, at the same time of year, with the same amount of time and 
the same level of support—so that the scores have the same meaning and 
can be compared. 
standards  The U.S. government has promoted standards as the basis 
for education reform in U.S. schools. States are required to set content 
and performance standards for the schools in their state, and they are 

Glossary 291
required to design assessments that measure students’ progress toward 
meeting the standards. 
supplemental educational services  Supplemental educational services 
are educational services provided to students in addition to the services 
normally provided to all students by a school or school district. Examples 
of supplemental educational services include English as a Second Lan-
guage classes, additional instruction or tutoring in reading or mathemat-
ics, and special education services. 
universal education  Universal education is based on the concept that 
education is a basic human right and that all children are entitled to a 
good-quality education. Universal education is promoted by such orga-
nizations as the United Nations and the World Bank as part of national 
and international development. 
vouchers  An educational voucher is a public payment for education 
that can be used to pay tuition at non-public schools as a way of offering 
choice in children’s education. Proponents of vouchers believe that of-
fering such choice promotes competition among schools, which can im-
prove schools and their offerings. A number of states in the United States 
offer vouchers to parents, and the entire public education system in Chile 
is based on vouchers. (See Chapter 3 for more information about Chile’s 
voucher system.) Critics of vouchers argue that vouchers are rarely large 
enough to allow students to attend high-quality private schools, and 
that vouchers take financial resources away from underfunded public 
schools.

This page intentionally left blank 

293
 Accelerated Schools model, 57 – 58 
 Access to education, 108 – 9 
 Accountability, 40 – 45, 107 – 8 
 Adequate yearly progress (AYP), 
19, 44, 63, 64, 66 
Affirming Diversity (Nieto and 
Bode), 152 
 Alternative schooling options, 
45 – 54 
Amazing Grace (Kozol), 150 
 “American 2000: a National 
Strategy,” 126 – 27 
 American Association of 
University Women, 11 
 America’s Choice, 158 
 Apartheid, 79 – 80, 109 
 A+ Schools model, 35 
 Assessment, 40 – 45 
 AYP (adequate yearly progress), 
19, 44, 63, 64, 66 
Baccalauréat credential, 95 – 96, 109 
 Bachelet, Michelle, 99, 102, 103 
 Baldrige model, 61 – 62 
 Banks, James A., 135 – 36 
 Berliner, David, 136 – 37 
Beyond the Big House (Ladson-
Billings), 151 
 Biddle, Bruce, 136 
 Bilingual Education Act, 10, 121 
 Biographical sketches, 135 – 59 
 Bloom, Benjamin, 59, 137 – 38 
 Bloom’s Taxonomy, 137 
 Boston Public Schools, 150 
 Brain-based education, 37 – 39 
Brown v. Board of Education (1954), 
5 – 6, 119, 161 – 67 
Brown v. Board of Education II
(1955), 6, 119, 167 – 71 
 Bruner, Jerome, 138 – 39, 146 
 Bush, George Herbert Walker, 15, 
124 – 25, 126 – 27, 189 
 Bush, George W., 131, 133.  See also
No Child Left Behind Act 
 Business models applied to 
school reform, 60 – 62 
 Caring, 153 – 54 
 Carnegie Forum on Education 
and the Economy, 145 
 Centralization of education.  See
Decentralization/centralization
of education; Governance of 
education
 Change capacity of teachers and 
school leaders, 110 – 11 
 Charter schools, 49 – 50, 52 – 53 
 Chen, Aibe, 92 – 93 
 Chile, 99 – 103; access to 
education, 109; accountability 
for student learning, 
107; capacity of teachers 
and school leaders to 
change, 110; compulsory 
Index

294 Index
education, 102; curriculum, 
102; decentralization 
of education, 100, 103, 
106; demographics, 103; 
educational equity, 105; “Full 
Day School” reform, 101 – 2; 
governance of education, 106; 
“modernization” of education, 
100, 106; private schools, 
102; teacher preparation and 
development, 109; teachers, 
100, 101, 102; voucher system, 
100 – 101, 102, 103, 109 
 China, 90 – 93; access to 
education, 108; accountability 
for student learning, 108; 
compulsory education, 90 – 91; 
creativity and innovation, 
92 – 93; curriculum, 91 – 92; 
decentralization of education, 
90 – 92, 106 – 7; demographics, 
90; educational equity, 105; 
funding of education, 90 – 91; 
governance of education, 
106 – 7; instruction, 92; learning 
environment quality, 108; 
teacher preparation and 
development, 92, 109 
 Chronology, 119 – 34 
 Civil Rights Act (1964), 8 – 9, 11, 
120
 Clinton, Bill, 128, 129, 130.  See also
Goals 2000: Educate America Act 
 Coalition of Essential Schools, 
152, 157 
 Coleman Report, 10 – 11, 121 
 Comer, James P., 54 – 55, 139 
 Commission on the Skills of the 
American Workforce, 158 
 Comprehensive school reform, 
54 – 60 
 Content, in differentiated 
instruction, 39 
 Core Knowledge Foundation, 
148 – 49 
 Cultural literacy, 148 – 49 
 Curriculum: Chile, 102; China, 
91 – 92; Finland, 87; France, 
94, 95; globalization and, 112; 
integrated, 34 – 36; mathematics, 
13; South Africa, 80, 82 – 83 
 Curriculum and teaching models, 
32 – 40 
 “Dangerous Consequences of 
High-Stakes Standardized 
Testing, The,” 196 – 99 
 Darling-Hammond, Linda, 140 – 41 
Death at an Early Age (Kozol), 150 
 Decentralization/centralization 
of education: Chile, 100, 103, 
106; China, 90 – 92, 106 – 7; 
Finland, 106; France, 94, 96, 97 
 Delpit, Lisa, 141 – 42 
 Deming, W. Edwards, 61 
 “Democracy at Risk” (Darling-
Hammond, Wood, and Glenn), 
66 – 67, 133 – 34 
 Dewey, John, 55 – 56 
 Differentiated instruction, 39 – 40 
 Direct Instruction (DI), 32 – 34 
 Diversity, 20 – 21, 97 – 98, 99 
Dreamkeepers, The (Ladson-
Billings), 151 
 Ebonics, 141 – 42 
 Economies, 75, 85, 89, 94 
 Edison Project, 142 – 43 
 Educational equity, 7 – 12, 18 – 20, 
104 – 6 
 Education of All Handicapped 
Children Act, 11 – 12, 122 – 23 
 Education Trust, 22 
 Effective Schools movement, 55, 
58 – 59, 184 – 88 
 Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act (ESEA), 10, 105, 
120 – 21.  See also No Child Left 
Behind Act 
 English language learners, 21 

Index 295
 “Equality in Educational 
Opportunity” (Coleman), 
10 – 11, 121 
 Equity, 7 – 12, 18 – 20, 104 – 6 
 ESEA.  See Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act 
 “Evaluating Comprehensive 
School Reform Models at 
Scale,” 132 
 Experimental Schools Program 
(ESP), 121 
 FairTest, 44 – 45, 196 – 99 
 Finland, 85 – 90; accountability 
for student learning, 107 – 8; 
capacity of teachers and school 
leaders to change, 110; class 
and school size, 88; compulsory 
education, 86, 87; curriculum, 
87; decentralization of 
education, 106; economy, 85, 
89; educational equity, 105 – 6; 
governance of education, 
89, 106; language study, 88; 
learning environment quality, 
108; primary education, 
86; secondary education, 
86 – 87; special learning 
needs education, 88; teacher 
preparation and development, 
109; teachers, 88 – 89; time spent 
in school by students, 87 
 Finn, Chester, 142 – 43 
 Forum for Education and 
Democracy, 66 – 67, 133 – 34 
 Fourteenth Amendment, 6, 
161 – 62, 163 – 64, 166 
 France, 94 – 99; access to 
education, 109; accountability 
for student learning, 107 – 8; 
assessment of students, 95 – 96; 
baccalauréat credential, 95 – 96, 
109; compulsory education, 
95; cultural diversity, 97 – 98, 
99; curriculum, 94, 95; 
decentralization/centralization 
of education, 94, 96, 97; economy, 
94; education priority zones, 97; 
equality principle, 94, 97 – 98, 99, 
105; governance of education, 
106; learning environment 
quality, 108; Ministry of 
Education, 94, 96, 97, 106; 
Muslims, 98; private schools, 96; 
regional languages, 98; school 
improvement efforts, 97; school 
week, 95; semiprivate schools, 
96; student achievement, 
98 – 99; teacher preparation and 
development, 109 
 Franklin, Benjamin, 2 – 3, 4 
 Freire, Paolo, 143 
 Fullan, Michael, 143 – 44 
 Funding, 22 – 23, 65, 90 – 91 
 Futrell, Mary Hatwood, 144 – 45 
 Gardner, Howard, 36, 37, 145 – 46 
 Gardner School (Vancouver, WA), 
37
Global Education Digest, 78 
 Globalization, 75, 111 – 13 
 Goals 2000: Educate America Act, 
17 – 18, 128 – 29, 190 – 94 
 Goodlad, John, 146 – 47 
 Goodman, Ken, 147 – 48 
 Governance of education, 106 – 7. 
See also Decentralization/
centralization of education 
Green v. County School Board of 
New Kent County (1968), 8 
 Head Start, 9, 120 
 Highly qualified teachers, 23, 
63 – 64 
 Hirsch, E. D., Jr., 148 – 49 
 Home schooling, 53 – 54 
 Houston Independent School 
District, 154 
How Schools Shortchange Girls
(Sadker and Sadker), 127 

296 Index
 Human Rights Watch, 83 
 Hunter, Madeline Cheek, 149 
 IDEA (Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act), 12, 
126, 130, 131 
 IEA.  See International Association 
for the Evaluation of 
Educational Achievement 
 Individual Education Plan (IEP), 
122 – 23 
 Individuals with Disabilities 
Education Act (IDEA), 12, 126, 
130, 131 
 Instruction: China, 92; 
differentiated, 39 – 40; direct, 
32 – 34 
 Integrated curriculum, 34 – 36 
 International Association for 
the Evaluation of Educational 
Achievement (IEA), 75 – 76, 
78, 120. See also Progress in 
International Reading Literacy 
Study; Trends in International 
Mathematics and Science Study 
 Jacob Javits Gifted and Talented 
Students Education Act (1988), 
10, 124 
 Jefferson, Thomas, 2 – 3, 4 
 Jensen, Eric, 37 – 38 
 Johnson, Lyndon, 9 
Keyes v. Denver School District No. 1
 (1973), 8 
 Key Learning Community 
(Indianapolis, IN), 36 – 37 
Knowledge Deficit, The  (Hirsch), 149 
 Kozol, Jonathan, 24, 131 – 32, 150 
 Kunkel, Christine, 36, 37 
 Ladson-Billings, Gloria, 150 – 51 
 Lam, Willy, 93 
 Learning environment, 40, 57, 108 
 Learning Society, 179 – 81 
 Learning to Lead Change course, 
144
 Least restrictive environment, 12, 
122
 Lezotte, Larry, 184 
 Limited English proficient 
students, 21 
 Linwood Elementary School 
(OK), 35 
 Little Rock, AR, 8 
 Magnet schools, 47 – 48, 53 
 Mann, Horace, 3 
Manufactured Crisis, The (Berliner 
and Biddle), 136 
 Mathematics curriculum, 13 
McLaurin v. Oklahoma State 
Regents, 164, 165 
 Meier, Deborah, 151 – 52 
 Milwaukee, WI, 51 
 Multiple intelligences, 36 – 37, 145, 
146
 Muslims, French, 98 
 NAACP.  See National Association 
for the Advancement of 
Colored People 
 National Assessment of 
Educational Progress (NAEP), 
23 – 24, 205 – 8 
 National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored 
People (NAACP), 5, 6, 8. See 
also Brown v. Board of Education
 National Board for Professional 
Teaching Standards, 158 
 National Center for Fair and 
Open Testing, 44 – 45, 196 – 99 
 National Center on Education 
and the Economy (NCEE), 
157 – 58 
 National Commission on 
Excellence in Education, 13, 
14, 15, 123. See also “Nation at 
Risk, A” 

Index 297
 National Council for Social 
Studies, 136 
 National Council on Education 
Standards and Testing 
(NCEST), 17, 127 
 National Defense Education 
Act (NDEA), 7, 12 – 13, 120, 
171 – 72 
 National Educational Summit on 
High Schools, 131 
 National Education Association 
(NEA), 65, 144, 145 
 National Education Goals: first 
set, 15 – 16, 124 – 25, 189; second 
set, 190 – 94; third set, 194 
 National Education Goals Panel, 
15 – 16, 125, 126, 127 – 28 
 “National Education Goals 
Report, The,” 126 
 National Education Summit, 124, 
129, 130 
 National Governors’ Association, 
15, 123 – 24 
 National Institute of Education, 
121 – 22 
 “Nation at Risk, A,” 13 – 15, 123, 
172 – 83 
 “Nation Prepared, A” (Tucker), 
158
 NCEE (National Center on 
Education and the Economy), 
157 – 58 
 NCLB.  See No Child Left Behind 
Act
 NDEA.  See National Defense 
Education Act 
 NDEA (National Defense 
Education Act), 7, 12 – 13, 120, 
171 – 72 
 New Century High Schools 
Initiative (New York City), 
46 – 47 
 New Standards Project (NSP), 
16 – 17, 126, 156, 158 
 Nieto, Sonia, 152 – 53 
 No Child Left Behind Act 
(NCLB): accountability for 
student learning, 19, 63, 
64, 107; components, 131; 
criticisms of, 19 – 20; funding, 
22, 65; goals in, 18 – 19, 194; 
highly qualified teachers, 23, 
63 – 64; magnet schools, 47; 
proposed regulation changes, 
133; reauthorization, 132 – 33; 
scope, 10; standardized tests, 
43, 44 – 45; standards-based 
education, 63 – 66; student 
achievement, 133; teachers and, 
110 – 11; Title I text, 194 – 96 
 Noddings, Nel, 153 – 54 
 North Carolina A+ Schools, 35 
 NSP (New Standards Project), 
16 – 17, 126, 156, 158 
 OBE (Outcome-Based Education), 
59 – 60, 81 – 82, 110 
 Observations of students, 41 – 42 
 OECD.  See Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and 
Development
 Oklahoma A+ Schools, 35 
 Opportunity to learn standards, 
129
 Organization for Economic  
Co-operation and Development 
(OECD), 77 – 78.  See also
Programme for International 
Student Assessment 
Other People’s Children (Delpit), 141 
 Outcome-Based Education (OBE), 
59 – 60, 81 – 82, 110 
 Paige, Rod, 154 
Parents Involved in Community 
Schools v. Seattle School District 
No. 1 et al. (2007), 25 
 Performance-based assessments, 
42, 43 
Phonics Phacts (Goodman), 148 

298 Index
 Pilot Twelve-Country Study, 
75 – 76, 120 
 Pinochet, Augusto, 99 – 100, 106 
 PIRLS (Progress in International 
Reading Literacy Study), 
76 – 77, 78, 85, 99, 202 – 3 
 PISA (Programme for International 
Student Assessment), 77 – 78, 
98 – 99, 203 – 5 
 PL 85-864.  See National Defense 
Education Act 
 PL 88-352.  See Civil Rights Act 
 PL 89-10.  See Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act 
 PL 94-142.  See Education of All 
Handicapped Children Act 
 PL 103-227.  See Goals 2000: 
Educate America Act 
 PL 105-17.  See Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act 
 PL 107-110.  See No Child Left 
Behind Act 
 PL 108-446.  See Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act 
Place Called School, A (Goodlad), 147 
 PLEs (powerful learning 
environments), 57 
Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), 5, 6, 119, 
162, 164, 166 
 Portfolios, 42 – 43 
 Poverty, 21, 24 
 Powerful learning environments 
(PLEs), 57 
Power of Their Ideas, The  (Meier), 152 
 Principles of Learning, 156 
 Process, in differentiated 
instruction, 39 
 Product, in differentiated 
instruction, 39 – 40 
 Programme for International 
Student Assessment (PISA), 
77 – 78, 98 – 99, 203 – 5 
 Progress in International Reading 
Literacy Study (PIRLS), 76 – 77, 
78, 85, 99, 202 – 3 
 Project Head Start, 120 
 Project Zero, 146 
 “Promises to Keep,” 16, 127 – 28 
 Quality, 12 – 20 
 “Quality Counts,” 22, 23 
 Quizzes, 41 
 Racial equality, 24 – 25, 31. See also 
Brown v. Board of Education
 Ravitch, Diane, 155 
Real Ebonics Debate, The (Delpit 
and Perry, eds.), 141 – 42 
 Resnick, Lauren B., 16, 155 – 56 
 Saltman, Kenneth J., 52 – 53 
Savage Inequalities (Kozol), 150 
 Sax, Leonard, 48 – 49 
 SCANS (Secretary’s Commission 
on Achieving Necessary Skills), 
125 – 26, 127 
 Scholarships, 51 – 53 
 School choice, 51 – 53 
 School Development Program 
(SDP), 55 – 56, 139 
 Scientific management, 3 
 SDP (School Development 
Program), 139 
 Secretary’s Commission on 
Achieving Necessary Skills 
(SCANS), 125 – 26, 127 
 “Separate but equal” doctrine, 5, 
6, 119, 162 – 63, 164, 166 
 Sexual violence in South African 
schools, 83 
Shame of the Nation, The (Kozol), 
131 – 32 
 Single-sex education, 48 – 49 
 Sizer, Theodore, 157 
Skin That We Speak, The (Delpit 
and Dowdy, eds.), 142 
 Small schools, 46 – 47 
 South Africa, 79 – 85; access to 
education, 108 – 9; accountability 
for student learning, 108; 
apartheid, 79 – 80, 109; capacity 
of teachers and school leaders 

Index 299
to change, 110; curriculum, 
80, 82 – 83; demographics, 
84 – 85; educational equity, 105; 
governance of education, 106; 
HIV/AIDS, 83, 84; Ministry of 
Education, 81, 82 – 83; National 
Qualifications Framework, 
81; “no-fee” schools, 84; 
outcome-based education, 
81 – 82, 110; Reconstruction and 
Development Programme, 
80 – 81; sexual violence in schools, 
83; student achievement, 
85; teacher preparation and 
development, 109 
 Spady, William, 59, 60, 81 – 82, 83 
 Spellings, Margaret, 133, 134 
 Spring, Joel, 111 – 12 
 Sputnik I, 6, 12, 13, 119, 120 
 Standardized tests, 43 – 45, 196 – 99 
 Standards-based education, 62 – 66 
 Student achievement: France, 
98 – 99; international 
comparisons, 75 – 78; South 
Africa, 85; United States, 23 – 24 
 Success for All program, 33 
Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenberg 
Board of Education (1971), 8 
Sweatt v. Painter, 164, 165 
 Systems-thinking approach to 
school reform, 54 
Taxonomy of Educational Objectives
(Bloom), 137 
 Taylor, Frederick W., 3 
 Teachers: capacity for 
change, 110 – 11; Chile, 100, 
101, 102; Finland, 88 – 89; 
highly qualified, 23, 63 – 64; 
preparation and development, 
92, 109 – 10 
 Technology advances, 75 
 Tests, 41, 43 – 45, 196 – 99 
 Themed schools, 47 – 48, 53 
 Theme study, 34 – 36 
 Thernstrom, Abigail, 52 
 Thernstrom, Stephan, 52 
 Title IX, 11, 122 
 Total Quality Management 
(TQM), 61 
 Total Quality Schools, 61 
 Total Quality Schools Process 
(TQSP), 61 
 Trends in International 
Mathematics and Science Study 
(TIMSS), 76, 78, 199 – 200; Chile, 
103; South Africa, 85; United 
States, 2 
Troublemaker (Finn), 142 
 Tucker, Marc, 16, 157 – 58 
 Tuition tax credits, 51, 52 – 53 
Understanding by Design 
Handbook, The (Wiggins and 
McTighe), 159 
Understanding by Design (Wiggins 
and McTighe), 159 
 United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO), 78 
 United States Supreme Court, 8, 
132. See also specific cases
 Vouchers: Chile, 100 – 101, 102, 103, 
109; United States, 51, 52 – 53 
 WEEA (Women’s Educational 
Equality Act), 11, 122 
What’s Whole in Whole Language
(Goodman), 148 
 “What Work Requires of 
Schools,” 127 
When School Reform Goes Wrong
(Noddings), 153 – 54 
 Whole language, 147 – 48 
 Wiggins, Grant, 158 – 59 
 Women’s Educational Equality 
Act (WEEA), 11, 122 
 World Bank, 101 
 Yale School Development 
Program, 55 – 56, 139 

