
The New
Drawing on the
Right Side of
the Brain

Also by the author:
Drawing on the Artist Within

The New
Drawing on the
Right Side of
the Brain
Betty Edwards
Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam
a member of
Penguin Putnam Inc.
New York

Most Tarcher/Putnam books are available at special quantity discounts for bulk
purchase for sales promotions, premiums, fund-raising, and educational needs.
Special books or book excerpts also can be created to fit specific needs. For details,
write Putnam Special Markets, 375 Hudson Street, New York, NY 10014.
Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam
a member of
Penguin Putnam Inc.
375 Hudson Street
New York, NY 10014
www.penguinputnam.com
Copyright © 1979,1989,1999 by Betty Edwards
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form
without permission.
Published simultaneously in Canada
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Edwards, Betty.
The new drawing on the right side of the brain / Betty Edwards.—
Rev. and expanded ed.
p. cm.
Rev. and expanded ed. of: Drawing on the right side of the brain.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-87477-419-5 (hardcover). — ISBN 0-87477-424-1 (pbk.)
1. Drawing—Technique. 2. Visual perception. 3. Cerebral dominance.
I. Edwards, Betty. Drawing on the right side of the brain. II. Title. III. Title:
Drawing on the right side of the brain.
NC.730.E34 1999 
99-35809 CIP
741.2—dc2i
Cover drawing: Betty Edwards
Instructional drawings: Betty Edwards and Brian Bomeisler
Design:Joe Molloy
Typeset in Monotype Janson by Mondo Typo, Inc.
Printed in the United States of America
40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33
This book is printed on acid-free paper. ®

To the memory of my father,
who sharpened my drawing pencils
with his pocketknife
when I was a child

Contents
Preface
Introduction
1. Drawing and the Art of Bicycle Riding
2: The Drawing Exercises: One Step at a Time
3. Your Brain: The Right and Left of It
4. Crossing Over: Experiencing the Shift from Left to Right
5. Drawing on Memories: Your History as an Artist
6. Getting Around Your Symbol System: Meeting Edges and Contours
7. Perceiving the Shape of a Space: The Positive Aspects of Negative Space
X
XVII
I
II
27
49
67
87
115

8. Relationships in a New Mode: Putting Sighting in Perspective
9. Facing Forward: Portrait Drawing with Ease
10. The Value of Logical Lights and Shadows
11. Drawing on the Beauty of Color
12. The Zen of Drawing: Drawing Out the Artist Within
Afterword: Is Beautiful Handwriting a Lost Art?
Postscript
Glossary
Bibliography
137
161
193
229
247
253
267
275
279 
.
Index
283

Preface
Twenty years have passed since the first publication of Drawing on
the Right Side of the Brain in July 1979. Ten years ago, in 1989,
I revised the book and published a second edition, bringing it up
to date with what I had learned during that decade. Now, in 1999,
I am revising the book one more time. This latest revision repre-
sents a culmination of my lifelong engrossment in drawing as a
quintessentially human activity.
How I came to write this book
Over the years, many people have asked me how I came to write
this book. As often happens, it was the result of numerous chance
events and seemingly random choices. First, my training and
background were in fine arts—drawing and painting, not in art
education. This point is important, I think, because I came to
teaching with a different set of expectations.
After a modest try at living the artist's life, I began giving pri-
vate lessons in painting and drawing in my studio to help pay the
bills. Then, needing a steadier source of income, I returned to
UCLA to earn a teaching credential. On completion, I began
teaching at Venice High School in Los Angeles. It was a mar-
velous job. We had a small art department of five teachers and
lively, bright, challenging, and difficult students. Art was their
favorite subject, it seemed, and our students often swept up many
awards in the then-popular citywide art contests.
At Venice High, we tried to reach students in their first year,
quickly teach them to draw well, and then train them up, almost
like athletes, for the art competitions during their junior and
senior years. (I now have serious reservations about student con-
X 
PREFACE

tests, but at the time they provided great motivation and, perhaps
because there were so many winners, apparently caused little
harm.)
Those five years at Venice High started my puzzlement about
drawing. As the newest teacher of the group, I was assigned the
job of bringing the students up to speed in drawing. Unlike many
art educators who believe that ability to draw well is dependent
on inborn talent, I expected that all of the students would learn to
draw. I was astonished by how difficult they found drawing, no
matter how hard I tried to teach them and they tried to learn.
I would often ask myself, "Why is it that these students, who
I know are learning other skills, have so much trouble learning to
draw something that is right in front of their eyes?" I would some-
times quiz them, asking a student who was having difficulty draw-
ing a still-life setup, "Can you see in the still-life here on the table
that the orange is in front of the vase?" "Yes," replied the student,
"I see that." "Well," I said, "in your drawing, you have the orange
and the vase occupying the same space." The student answered,
"Yes, I know. I didn't know how to draw that." "Well," I would say
carefully, "you look at the still-life and you draw it as you see it."
"I was looking at it," the student replied. "I just didn't know how
to draw that." "Well," I would say, voice rising, "you just look at
it..." The response would come, "I am looking at it," and so on.
Another puzzlement was that students often seemed to "get"
how to draw suddenly rather than acquiring skills gradually.
Again, I questioned them: "How come you can draw this week
when you couldn't draw last week?" Often the reply would be, "I
don't know. I'm just seeing things differently." "In what way differ-
ently?" I would ask. "I can't say—just differently." I would pursue
the point, urging students to put it into words, without success.
Usually students ended by saying, "I just can't describe it."
In frustration, I began to observe myself: What was I doing
when I was drawing? Some things quickly showed up—that I
couldn't talk and draw at the same time, for example, and that
I lost track of time while drawing. My puzzlement continued.
XI
PREFACE

One day, on impulse, I asked the students to copy a Picasso
drawing upside down. That small experiment, more than any-
thing else I had tried, showed that something very different is
going on during the act of drawing. To my surprise, and to the
students' surprise, the finished drawings were so extremely well
done that I asked the class, "How come you can draw upside
down when you can't draw right-side up?" The students
responded, "Upside down, we didn't know what we were draw-
ing." This was the greatest puzzlement of all and left me simply
baffled.
During the following year, 1968, first reports of psychobiolo-
gist Roger W. Sperry's research on human brain-hemisphere
functions, for which he later received a Nobel Prize, appeared in
the press. Reading Sperry's work caused in me something of an
Ah-ha! experience. His stunning finding, that the human brain
uses two fundamentally different modes of thinking, one verbal,
analytic, and sequential and one visual, perceptual, and simulta-
neous, seemed to cast light on my questions about drawing. The
idea that one is shifting to a different-from-usual way of think-
ing/seeing fitted my own experience of drawing and illuminated
my observation of my students.
Avidly, I read everything I could find about Sperry's work and
did my best to explain to my students its possible relationship to
drawing. They too became interested in the problems of drawing
and soon they were achieving great advances in their drawing
skills.
I was working on my master's degree in Art at the time and
realized that if I wanted to seriously search for an educational
application of Sperry's work in the field of drawing, I would need
further study. Even though by that time I was teaching full time at
Los Angeles Trade Technical College, I decided to return yet
again to UCLA for a doctoral degree. For the following three
years, I attended evening classes that combined the fields of art,
psychology, and education. The subject of my doctoral disserta-
tion was "Perceptual Skills in Drawing," using upside-down
drawing as an experimental variable. After receiving my doctoral
degree in 1976, I began teaching drawing in the art department ot
XII
PREFACE

California State University, Long Beach. I needed a drawing text-
hook that included Sperry's research. During the next three years
I wrote Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain.
Since the book was first published in 1979, the ideas I expres-
sed about learning to draw have become surprisingly widespread,
much to my amazement and delight. I feel honored by the many
foreign language translations of Drawing on the Right Side of the
Brain. Even more surprising, individuals and groups working in
fields not remotely connected with drawing have found ways to
use the ideas in my book. A few examples will indicate the diver-
sity: nursing schools, drama workshops, corporate training semi-
nars, sports-coaching schools, real-estate marketing associations,
psychologists, counselors of delinquent youths, writers, hair styl-
ists, even a school for training private investigators. College and
university art teachers across the nation also have incorporated
many of the techniques into their teaching repertoires.
Public-school teachers are also using my book. After twenty-
five years of budget cuts in schools' arts programs, I am happy to
report that state departments of education and public school
boards of education are starting to turn to the arts as one way to
help repair our failing educational systems. Educational adminis-
trators, however, tend to be ambivalent about the purpose of
including the arts, often still relegating arts education to "enrich-
ment." This term's hidden meaning is "valuable but not essential."
My view, in contrast, is that the arts are essential for training
specific, visual, perceptual ways of thinking, just as the "3 R's" are
essential for training specific, verbal, numerical, analytical ways
of thinking. I believe that both thinking modes—one to compre-
hend the details and the other to "see" the whole picture, for
example, are vital for critical-thinking skills, extrapolation of
meaning, and problem solving.
To help public-school administrators see the utility of arts
education, I believe we must find new ways to teach students how
to transfer skills learned through the arts to academic subjects
and problem solving. Transfer of learning is traditionally
regarded as a most difficult kind of instruction and, unfortunately,
transfer is often left to chance. Teachers hope that students will
3. WORKINC DRAWING FROM
WHICH THE ORIGINAL
PHONOCRAPH WAS BUILT
In the history of inventions, many
creative ideas began with small
sketches. The examples above are
by Galileo, Jefferson, Faraday, and
Edison.
Henning Nelms, Thinking With a
Pencil, New York: Ten Speed Press,
1981, p. xiv.
XIII
SUGGESTED DESIGN
FOR U.S. CAPITOL
PREFACE

"Analog" drawings are purely
expressive drawings, with no nam-
able objects depicted, using only the
expressive quality of line—or lines.
Unexpectedly, persons untrained in
art are able to use this language—
that is, produce expressive draw-
ings—and are also able to read the
drawings for meaning. The drawing
lessons of the seminar's first seg-
ment are used mainly to increase
artistic self-confidence and confi-
dence in the efficacy of analog
drawing.
"get" the connection, say, between learning to draw and "seeing"
solutions to problems, or between learning English grammar and
logical, sequential thinking.
Corporate training seminars
My work with various corporations represents, I believe, one
aspect of transfer of learning, in this instance, from drawing skills
to a specific kind of problem solving sought by corporate execu-
tives. Depending on how much corporate time is available, a
typical seminar takes three days: a day and a half focused on
developing drawing skills and the remaining time devoted to
using drawing for problem solving.
Groups vary in size but most often number about twenty-five.
Problems can be very specific ("What is_________________?"—
a specific chemical problem that had troubled a particular com-
pany for several years) or very general ("What is our relationship
with our customers?") or something in between specific and gen-
eral ("How can members of our special unit work together more
productively?").
The first day and a half of drawing exercises includes the
lessons in this book through the drawing of the hand. The two-
fold objective of the drawing lessons is to present the five percep-
tual strategies emphasized in the book and to demonstrate each
participant's potential artistic capabilities, given effective instruc-
tion.
The problem-solving segment begins with exercises in using
drawing to think with. These exercises, called analog drawings,
are described in my book Drawing on the Artist Within. Participants
use the so-called "language of line," first to draw out the problem
and then to make visible possible solutions. These expressive
drawings become the vehicle for group discussion and analysis,
guided, but not led, by me. Participants use the concepts of edges
(boundaries), negative spaces (often called "white spaces" in busi-
ness parlance), relationships (parts of the problem viewed pro-
portionally and "in perspective"), lights and shadows (extra-
polation from the known to the as-yet unknown), and the gestalt
XIV
PREFACE

of the problem (how the parts fit—or don't fit—together).
The problem-solving segment concludes with an extended
small drawing of an object, different for each participant, which
has been chosen as somehow related to the problem at hand. This
drawing, combining perceptual skills with problem solving,
evokes an extended shift to an alternate mode of thinking which I
have termed "R-mode," during which the participant focuses on
the problem under discussion while also concentrating on the
drawing. The group then explores insights derived from this
process.
The results of the seminars have been sometimes startling,
sometimes almost amusing in terms of the obviousness of engen-
dered solutions. An example of a startling result was a surprising
revelation experienced by the group working on the chemical
problem. It turned out that the group had so enjoyed their special
status and favored position and they were so intrigued by the fas-
cinating problem that they were in no hurry to solve it. Also, solv-
ing the problem would mean breaking up the group and
returning to more humdrum work. All of this showed up clearly
in their drawings. The curious thing was that the group leader
exclaimed, "I thought that might be what was going on, but I just
didn't believe it!" The solution? The group realized that they
needed—and welcomed—a serious deadline and assurance that
other, equally interesting problems awaited them.
Another surprising result came in response to the question
about customer relations. Participants' drawings in that seminar
were consistently complex and detailed. Nearly every drawing
represented customers as small objects floating in large empty
spaces. Areas of great complexity excluded these small objects.
The ensuing discussion clarified the group's (unconscious) indif-
ference toward and inattention to customers. That raised other
questions: What was in all of that empty negative space, and how
could the complex areas (identified in discussion as aspects of the
work that were more interesting to the group) make connection
with customer concerns? This group planned to explore the
problem further.
x v
PREFACE

Krishnamurti: "So where does
silence begin? Does it begin when
thought ends? Have you ever tried
to end thought?"
Questioner: "How do you do it?"
Krishnamurti: "I don't know, but
have you ever tried it? First of all,
who is the entity who is trying to
stop thought?"
Questioner: "The thinker."
Krishnamurti: "It's another thought,
isn't it? Thought is trying to stop
itself, so there is a battle between
the thinker and the thought....
Thought says, 'I must stop thinking
because then I shall experience a
marvelous state.'... One thought is
trying to suppress another thought,
so there is conflict. When I see this
as a fact, see it totally, understand
it completely, have an insight into
it... then the mind is quiet. This
comes about naturally and easily
when the mind is quiet to watch, to
look, to see."
—J. Krishnamurti
You Are the World, 1972
The group seeking more productive ways of working
together came to a conclusion that was so obvious the group
actually laughed about it. Their conclusion was that they
needed to improve communication within the group. Members
were nearly all scientists holding advanced degrees in chem-
istry and physics. Apparently, each person had a specific
assignment for one part of the whole task, but they worked in
different buildings with different groups of associates and on
individual time schedules. For more than twenty-five years
they had never met together as a group until we held our
three-day seminar.
I hope these examples give-at least some flavor of the cor-
porate seminars. Participants, of course, are highly educated,
successful professionals. Working as I do with a different way of
thinking, the seminars seem to enable these highly trained
people to see things differently. Because the participants them-
selves generate the drawings, they provide real evidence to
refer to. Thus, insights are hard to dismiss and the discussions
stay very focused.
I can only speculate why this process works effectively to
get at information that is often hidden or ignored or "explained
away" by the language mode of thinking. I think it's possible
that the language system (L-mode, in my terminology) regards
drawing—especially analog drawing—as unimportant, even as
just a form of doodling. Perhaps, L-mode drops out of the task,
putting its censoring function on hold. Apparently, what the
person knows but doesn't know at a verbal, conscious level
therefore comes pouring out in the drawings. Traditional exec-
utives, of course, may regard this information as "soft," but
I suspect that these unspoken reactions do have some effect on
the ultimate success and failure of corporations. Broadly
speaking, a glimpse of underlying affective dynamics probably
helps more than it hinders.
XVI
PREFACE

Introduction
The subject of how people learn to draw has never lost its charm
and fascination for me. Just when I begin to think I have a grasp
on the subject, a whole new vista or puzzlement opens up. This
book, therefore, is a work in progress, documenting my under-
standing at this time.
Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain, I believe, was one of the
first practical educational applications of Roger Sperry's pioneer-
ing insight into the dual nature of human thinking—verbal, ana-
lytic thinking mainly located in the left hemisphere, and visual,
perceptual thinking mainly located in the right hemisphere.
Since 1979, many writers in other fields have proposed applica-
tions of the research, each in turn suggesting new ways to
enhance both thinking modes, thereby increasing potential for
personal growth.
During the past ten years, my colleagues and I have polished
and expanded the techniques described in the original book. We
have changed some procedures, added some, and deleted some.
My main purpose in revising the book and presenting this third
edition is to bring the work up-to-date again for my readers.
As you will see, much of the original work is retained, having
withstood the test of time. But one important organizing princi-
ple was missing in the original text, for the curious reason that
I couldn't see it until after the book was published. I want to
reemphasize it here, because it forms the overall structure within
which the reader can see how the parts of the book fit together to
form a whole. This key principle is: Drawing is a global or
"whole" skill requiring only a limited set of basic components.
This insight came to me about six months after the book was
published, right in the middle of a sentence while teaching a
INTRODUCTION
XVII

Please note that I am referring to
the learning stage of basic realistic
drawing of a perceived image.
There are many other kinds of
drawing: abstraction, nonobjective
drawing, imaginative drawing,
mechanical drawing, and so forth.
Also, drawing can be defined in
many other ways—by mediums,
historic styles, or the artist's intent.
group of students. It was the classic Ah-ha! experience, with the
strange physical sensations of rapid heartbeat, caught breath, and
a sense of joyful excitement at seeing everything fall into place. I
had been reviewing with the students the set of skills described in
my book when it hit me that this was it, there were no more, and
that the book had a hidden content of which I had been unaware.
I checked the insight with my colleagues and drawing experts.
They agreed.
Like other global skills—for example, reading, driving, skiing,
and walking—drawing is made up of component skills that
become integrated into a whole skill. Once you have learned the
components and have integrated them, you can draw—just as
once you have learned to read, you know how to read for life;
once you have learned to walk, you know how to walk for life. You
don't have to go on forever adding additional basic skills. Progress
takes the form of practice, refinement of technique, and learning
what to use the skills for.
This was an exciting discovery because it meant that a person
can learn to draw within a reasonably short time. And, in fact, my
colleagues and I now teach a five-day seminar, fondly known as
our "Killer Class," which enables students to acquire the basic
component skills of realistic drawing in five days of intense learn-
ing.
Five basic skills of drawing
The global skill of drawing a perceived object, person, landscape
(something that you see "out there") requires only five basic com-
ponent skills, no more. These skills are not drawing skills. They
are perceptual skills, listed as follows:
One: 
the perception of edges
Two: 
the perception of spaces
Three: the perception of relationships
Four: the perception of lights and shadows
Five: 
the perception of the whole, or gestalt
XVIII
INTRODUCTION

I am aware, of course, that additional basic skills are required
for imaginative, expressive drawing leading to "Art with a capital
A." Of these, I have found two and only two additional skills:
drawing from memory and drawing from imagination. And there
remain, naturally, many techniques of drawing—many ways of
manipulating drawing mediums and endless subject matter, for
example. But, to repeat, for skillful realistic drawing of one's per-
ceptions, using pencil on paper, the five skills I will teach you in
this book provide the required perceptual training.
Those five basic skills are the prerequisites for effective use of
the two additional "advanced" skills, and the set of seven may
constitute the entire basic global skill of drawing. Many books on
drawing actually focus mainly on the two advanced skills. There-
fore, after you complete the lessons in this book, you will find
ample instruction available to continue learning.
I need to emphasize a further point: Global or whole skills,
such as reading, driving, and drawing, in time become automatic.
As I mentioned above, basic component skills become completely
integrated into the smooth flow of the global skill. But in acquir-
ing any new global skill, the initial learning is often a struggle,
first with each component skill, then with the smooth integration
of components. Each of my students goes through this process,
and so will you. As each new skill is learned, you will merge it
with those previously learned until, one day, you are simply
drawing—just as, one day, you found yourself simply driving
without thinking about how to do it. Later, one almost forgets
about having learned to read, learned to drive, learned to draw.
In order to attain this smooth integration in drawing, all five
component skills must be in place. I'm happy to say that the fifth
skill, the perception of the whole, or gestalt, is neither taught nor
learned but instead seems to emerge as a result of acquiring the
other four skills. But of the first four, none can be omitted, just as •
learning how to brake or steer cannot be omitted when learning
to drive.
In the original book, I believe I explained sufficiently well the
first two skills, the perception of edges and the perception of
spaces. The importance of sighting (the third skill of perceiving
The global skill of drawing
INTRODUCTION
XIX

"You have two brains: a left and a
right. Modern brain scientists now
know that your left brain is your
verbal and rational brain; it thinks
serially and reduces its thoughts to
numbers, letters, and words....
Your right brain is your non-verbal
and intuitive brain; it thinks in pat-
terns, or pictures, composed of
'whole things,' and does not com-
prehend reductions, either num-
bers, letters, or words."
From The Fabric of Mind, by the
eminent scientist and neurosur-
geon Richard Bergland. New York:
Viking Penguin, Inc., 1985, p. 1.
relationships) however, needed greater emphasis and clearer
explanation, because students often tend to give up too quickly
on this complicated skill. And the fourth skill, the perception of
lights and shadows, also needed expanding. Most of the content
changes for this new edition, therefore, are in the last chapters.
A basic strategy for accessing R-mode
In this edition, I again reiterate a basic strategy for gaining access
at conscious level to R-mode, my term for the visual, perceptual
mode of the brain. I continue to believe that this strategy is prob-
ably my main contribution to educational aspects of the "right-
hemisphere story" that began with Roger Sperry's celebrated
scientific work. The strategy is stated as follows:
In order to gain access to the subdominant visual, perceptual
R-mode of the brain, it is necessary to present the brain with a job
that the verbal, analytic L-mode will turn down.
For most of us, L-mode thinking seems easy, normal, and
familiar (though perhaps not for many children and dyslexic
individuals). The perverse R-mode strategy, in contrast, may
seem difficult and unfamiliar—even "off-the-wall." It must be
learned in opposition to the "natural" tendency of the brain to
favor L-mode because, in general, language dominates. By learn-
ing to control this tendency for specific tasks, one gains access to
powerful brain functions often obscured by language.
All of the exercises in this book, therefore, are based on two
organizing principles and major aims. First, to teach the reader
five basic component skills of drawing and, second, to provide
conditions that facilitate making cognitive shifts to R-mode, the
thinking/seeing mode specialized for drawing.
In short, in the process of learning to draw, one also learns to
control (at least to some degree) the mode by which one's own
brain handles information. Perhaps this explains in part why my
book appeals to individuals from such diverse fields. Intuitively,
they see the link to other activities and the possibility of seeing
things differently by learning to access R-mode at conscious
level.
xx
INTRODUCTION

Color in drawing
Chapter Eleven, "Drawing on the Beauty of Color," was a new
chapter in the 1989 edition, written in response to many requests
from my readers. The chapter focuses on using color in draw-
ing—a fine transitional step toward painting. Over the past
decade, my teaching staff and I have developed a five-day inten-
sive course on basic color theory, a course that is still a "work in
progress." I am still using the concepts in the chapter on color, so
I have not revised it for this edition.
I believe the logical progression for a person starting out in
artistic expression should be as follows:
From Line 
to Value 
to Color 
to Painting
First, a person learns the basic skills of drawing, which pro-
vide knowledge of line (learned through contour drawing of
edges, spaces, and relationships) and knowledge of value (learned
through rendering lights and shadows). Skillful use of color
requires first of all the ability to perceive color as value. This abil-
ity is difficult, perhaps impossible, to acquire unless one has
learned to perceive the relationships of lights and shadows
through drawing. I hope that my chapter introducing color in
drawing will provide an effective bridge for those who want to
progress from drawing to painting.
Handwriting
Finally, I am retaining the brief section on handwriting. In many
cultures, writing is regarded as an art form. Americans often
deplore their handwriting but are at a loss as to how to improve it.
Handwriting, however, is a form of drawing and can be improved.
I regret to say that many California schools are still using
handwriting-instructional methods that were failing in 1989 and
are still failing today. My suggestions in this regard appear in the
Afterword.
INTRODUCTION 
XXI

An empirical basis for my theory
The underlying theory of this revised edition remains the same:
to explain in basic terms the relationship of drawing to visual,
perceptual brain processes and to provide methods of accessing
and controlling these processes. As a number of scientists have
noted, research on the human brain is complicated by the fact
that the brain is struggling to understand itself. This three-pound
organ is perhaps the only bit of matter in the universe—at least as
far as we know—that is observing itself, wondering about itself,
trying to analyze itself, and attempting to gain better control of
its own capabilities. This paradoxical situation no doubt con-
tributes—at least in part—to the deep mysteries that still remain,
despite rapidly expanding scientific knowledge about the brain.
One question scientists are studying intensely is where the
two major thinking modes are specifically located in the human
brain and how the organization of modes can vary from individ-
ual to individual. While the so-called location controversy con-
tinues to engage scientists, along with myriad other areas of brain
research, the existence in every brain of two fundamentally dif-
ferent cognitive modes is no longer controversial. Corroborating
research since Sperry's original work is overwhelming. Moreover,
even in the midst of the argument about location, most scientists
agree that for a majority of individuals, information-processing
based primarily on linear, sequential data is mainly located in the
left hemisphere, while global, perceptual data is mainly-
processed in the right hemisphere.
Clearly, for educators like myself, the precise location of
these modes in the individual brain is not an important issue.
What is important is that incoming information can be handled in
two fundamentally different ways and that the two modes can
apparently work together in a vast array of combinations. Since
the late 1970s, I have used the terms L-mode and R-mode to try to
avoid the location controversy. The terms are intended to differ-
entiate the major modes of cognition, regardless of where they
are located in the individual brain.
Over the past decade or so, a new interdisciplinary field of
XXII 
INTRODUCTION

brain-function study has become formally known as cognitive
neuroscience. In addition to the traditional discipline of neurol-
ogy, cognitive neuroscience encompasses study of other higher
cognitive processes such as language, memory, and perception.
Computer scientists, linguists, neuroimaging scientists, cognitive
psychologists, and neurobiologists are all contributing to a grow-
ing understanding of how the human brain functions.
Interest in "right brain, left brain" research has subsided
somewhat among educators and the general public since Roger
Sperry first published his research findings. Nevertheless, the fact
of the profound asymmetry of human brain functions remains,
becoming ever more central, for example, among computer sci-
entists trying to emulate human mental processes. Facial recogni-
tion, a function ascribed to the right hemisphere, has been sought
for decades and is still beyond the capabilities of most computers.
Ray Kurzweil, in his recent book The Age of Spiritual Machines
(Viking, 1999) contrasted human and computer capability in pat-
tern seeking (as in facial recognition) and sequential processing
(as in calculation):
The human brain has about 100 billion neurons. With an estimated
average of one thousand connections between each neuron and its
neighbors, we have about 100 trillion connections, each capable of a
simultaneous calculation. That's rather massive parallel processing,
and one key to the strength of human thinking. A profound weakness,
however, is the excruciatingly slow speed of neural circuitry, only 200
calculations per second. For problems that benefit from massive par-
allelism, such a neural-net-based pattern recognition, the human
brain does a great job. For problems that require extensive sequential
thinking, the human brain is only mediocre, (p. 103)
In 1979, I proposed that drawing required a cognitive shift to
R-mode, now postulated to be a massively parallel mode of pro-
cessing, and away from L-mode, postulated to be a sequential
processing mode. I had no hard evidence to support my proposal,
only my experience as an artist and a teacher. Over the years, I
have been criticized occasionally by various neuroscientists for
overstepping the boundaries of my own field—though not by
In a conversation with his friend
Andre Marchand, the French artist
Henri Matisse described the
process of passing perceptions
from one way of looking to
another:
"Do you know that a man has only
one eye which sees and registers
everything; this eye, like a superb
camera which takes minute pic-
tures, very sharp, tiny—and with
that picture man tells himself:
'This time I know the reality of
things,' and he is calm for a
moment. Then, slowly superim-
posing itself on the picture,
another eye makes its appearance,
invisibly, which makes an entirely
different picture for him.
"Then our man no longer sees
clearly, a struggle begins between
the first and second eye, the fight is
fierce, finally the second eye has
the upper hand, takes over and
that's the end of it. Now it has
command of the situation, the sec-
ond eye can then continue its work
alone and elaborate its own picture
according to the laws of interior
vision. This very special eye is
found here," says Matisse, pointing
to his brain.
Marchand didn't mention which
side of his brain Matisse pointed
to.
—J. Flam
Matisse on Art, 1973
INTRODUCTION
XXIII

A recent article in an educational
journal summarizes neuroscien-
tists' objections to "brain-based
education."
"The fundamental problem with the
right-brain versus left-brain claims
that one finds in educational litera-
ture is that they rely on our intu-
itions and folk theories about the
brain, rather than on what brain
science is actually able to tell us.
Our folk theories are too crude
and imprecise to have any scien-
tific predictive or instructional
value. What modern brain science
is telling us—and what brain-based
educators fail to appreciate—is
that it makes no scientific sense to
map gross, unanalyzed behaviors
and skills—reading, arithmetic,
spatial reasoning—onto one brain
hemisphere or another."
But the author also states:
"Whether or not [brain-based]
educational practices should be
adopted must be determined on
the basis of the impact on student
learning."
—John T. Bruer
"In Search of...
Brain-Based Education,"
Phi Delta Kappan, May
1999, p. 603
Roger Sperry, who believed that my application of his research
was reasonable.
What kept me working at my "folk" theory (see the margin
excerpt) was that, when put into practice, the results were inspir-
ing. Students of all ages made significant gains in drawing ability
and, by extension, in perceptual abilities, since drawing well
depends on seeing well. Drawing ability has always been
regarded as difficult to acquire, and has nearly always been addi-
tionally burdened by the notion that it is an extraordinary, not an
ordinary, skill. If my method of teaching enables people to gain a
skill they previously thought closed off to them, is it the neuro-
logical explanation that makes the method work, or is it some-
thing else that I may not be aware of?
I know that it is not simply my style of teaching that causes
the method to work, since the hundreds of teachers who have
reported equal success using my methods obviously have widely
differing teaching styles. Would the exercises work without the
neurological rationale? It's possible, but it would be very difficult
to persuade people to accede to such unlikely exercises as
upside-down drawing without some reasonable explanation. Is it,
then, just the fact of giving people a rationale—that any rationale
would do? Perhaps, but I have always been struck by the fact that
my explanation seems to make sense to people at a subjective
level. The theory seems to fit their experience, and certainly the
ideas derive from my own subjective experience with drawing.
In each edition of this book I have made the following state-
ment:
The theory and methods presented in my book have proven
empirically successful. In short, the method works, regardless of
the extent to which future science may eventually determine
exact location and confirm the degree of separation of brain func-
tions in the two hemispheres.
I hope that eventually scholars using traditional research
methods will help answer the many questions I have myself about
this work. It does appear that recent research tends to corroborate
my basic ideas. For example, new findings on the function of the
huge bundle of nerve fibers connecting the two hemispheres, the
INTRODUCTION
XXIV

corpus callosum, indicate that the corpus callosum can inhibit the
passage of information from hemisphere to hemisphere when the
task requires noninterference from one or the other hemisphere.
Meanwhile, the work appears to bring a great deal of joy to
my students, whether or not we fully understand the underlying
process.
A further complication
One further complication of seeing needs mentioning. The eyes
gather visual information by constantly scanning the environ-
ment. But visual data from "out there," gathered by sight, is not
the end of the story. At least part, and perhaps much of what we
see is changed, interpreted, or conceptualized in ways that
depend on a person's training, mind-set, and past experiences. We
tend to see what we expect to see or what we decide we have seen.
This expectation or decision, however, often is not a conscious
process. Instead, the brain frequently does the expecting and the
deciding, without our conscious awareness, and then alters or
rearranges—or even simply disregards—the raw data of vision
that hits the retina. Learning perception through drawing seems
to change this process and to allow a different, more direct kind of
seeing. The brain's editing is somehow put on hold, thereby per-
mitting one to see more fully and perhaps more realistically.
This experience is often moving and deeply affecting. My
students' most frequent comments after learning to draw are
"Life seems so much richer now" and "I didn't realize how much
there is to see and how beautiful things are." This new way of see-
ing may alone be reason enough to learn to draw.
"The artist is the confidant of
nature. Flowers carry on dialogues
with him through the graceful
bending of their stems and the har-
moniously tinted nuances of their
blossoms. Every flower has a cor-
dial word which nature directs
towards him."
— Auguste Rodin
INTRODUCTION
xxv

Drawing and
the Art of Bicycle
Riding

D
RAWING is A CURIOUS PROCESS, so intertwined with see-
ing that the two can hardly be separated. Ability to draw
depends on ability to see the way an artist sees, and this kind of
seeing can marvelously enrich your life.
In many ways, teaching drawing is somewhat like teaching
someone to ride a bicycle. It is very difficult to explain in words.
In teaching someone to ride a bicycle, you might say, "Well, you
just get on, push the pedals, balance yourself, and off you'll go."
Of course, that doesn't explain it at all, and you are likely
finally to say, "I'll get on and show you how. Watch and see how I
do it."
And so it is with drawing. Most art teachers and drawing text-
book authors exhort beginners to "change their ways of looking at
things" and to "learn how to see." The problem is that this differ-
ent way of seeing is as hard to explain as how to balance a bicycle,
and the teacher often ends by saying, in effect, "Look at these
examples and just keep trying. If you practice a lot, eventually
you may get it." While nearly everyone learns to ride a bicycle,
many individuals never solve the problems of drawing. To put it
more precisely, most people never learn to see well enough to
draw.
Fig. I-I. Bellowing Bison. Paleolithic
cave painting from Altamira, Spain.
Drawing by Brevil. Prehistoric
artists were probably thought to
have magic powers.
Drawing as a magical ability
Because only a few individuals seem to possess the ability to see
and draw, artists are often regarded as persons with a rare God-
given talent. To many people, the process of drawing seems mys-
terious and somehow beyond human understanding.
Artists themselves often do little to dispel the mystery. If you
ask an artist (that is, someone who draws well as a result of either
long training or chance discovery of the artist's way of seeing),
"How do you draw something so that it looks real—say a portrait
or a landscape?" the artist is likely to reply, "Well, I just have a gift
for it, I guess," or "I really don't know. I just start in and work
things out as I go along," or "Well, I just look at the person (or the
landscape) and I draw what I see." The last reply seems like a
logical and straightforward answer. Yet, on reflection, it clearly
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
2

doesn't explain the process at all, and the sense that the skill of
drawing is a vaguely magical ability persists (Figure I-I).
While this attitude of wonder at artistic skill causes people to
appreciate artists and their work, it does little to encourage indi-
viduals to try to learn to draw, and it doesn't help teachers
explain to students the process of drawing. Often, in fact, people
even feel that they shouldn't take a drawing course because they
don't know already how to draw. This is like deciding that you
shouldn't take a French class because you don't already speak
French, or that you shouldn't sign up for a course in carpentry
because you don't know how to build a house.
Drawing as a learnable, teachable skill
You will soon discover that drawing is a skill that can be learned
by every normal person with average eyesight and average eye-
hand coordination—with sufficient ability, for example, to thread
a needle or catch a baseball. Contrary to popular opinion, manual
skill is not a primary factor in drawing. If your handwriting is
readable, or if you can print legibly, you have ample dexterity to
draw well.
We need say no more here about hands, but about eyes we
cannot say enough. Learning to draw is more than learning the
skill itself; by studying this book you will learn how to see. That is,
you will learn how to process visual information in the special
way used by artists. That way is differentirom the way you usually
process visual information and seems to require that you use your
brain in a different way than you ordinarily use it.
You will be learning, therefore, something about how your
brain handles visual information. Recent research has begun to
throw new scientific light on that marvel of capability and com-
plexity, the human brain. And one of the things we are learning is
how the special properties of our brains enable us to draw pic-
tures of our perceptions.
Roger N. Shepard, professor of
psychology at Stanford University,
recently described his personal
mode of creative thought during
which research ideas emerged in
his mind as unverbalized, essen-
tially complete, long-sought solu-
tions to problems.
"That in all of these sudden illumi-
nations my ideas took shape in a
primarily visual-spatial form with-
out, so far as I can introspect, any
verbal intervention is in accor-
dance with what has always been
my preferred mode of thinking....
Many of my happiest hours have
since childhood been spent
absorbed in drawing, in tinkering,
or in exercises of purely mental
visualization."
— Roger N . Shepard
Visual Learning, Thinking,
and Communication, 1978
"Learning to draw is really a
matter of learning to see—to see
correctly—and that means a good
deal more than merely looking
with the eye."
— Kimon Nicolaides
The Natural Way to Draw,
1941
DRAWING AND THE ART OF BICYCLE RIDING
3

Gertrude Stein asked the French
artist Henri Matisse whether, when
eating a tomato, he looked at it the
way an artist would. Matisse
replied:
"No, when I eat a tomato I look at it
the way anyone else would. But
when I paint a tomato, then I see it
differently."
— Gertrude Stein
Picasso, 1938
"The painter draws with his eyes,
not with his hands. Whatever he
sees, if he sees it clear, he can put
down. The putting of it down
requires, perhaps, much care and
labor, but no more muscular agility
than it takes for him to write his
name. Seeing clear is the important
thing."
— Maurice Grosser
The Painter's Eye, 1951
"It is in order to really see, to see
ever deeper, ever more intensely,
hence to be fully aware and alive,
that I draw what the Chinese call
'The Ten Thousand Things'
around me. Drawing is the disci-
pline by which I constantly redis-
cover the world.
"I have learned that what I have not
drawn, I have never really seen,
and that when I start drawing an
ordinary thing, I realize how extra-
ordinary it is, sheer miracle."
— Frederick Franck
The Zen of Seeing, 1973
Drawing and seeing
The magical mystery of drawing ability seems to be, in part at
least, an ability to make a shift in brain state to a different mode of
seeing/perceiving. When you see in the special way in which experi-
enced artists see, then you can draw. This is not to say that the draw-
ings of great artists such as Leonardo da Vinci or Rembrandt are
not still wondrous because we may know something about the
cerebral process that went into their creation. Indeed, scientific
research makes master drawings seem even more remarkable
because they seem to cause a viewer to shift to the artist's mode of
perceiving. But the basic skill of drawing is also accessible to
everyone who can learn to make the shift to the artist's mode and
see in the artist's way.
The artist's way of seeing: A twofold process
Drawing is not really very difficult. Seeing is the problem, or, to
be more specific, shifting to a particular way of seeing. You may
not believe me at this moment. You may feel that you are seeing
things just fine and that it's the drawing that is hard. But the oppo-
site is true, and the exercises in this book are designed to help you
make the mental shift and gain a twofold advantage. First, to open
access by conscious volition to the visual, perceptual mode of think-
ing in order to experience a focus in your awareness, and second,
to see things in a different way. Both will enable you to draw well.
Many artists have spoken of seeing things differently while
drawing and have often mentioned that drawing puts them into a
somewhat altered state of awareness. In that different subjective
state, artists speak of feeling transported, "at one with the work,"
able to grasp relationships that they ordinarily cannot grasp.
Awareness of the passage of time fades away and words recede
from consciousness. Artists say that they feel alert and aware yet
are relaxed and free of anxiety, experiencing a pleasurable,
almost mystical activation of the mind.
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
4

Drawing attention to states of consciousness
The slightly altered consciousness state of feeling transported,
which most artists experience while drawing, painting, sculpting,
or doing any kind of art work, is a state probably not altogether
unfamiliar to you. You may have observed in yourself slight shifts
in your state of consciousness while engaged in much more ordi-
nary activities than artwork.
For example, most people are aware that they occasionally
slip from ordinary waking consciousness into the slightly altered
state of daydreaming. As another example, people often say that
reading takes them "out of themselves." And other kinds of activ-
ities which apparently produce a shift in consciousness state are
meditation, jogging, needlework, typing, listening to music, and,
of course, drawing itself.
Also, I believe that driving on the freeway probably induces a
slightly different subjective state that is similar to the drawing
state. After all, in freeway driving we deal with visual images,
keeping track of relational, spatial information, sensing complex
components of the overall traffic configuration. Many people find
that they do a lot of creative thinking while driving, often losing
track of time and experiencing a pleasurable sense of freedom
from anxiety. These mental operations may activate the same
parts of the brain used in drawing. Of course, if driving condi-
tions are difficult, if we are late or if someone sharing the ride
talks with us, the shift to the alternative state doesn't occur. The
reasons for this we'll take up in Chapter Three.
The key to learning to draw, therefore, is to set up conditions
that cause you to make a mental shift to a different mode of infor-
mation processing—the slightly altered state of consciousness—
that enables you to see well. In this drawing mode, you will be
able to draw your perceptions even though you may never have
studied drawing. Once the drawing mode is familiar to you, you
will be able to consciously control the mental shift.
"If a certain kind of activity, such as
painting, becomes the habitual
mode of expression, it may follow
that taking up the painting materi-
als and beginning work with them
will act suggestively and so
presently evoke a flight into the
higher state."
— Robert Henri
The Art Spirit, 1923
DRAWING AND THE ART OF BICYCLE RIDING
5

My students often report that
learning to draw makes them feel
more creative. Obviously, many
roads lead to creative endeavor:
Drawing is only one route. Howard
Gardner, Harvard professor of
psychology and education, refers
to this linkage:
"By a curious twist, the words art
and creativity have become closely
linked in our society."
From Gardner's book Creating
Minds, 1993.
Samuel Goldwyn once said:
"Don't pay any attention to the
critics. Don't even ignore them."
Quoted in Being Digital by Nicolas
Negroponte, 1995.
Drawing on your creative self
I see you as an individual with creative potential for expressing
yourself through drawing. My aim is to provide the means for
releasing that potential, for gaining access at a conscious level to
your inventive, intuitive, imaginative powers that may have been
largely untapped by our verbal, technological culture and educa-
tional system. I am going to teach you how to draw, but drawing is
only the means, not the end. Drawing will tap the special abilities
that are right for drawing. By learning to draw you will learn to
see differently and, as the artist Rodin lyrically states, to become a
confidant of the natural world, to awaken your eye to the lovely
language of forms, to express yourself in that language.
In drawing, you will delve deeply into a part of your mind too
often obscured by endless details of daily life. From this experi-
ence you will develop your ability to perceive things freshly in
their totality, to see underlying patterns and possibilities for new
combinations. Creative solutions to problems, whether personal
or professional, will be accessible through new modes of thinking
and new ways of using the power of your whole brain.
Drawing, pleasurable and rewarding though it is, is but a key
to open the door to other goals. My hope is that Drawing on the
Right Side of the Brain will help you expand your powers as an
individual through increased awareness of your own mind and its
workings. The multiple effects of the exercises in this book are
intended to enhance your confidence in decision making and
problem solving. The potential force of the creative, imaginative
human brain seems almost limitless. Drawing may help you come
to know this power and make it known to others. Through draw-
ing, you are made visible. The German artist Albrecht Dürer
said, "From this, the treasure secretly gathered in your heart will
become evident through your creative work."
Keeping the real goal in mind, let us begin to fashion the key.
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
6

My approach: A path to creativity
The exercises and instructions in this book have been designed
specifically for people who cannot draw at all, who may feel that
they have little or no talent for drawing, and who may feel doubt-
ful that they could ever learn to draw—but who think they might
like to learn. The approach of this book is different from other
drawing instruction books in that the exercises are aimed at
opening access to skills you already have but that are simply waiting
to be released.
Creative persons from fields other than art who want to get
their working skills under better control and learn to overcome
blocks to creativity will benefit from working with the techniques
presented here. Teachers and parents will find the theory and
exercises useful in helping children to develop their creative abil-
ities. At the end of the book, I have supplied a brief postscript that
offers some general suggestions for adapting my methods and
materials to children. A second postscript is addressed to art stu-
dents.
This book is based on the five-day workshop that I have been
teaching for about fifteen years to individuals of widely ranging
ages and occupations. Nearly all of the students begin the course
with very few drawing skills and with high anxiety about their
potential drawing ability. Almost without exception, the students
achieve a high level of skill in drawing and gain confidence to go
on developing their expressive drawing skills in further art
courses or by practice on their own.
An intriguing aspect of the often-remarkable gains most stu-
dents achieve is the rapid rate of improvement in drawing skills.
It's my belief that if persons untrained in art can learn to make
the shift to the artist's mode of seeing—that is, the right-hemi-
sphere mode—those individuals are then able to draw without
further instruction. To put it another way, you already know how
to draw, but old habits of seeing interfere with that ability and
block it. The exercises in this book are designed to remove the
interference and unblock the ability.
"To be shaken out of the ruts of
ordinary perception, to be shown
for a few timeless hours the outer
and the inner world, not as they
appear to an animal obsessed with
words and notions, but as they are
apprehended, directly and uncon-
ditionally, by Mind at Large—this
is an experience of inestimable
value to everyone."
— Aldous Huxley
The Doors of Perception,
1954
DRAWING AND THE ART OF BICYCLE RIDING
7

"When the artist is alive in any per-
son, whatever his kind of work may
be, he becomes an inventive,
searching, daring, self-expressive
creature. He becomes interesting
to other people. He disturbs,
upsets, enlightens, and opens ways
for a better understanding. Where
those who are not artists are trying
to close the book, he opens it and
shows there are still more pages
possible."
— Robert Henri
The Art Spirit, 1923
While you may have no interest whatever in becoming a full-
time working artist, the exercises will provide insights into the
way your mind works, or your two minds work—singly, coopera-
tively, one against the other. And, as many of my students have
told me, their lives seem richer because they are seeing better and
seeing more. It's helpful to remember that we don't teach reading
and writing to produce only poets and writers, but rather to
improve thinking.
Realism as a means to an end
Why faces?
A number of the exercises and instructional sequences in this
book are designed to enable you to draw recognizable portraits.
Let me explain why I think portrait drawing is useful as a subject
for beginners in art. Broadly speaking, except for the degree of
complexity, all drawing is the same. One drawing task is no harder
than any other. The same skills and ways of seeing are involved in
drawing still-life setups, landscapes, the figure, random objects,
even imaginary subjects, and portrait drawing. It's all the same thing:
You see what's out there (imaginary subjects are "seen" in the
mind's eye) and you draw what you see.
Why, then, have I selected portrait drawing for some of the
exercises? For three reasons. First, beginning students of drawing
often think that drawing human faces is the hardest of all kinds of
drawing. Thus, when students see that they can draw portraits,
they feel confident and their confidence enhances progress. A
second, more important, reason is that the right hemisphere of
the human brain is specialized for recognition of faces. Since the
right brain is the one we will be trying to gain access to, it makes
sense to choose a subject that the right brain is used to working
with. And third, faces are fascinating! Once you have drawn a per-
son, you will really have seen that individual's face. As one of my
students said, "I don't think I ever actually looked at anyone's face
before I started drawing. Now, the oddest thing is that everyone
looks beautiful to me."
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
8

Summing up
I have described to you the basic premise of this book—that
drawing is a teachable, learnable skill that can provide a twofold
advantage. By gaining access to the part of your mind that works
in a style conducive to creative, intuitive thought, you will learn a
fundamental skill of the visual arts: how to put down on paper
what you see in front of your eyes. Second, through learning to
draw by the method presented in this book, you will enhance
your ability to think more creatively in other areas of your life.
How far you go with these skills after you complete the
course will depend on other traits such as energy and curiosity.
But first things first! The potential is there. It's sometimes neces-
sary to remind ourselves that Shakespeare at some point learned
to write a line of prose, Beethoven learned the musical scales, and
as you see in the margin quotation, Vincent Van Gogh learned
how to draw.
"... at the time when you spoke of
my becoming a painter, I thought it
very impractical and would not
hear of it. What made me stop
doubting was reading a clear book
on perspective, Cassange's Guide to
the ABC of Drawing: and a week
later I drew the interior of a
kitchen with stove, chair, table and
window—in their places and on
their legs—whereas before it had
seemed to me that getting depth
and the right perspective into a
drawing was witchcraft or pure
chance."
— Vincent Van Gogh,
in a letter to his brother,
Theo, who had suggested
that Vincent become a
painter. Letter 184, p. 331.
DRAWING AND THE ART OF BICYCLE RIDING
9

The Drawing
Exercises:
One Step at a Time
2

O
VER THE YEARS OF TEACHING, I have experimented
with various progressions, sequences, and comb-
nations of exercises. The sequence set out in this book has
proved to be the most effective in terms of student progress.
We'll take the first step, the all-important preinstruction draw-
ings, in this chapter.
When you begin the drawing exercises in Chapter Four,
you'll have some background in the underlying theory, how the
exercises have been set up, and why they work. The sequence is
designed to enhance success at every step of the way and to pro-
vide access to a new mode of information processing with as lit-
tle upset to the old mode as possible. Therefore, I ask you to read
the chapters in the order presented and to do the exercises as
they appear.
I have limited the recommended exercises to a minimum
number, but if time permits, do more drawings than are sug-
gested: Seek your own subjects and devise your own exercises.
The more practice you provide for yourself, the faster you will
progress. To this end, in addition to the exercises that appear in
the text, supplementary exercises often appear in the margin.
Doing these exercises will reinforce both your skills and your
confidence.
For most of the exercises, I recommend that you read
through all of the directions before you start drawing and, where
directed, view the examples of students' drawings before begin-
ning. Keep all of your drawings together in a folder or large
envelope, so that by the time you've come to the end of the book
you can review your own progress.
Definitions of terms
A glossary of terms appears at the end of the book. Certain terms
are defined fairly extensively in the text, and the glossary con-
tains other terms not so extensively defined. Words that are com-
monly used in everyday language, such as "value" and
"composition," have very specific, and often different, meanings
in art terminology. I suggest that you glance through the glossary
before starting to read the chapters.
12 
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Drawing materials
The materials list for the first two editions was very simple: some
inexpensive bond typing paper or a pad of inexpensive drawing
paper, a pencil, and an eraser. I mentioned that a #4B drawing
pencil is pleasant to use, as the lead is smooth and makes a clear,
dark line, but an ordinary number 2 writing pencil is nearly as
good. For this edition, you still need these basic materials, but I
wish to suggest a few additional aids that will help you learn to
draw quickly.
• You will need a piece of clear plastic, about 8" x 10" and about
1/16" thick. A piece of glass is fine, but the edges must be taped.
Use a permanent marker to draw two crosshairs on the plastic,
a horizontal line and a vertical line crossing at the center of
the plane. (See the sketch in the margin.)
• Also, you will need two "viewfinders," made of black card-
board about 8" x 10". From one, cut a rectangular opening of
4+1/4" x 5+1/4" and from the other, cut out a larger opening of 6" x
7+5/8". See Figure 2-1.
• A nonpermanent black felt-tip marker
• Two clips to fasten your viewfinders to the plastic picture
plane
• A "graphite stick," #4B, available at most art supply stores
• Some masking tape
• A pencil sharpener—a small, hand-held sharpener is fine
• An eraser, such a "Pink Pearl" or a white plastic eraser
Gathering these materials requires a bit of effort, but they will
truly help you to learn rapidly. You can buy them at any art mate-
rials or crafts store. My staff of teachers and I no longer attempt
to teach our students without using viewfinders and the plastic
picture plane, and they will help you just as much. Because these
items are so essential to students' understanding of the basic
nature of drawing, for years now we have put together—by
hand!—portfolios containing the special learning tools that we
have developed for our five-day intensive workshops. The portfo-
lios also contained all of the necessary drawing materials and a
lightweight drawing board. Now I have made our Portfolio avail-
THE DRAWING EXERCISES: ONE STEP AT A TIME
13

Construct a viewfinder as follows:
1. Take a sheet of paper or use thin
cardboard of the same size as the
paper you use for drawing. The
viewfinder must be the same for-
mat, that is, the same proportional
shape, as the paper you are using
to draw on.
2. Draw diagonal lines from oppo-
site corners, crossing in the center.
In the center of the paper, draw a
small rectangle by connecting hor-
izontal and vertical lines at points
on the diagonals. The rectangle
should be about 1 x 1/4". (See Fig-
ure 2-1.) Constructed this way, the
inner rectangle has the same pro-
portion of length to width as the
outer edges of the paper.
3. Next, cut the small rectangle out
of the center with scissors. Hold
the paper up and compare the
shape of the small opening with the
shape of the whole format. You can
see that the two shapes are the
same, and only the size is different.
This perceptual aid is called a
viewfinder. It will help you to per-
ceive negative spaces by establish-
ing an edge to the space around
forms.
Fig. 2-1.
able for purchase. It includes as well a two-hour instructional
video of the lessons in this book.
If you are interested in purchasing a Portfolio, you will find
an order slip at the end of the book, or you can contact my web-
site at www.drawright.com. But the few items listed above will be
sufficient if you would rather put together your own set of mate-
rials.
Pre-instruction drawings: A valuable record of your
art skills
Now, let's get started. First, you need to make a record of your
present drawing skills. This is important! You don't want to miss
the pleasure of having a real memento of your starting point to
compare with your later drawings. I'm fully aware how difficult
this is, but just do it! As the great Dutch artist Vincent Van Gogh
wrote (in a letter to his brother, Theo):
"Just dash something down if you see a blank canvas staring at
you with a certain imbecility. You do not know how paralyzing it
is, that staring of a blank canvas which says to a painter, 'You don't
know anything.'"
Soon, you will "know something," I promise. Just gear your-
self up and do these drawings. Later, you'll be very happy that
you did. The drawings have proved to be invaluable in aiding stu-
dents to see and recognize their own progress. A kind of amnesia
seems to set in as drawing skills improve. Students forget what
their drawing was like before instruction. Moreover the degree of
criticism keeps pace with progress. Even after considerable
improvement, students are sometimes critical of their latest
drawing because it's "not as good as da Vinci's." The before draw-
ings provide a realistic gauge of progress. After you do the draw-
ings, put them away and we will look at them again later on in the
light of your newly acquired skills.
14
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

What you'll need:
• Paper to draw on—plain white bond paper is fine
• Your #2 writing pencil
• Your pencil sharpener
• Your masking tape
• A small mirror, about 5" x 7", that could be attached to a wall,
or any available wall or door mirror
• Something to use as a drawing board—a breadboard or a
sturdy piece of cardboard, about 15" x 18"
• An hour to an hour and a quarter of uninterrupted time
What you'll do:
You will do three drawings. This usually takes our students about
an hour or so, but feel free to take as long as you wish for each of
them. I will first list the drawing titles. Instruction for each draw-
ing follows.
• "Self-Portrait"
• "A Person, Drawn from Memory"
• "My Hand"
Pre-instruction drawing #1: Your "Self-Portrait"
1. Tape a stack of two or three sheets of paper to your drawing
board or work in your pad of paper. (Stacking the sheets pro-
vides a "padded" surface to draw on—much better than the
rather hard surface of the drawing board.)
2. Sit at arm's length (about 2 to 2+1/2 feet) from a mirror. Lean
your board up against the wall, resting the bottom of the
board on your lap.
3. Look at the reflection of your head and face in the mirror and
draw your "Self-Portrait."
4. When you have finished, title, date, and sign the drawing in
the lower right-hand or lower left-hand corner.
THE DRAWING EXERCISES: ONE STEP AT A TIME
15

Pre-instruction drawing #2: A person, drawn from memory
1. Call up in your mind's eye an image of a person—perhaps
someone from the past or a person you know now. Or you
may recall a drawing you did in the past or a photograph
of a person well known to you.
2. To the best of your ability, make a drawing of that person.
You may draw just the head, a half-figure, or the whole
figure.
3. When you have finished, title, sign, and date your draw-
ing.
Pre-instruction drawing #3: Your hand
1. Seat yourself at a table to draw.
2. If you are right-handed, draw your left hand in whatever
position you choose. If you are left-handed, draw your
right hand.
3. Title, date and sign your drawing.
When you have finished the pre-instruction drawings:
Be sure that you have titled, signed, and dated each of the
three drawings. Some of my students have enjoyed writing a
few comments on the back of each drawing, noting what is
pleasing and what is perhaps displeasing, what seemed easy
and what seemed difficult in the process of drawing. You'll
find these comments interesting to read later on.
Spread the three drawings on a table and look at them
closely. If I were there with you, I would be looking for small
areas in the drawings that show you were observing care-
fully—perhaps the way a collar turns or a beautifully
observed curve of an eyebrow. Once I encounter such signs of
careful seeing, I know the person will learn to draw well. You,
on the other hand, may find nothing admirable and perhaps
dismiss the drawings as "childish" and "amateurish." Please
remember that these drawings are made before instruction.
Would you expect yourself to solve problems in algebra with-
l6 
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

out any instruction? On the other hand, you may be surprised and
pleased with parts of your drawings, perhaps especially the draw-
ing of your own hand.
The reason for doing the memory drawing
I'm sure that drawing a person from memory was very difficult
for you, and rightfully so. Even a trained artist would find it diffi-
cult to draw a person from memory. Visual information from the
real world is rich, complicated, and unique to each thing we see.
Visual memory is necessarily simplified, generalized, and abbre-
viated—frustratingly so for artists, who often have only a limited
repertoire of memorized images. "Then why do it?" you may well
ask.
The reason is simply this: Drawing a person from memory
brings forth a memorized set of symbols, practiced over and over
during childhood. While doing the drawing from memory, can
you recall that your hand seemed to have a mind of its own? You
knew that you weren't making the image you wanted to, but you
couldn't keep your hand from making those simplified shapes—
perhaps the nose shape, for example. This is the so-called "sym-
bol system" of children's drawing, memorized by countless
repetitions during early childhood. You'll learn more about this
in Chapter Five.
Now, compare your Self-Portrait with your memory drawing.
Do you see the symbols repeated in both drawings—that is, are
the eyes (or the nose or mouth) similar in shape, or even identi-
cal? If so, this indicates that your symbol system was controlling
your hand even when you were observing the actual shapes in the
mirror.
The symbol system of childhood
This "tyranny" of the symbol system explains in large part why
people untrained in drawing continue to produce "childish"
drawings right into adulthood and even old age. What you will
learn from me is how to set your symbol system aside and accu-
rately draw what you see. This training in perceptual skills is the
THE DRAWING EXERCISES: ONE STEP AT A TIME 
17

rockbottom "ABC" of drawing, necessarily—or at least ideally—
learned before progressing to imaginative drawing, painting, and
sculpture.
With this information about the symbol system in mind, you
may want to add a few more notes on the back of your drawings.
Then, put all three drawings away for safekeeping. Do not look at
them again until after you have completed my course and have
learned to see and draw.
Student showing: A preview of before-and-after
drawings
Now I would like to show you some drawings done by my stu-
dents. The drawings show typical changes in students' drawing
18
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
Cynthia M. Skewes
Tony Schwartz
Susan W. Dryfoos
Yvonne Olive

The drawings on this page and the following page show
Before-and-After drawings of an entire five-day class,
held in Seattle, August 4,1997, to August 8,1997.
THE DRAWING EXERCISES: ONE STEP AT A TIME
Frank Fernandez
John Davis
Angie Hinckel
Alan O'Connell
Dianne
Sam Ferguson

Lori Bishop
Chris Fercnison
Virginia Davis
Gay Stroble
Carla Di Pietro
Darci Park
Drawings from the five-day Seattle class, continued.
2O 
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

ability from the first lesson (before instruction) to the last lesson.
Most of these students attended five-day workshops, eight hours
a day for the five days. Both the Pre-instruction and Post-instruc-
tion drawings are self-portraits, drawn by students observing
their own images in mirrors. As you can see, the Before-and-After
drawings in the student examples demonstrate that the students
have transformed their ways of seeing and drawing. The changes
are significant enough that it almost seems as though two differ-
ent persons have done the drawings.
Learning to perceive is the basic skill that the students acquired.
The change you see in their ability to draw possibly reflects an
equally significant change in their ability to see. Regard the draw-
ings from that standpoint: as a visible record of the students'
improvement in perceptual skills.
On pages 19-20 I present Before-and-After drawings by an
entire class, a group of adult students in Seattle, Washington.
Looking at the "Before" drawings, you will see that students came
to the five-day class with different levels of existing drawing skills
and backgrounds in art. The "After" drawings, done five days
later, however, show a remarkably consistent high level of skills.
This overall success rate, I believe, demonstrates our goal with
every group: that every student will gain high-level drawing skills
regardless of their existing (or non-existing) skill level.
Expressing yourself in drawing: The nonverbal
language of art
The purpose of this book is to teach you basic skills in seeing and
drawing. The purpose of this book is not teach you to express
yourself, but instead to provide you with the skills that will release
you from stereotypic expression. This release in turn will open
the way for you to express your individuality—your essential
uniqueness—in your own way, using your own particular drawing
style.
If, for a moment, we could regard your handwriting as a form
of expressive drawing, we could say that you are already express-
ing yourself with a fundamental element of art: line.
"The art of archery is not an ath-
letic ability mastered more or less
through primarily physical prac-
tice, but rather a skill with its ori-
gin in mental exercise and with its
object consisting in mentally hit-
ting the mark.
"Therefore, the archer is basically
aiming for himself. Through this,
perhaps, he will succeed in hitting
the target—his essential self."
— Herrigel
THE DRAWING EXERCISES: ONE STEP AT A TIME
21

On a sheet of paper, right in the middle of the sheet, write
your own name the way you usually sign your name. Next, regard
your signature from the following point of view: you are looking
at a drawing which is your original creation—shaped, it is true,
by the cultural influences of your life, but aren't the creations of
every artist shaped by such influences?
Every time you write your name, you have expressed yourself
through the use of line. Your signature, "drawn" many times over,
is expressive of you, just as Picasso's line is expressive of him. The
line can be "read" because, in writing your name, you have used
the nonverbal language of art. Let's try reading a line. There are
signatures in the margin. All are the same name: Luther Gibson.
Tell me, what is the first Luther Gibson like?
You would probably agree that Luther Gibson is more likely
to be extroverted than introverted, more likely to wear bright col-
ors than subtle ones, and, at least superficially, likely to be outgo-
ing, talkative, even dramatic. Of course, these assumptions may or
may not be correct, but the point is that this is how most people
would read the nonverbal expression of the signature, because
that's what Luther Gibson is (nonverbally) saying.
Let's look at the second Luther Gibson in the margin.
Now, look at the third signature. How would you describe
him?
And another, the fourth signature.
And the last signature? How would you read that?
Now regard your own signature and respond to the nonverbal
message of its line. Write your name in three different ways, each
time responding to the message. Next, think back on how you
responded differently to each of these signatures; recall that the
name that was formed by the "drawings" did not change. What,
then, were you responding to?
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
22

You were seeing and responding to the felt, individual quali-
ties of each "drawn" line or set of lines. You responded to the felt
speed of the line, the size and spacing of the marks, the muscle
tension or lack of tension. All of that is precisely communicated
by the line, the directional pattern or lack of pattern—in other
words, by the whole signatures and all of their parts at once. A
person's signature is an individual expression so unique to the
writer that it is identified legally as being "owned" by that single
person and none other.
Your signature, however, does more than identify you. It also
expresses you and your individuality, your creativity. Your signa-
ture is true to yourself. In this sense, you already speak the non-
verbal language of art: You are using the basic element of
drawing, line, in an expressive way, unique to yourself.
In the chapters to follow, therefore, we won't dwell on what
you can do already. Instead, the aim is to teach you how to see so
that you can use your expressive, individual line to draw your
perceptions.
Drawing as a mirror and metaphor for the artist
The object of drawing is not only to show what you are trying to
portray, but also to show you. To illustrate how much personal
style is embedded in drawings, I wish to show you two drawings
on page 24, done at the same time by two different people—
myself and artist/teacher Brian Bomeisler. We sat on either side
of our model, Heather Allan. We were demonstrating how to
draw a profile portrait for a group of students, the same profile
portrait you will learn to do in Chapter Nine. The materials we
used were identical, and we both drew for the same length of
time—30 to 40 minutes. A viewer immediately sees that the
model is the same—that is, both drawings achieve a likeness of
Heather. But Brian's portrayal expresses his response to Heather
in his more "painterly" style (meaning emphasis on shapes), and
my portrayal expresses my response in my more "linear" style
(emphasis on line). By looking at my portrait of Heather, the
viewer catches sight of me, and Brian's drawing provides an
Torii Kiyotada (active 1723-1750),
Actor Dancing, and Torii Kiyonobu I
(1664—1729), Woman Dancer (c. 1708).
Courtesy of The Metropolitan
Museum of Art, Harris Brisbane
Dick Fund, 1949-
Line expresses two different kinds
of dances in the two Japanese
prints. Try to visualize each dance.
Can you hear the music in your
imagination? Try to see how the
character of the line controls your
response to the drawing.
THK DRAWING KXKRCISES: ON'F. STKP AT A TIMF.
23

Heather by instructor Brian
Bomeisler.
insight into him. Thus, paradoxically, the more clearly you can
perceive and draw what you see in the external world, the more
clearly the viewer can see you, and the more you can know about
yourself. Drawing becomes a metaphor for the artist.
Because the exercises in this book focus on expanding your
perceptual powers, not on techniques of drawing, your individual
style—your unique and valuable manner of drawing—will
emerge intact. This is true even though the exercises concentrate
on realistic drawings, which tend to "look alike" in a large sense.
(This probably is true only for this century, because we are used
to seeing radically different forms of art, both stylistically and
culturally.) But a closer look at realistic art reveals subtle differ-
ences in line style, emphasis, and intent. In this age of massive
self-expression in the arts, this more subtle communication often
goes unnoticed and unappreciated.
As your skills in seeing increase, your ability to draw what
you see will increase, and you will observe your style forming.
Guard it, nurture it, and cherish it, for your style expresses you.
As with the Zen master-archer, the target is yourself.
Heather by the author.
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
24

Fig. 2-2. Rembrandt Van Rijn
(1606-1669), Winter Landscape
(c. 1649). Courtesy of The Fogg Art
Museum, Harvard University.
Rembrandt drew this tiny land-
scape with a rapid calligraphic
line. Through it, we sense Rem-
brandt's visual and emotional
response to the deeply silent win-
ter scene. We see, therefore, not
only the landscape; we see through
the landscape to Rembrandt him-
self.
A "bold" line.
A "broken" line.
A "pure" line.
A "lost-and-found" line.
Artists are known by their unique
line qualities, and experts in draw-
ing often base their authentication
of drawings on these known line
qualities. Styles of line have actu-
ally been put into named cate-
gories. There are quite a few: the
"bold line;" the "broken line"
(sometimes called "the line that
repeats itself"); the "pure line"—
thin and precise, sometimes called
"the Ingres line" after the 19th cen-
tury French artist Jean-Auguste
Dominique Ingres; the "lost-and-
found line," which starts out dark,
fades away, then becomes dark
again. See samples in figure 2-3.
Beginning students most often
admire drawings done in a rapid,
self-confident style—the "bold"
line that is rather like Picasso's, in
fact. But an important point to
remember is that every style of line is
valued, one not more than another.
Fig. 2-3.
THE DRAWING EXERCISES: ONE STEP AT A TIME
25

Your Brain:
The Right and Left
of It

"Few people realize what an aston-
ishing achievement it is to be able to
see at all. The main contribution of
the new field of artificial intelli-
gence has been not so much to solve
these problems of information han-
dling as to show what tremendously
difficult problems they are. When
one reflects on the number of com-
putations that must have to be car-
ried out before one can recognize
even such an everyday scene as
another person crossing the street,
one is left with a feeling of amaze-
ment that such an extraordinary
series of detailed operations can be
accomplished so effortlessly in such
a short space of time."
F. H. C. Crick, "Thinking about the
Brain," in The Brain, San Francisco:
A Scientific American Book, W. H.
Freeman, 1979, p. 130.
H
ow DOES THE HUMAN BRAIN WORK? That remains the
most baffling and elusive of all questions having to do
with human understanding. Despite centuries of study and
thought and the accelerating rate of knowledge in recent years,
the brain still engenders awe and wonder at its marvelous capa-
bilities—many of which we simply take for granted.
Scientists have targeted visual perception in particular with
highly precise studies, and yet vast mysteries still exist. The most
ordinary activities are awe-inspiring. For example, in a recent
contest, people were shown a photograph of six mothers and
their six children, arranged randomly in a group. Contestants,
strangers to the photographed group, were asked to link the six
mother-and-child pairs. Forty people responded, and each had
paired all of the mothers and children correctly.
To think of the complexity of that task is to make one's head
spin. Our faces are more alike than unlike: two eyes, a nose, a
mouth, hair, and two ears, all more or less the same size and in the
same places on our heads. Telling two people apart requires fine
discriminations beyond the capability of nearly all computers, as
I mentioned in the Introduction. In this contest, participants had
to distinguish each adult from all the others and estimate, using
even finer discriminations, which child's features/head-
shape/expression best fitted with which adult. The fact that peo-
ple can accomplish this astounding feat and not realize how
astounding it is forms, I think, a measure of our underestimation
of our visual abilities.
Another extraordinary activity is drawing. As far as we know,
of all the creatures on this planet, human beings are the only ones
who draw images of things and persons in their environment.
Monkeys and elephants have been persuaded to paint and draw
and their artworks have been exhibited and sold. And, indeed,
these works do seem to have expressive content, but they are
never realistic images of the animals' perceptions. Animals do not
do still-life, landscape, or portrait drawing. So unless there is
some monkey that we don't know about out there in the forest
drawing pictures of other monkeys, we can assume that drawing
28
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

perceived images is an activity confined to human beings and
made possible by our human brain.
Both sides of your brain
Seen from above, the human brain resembles the halves of a wal-
nut—two similar appearing, convoluted, rounded halves con-
nected at the center (Figure 3-1). The two halves are called the
"left hemisphere" and the "right hemisphere."
The left hemisphere controls the right side of the body; the
right hemisphere controls the left side. If you suffer a stroke or
accidental brain damage to the left half of your brain, for exam-
ple, the right half of your body will be most seriously affected and
vice versa. As part of this crossing over of the nerve pathways, the
left hand is controlled by the right hemisphere; the right hand, by
the left hemisphere, as shown in Figure 3-2.
The double brain
With the exception of human beings and possibly songbirds, the
greater apes, and certain other mammals, the cerebral hemi-
spheres (the two halves of the brain) of Earth's creatures are
Fig. 3-1.
Fig. 3-2. The crossover connections
of left hand to right hemisphere,
right hand to left hemisphere.
YOUR BRAIN: THE RIGHT AND LEFT OF IT
29

essentially alike, or symmetrical, both in appearance and in func-
tion. Human cerebral hemispheres, and those of the exceptions
noted above, develop asymmetrically in terms of function. The
most noticeable outward effect of the asymmetry of the human
brain is handedness, which seems to be unique to human beings
and possibly chimpanzees.
For the past two hundred years or so, scientists have known
that language and language-related capabilities are mainly
located in the left hemispheres of the majority of individuals—
approximately 98 percent of right-handers and about two-thirds
of left-handers. Knowledge that the left half of the brain is spe-
cialized for language functions was largely derived from observa-
tions of the effects of brain injuries. It was apparent, for example,
that an injury to the left side of the brain was more likely to cause
a loss of speech capability than an injury of equal severity to the
right side.
Because speech and language are such vitally important
human capabilities, nineteenth-century scientists named the left
hemisphere the "dominant," "leading," or "major" hemisphere.
Scientists named the right brain the "subordinate" or "minor"
hemisphere. The general view, which prevailed until fairly
Fig. 3-3. A diagram of one half of a
human brain, showing the corpus
callosum and related commissures.
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
30

recently, was that the right half of the brain was less advanced,
less evolved than the left half—a mute twin with lower-level
capabilities, directed and carried along by the verbal left hemi-
sphere. Even as late as 1961, neuroscientist. Z. Young could still
wonder whether the right hemisphere might be merely a
"vestige," though he allowed that he would rather keep than lose
his. [Quoted from The Psychology of Left and Right, M. Corbalis
and Ivan Beale, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
1976, p. 101.]
A long-time focus of neuroscientific study has been the func-
tions, unknown until fairly recently, of a thick nerve cable com-
posed of millions of fibers that cross-connect the two cerebral
hemispheres. This connecting cable, the corpus callosum, is
shown in the diagrammatic drawing of half of a human brain,
Figure 3-3. Because of its large size, tremendous number of nerve
fibers, and strategic location as a connector of the two hemi-
spheres, the corpus callosum gave all the appearances of being an
important structure. Yet enigmatically, available evidence indi-
cated that the corpus callosum could be completely severed
without observable significant effect. Through a series of animal
studies during the 1950s, conducted mainly at the California
Institute of Technology by Roger W. Sperry and his students,
Ronald Myers, Colwyn Trevarthen, and others, it was established
that a main function of the corpus callosum was to provide com-
munication between the two hemispheres and to allow transmis-
sion of memory and learning. Furthermore, it was determined
that if the connecting cable was severed the two brain halves con-
tinued to function independently, thus explaining in part the
apparent lack of effect on behavior and functioning.
Then during the 1960s, extension of similar studies to human
neurosurgical patients provided further information on the func-
tion of the corpus callosum and caused scientists to postulate a
revised view of the relative capabilities of the halves of the
human brain: that both hemispheres are involved in higher cogni-
tive functioning, with each half of the brain specialized in com-
plementary fashion for different modes of thinking, both highly
complex.
YOUR BRAIN: THE RIGHT AND LEFT OF IT
31

As journalist Maya Pines stated in
her 1982 book, The Brain Changers,
"All roads lead to Dr. Roger
Sperry, a California Institute of
Technology psychobiology profes-
sor who has the gift of making—or
provoking—important discover-
ies."
"The main theme to emerge...
is that there appear to be two
modes of thinking, verbal and
nonverbal, represented rather
separately in left and right hemi-
spheres, respectively, and that our
educational system, as well as sci-
ence in general, tends to neglect
the nonverbal form of intellect.
What it comes down to is that
modern society discriminates
against the right hemisphere."
— Roger W. Sperry
"Lateral Specialization
of Cerebral Function in
the Surgically Separated
Hemispheres," 1973
Because this changed perception of the brain has important
implications for education in general and for learning to draw in
particular, I'll briefly describe some of the research often referred
to as the "split-brain" studies. The research was mainly carried
out at Cal Tech by Sperry and his students Michael Gazzaniga,
Jerre Levy, Colwyn Trevarthen, Robert Nebes, and others.
The investigation centered on a small group of individuals
who came to be known as the commissurotomy, or "split-brain,"
patients. They are persons who had been greatly disabled by
"epileptic seizures that involved both hemispheres. As a last-resort
measure, after all other remedies had failed, the incapacitating
spread of seizures between the two hemispheres was controlled
by means of an operation, performed by Phillip Vogel and Joseph
Bogen, that severed the corpus callosum and the related commis-
sures, or cross-connections, thus isolating one hemisphere from
the other. The operation yielded the hoped-for result: The
patients' seizures were controlled and they regained health. In
spite of the radical nature of the surgery, the patients' outward
appearance, manner, and coordination were little affected; and to
casual observation their ordinary daily behavior seemed little
changed.
The Cal Tech group subsequently worked with these patients
in a series of ingenious and subtle tests that revealed the sepa-
rated functions of the two hemispheres. The tests provided sur-
prising new evidence that each hemisphere, in a sense, perceives
its own reality—or perhaps better stated, perceives reality in its
own way. The verbal half of the brain—the left half—dominates
most of the time in individuals with intact brains as well as in the
split-brain patients. Using ingenious procedures, however, the
Cal Tech group tested the patients' separated right hemispheres
and found evidence that the right, nonspeaking half of the brain
also experiences, responds with feelings, and processes informa-
tion on its own. In our own brains, with intact corpus callosa,
communication between the hemispheres melds or reconciles the
two perceptions, thus preserving our sense of being one person, a
unified being.
In addition to studying the right/left separation of inner
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
32

mental experience created by the surgical procedure, the scien-
tists examined the different ways in which the two hemispheres
process information. Evidence accumulated showing that the
mode of the left hemisphere is verbal and analytic, while that of
the right is nonverbal and global. New evidence found by Jerre
Levy in her doctoral studies showed that the mode of processing
used by the right brain is rapid, complex, whole-pattern, spatial,
and perceptual—processing that is not only different from but
comparable in complexity to the left brain's verbal, analytic
mode. Additionally, Levy found indications that the two modes of
processing tend to interfere with each other, preventing maximal
performance; and she suggested that this may be a rationale for
the evolutionary development of asymmetry in the human
brain—as a means of keeping the two different modes of process-
ing in two different hemispheres.
Based on the evidence of the split-brain studies, the view
came gradually that both hemispheres use high human-level cog-
nitive modes which, though different, involve thinking, reasoning,
and complex mental functioning. Over the past decade, since the
first statement in 1968 by Levy and Sperry, scientists have found
extensive supporting evidence for this view, not only in brain-
injured patients but also in individuals with normal, intact brains.
A few examples of the specially designed tests devised for use
with the split-brain patients might illustrate the separate reality
perceived by each hemisphere and the special modes of process-
ing employed. In one test, two different pictures were flashed for
an instant on a screen, with a split-brain patient's eyes fixed on a
midpoint so that scanning both images was prevented. Each
hemisphere, then, received different pictures. A picture of a
spoon on the left side of the screen went to the right brain; a pic-
ture of a knife on the right side of the screen went to the verbal
left brain, as in Figure 3-4. When questioned, the patient gave
different responses. If asked to name what had been flashed on the
screen, the confidently articulate left hemisphere caused the
patient to say, "knife." Then the patient was asked to reach behind
a curtain with his left hand (right hemisphere) and pick out what
had been flashed on the screen. The patient then picked out a
"The data indicate that the mute,
minor hemisphere is specialized
for Gestalt perception, being pri-
marily a synthesist in dealing with
information input. The speaking,
major hemisphere, in contrast,
seems to operate in a more logical,
analytic, computer-like fashion. Its
language is inadequate for the
rapid complex syntheses achieved
by the minor hemisphere."
—Jerre Levy and
R. W. Sperry
1968
Fig. 3-4. A diagram of the
apparatus used to test visual-
tactile associations by split-brain
patients. Adapted from Michael
S. Gazzaniga, "The Split Brain
in Man."
YOUR BRAIN: THE RIGHT AND LEFT OF IT
33

spoon from a group of objects that included a spoon and a knife.
If the experimenter asked the patient to identify what he held in
his hand behind the curtain, the patient might look confused for a
moment and then say, "A knife." The right hemisphere, knowing
that the answer was wrong but not having sufficient words to cor-
rect the articulate left hemisphere, continued the dialogue by
causing the patient to mutely shake his head. At that, the verbal
left hemisphere wondered aloud, "Why am I shaking my head?"
In another test that demonstrated the right brain to be better
at spatial problems, a male patient was given several wooden
shapes to arrange to match a certain design. His attempts with his
right hand (left hemisphere) failed again and again. His left hand
kept trying to help. The right hand would knock the left hand
away; and finally, the man had to sit on his left hand to keep it
away from the puzzle. When the scientists finally suggested that
he use both hands, the spatially "smart" left hand had to shove the
spatially "dumb" right hand away to keep it from interfering.
As a result of these extraordinary findings over the past fifteen
years, we now know that despite our normal feeling that we are
one person—a single being—our brains are double, each half
with its own way of knowing, its own way of perceiving external
reality. In a manner of speaking, each of us has two minds, two
consciousnesses, mediated and integrated by the connecting
cable of nerve fibers between the hemispheres.
We have learned that the two hemispheres can work together
in a number of ways. Sometimes they cooperate with each half
contributing its special abilities and taking on the particular part
of the task that is suited to its mode of information processing. At
other times, the hemispheres can work singly, with one mode
more or less "leading," the other more or less "following." And it
seems that the hemispheres may also conflict, one half attempting
to do what the other half "knows" it can do better. Furthermore, it
may be that each hemisphere has a way of keeping knowledge
from the other hemisphere. It may be, as the saying goes, that the
right hand truly does not know what the left hand is doing.
34 
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

The double reality of split-brain patients
But what, you might ask, does all this have to do with learning
how to draw? Research on brain-hemisphere aspects of visual
perception indicates that ability to draw may depend on whether
you can access at conscious level the "minor," or subdominant, R-
mode. How does this help a person to draw? It appears that the
right brain perceives—processes visual information—in a mode
suitable for drawing, and that the left-brain mode of functioning
may be inappropriate for complex realistic drawing of perceived
forms.
Nasrudin was sitting with a friend
as dusk fell. "Light a candle," the
man said, "because it is dark now.
There is one just by your left side."
"How can I tell my right from my
left in the dark, you fool?" asked
the Mulla.
— Indries Shah
The Exploits of the
Incomparable Mulla
Nasrudin
Language clues
In hindsight, we realize that human beings must have had some
sense of the differences between the halves of the brain. Lan-
guages worldwide contain numerous words and phrases suggest-
ing that the left side of a person has different characteristics from
the right side. These terms indicate not just differences in loca-
tion but differences in fundamental traits or qualities. For exam-
ple, if we want to compare unlike ideas, we say, "On the one hand
... on the other hand..." "A left-handed compliment," meaning a
sly dig, indicates the differing qualities we assign to left and right.
Keep in mind, however, that these phrases generally speak of
hands, but because of the crossover connections of hands and
hemispheres, the terms can be inferred also to mean the hemi-
spheres that control the hands. Therefore, the examples of famil-
iar terms in the next section refer specifically to the left and right
hands but in reality also refer inferentially to the opposite brain
halves—the left hand controlled by the right hemisphere, the
right hand by the left hemisphere.
The bias of language and customs
Words and phrases concerning concepts of left and right perme-
ate our language and thinking. The right hand (meaning also the
left hemisphere) is strongly connected with what is good, just,
moral, and proper. The left hand (therefore the right hemisphere)
YOUR BRAIN: THE RIGHT AND LEFT OF IT
35

is strongly linked with concepts of anarchy and feelings that are
out of conscious control—somehow bad, immoral, and danger-
ous.
Until very recently, the ancient bias against the left hand/
right hemisphere sometimes even led parents and teachers of
left-handed children to try to force the children to use their right
hands for writing, eating, and so on—a practice that often caused
problems lasting into adulthood.
Throughout human history, terms with connotations of good
for the right hand/left hemisphere and connotations of bad for
the left hand/right hemisphere appear in most languages around
the world. The Latin word for left is sinister, meaning "bad," "omi-
nous," "treacherous." The Latin word for right is dexter, from
which comes our word "dexterity," meaning "skill" or "adroit-
ness."
The French word for left—remember that the left hand is
connected to the right hemisphere—is gauche, meaning "awk-
ward," from which comes our word "gawky." The French word for
right is droit, meaning "good," "just," or "proper."
In English, left comes from the Anglo-Saxon lyft, meaning
"weak" or "worthless." The left hand of most right-handed people
is in fact weaker than the right, but the original word also implied
lack of moral strength. The derogatory meaning of left may refl-
ect a prejudice of the right-handed majority against a minority
of people who were different, that is, left-handed. Reinforcing
this bias, the Anglo-Saxon word for right, reht (or riht), meant
"straight" or "just." From reht and its Latin cognate rectus we
derived our words "correct" and "rectitude."
These ideas are also reflected in our political vocabulary. The
political right, for instance, admires national power, is conserva-
tive, and resists change. The political left, conversely, admires
individual autonomy and promotes change, even radical change.
At their extremes, the political right is fascist, the political left is
anarchist.
In the context of cultural customs, the place of honor at a for-
mal dinner is on the host's right-hand side. The groom stands on
the right in the marriage ceremony, the bride on the left—a non-
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
36

verbal message of the relative status of the two participants. We
shake hands with our right hands; it seems somehow wrong to
shake hands with our left hands.
Under "left-handed," the dictionary lists as synonyms
"clumsy," "awkward," "insincere," "malicious." Synonyms for
"right-handed," however, are "correct," "indispensable," and
"reliable." Now, it's important to remember that these terms were
all made up, when languages began, by some persons' left hemi-
spheres—the left brain calling the right bad names! And the right
brain—labeled, pinpointed, and buttonholed—was without a
language of its own to defend itself.
Two ways of knowing
Along with the opposite connotations of left and right in our lan-
guage, concepts of the duality, or two-sidedness, of human nature
and thought have been postulated by philosophers, teachers, and
scientists from many different times and cultures. The key idea is
that there are two parallel "ways of knowing."
You probably are familiar with these ideas. As with the
left/right terms, they are embedded in our languages and cul-
tures. The main divisions are, for example, between thinking and
feeling, intellect and intuition, objective analysis and subjective
insight. Political writers say that people generally analyze the
good and bad points of an issue and then vote on their "gut" feel-
ings. The history of science is replete with anecdotes about
researchers who try repeatedly to figure out a problem and then
have a dream in which the answer presents itself as a metaphor
intuitively comprehended by the scientist. The statement on page
39 by Henri Poincare is a vivid example of the process.
In another context, people occasionally say about someone,
"The words sound okay, but something tells me not to trust him
(or her)." Or "I can't tell you in words exactly what it is, but there
is something about that person that I like (or dislike)." These
statements are intuitive observations that both sides of the brain
are at work, processing the same information in two different
ways.
Parallel Ways of Knowing
intellect 
intuition
divergent
analogic
primary
concrete
free
imaginative
relational
nonlineal
intuitive
multiple
holistic
convergent
digital
secondary
abstract
directed
propositional
analytic
lineal
rational
sequential
analytic
objective
successive
subjective
simultaneous
—J. E. Bogen
"Some Educational
Aspects of Hemisphere
Specialization" in UCLA
Educator, 1972
The Duality of Yin and Yang
Yin
feminine
negative
moon
darkness
yielding
left side
cold
autumn
winter
unconscious
right brain
emotion
Yang
masculine
positive
sun
light
aggressive
right side
warm
spring
summer
conscious
left brain
reason
— I Ching or Book of Changes,
a Chinese Taoist work
YOUR BRAIN: THE RIGHT AND LEFT OF IT
37

Dr.J. William Bergquist, a mathe-
matician and specialist in the com-
puter language known as APL,
proposed in a paper given at Snow-
mass, Colorado, in 1977 that we can
look forward to computers that
combine digital and analog func-
tions in one machine. Dr. Bergquist
dubbed his machine "The Bifur-
cated Computer." He stated that
such a computer would function
similarly to the two halves of the
human brain.
"The left hemisphere analyzes over
time, whereas the right hemisphere
synthesizes over space."
—Jerre Levy
"Psychobiological
Implications of Bilateral
Asymmetry," 1974
"Every creative act involves ...
a new innocence of perception,
liberated from the cataract of
accepted belief."
— Arthur Koestler
The Sleepwalkers, 1959
The two modes of information processing
Inside each of our skulls, therefore, we have a double brain with
two ways of knowing. The dualities and differing characteristics
of the two halves of the brain and body, intuitively expressed in
our language, have a real basis in the physiology of the human
brain. Because the connecting fibers are intact in normal brains,
we rarely experience at a conscious level conflicts revealed by the
tests on split-brain patients.
Nevertheless, as each of our hemispheres gathers in the same
sensory information, each half of our brains may handle the
information in different ways: The task may be divided between
the hemispheres, each handling the part suited to its style. Or one
hemisphere, often the dominant left, will "take over" and inhibit
the other half. The left hemisphere analyzes, abstracts, counts,
marks time, plans step-by-step procedures, verbalizes, and makes
rational statements based on logic. For example, "Given numbers
a, b, and c—we can say that if a is greater than b, and b is greater
than c, then a is necessarily greater than c." This statement illus-
trates the left-hemisphere mode: the analytic, verbal, figuring-
out, sequential, symbolic, linear, objective mode.
On the other hand, we have a second way of knowing: the
right-hemisphere mode. We "see" things in this mode that may be
imaginary—existing only in the mind's eye. In the example given
just above, did you perhaps visualize the "a, b, c" relationship? In
visual mode, we see how things exist in space and how the parts
go together to make up the whole. Using the right hemisphere, we
understand metaphors, we dream, we create new combinations of
ideas. When something is too complex to describe, we can make
gestures that communicate. Psychologist David Galin has a
favorite example: try to describe a spiral staircase without making
a spiral gesture. And using the right-hemisphere mode, we are
able to draw pictures of our perceptions.
My students report that learning to draw makes them feel
more "artistic" and therefore more creative. One definition of a
creative person is someone who can process in new ways infor-
mation directly at hand—the ordinary sensory data available to
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
38

all of us. A writer uses words, a musician notes, an artist visual
perceptions, and all need some knowledge of the techniques of
their crafts. But a creative individual intuitively sees possibilities
for transforming ordinary data into a new creation, transcendent
over the mere raw materials.
Time and again, creative individuals have recognized the
differences between the two processes of gathering data and
transforming those data creatively. Neuroscience is now illumi-
nating that dual process. I propose that getting to know both sides
of your brain is an important step in liberating your creative
potential.
The Ah-ha! response
In the right-hemisphere mode of information processing, we use
intuition and have leaps of insight—moments when "everything
seems to fall into place" without figuring things out in a logical
order. When this occurs, people often spontaneously exclaim,
"I've got it" or "Ah, yes, now I see the picture." The classic exam-
ple of this kind of exclamation is the exultant cry, "Eureka!" (I
have found it!) attributed to Archimedes. According to the story,
Archimedes experienced a flash of insight while bathing that
enabled him to use the weight of displaced water to determine
whether a certain crown was pure gold or alloyed with silver.
This, then, is the right-hemisphere mode: the intuitive, sub-
jective, relational, holistic, time-free mode. This is also the dis-
dained, weak, left-handed mode that in our culture has been
generally ignored. For example, most of our educational system
has been designed to cultivate the verbal, rational, on-time left
hemisphere, while half of the brain of every student is virtually
neglected.
Half a brain is better than none: A whole brain would
be better
With their sequenced verbal and numerical classes, the schools
you and I attended were not equipped to teach the right-hemi-
sphere mode. The right hemisphere is not, after all, under very
The nineteenth-century mathe-
matician Henri Poincare described
a sudden intuition that gave him
the solution to a difficult problem:
"One evening, contrary to my
custom, I drank black coffee and
could not sleep. Ideas rose in
crowds; I felt them collide until
pairs interlocked, so to speak,
making a stable combination."
[That strange phenomenon pro-
vided the intuition that solved the
troublesome problem. Poincare
continued,] "It seems, in such
cases, that one is present at his own
unconscious work, made partially
perceptible to the overexcited con-
sciousness, yet without having
changed its nature. Then we
vaguely comprehend what distin-
guishes the two mechanisms or, if
you wish, the working methods of
the two egos."
YOUR BRAIN: TI1K RIGHT AND LEFT OF IT
39

"Approaching forty, I had a singular
dream in which I almost grasped
the meaning and understood the
nature of what it is that wastes in
wasted time."
— Cyril Connolly
The Unquiet Grave: A Word
Cycle by Palinuris, 1945
Many creative people seem to have
intuitive awareness of the sepa-
rate-sided brain. For example,
Rudyard Kipling wrote the follow-
ing poem, entitled "The Two-
Sided Man," more than fifty years
ago.
Much I owe to the lands that grew-
More to the Lives that fed-
But most to the Allah Who gave me
Two
Separate sides to my head.
Much I reflect on the Good and the
True
In the faiths beneath the sun
But most upon Allah Who gave me
Two
Sides to my head, not one.
I would go without shirt or shoe,
Friend, tobacco or bread,
Sooner than lose for a minute the
two
Separate sides of my head!
— Rudyard Kipling
good verbal control. You can't reason with it. You can't get it to
make logical propositions such as "This is good and that is bad,
for a, b, and c reasons." It is metaphorically left-handed, with all
the ancient connotations of that characteristic. The right hemi-
sphere is not good at sequencing—doing the first thing first, tak-
ing the next step, then the next. It may start anywhere, or take
everything at once. Furthermore, the right hemisphere hasn't a
good sense of time and doesn't seem to comprehend what is
meant by the term "wasting time," as does the good, sensible left
hemisphere. The right brain is not good at categorizing and nam-
ing. It seems to regard the thing as-it-is, at the present moment of
the present; seeing things for what they simply are, in all of their
awesome, fascinating complexity. It is not good at analyzing and
abstracting salient characteristics.
Today, educators are increasingly concerned with the impor-
tance of intuitive and creative thought. Nevertheless, school sys-
tems in general are still structured in the left-hemisphere mode.
Teaching is sequenced: Students progress through grades one,
two, three, etc., in a linear direction. The main subjects learners
study are verbal and numerical: reading, writing, arithmetic.
Nowadays, however, seats often are set circles rather than in rows.
Time schedules are more flexible. But learners still converge
on "correct" answers to often-ambiguous questions. Teachers still
give out grades that often are tied to the "bell curve," which guar-
antees that one-third of every group will be judged "below
average," regardless of achievement. And everyone senses that
something is amiss.
The right brain—the dreamer, the artificer, and the artist—is
lost in our school system and goes largely untaught. We might
find a few art classes, a few shop classes, something called "cre-
ative writing," and perhaps courses in music; but it's unlikely that
we would find courses in imagination, in visualization, in percep-
tual or spatial skills, in creativity as a separate subject, in intu-
ition, in inventiveness. Yet educators value these skills and have
apparently hoped that students would develop imagination, per-
ception, and intuition as natural consequences of training in ver-
bal, analytic skills.
40
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Fortunately, such development often does occur almost in
spite of the school system—a tribute to the survival capacity of
creative abilities. But the emphasis of our culture is so strongly
slanted toward rewarding left-brain skills that we are surely los-
ing a very large proportion of the potential ability of the other
halves of our children's brains. Scientist Jerre Levy has said—
only partly humorously—that American scientific training
through graduate school may entirely destroy the right hemi-
sphere. We certainly are aware of the effects of inadequate train-
ing in verbal, computational skills. The verbal left hemisphere
never seems to recover fully, and the effects may handicap stu-
dents for life. What happens, then, to the right hemisphere that is
hardly trained at all?
Perhaps now that neuroscientists have provided a conceptual
base for right-brain training, we can begin to build a school sys-
tem that will teach the whole brain. Such a system will surely
include training in drawing skills—an efficient, effective way to
teach thinking strategies suited to the right brain.
Handedness, left or right
Students ask many questions about left- and right-handedness.
This is a good place to address the subject, before we begin
instruction in the basic skills of drawing. I will attempt to clarify
only a few points, because the extensive research on handedness
is difficult and complicated.
First, classifying people as strictly left-handed or right-
handed is not quite accurate. People range from being completely
left-handed or completely right-handed to being completely
ambidextrous—that is, able to do many things with either hand,
without a decided preference. Most of us fall somewhere on a
continuum, with about 90 percent of humans preferring, more or
less strongly, the right hand, and 10 percent preferring the left.
The percentage of individuals with left-hand preference for
handwriting seems to be rising, from about 2 percent in 1932 to
about 11 percent in the 1980s. The main reason for this rise is prob-
ably that teachers and parents have learned to tolerate left-
"To make biological survival
possible, Mind at Large has to be
funneled through the reducing
valve of the brain and nervous
system. What comes out the other
end is a measly trickle of the kind
of consciousness which will help us
to stay alive on the surface of this
particular planet. To formulate
and express the contents of this
reduced awareness, man has
invented and endlessly elaborated
those symbol-systems and implicit
philosophies which we call
languages."
— Aldous Huxley
The Doors of Perception
Some famous individuals usually
classified as left-handers:
Charlie Chaplin
Judy Garland
Ted Williams
Robert McNamara
George Burns
Lewis Carroll
King George VI of Britain
W. C. Fields
Albert Einstein
Billy the Kid
Queen Victoria
Harry S. Truman
Casey Stengel
Charlemagne
Paul McCartney
Pharoah Rameses II
Cole Porter
Gerald Ford
Cary Grant
Ringo Starr
Prince Charles
Benjamin Franklin
Julius Caesar
Marilyn Monroe
George Bush
YOUR BRAIN: THE RIGHT AND LEFT OF IT
41

Mirror writing reverses the shape
of every letter and is written from
right to left—that is, backwards.
Only when held up to a mirror
does it become legible for most
readers:
The most famous mirror-writer in
history is the Italian artist, inven-
tor, and left-hander Leonardo da
Vinci. Another is Lewis Carroll,
left-handed author of Alice's Adven-
tures in Wonderland and its sequel,
Through the tooking-Glass and What
Alice Found There, whose mirror-
written poem is shown above.
Most right-handers find mirror
writing difficult, but it is quite easy
for many left-handers.
Try writing your signature in
mirror writing.
handed writing and no longer force children to use the right
hand. This relatively new tolerance is fortunate, because forcible
change can cause a child to have serious problems, such as stut-
tering, right/left directional confusion, and difficulty in learning
to read.
A useful way to regard handedness is to recognize that hand
preference is the most visible outward sign of how an individual's
brain is organized. There are other outward signs: eyedness
(everyone has a dominant eye, used in sighting along an edge, for
.example) and footedness (the foot used to step off a curb or to
start a dance step). The key reason for not forcing a child to use
the nonpreferred hand is that brain organization is probably
genetically determined, and forcing a change works against this
natural organization. Natural preference is so strong that past
efforts to change left-handers often resulted in ambidexterity:
children capitulated to pressure (in the old days, even punish-
ment) and learned to use the right hand for writing but continued
to use the left for everything else.
Moreover, there is no acceptable reason for teachers or par-
ents to force a change. Reasons proffered run from "Writing with
the left hand looks so uncomfortable," to "The world is set up for
right-handers and my left-handed child would be at a disadvan-
tage." These are not good reasons, and I believe they often mask
an inherent prejudice against left-handedness—a prejudice now
rapidly disappearing, I'm happy to report.
Putting prejudice aside, there are important differences
between left-handers and right-handers. Left-handers are gener-
ally less lateralized than right-handers. Lateralization means the
degree to which specific functions are carried out almost exclu-
sively by one hemisphere. For example, left-handers more fre-
quently process language in both hemispheres and process spatial
information in both hemispheres than do right-handers. Specifi-
cally, language is mediated in the left hemisphere in 90 percent of
right-handers and 70 percent of left-handers. Of the remaining 10
percent of right-handers, about 2 percent have language located
in the right brain, and about 8 percent mediate language in both
hemispheres. Of the remaining 30 percent of left-handers, about
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
41

15 percent have language located in the right brain, and about 15
percent mediate language in both hemispheres. Note that indi-
viduals with right-hemisphere language location—termed right-
hemisphere dominance, since language dominates—often write
in the "hooked" position that seems to cause teachers so much
dismay. Scientist Jerre Levy has proposed that hand position in
writing is another outward sign of brain organization.
Do these differences matter? Individuals vary so much that
generalizations are risky. Nevertheless, experts agree in general
that a mixture of functions in both hemispheres (that is, a lesser
degree of lateralization) creates the potential for conflict or inter-
ference. It is true that left-handers statistically are more prone to
stutter and to experience the reading difficulty called dyslexia.
However, other experts suggest that bilateral distribution of func-
tions may produce superior mental abilities. Left-handers excel
in mathematics, music, and chess. And the history of art certainly
gives evidence of an advantage for left-handedness: Leonardo da
Vinci, Michelangelo, and Raphael were all left-handed.
Aztecs in early Mexico used the
left hand for medicine for kidney
trouble, the right when curing the
liver.
From The Left-Handers' Handbook,
by J. Bliss and J. Morella.
The Incas of ancient Peru
considered left-handedness a sign
of good fortune.
Former United States Vice Presi-
dent Nelson Rockefeller, a changed
left-hander, had difficulty reading
prepared speeches because of a
tendency to read backward from
right to left. The cause of this diffi-
culty may have been his father's
unrelenting effort to change his
son's left-handedness.
"Around the family dinner table, the
elder Mr. Rockefeller would put a
rubber band around his son's left
wrist, tie a long string on it and
jerk the string whenever Nelson
started to eat with his left hand, the
one he naturally favored."
— Quoted in The Left-
Handers' Handbook
by J. Bliss and J. Morella,
1980
Eventually, young Nelson
capitulated and achieved a rather
awkward ambidextrous
compromise, but he suffered the
consequences of his father's
rigidity throughout his lifetime.
Mayan Indians were pro-right:
the twitching of a soothsayer's left
leg foretold disaster.
YOUR BRAIN: THE RIGHT AND LEFT OF IT
43

A comparison of left-mode and right-mode characteristics
I
Verbal 
Using words to name, describe, define.
Nonverbal 
Using non-verbal cognition to process
perceptions.
Analytic Figuring things out step-by-step and part-
by-part.
Synthetic Putting things together to form wholes.
Symbolic Using a symbol to stand for something. For
example, the drawn form 
stands for eye,
the sign + stands for the process of addition.
Actual, real 
Relating to things as they are, at the present
moment.
Abstract Taking out a small bit of information and
using it to represent the whole thing.
Analogic 
Seeing likenesses among things; understand-
ing metaphoric relationships.
Temporal Keeping track of time, sequencing one thing
after another: Doing first things first, second
things second, etc.
Nontemporal Without a sense of time.
Rational 
Drawing conclusions based on reason and
facts.
Nonrational Not requiring a basis of reason or facts; will-
ingness to suspend judgment.
Digital 
Using numbers as in counting.
Spatial 
Seeing where things are in relation to other
things and how parts go together to form a
whole.
Logical Drawing conclusions based on logic: one
thing following another in logical order—
for example, a mathematical theorem or a
well-stated argument.
Intuitive Making leaps of insight, often based on
incomplete patterns, hunches, feelings, or
visual images.
Linear Thinking in terms of linked ideas, one
thought directly following another, often
leading to a convergent conclusion.
Holistic 
(meaning "wholistic") Seeing whole things
all at once; perceiving the overall patterns
and structures, often leading to divergent
conclusions.
44
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Handedness and drawing
Does left-handedness, then, improve a person's ability to gain
access to right-hemisphere functions such as drawing? From my
observations as a teacher, I can't say that I have noticed much
difference in ease of learning to draw between left- and right-
handers. Drawing came easily to me, for example, and I am
extremely right-handed—though, like many people, I have some
right/left confusion, perhaps indicating bilateral functions. (A
person with right/left confusion is one who says "Turn left,"
while pointing right.) But there is a point to be made here. The
process of learning to draw creates quite a lot of mental conflict.
It's possible that left-handers are more used to that kind of confl-
ict and are therefore better able to cope with the discomfort it
creates than are fully lateralized right-handers. Clearly, much
research is needed in this area.
Some art teachers recommend that right-handers shift the
pencil to the left hand, presumably to have more direct access to
R-mode. I do not agree. The problems with seeing that prevent
individuals from being able to draw do not disappear simply by
changing hands; the drawing is just more awkward. Awkwardness,
I regret to say, is viewed by some art teachers as being more cre-
ative or more interesting. I think this attitude does a disservice to
the student and is demeaning to art itself. We do not view awk-
ward language, for instance, or awkward science as being more
creative and somehow better.
A small percentage of students do discover by trying to draw
with the left hand that they actually draw more proficiently that
way. On questioning, however, it almost always comes to light that
the student has some ambidexterity or was a left-hander who had
been pressured to change. It would not even occur to a true right-
hander like myself (or to a true left-hander) to draw with the less-
used hand. But on the chance that a few of you may discover
some previously hidden ambidexterity, I encourage you to try
both hands at drawing, then settle on whichever hand feels the
most comfortable.
Sigmund Freud, Hermann von
Helmholtz, and the German poet
Schiller were afflicted with
right/left confusion. Freud wrote
to a friend:
"I do not know whether it is obvious
to other people which is their own
or other's right or left. In my case,
I had to think which was my right;
no organic feeling told me. To
make sure which was my right hand
I used quickly to make a few writ-
ing movements."
— Sigmund Freud
The Origins of Psycho-
analysis
A less august personage had the
same problem:
Pooh looked at his two paws. He
knew that one of them was the
right, and he knew that when you
had decided which one of them was
the right, that the other one was
the left, but he never could
remember how to begin. "Well," he
said slowly...
— A. A. Milne
The House at Pooh Corner
YOUR BRAIN: THE RIGHT AND LEFT OF IT
45

Psychologist Charles T. Tart,
discussing alternate states of
consciousness, has said, "Many
meditative disciplines take the
view that... one possesses (or can
develop) an Observer that is highly
objective with respect to the
ordinary personality. Because it
is an Observer that is essentially
pure attention/awareness, it has
no characteristics of its own."
Professor Tart goes on to say that
some persons who feel that they
have a fairly well-developed
Observer "feel that this Observer
can make essentially continuous
observations not only within a
particular d-SoC (discrete state
of consciousness) but also during
the transition between two or more
discrete states."
— "Putting the Pieces
Together," 1977
In the chapters to follow, I will address the instructions to
right-handers and thus avoid tedious repetition of instructions
specifically for left-handers, with no intention of the "handism"
that left-handers know so well.
Setting up the conditions for the L->R shift
The exercises in the next chapter are specifically designed to
cause a (hypothesized) mental shift from L-mode to R-mode.
The basic assumption of the exercises is that the nature of the
task can influence which mode will "take up" the job while
inhibiting the other hemisphere. But the question is what factors
determine which mode will predominate?
Through studies with animals, split-brain patients, and indi-
viduals with intact brains, scientists believe that the control ques-
tion may be decided mainly in two ways. One way is speed:
Which hemisphere gets to the job the quickest? A second way is
motivation: Which hemisphere cares most or likes the task the
best? And conversely: Which hemisphere cares least and likes the
job the least?
Since drawing a perceived form is largely an R-mode func-
tion, it helps to reduce L-mode interference as much as possible.
The problem is that the left brain is dominant and speedy and is
very prone to rush in with words and symbols, even taking over
jobs which it is not good at. The split brain studies indicated that
dominant L-mode prefers not to relinquish tasks to its mute part-
ner unless it really dislikes the job—either because the job takes
too much time, is too detailed or slow or because the left brain is
simply unable to accomplish the task. That's exactly what we
need—tasks that the dominant left brain will turn down. The
exercises that follow are designed to present the brain with a task
that the left hemisphere either can't or won't do.
46
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

And now if e'er by chance I put
My fingers into glue
Or madly squeeze a right-hand foot
Into a left-hand shoe...
— Lewis Carroll
Upon the Lonely Moor, 1856
YOUR BRAIN: THE RIGHT AND LEFT OF IT
47

Crossing Over:
Experiencing the Shift
from Left to Right

Vases and faces: An exercise for the double brain
A puzzle: "If one picture is worth
a thousand words, can a thousand
words explicate one picture?"
— Michael Stephan
A 
Transformational
Theory of Aesthetics,
London: Routledge, 1990
Fig. 4-1.
The exercises that follow are specifically designed to help you
understand the shift from dominant left-hemisphere mode to
subdominant R-mode. I could go on describing the process over
and over in words, but only you can experience for yourself this
cognitive shift, this slight change in subjective state. As Fats
Waller once said, "If you gotta ask what jazz is, you ain't never
gonna know." So it is with R-mode state: You must experience the
L- to R-mode shift, observe the R-mode state, and in this way
come to know it. As a first step, the exercise below is designed to
cause conflict between the two modes.
Following is a quick exercise designed to induce mental conflict.
What you'll need:
• Drawing paper
• Your #2 writing pencil
• Your pencil sharpener
• Your drawing board and masking tape
Figure 4-1 is a famous optical-illusion drawing, called "Vase/
Faces" because it can be seen as either:
• two facing profiles
or
• a symmetrical vase in the center.
What you'll do:
Your job, of course, is to complete the second profile, which will
inadvertently complete the symmetrical vase in the center.
Before you begin: Read all the directions for the exercise.
1. Copy the pattern (either Figure 4-2 or 4-3). If you are right-
handed, copy the profile on the left side of the paper, facing
toward the center. If you are left-handed, draw the profile on
the right side, facing toward the center. Examples are shown
of both the right-handed and left-handed drawings. Make up
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
50

your own version of the profile if you wish.
2. Next, draw horizontal lines at the top and bottom of your
profile, forming top and bottom of the vase (Figures 4-2 and
4-3).
3. Now, redraw the profile on your "Vase/Faces" pattern. Just
take your pencil and go over the lines, naming the parts as you
go, like this: "Forehead ... nose ... upper lip ... lower lip ...
chin . . . neck." You might even do that a second time, re-
drawing one more time and really thinking to yourself what
those terms mean.
4. Then, go to the other side and start to draw the missing
profile that will complete the symmetrical vase.
5. When you get to somewhere around the forehead or nose,
you may begin perhaps to experience some confusion or
conflict. Observe this as it happens.
6. The purpose of this exercise is for you to self-observe: "How
do I solve the problem?"
Begin the exercise now. It should take you about five or six min-
utes.
Why you did this exercise:
Nearly all of my students experience some confusion or conflict
while doing this exercise. A few people experience a great deal of
conflict, even a moment of paralysis. If this happened to you, you
may have come to a point where you needed to change direction
in the drawing, but didn't know which way to go. The conflict
may have been so great that you could not make your hand move
the pencil to the right or the left.
That is the purpose of the exercise: to create conflict so that
each person can experience in their own minds the mental
"crunch" that can occur when instructions are inappropriate to
the task at hand. I believe that the conflict can be explained as fol-
lows:
I gave you instructions that strongly "plugged in" the verbal
system in the brain. Remember that I insisted that you name each
Fig. 4-2. For left-handers.
Fig. 4-3. For right-handers.
CROSSING OVER: EXPERIENCING THE SHIFT FROM LEFT TO RIGHT
51

By the way, I must mention that the
eraser is just as important a tool
for drawing as the pencil. I'm not
exactly sure where the notion
"erasing is bad" came from. The
eraser allows you to correct your
drawings. My students certainly
see me erasing when I do demon-
stration drawings in our work-
shops.
part of the profile and I said, "Now, really think what those terms
mean."
Then, I gave you a task (to complete the second profile and,
simultaneously, the vase) that can only be done by shifting to the
visual, spatial mode of the brain. This is the part of the brain that
can perceive and nonverbally assess relationship of sizes, curves,
angles, and shapes.
The difficulty of making that mental shift causes a feeling of
conflict and confusion—and even a momentary mental paralysis.
You may have found a way to solve the problem, thereby
enabling yourself to complete the second profile and therefore
the symmetrical vase.
How did you solve it?
• By deciding not to think of the names of the features?
• By shifting your focus from the face-shapes to the vase-
shapes?
• By using a grid (drawing vertical and horizontal lines to help
you see relationships)? Or perhaps by marking points where
the outermost and innermost curves occurred?
• By drawing from the bottom up rather than from the top
down?
• By deciding that you didn't care whether the vase was sym-
metrical or not and drawing any old memorized profile just to
finish with the exercise? (With this last decision, the verbal
system "won" and the visual system "lost.")
Let me ask you a few more questions. Did you use your eraser to
"fix up" your drawing? If so, did you feel guilty? If so, why? (The
verbal system has a set of memorized rules, one of which may be,
"You can't use an eraser unless the teacher says it's okay.") The
visual system, which is largely without language, just keeps look-
ing for ways to solve the problem according to another kind of
logic—visual logic.
To sum up, the point of the seemingly simple "Vase/Faces"
exercise is this:
In order to draw a perceived object or person—something
that you see with your eyes—you must make a mental shift to a
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
52

brain-mode that is specialized for this visual, perceptual task.
The difficulty of making this shift from verbal to visual mode
often causes conflict. Didn't you feel it? To reduce the discomfort
of the conflict, you stopped (do you remember feeling stopped
short?) and made a new start. That's what you were doing when
you gave yourself instructions—that is, gave your brain instruc-
tions—to "shift gears," or "change strategy," or "don't do this; do
that," or whatever terms you may have used to cause a cognitive
shift.
There are numerous solutions to the mental "crunch" of the
"Vase/Faces" Exercise. Perhaps you found a unique or unusual
solution. To capture your personal solution in words, you might
want to write down what happened on the back of your drawing.
Thomas Gladwin, an anthropolo-
gist, contrasted the ways that a
European and a native Trukese
sailor navigated small boats
between tiny islands in the vast
Pacific Ocean.
Before setting sail, the European
begins with a plan that can be writ-
ten in terms of directions, degrees
of longitude and latitude, estimated
time of arrival at separate points on
the journey. Once the plan is con-
ceived and completed, the sailor
has only to carry out each step con-
secutively, one after another, to be
assured of arriving on time at the
planned destination. The sailor
uses all available tools, such as a
compass, a sextant, a map, etc., and
if asked, can describe exactly how
he got where he was going.
The European navigator uses the left-
hemisphere mode.
In contrast, the native Trukese
sailor starts his voyage by imaging
the position of his destination relative
to the position of other islands. As he
sails along, he constantly adjusts his
direction according to his aware-
ness of his position thus far. His
decisions are improvised continu-
ally by checking relative positions
of landmarks, sun, wind direction,
etc. He navigates with reference to
where he started, where he is going,
and the space between his destina-
tion and the point where he is at the
moment. If asked how he navigates
so well without instruments or a
written plan, he cannot possibly
put it into words. This is not
because the Trukese are unaccus-
tomed to describing things in
words, but rather because the
process is too complex and fluid to
be put into words.
The Trukese navigator uses the right-
hemisphere mode.
—J. A. Paredes and M. J. Hepburn
"The Split-Brain and the Culture-
Cognition Paradox," 1976
CROSSING OVER: EXPERIENCING THE SHIFT FROM LEFT TO RIGHT
53

Charles Tart, professor of psy-
chology at the University of Cali-
fornia, Davis, states: "We begin
with a concept of some kind of
basic awareness, some kind of basic
ability to 'know' or 'sense' or 'cog-
nize' or 'recognize' that something
is happening. This is a fundamental
theoretical and experiential given.
We do not know scientifically what
the ultimate nature of awareness is,
but it is our starting point."
— Charles T. Tart
Alternate States of
Consciousness, 1975
Navigating a drawing in right-hemisphere mode
When you did your drawing of the Vase/Faces, you drew the first
profile in the left-hemisphere mode, like the European navigator,
taking one part at a time and naming the parts one by one. The
second profile was drawn in the right-hemisphere mode. Like the
navigator from the South Sea Island of Truk, you constantly
scanned to adjust the direction of the line. You probably found
that naming the parts such as forehead, nose, or mouth seemed to
confuse you. It was better not to think of the drawing as a face. It
was easier to use the shape of the space between the two profiles
as your guide. Stated differently, it was easiest not to think at all—
that is, in words. In right-hemisphere-mode drawing, the mode of
the artist, if you do use words to think, ask yourself only such
things as:
"Where does that curve start?"
"How deep is that curve?"
"What is that angle relative to the edge of the paper?"
"How long is that line relative to the one I've just drawn?"
"Where is that point as I scan across to the other side—where
is that point relative to the distance from the top (or bottom) edge
of the paper?"
These are R-mode questions: spatial, relational, and compar-
ative. Notice that no parts are named. No statements are made,
no conclusions drawn, such as, "The chin must come out as far as
the nose," or "Noses are curved."
A brief review: What is learned in "learning to draw"?
Realistic drawing of a perceived image requires the visual mode
of the brain, most often mainly located in the right hemisphere.
This visual mode of thinking is fundamentally different from the
brain's verbal system—the one we largely rely on nearly all of
our waking hours.
For most tasks, the two modes are combined. Drawing a per-
ceived object or person may be one of the few tasks that requires
mainly one mode: the visual mode largely unassisted by the ver-
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
54

bal mode. There are other examples. Athletes and dancers, for
instance, seem to perform best by quieting the verbal system dur-
ing performances. Moreover, a person who needs to shift in the
other direction, from visual to verbal mode, can also experience
conflict. A surgeon once told me that while operating on a patient
(mainly a visual task, once a surgeon has acquired the knowledge
and experience needed) he would find himself unable to name
the instruments. He would hear himself saying to an attendant,
"Give me the... the... you know, the... thingamajig!"
Learning to draw, therefore, turns out not to be "learning to
draw." Paradoxically, learning to draw means learning to access at
will that system in the brain that is the appropriate one for draw-
ing. Putting it another way, accessing the visual mode of the
brain—the appropriate mode for drawings—causes you to see in
the special way an artist sees. The artist's way of seeing is differ-
ent from ordinary seeing and requires an ability to make mental
shifts at conscious level. Put another way and perhaps more accu-
rately, the artist is able to set up conditions that cause a cognitive
shift to "happen." That is what a person trained in drawing does,
and that is what you are about to learn.
Again, this ability to see things differently has many uses in
life aside from drawing—not the least of which is creative prob-
lem solving.
Keeping the "Vase/Faces" lesson in mind, then, try the next
exercise, one that I designed to reduce conflict between the two
brain-modes. The purpose of this exercise is just the reverse of
the previous one.
Upside-down drawing: Making the shift to R-mode
Familiar things do not look the same when they are upside down.
We automatically assign a top, a bottom, and sides to the things
we perceive, and we expect to see things oriented in the usual
way—that is, right side up. For, in upright orientation, we can
recognize familiar things, name them, and categorize them by
matching what we see with our stored memories and concepts.
When an image is upside down, the visual clues don't match.
"The object of painting a picture is
not to make a picture—however
unreasonable that may sound ...
The object, which is back of every
true work of art, is the attainment
of a state of being [Henri's empha-
sis], a state of high functioning, a
more than ordinary moment of
existence. [The picture] is but a
by-product of the state, a trace, the
footprint of the state."
From The Art Spirit by American
artist and teacher Robert Henri,
B. Lippincott Company, 1923.
CROSSING OVER: EXPERIENCING THE SHIFT FROM LEFT TO RIGHT
55

The message is strange, and the brain becomes confused. We see
the shapes and the areas of light and shadow. We don't particu-
larly object to looking at upside-down pictures unless we are
called on to name the image. Then the task becomes exasperat-
ing.
Seen upside down, even well-known faces are difficult to rec-
ognize and name. For example, the photograph in Figure 4-4 is of
a famous person. Do you recognize who it is?
You may have had to turn the photograph right side up to see
that it is Albert Einstein, the famous scientist. Even after you
Fig. 4-4. Photograph by Philippe Halsman.
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
56

know who the person is, the upside-down image probably contin-
ues to look strange.
Inverted orientation causes recognition problems with other
images (see Figure 4-5). Your own handwriting, turned upside
down, is probably difficult for you to figure out, although you've
been reading it for years. To test this, find an old shopping list or
letter in your handwriting and try to read it upside down.
A complex drawing, such as the one shown upside down in
the Tiepolo drawing, Figure 4-6, is almost indecipherable. The
(left) mind just gives up on it.
Upside-down drawing
An exercise that reduces mental conflict
We shall use this gap in the abilities of the left hemisphere to
allow R-mode to have a chance to take over for a while.
Figure 4-7 is a reproduction of a line drawing by Picasso of
the composer Igor Stravinsky. The image is upside down. You will
be copying the upside-down image. Your drawing, therefore, will
be done also upside down. In other words, you will copy the
Picasso drawing just as you see it. See Figures 4-8 and 4-9.
What you'll need:
• The reproduction of the Picasso drawing, Fig. 4-7, p. 58.
• Your #2 writing pencil, sharpened.
• Your drawing board and masking tape.
• Forty minutes to an hour of uninterrupted time.
What you'll do:
Before you begin: Read all of the following instructions.
1. Play music if you like. As you shift into R-mode, you may find
that the music fades out. Finish the drawing in one sitting,
allowing yourself at least forty minutes—more if possible.
And more important, do not turn the drawing right side up
until you have finished. Turning the drawing would cause a
shift back to L-mode, which we want to avoid while you are
Fig. 4-5. In copying signatures,
forgers turn the originals upside
down to see the exact shapes of the
letters more clearly—to see, in
fact, in the artist's mode.
Fig. 4-6. Giovanni Battista Tiepolo
(1696-1770), The Death of Seneca.
Courtesy of The Art Institute of
Chicago, Joseph and Helen Regen-
stein Collection.
CROSSING OVER: EXPERIENCING THE SHIFT FROM LEFT TO RIGHT
57

Photograph by Philippe Haisman,
1947. © Yvonne Haisman, 1989. This
is the full photograph shown
upside down on the page 56. We
are indebted to Yvonne Haisman
for allowing this unorthodox pre-
sentation of Philippe Halsman's
famous image of Einstein.
learning to experience the focused R-mode state of aware-
ness.
2. You may start anywhere you wish—bottom, either side, or
the top. Most people tend to start at the top. Try not to figure
out what you are looking at in the upside-down image. It is
better not to know. Simply start copying the lines. But
remember: don't turn the drawing right side up!
Fig. 4-7. Pablo Picasso (1881-1973), Portrait of Igor Stravinsky. Paris, May 21,
1920 (dated). Privately owned.
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
58

3. I recommend that you not try to draw the entire outline of
the form and then "fill in" the parts. The reason is that if you
make any small error in the outline, the parts inside won't fit.
One of the great joys of drawing is the discovery of how the
parts fit together. Therefore, I recommend that you move
from line to adjacent line, space to adjacent shape, working
your way through the drawing, fitting the parts together as
you go.
4. If you talk to yourself at all, use only the language of vision,
such as: "This line bends this way," or, "That shape has a curve
there," or "Compared to the edge of the paper (vertical or
horizontal), this line angles like that," and so on. What you do
not want to do is to name the parts.
5. When you come to parts that seem to force their names on
you—the H-A-N-D-S and the F-A-C-E—try to focus on
these parts just as shapes. You might even cover up with one
hand or finger all but the specific line you are drawing and
then uncover each adjacent line. Alternatively, you might shift
to another part of the drawing.
6. At some point, the drawing may begin to seem like an inter-
esting, even fascinating, puzzle. When this happens, you will
be "really drawing," meaning that you have successfully
shifted to R-mode and you are seeing clearly. This state is
easily broken. For example, if someone were to come into the
room and ask, "How are you doing?" your verbal system
would be reactivated and your focus and concentration would
be over.
7. You may even want to cover most of the reproduced drawing
with another piece of paper, slowly uncovering new areas as
you work your way down through the drawing. A note of cau-
tion, however: Some of my students find this ploy helpful,
while some find it distracting and unhelpful.
8. Remember that everything you need to know in order to
draw the image is right in front of your eyes. All of the infor-
mation is right there, making it easy for you. Don't make it
complicated. It really is as simple as that.
Begin your Upside-Down Drawing now.
Figs. 4-8,4-9. Inverted drawing.
Forcing the cognitive shift from the
dominant left-hemisphere mode to
the subdominant right-hemisphere
mode.
CROSSING OVER: EXPERIENCING THE SHIFT FROM LEFT TO RIGHT
59

Fig. 4-10. "I Want You for U S.
Army" by James Montgomery
Flagg, 1917 poster. Permission:
Trustees of the Imperial War
Museum, London, England.
Uncle Sam's arm and hand are
"foreshortened" in this Army
poster. Foreshortening is an art
term. It means that, in order to
give the illusion of forms advancing
or receding in space, the forms
must be drawn just as they appear
in that position, not depicting what
we know about their actual length.
Learning to "foreshorten" is often
difficult for beginners in drawing.
Fig. 4-11; near right: The Picasso
drawing mistakenly copied right
side up by a university student.
Fig. 4-12; far right: The Picasso
drawing copied upside down the
next day by the same student.
After you have finished:
Turn both of the drawings—the reproduction in the book and
your copy—right side up. I can confidently predict that you will
be pleased with your drawing, especially if you have thought in
the past that you would never be able to draw.
I can also confidently predict that the most "difficult" parts,
the "foreshortened" areas, are beautifully drawn, creating a spa-
tial illusion.
Yet, see what you have accomplished, drawing upside down.
If you used Picasso's drawing of Igor Stravinsky seated in a chair,
you drew the crossed legs beautifully in foreshortened view. For
most of my students, this is the finest part of their drawing,
despite the foreshortening. How could they draw this "difficult"
part so well? Because they didn't know what they were drawing!
They simply drew what they saw, just as they saw it—one of the
most important keys to drawing well. The same applies to the
foreshortened horse in the German drawing, Figure 4-13.
A logical box for L-mode
Figure 4-11 and Figure 4-12 show two drawings by the same uni-
versity student. This student had misunderstood my instructions
to the class and did the drawing right side up. When he came to
class the next day, he showed me his drawing and said, "I misun-
derstood. I just drew it the regular way." I asked him to do another
drawing, this time upside down. He did, and Fig. 4-12 was the
result.
It goes against common sense that the upside-down drawing
60
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

is so far superior to the drawing done right side up. The student
himself was astonished.
This puzzle puts L-mode into a logical box: how to account
for this sudden ability to draw well, when the verbal mode has
been eased out of the task. The left brain, which admires a job
well done, must now consider the possibility that the disdained
right brain is good at drawing
For reasons that are still unclear, the verbal system immedi-
ately rejects the task of "reading" and naming upside-down
images. L-mode seems to say, in effect, "I don't do upside down.
It's too hard to name things seen this way, and, besides, the world
isn't upside down. Why should I bother with such stuff?"
Well, that's just what we want! On the other hand, the visual
system seems not to care. Right side up, upside down, it's all
interesting, perhaps even more interesting upside down because
R-mode is free of interference from its verbal partner, which is
often in a "rush to judgment" or, at least, a rush to recognize and
name.
"Our normal waking consciousness,
rational consciousness, as we call
it, is but one special type of con-
sciousness, whilst all about it,
parted from it by the filmiest of
screens, there lie potential forms of
consciousness entirely different.
We may go through life without
suspecting their existence; but
apply the requisite stimulus, and at
a touch they are there in all their
completeness, definite types of
mentality which probably some-
where have their field of applica-
tion and adaptation."
— William James
The Varieties of Religious
Experience, 1902
Why you did this exercise:
The reason you did this exercise, therefore, is to experience
escaping the clash of conflicting modes—the kind of conflict and
even mental paralysis that the "Vase/Faces" exercise caused.
When L-mode drops out voluntarily, conflict is avoided and R-
mode quickly takes up the task that is appropriate for it: drawing
a perceived image.
Getting to know the L->R shift
Two important points of progress emerge from the upside-down
exercise. The first is your conscious recall of how you felt after
you made the L->R cognitive shift. The quality of the R-mode
state of consciousness is different from the L-mode. One can
detect those differences and begin to recognize when the cogni-
tive shift has occurred. Oddly, the moment of shifting between
states of consciousness always remains out of awareness. For
example, one can be aware of being alert and then of being in a
L-mode is the "right-handed,"
left-hemisphere mode. The L is
foursquare, upright, sensible,
direct, true, hard-edged, unfanci-
ful, forceful.
R-mode is the "left-handed,"
right-hemisphere mode. The R is
curvy, flexible, more playful in its
unexpected twists and turns, more
complex, diagonal, fanciful.
CROSSING OVER: EXPERIENCING THE SHIFT FROM LEFT TO RIGHT
61

"I have supposed a Human Being to
be capable of various physical
states, and varying degrees of con-
sciousness, as follows:
"(a) the ordinary state, with no con-
sciousness of the presence of
Fairies;
"(b) the 'eerie' state, in which, while
conscious of actual surroundings,
he is also conscious of the presence
of Fairies;
"(c) a form of trance, in which,
while unconscious of actual sur-
rounding, and apparently asleep,
he (i.e., his immaterial essence)
migrates to other scenes, in the
actual world, or in Fairyland, and
is conscious of the presence of
Fairies."
— Lewis Carroll
Preface to Sylvie and
Bruno
daydream, but the moment of shifting between the two states
remains elusive. Similarly, the moment of the cognitive shift from
L->R remains out of awareness, but once you have made the
shift, the difference in the two states is accessible to knowing.
This knowing will help to bring the shift under conscious con-
trol—a main goal of these lessons.
The second insight gained from the exercise is your aware-
ness that shifting to the R-mode enables you to see in the way a
trained artist sees, and therefore to draw what you perceive.
Now, it's obvious that we can't always be turning things
upside down. Your models are not going to stand on their heads
for you, nor is the landscape going to turn itself upside down or
inside out. Our goal, then, is to teach you how to make the cogni-
tive shift when perceiving things in their normal right-side-up
positions. You will learn the artist's "gambit": to direct your atten-
tion toward visual information that L-mode cannot or will not
process. In other words, you will always try to present your brain
with a task the language system will refuse, thus allowing R-
mode to use its capability for drawing. Exercises in the coming
chapters will show you some ways to do this.
A review of R-mode
It might be helpful to review what R-mode feels like. Think back.
You have made the shift several times now—slightly, perhaps,
while doing the Vase/Faces drawings and more intensely just
now while drawing the "Stravinsky."
In the R-mode state, did you notice that you were somewhat
unaware of the passage of time—that the time you spent drawing
may have been long or short, but you couldn't have known until
you checked it afterward? If there were people near, did you
notice that you couldn't listen to what they said—in fact, that you
didn't want to hear? You may have heard sounds, but you proba-
bly didn't care about figuring out the meaning of what was being
said. And were you aware of feeling alert, but relaxed—confident,
interested, absorbed in the drawing and clear in your mind?
Most of my students have characterized the R-mode state of
62
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

consciousness in these terms, and the terms coincide with my
own experience and accounts related to me of artists' experi-
ences. One artist told me, "When I'm really working well, it's like
nothing else I've ever experienced. I feel at one with the work: the
painter, the painting, it's all one. I feel excited, but calm—exhila-
rated, but in full control. It's not exactly happiness; it's more like
bliss. I think it's what keeps me coming back and back to painting
and drawing."
R-mode state is indeed pleasurable, and in that mode you can
draw well. But there is an additional advantage: Shifting to R-
mode releases you for a time from the verbal, symbolic domina-
tion of L-mode, and that's a welcome relief. The pleasure may
come from resting the left hemisphere, stopping its chatter, keep-
ing it quiet for a change. This yearning to quiet L-mode may par-
tially explain centuries-old practices such as meditation and
self-induced altered states of consciousness achieved through
fasting, drugs, chanting, and alcohol. Drawing induces a focused,
alert state of consciousness that can last for hours, bringing
significant satisfaction.
Before you read further, do at least one or two more drawings
upside down. Use either the reproduction in Figure 4-13, or find
other line drawings to copy. Each time you draw, try consciously
to experience the R-mode shift, so that you become familiar with
how it feels to be in that mode.
"I know perfectly well that only in
happy instants am I lucky enough
to lose myself in my work. The
painter-poet feels that his true
immutable essence comes from
that invisible realm that offers him
an image of eternal reality....
I feel that I do not exist in time,
but that time exists in me. I can
also realize that it is not given to
me to solve the mystery of art in
an absolute fashion. Nonetheless,
I am almost brought to believe that
I am about to get my hands on the
divine."
— Carlo Carra
"The Quadrant of the
Spirit," 1919
Recalling the art of your childhood
In the next chapter we'll review your childhood development as
an artist. The developmental sequence of children's art is linked
to development changes in the brain. In the early stages, infants'
brain hemispheres are not clearly specialized for separate func-
tions. Lateralization—the consolidation of specific functions into
one hemisphere or the other—progresses gradually through the
childhood years, paralleling the acquisition of language skills and
the symbols of childhood art.
Lateralization is usually complete by around age ten, and this
coincides with the period of conflict in children's art, when the
CROSSING OVER: EXPERIENCING THE SHIFT FROM LEFT TO RIGHT
63

This sixteenth-century drawing by
an unknown German artist offers a
wonderful opportunity to practice
upside-down drawing.
Fig. 4-13. Line drawing copy of the German horse and rider.
64
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

symbol system seems to override perceptions and to interfere
with accurate drawing of those perceptions. One could speculate
that conflict arises because children may be using the "wrong"
brain mode—L-mode—to accomplish a task best suited for R-
mode. Perhaps they simply cannot work out a way to shift to the
visual mode. Also, by age ten, language dominates, adding further
complication as names and symbols overpower spatial, holistic
perceptions.
Reviewing your childhood art is important for several rea-
sons: to look back as an adult at how your set of drawing symbols
developed from infancy onward; to reexperience the increasing
complexity of your drawing as you approached adolescence; to
recall the discrepancy between your perceptions and your draw-
ing skills; to view your childhood drawings with a less critical eye
than you were able to manage at the time; and finally, to set your
childhood symbol system aside and move on to an adult level of
visual expression by using the appropriate brain mode—the right
mode—for the task of drawing.
CROSSING OVER: EXPERIENCING THE SHIFT FROM LEFT TO RIGHT
65

Drawing on
Memories: Your
History as an Artist

"When I was a child, I spake as a
child, I understood as a child,
I thought as a child: but when I
became a man, I put away childish
things."
— 1 Cor. 13:11
Fig. 5-1.
Fig. 5-2.
HE MAJORITY OF ADULTS IN THE WESTERN WORLD do not
progress in art skills much beyond the level of develop-
ment they reached at age nine or ten. In most mental and physical
activities, individuals' skills change and develop as they grow to
adulthood: Speech is one example, handwriting another. The
development of drawing skills, however, seems to halt unac-
countably at an early age for most people. In our culture, chil-
dren, of course, draw like children, but most adults also draw like
children, no matter what level they may have achieved in other
areas of life. For example, Figures 5-1 and 5-2 illustrate the persis-
tence of childlike forms in drawings that were done recently by a
brilliant young professional man who was just completing a doc-
toral degree at a major university.
I watched the man as he did the drawings, watched him as he
regarded the models, drew a bit, erased and drew again, for about
twenty minutes. During this time, he became restless and seemed
tense and frustrated. Later he told me that he hated his drawings
and that he hated drawing, period.
If we were to attach a label to this disability in the way that
educators have attached the label dyslexia to reading problems,
we might call the problem dyspictoria or dysartistica or some
such term. But no one has done so because drawing is not a vital
skill for survival in our culture, whereas speech and reading are.
Therefore, hardly anyone seems to notice that many adults draw
childlike drawings and many children give up drawing at age nine
or ten. These children grow up to become the adults who say that
they never could draw and can't even draw a straight line. The
same adults, however, if questioned, often say that they would
have liked to learn to draw well, just for their own satisfaction at
solving the drawing problems that plagued them as children. But
they feel that they had to stop drawing because they simply
couldn't learn how to draw.
A consequence of this early cutting off of artistic develop-
ment is that fully competent and self-confident adults often
become suddenly self-conscious, embarrassed, and anxious if
they are asked to draw a picture of a human face or figure. In this
situation, individuals often say such things as "No, I can't! What-
68
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN1
T

ever I draw is always terrible. It looks like a kid's drawing." Or, "I
don't like to draw. It makes me feel so stupid." You yourself may
have felt a twinge or two of those feelings when you did the Pre-
instruction drawings.
The crisis period
The beginning of adolescence seems to mark the abrupt end of
artistic development in terms of drawing skills for many adults.
As children, they confronted an artistic crisis, a conflict between
their increasingly complex perceptions of the world around them
and their current level of art skills.
Most children between the ages of about nine and eleven
have a passion for realistic drawing. They become sharply critical
of their childhood drawings and begin to draw certain favorite
subjects over and over again, attempting to perfect the image.
Anything short of perfect realism may be regarded as failure.
Perhaps you can remember your own attempts at that age to
make things "look right" in your drawings, and your feeling of
disappointment with the results. Drawings you might have been
proud of at an earlier age probably seemed hopelessly wrong and
embarrassing. Looking at your drawings, you may have said, as
many adolescents say, "This is terrible! I have no talent for art.
I never liked it anyway, so I'm not doing it anymore."
Children often abandon art as an expressive activity for
another unfortunately frequent reason. Unthinking people some-
times make sarcastic or derogatory remarks about children's art.
The thoughtless person may be a teacher, a parent, another child,
or perhaps an admired older brother or sister. Many adults have
related to me their painfully clear memories of someone ridicul-
ing their attempts at drawing. Sadly, children often blame the
drawing for causing the hurt, rather than blaming the careless
critic. Therefore, to protect the ego from further damage, chil-
dren react defensively, and understandably so: They seldom ever
attempt to draw again.
As an expert on children's art,
Miriam Lindstrom of the San
Francisco Art Museum, described
the adolescent art student:
"Discontented with his own accom-
plishments and extremely anxious
to please others with his art, he
tends to give up original creation
and personal expression.... Fur-
ther development of his visualizing
powers and even his capacity for
original thought and for relating
himself through personal feelings
to his environment may be blocked
at this point. It is a crucial stage
beyond which many adults have not
advanced."
— Miriam Lindstrom
Children's Art, 1957
DRAWING ON MEMORIES: YOUR HISTORY AS AN ARTIST
69

Art in school
"The scribblings of any... child
clearly indicate how thoroughly
immersed he is in the sensation
of moving his hand and crayon
aimlessly over a surface, depositing
a line in his path. There must be
some quantity of magic in this
alone."
— Edward Hill
The Language of Drawing,
1966
Even sympathetic art teachers, who may feel dismayed by unfair
criticism of children's art and who want to help, become discour-
aged by the style of drawing that young adolescents prefer—
complex, detailed scenes, labored attempts at realistic drawing,
endless repetitions of favorite themes such as racing cars, and so
on. Teachers recall the beguiling freedom and charm of younger
children's work and wonder what happened. They deplore what
they see as "tightness" and "lack of creativity" in students' draw-
ings. The children themselves often become their own most
unrelenting critics. Consequently, teachers frequently resort to
crafts projects because they seem safer and cause less anguish—
projects such as paper mosaics, string painting, drip painting, and
other manipulations of materials.
As a result, most students do not learn how to draw in the
early and middle grades. Their self-criticism becomes perma-
nent, and they very rarely try to learn how to draw later in life.
Like the doctoral candidate mentioned earlier, they might grow
up to be highly skilled in a number of areas, but if asked to draw a
human being, they will produce the same childlike image they
were drawing at age ten.
From infancy to adolescence
For most of my students, it has proved beneficial to go back in
time to try to understand how their visual imagery in drawing
developed from infancy to adolescence. With a firm grasp on how
the symbol system of childhood drawing has developed, students
seem to "unstick" their artistic development more easily in order
to move on to adult skills.
The scribbling stage
Making marks on paper begins at about age one and a half, when
you as an infant were given a pencil or crayon, and you, by your-
self, made a mark. It's hard for us to imagine the sense of wonder
a child experiences on seeing a black line emerge from the end of
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
70

a stick, a line the child controls. You and I, all of us, had that
experience.
After a tentative start, you probably scribbled with delight on
every available surface, perhaps including your parents' best
books and the walls of a bedroom or two. Your scribbles were
seemingly quite random at first, like the example in Figure 5-3,
but very quickly began to take on definite shapes. One of the basic
scribbling movements is a circular one, probably arising simply
from the way the shoulder, arm, wrist, hand, and fingers work
together. A circular movement is a natural movement—more so,
for instance, than the arm movements required to draw a square.
(Try both on a piece of paper, and you'll see what I mean.)
The stage of symbols
After some days or weeks of scribbling, infants—and apparently
all human children—make the basic discovery of art: A drawn
symbol can stand for something out there in the environment.
The child makes a circular mark, looks at it, adds two marks for
eyes, points to the drawing, and says, "Mommy," or "Daddy," or
"That's me," or "My dog," or whatever. Thus, we all made the
uniquely human leap of insight that is the foundation for art,
from the prehistoric cave paintings all the way up through the
centuries to the art of Leonardo, Rembrandt, and Picasso.
With great delight, infants draw circles with eyes, mouth, and
lines sticking out to represent arms and legs, as in Figure 5-4.
This form, a symmetrical, circular form, is a basic form univer-
sally drawn by infants. The circular form can be used for almost
anything: With slight variations, the basic pattern can stand for a
human being, a cat, a sun, a jellyfish, an elephant, a crocodile, a
flower, or a germ. For you as a child, the picture was whatever you
said it was, although you probably made subtle and charming
adjustments of the basic form to get the idea across.
By the time children are about three and a half, the imagery
of their art becomes more complex, reflecting growing awareness
and perceptions of the world. A body is attached to the head,
though it may be smaller than the head. Arms may still grow out
Fig. 5-3. Scribble drawing by a two-
and-a-half-year-old.
Fig. 5-4. Figure-image drawing by
a three-and-a-half-year-old.
DRAWING ON MEMORIES: YOUR HISTORY AS AN ARTIST
71

Children's repeated images
become known to fellow students
and teachers, as shown in this won-
derful cartoon by Brenda Burbank.
of the head, but more often they emerge from the body—some-
times from below the waist. Legs are attached to the body.
By age four, children are keenly aware of details of cloth-
ing—buttons and zippers, for example, appear as details of the
drawings. Fingers appear at the ends of arms and hands, and toes
at the ends of legs and feet. Numbers of fingers and toes vary
imaginatively. I have counted as many as thirty-one fingers on
one hand and as few as one toe per foot (Figure 5-4).
Although children's drawings of figures resemble each other
in many ways, each child works out through trial and error a
favorite image, which becomes refined through repetition. Chil-
dren draw their special images over and over, memorizing them
and adding details as time goes on. These favorite ways to draw
various parts of the image eventually become embedded in the
memory and are remarkably stable over time (Figure 5-5).
Fig. 5-6.
Fig. 5-5. Notice that the features are the same in each figure—including
the cat—and that the little hand symbol is also used for the cat's paws.
Pictures that tell stories
Around age four or five, children begin to use drawings to tell sto-
ries and to work out problems, using small or gross adjustments of
the basic forms to express their intended meaning. For example,
in Figure 5-6, the young artist has made the arm that holds the
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
72

Using his basic figure symbol, he
first drew himself.
He then added his mother, using the
same basic figure configuration with
adjustments—long hair, a dress.
umbrella huge in relation to the other arm, because the arm that
holds the umbrella is the important point of the drawing.
Another instance of using drawing to portray feelings is a
family portrait, drawn by a shy five-year-old whose every waking
moment apparently was dominated by his older sister.
Even Picasso could hardly have expressed a feeling with
greater power than that. Once the feeling was drawn, giving form
to formless emotions, the child who drew the family portrait may
have been better able to cope with his overwhelming sister.
The landscape
By around age five or six, children have developed a set of sym-
bols to create a landscape. Again, by a process of trial and error,
children usually settle on a single version of a symbolic land-
scape, which is endlessly repeated. Perhaps you can remember
the landscape you drew around age five or six.
What were the components of that landscape? First, the
ground and sky. Thinking symbolically, a child knows that the
ground is at the bottom and the sky is at the top. Therefore, the
ground is the bottom edge of the paper, and the sky is the top
edge, as in Figure 5-7. Children emphasize this point, if they are
working with color, by painting a green stripe across the bottom,
blue across the top.
Most children's landscapes contain some version of a house.
Try to call up in your mind's eye an image of the house you drew.
Did it have windows? With curtains? And what else? A door?
He then added his father, who was
bald and wore glasses.
He then added his sister, with
teeth.
DRAWING ON MEMORIES: YOUR HISTORY AS AN ARTIST
73

Fig. 5-7. Landscape drawing by a
six-year-old. This house is very
close to the viewer. The bottom
edge of the paper functions as the
ground. To a child it seems that
every part of the drawing surface
has symbolic meaning, the empty
spaces of this surface functioning
as air through which smoke rises,
the sun's rays shine, and birds fly.
Fig. 5-8. Landscape drawing by a
six-year-old. This house is farther
away from the viewer and has a
wonderfully self-satisfied expres-
sion, enclosed as it is under the arc
of a rainbow.
What was on the door? A doorknob, of course, because that's how
you get in. I have never seen an authentic, child-drawn house
with a missing doorknob.
You may begin to remember the rest of your landscape: the
sun (did you use a corner sun or a circle with radiating rays?), the
clouds, the chimney, the flowers, the trees (did yours have a con-
venient limb sticking out for a swing?), the mountains (were
yours like upside-down ice cream cones?). And what else? A road
going back? A fence? Birds?
At this point, before you read any further, please take a sheet
of paper and draw the landscape that you drew as a child. Label
your drawing "Recalled Childhood Landscape." You may
remember this image with surprising clarity as a whole image,
complete in all its parts; or it may come back to you more gradu-
ally as you begin to draw.
While you are drawing the landscape, try also to recall the
pleasure drawing gave you as a child, the satisfaction with which
each symbol was drawn, and the sense of Tightness about the
placement of each symbol within the drawing. Recall the sense
that nothing must be left out and, when all the symbols were in
place, your sense that the drawing was complete.
If you can't recall the drawing at this point, don't be con-
cerned. You may recall it later. If not, it may simply indicate that
you've blocked it out for some reason. Usually about ten percent
of my adult students are unable to recall their childhood draw-
ings.
Before we go on, let's take a minute to look at some recalled
childhood landscapes drawn by adults. First, you will observe
that the landscapes are personalized images, each different from
the other. Observe also that in every case the composition—the
way the elements of each drawing are composed or distributed
within the four edges—seems exactly right, in the sense that not a
single element could be added or removed without disturbing the
Tightness of the whole (Figure 5-9). Let me demonstrate that by
showing you what happens in Figure 5-10 when one form (the
tree) is removed. Test this concept in your own recalled land-
scape by covering one form at a time. You will find that removing
74
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

any single form throws off the balance of the whole picture. Fig-
ures 5-9.and 5-10 show examples of some of the other characteris-
tics of childhood landscape drawings.
After you have looked at the examples, observe your own
drawing. Observe the composition (the way the forms are
arranged and balanced within the four edges). Observe distance
as a factor in the composition. Try to characterize the expression
of the house, at first wordlessly and then in words. Cover one ele-
ment and see what effect that has on the composition. Think back
on how you did the drawing. Did you do it with a sense of sure-
ness, knowing where each part was to go? For each part, did you
find that you had an exact symbol that was perfect in itself and fit
perfectly with the other symbols? You may have been aware of
feeling the same sense of satisfaction that you felt as a child when
the forms were in place and the image completed.
The stage of complexity
Now, like the ghosts in Dickens's A Christmas Carol, we'll move you
on to observe yourself at a slightly later age, at nine or ten. Possi-
bly you may remember some of the drawings you did at that
age—in the fifth, sixth, or seventh grade.
During this period, children try. for more detail in their art-
work, hoping by this means to achieve greater realism, which is a
prized goal. Concern for composition diminishes, the forms often
being placed almost at random on the page. Seemingly, children's
concern for where things are in the drawing is replaced with con-
cern for how things look, particularly the details of forms. Over-
all, drawings by older children show greater complexity and, at
the same time, less assurance than do the landscapes of early
childhood.
Also around this time, children's drawings become differenti-
ated by sex, probably because of cultural factors. Boys begin to
draw automobiles—hot rods and racing cars; war scenes with
dive bombers, submarines, tanks, and rockets. They draw leg-
endary figures and heroes—bearded pirates, Viking crewmen and
their ships, television stars, mountain climbers, and deep-sea
Fig. 5-9.
Fig. 5-10.
Children seem to start out with a
nearly perfect sense of composi-
tion, which they often lose during
adolescence and regain only
through laborious study. I believe
that the reason may be that older
children concentrate their percep-
tions on separate objects existing
in an undifferentiated space,
whereas young children construct
a self-contained conceptual world
bounded by the paper's edges.
For older children, however, the
edges of the paper seem almost
nonexistent, just as edges are
nonexistent in open, real space.
DRAWING ON MEMORIES: YOUR HISTORY AS AN ARTIST
75

divers. They are fascinated by block letters, especially mono-
grams; and some odd images such as (my favorite) an eyeball
complete with piercing dagger and pools of blood.
Meanwhile, girls are drawing tamer things—flowers in vases,
waterfalls, mountains reflected in still lakes, pretty girls running
or sitting on the grass, fashion models with incredible eyelashes,
elaborate hairstyles, tiny waists and feet, and hands held behind
the back because hands are "hard to draw."
Figures 5-11 through 5-14 are some examples of these early
adolescent drawings. I've included a cartoon drawing: Cartoons
are drawn by both boys and girls and are much admired. I believe
that cartooning appeals to children at this age because cartoons
employ familiar symbolic forms but are used in a more sophisti-
cated way, thus enabling adolescents to avoid feeling that their
drawing is "babyish."
Fig. 5-11. Gruesome eyeballs are a
favorite theme of adolescent boys.
Meanwhile, girls are drawing
tamer subjects such as this bride.
76
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Fig. 5-12. Complex drawing by
Naveen Molloy, then ten years old.
This is an example of the kind of
drawing by adolescents that teach-
ers often deplore as "tight" and
uncreative. Young artists work very
hard to perfect images like this one
of electronic equipment. Note the
keyboard and mouse. The child
will soon reject this image, how-
ever, as hopelessly inadequate.
Fig. 5-13. Complex drawing by a
nine-year-old girl. Transparency is
a recurrent theme in the drawings
of children at this stage. Things
seen under water, through glass
windows, or in transparent vases—
as in this drawing—are all favorite
themes. Though one could guess at
a psychological meaning, it is quite
likely that young artists are simply
trying this idea to see if they can
make the drawings "look right."
Fig. 5-14. Complex drawing by a
ten-year-old boy. Cartooning is a
favorite form of art in the early
adolescent years. As art educator
Miriam Lindstrom notes in
Children's Art, the level of taste at
this age is at an all-time low.
DRAWING ON MEMORIES: YOUR HISTORY AS AN ARTIST
77

The stage of realism
By around age ten or eleven, children's passion for realism is in
full bloom (Figures 5-15 and 5-16). When their drawings don't
come out "right"—meaning that they don't look realistic—chil-
dren often become discouraged and ask their teachers for help.
The teacher may say, "You must look more carefully," but this
doesn't help, because the child doesn't know what to look more
carefully for. Let me illustrate that with an example.
Fig. 5-15. Realistic drawing by a twelve-year-old.
Children aged ten to twelve are searching for ways to
make things "look real." Figure drawing in particular
fascinates adolescents. In this drawing, symbols from
an earlier stage are fitted into new perceptions: Note
the front-view eye in this profile drawing. Note also
that the child's knowledge of the chair back has been
substituted for the purely visual appearance of the
back of the chair seen from the side.
Fig. 5-16. Realistic drawing by a twelve-year-old. At
this stage, children's main effort is toward achieving
realism. Awareness of the edges of the drawing sur-
face fades and attention is concentrated on individual,
unrelated forms randomly distributed about the page.
Each segment functions as an individual element
without regard for unified composition.
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
78

Say that a ten-year-old wants to draw a picture of a cube, per-
haps a three-dimensional block of wood. Wanting the drawing to
look "real," the child tries to draw the cube from an angle that
shows two or three planes—not just a straight-on side view that
would show only a single plane, and thus would not reveal the
true shape of the cube.
To do this, the child must draw the oddly angled shapes just
as they appear—that is, just like the image that falls on the retina
of the perceiving eye. Those shapes are not square. In fact, the
child must suppress knowing that the cube is square and draw
shapes that are "funny." The drawn cube will look like a cube
only if it is comprised of oddly angled shapes. Put another way,
the child must draw unsquare shapes to draw a square cube. The
child must accept this paradox, this illogical process, which confl-
icts with verbal, conceptual knowledge. (Perhaps this is one
meaning of Picasso's statement that "Painting is a lie that tells the
truth.")
Fig. 5-17. Children's unsuccessful attempts to draw a cube that "looks real."
Fig. 5-18. Realistic depiction of a cube requires drawing uncubelike shapes.
DRAWING ON MEMORIES: YOUR HISTORY AS AN ARTIST
79

"The painter who strives to repre-
sent reality must transcend his own
perception. He must ignore or
override the very mechanisms in
his mind that create objects out of
images.... The artist, like the eye,
must provide true images and the
clues of distance to tell his magic
lies."
— Colin Blakemore
Mechanics of the Mind, 1977
From childhood onward, we have
learned to see things in terms of
words: We name things, and we
know facts about them. The domi-
nant left verbal system doesn't
want too much information about
things it perceives—just enough to
recognize and to categorize. It
seems that one of its functions is to
screen out a large proportion of
contextual perceptions. This is a
necessary process and one that
works very well for us most of the
time, enabling us to focus our
attention. The left brain, in this
sense, learns to take a quick look
and says, "Right, that's a chair (or
an umbrella, bird, tree, dog, etc.)."
But drawing requires that you
look at something for a long time,
perceiving lots of details and
how they fit together, registering
as much information as possible—
ideally, everything, as Albrecht
Dürer apparently tried to do in
Figure 5-19.
If verbal knowledge of the cube's real shape overwhelms the
student's purely visual perception, "incorrect" drawing results—
drawing with the kinds of problems that make adolescents
despair (see Figure 5-17). Knowing that cubes have square cor-
ners, students usually start a drawing of a cube with a square cor-
ner. Knowing that a cube rests on a flat surface, students draw
straight lines across the bottom. Their errors compound them-
selves as the drawing proceeds, and the students become more
and more confused.
Though a sophisticated viewer, familiar with the art of
cubism and abstraction, might find the "incorrect" drawings in
Figure 5-17 more interesting than the "correct" drawings in Fig-
ure 5-18, young students find praise of their wrong forms incom-
prehensible. In this case, the child's intent was to make the cube
look "real." Therefore, to the child, the drawing is a failure. To
say otherwise seems as absurd to students as telling them that
"two plus two equals five" is a creative and praiseworthy solution.
On the basis of "incorrect" drawings such as the cube draw-
ings, students may decide that they "can't draw." But they can
draw; that is, the forms indicate that manually they are perfectly
able to draw. The dilemma is that previously stored knowledge—
which is useful in other contexts—prevents their seeing the
thing-as-it-is, right there in front of their eyes.
Sometimes the teacher solves the problem by showing the
students how—that is, by demonstrating the process of drawing.
Learning by demonstration is a time-honored method of teach-
ing art, and it works if the teacher can draw well and has con-
fidence enough to demonstrate realistic drawing in front of a
class. Unfortunately, most teachers at the crucial elementary
level are themselves not trained in perceptual skills in drawing.
Therefore, teachers often have the same feelings of inadequacy
concerning their own ability to draw realistically as the children
they wish to teach.
Many teachers wish children at this age would be freer, less
concerned about realism in their artwork. But however much
some teachers may deplore their students' insistence on realism,
the children themselves are relentless. They will have realism, or
80
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

they will give up art forever. They want their drawings to match
what they see, and they want to know how to do that.
I believe that children at this age love realism because they
are trying to learn how to see. They are willing to put great
energy and effort into the task if the results are encouraging. A
few children are lucky enough to accidentally discover the secret:
how to see things in a different (R-mode) way. I think I was one of
those children who, by chance, stumbles on the process. But the
majority of children need to be taught how to make that cognitive
shift. Fortunately, we are now developing new instructional
methods, based on recent brain research, which will enable
teachers to help satisfy children's yearning for seeing and draw-
ing skills.
How the symbol system, developed in childhood,
influences seeing
Now we are coming closer to the problem and its solution. First,
what prevents a person from seeing things clearly enough to draw
them?
The left hemisphere has no patience with this detailed per-
ception and says, in effect, "It's a chair, I tell you. That's enough to
know. In fact, don't bother to look at it, because I've got a ready-
made symbol for you. Here it is; add a few details if you want, but
don't bother me with this looking business."
And where do the symbols come from? From the years of
childhood drawing during which every person develops a system
of symbols. The symbol system becomes embedded in the mem-
ory, and the symbols are ready to be called out, just as you called
them out to draw your childhood landscape.
The symbols are also ready to be called out when you draw a
face, for example. The efficient left brain says, "Oh yes, eyes.
Here's a symbol for eyes, the one you've always used. And a nose?
Yes, here's the way to do it." Mouth? Hair? Eyelashes? There's a
symbol for each. There are also symbols for chairs, tables, and
hands.
To sum up, adult students beginning in art generally do not
"By the time the child can draw
more than a scribble, by age three
or four years, an already well-
formed body of conceptual knowl-
edge formulated in language
dominates his memory and con-
trols his graphic work.... Draw-
ings are graphic accounts of
essentially verbal processes. As an
essentially verbal education gains
control, the child abandons his
graphic efforts and relies almost
entirely on words. Language has
first spoilt drawing and then swal-
lowed it up completely."
— Written in 1930 by
psychologist Karl Buhler
DRAWING ON MEMORIES: YOUR HISTORY AS AN ARTIST
8l

"I must begin, not with hypothesis,
but with specific instances, no mat-
ter how minute."
— Paul Klee
really see what is in front of their eyes—that is, they do not per-
ceive in the special way required for drawing. They take note of
what's there, and quickly translate the perception into words and
symbols mainly based on the symbol system developed through-
out childhood and on what they know about the perceived object.
What is the solution to this dilemma? Psychologist Robert
Ornstein suggests that in order to draw, the artist must "mirror"
things or perceive them exactly as they are. Thus, you must set
aside your usual verbal categorizing and turn your full visual
attention to what you are perceiving—to all of its details and how
each detail fits into the whole configuration. In short, you must
see the way an artist sees.
Fig. 5-19. Albrecht Dürer, Study for
the Saint Jerome (1521). One of the
L-mode functions is to screen out a
large proportion of incoming per-
ceptions. This is a necessary
process to enable us to focus our
thinking and one that works very
well for us most of the time. But
drawing requires that you look at
something for a long time, perceiv-
ing lots of details, registering as
much information as possible—
ideally, everything, as Albrecht
Diirer tried to do here.
82
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Given proper instruction, young
children can easliy learn to draw.
These examples are by third-grade
children, age eight.
DRAWING ON MEMORIES: YOUR HISTORY AS AN ARTIST
83

"Art is a form of supremely delicate
awareness... meaning at-oneness,
the state of being at one with the
object.... The picture must all
come out of the artist's inside.... It
is the image that lives in the con-
sciousness, alive like a vision, but
unknown."
— D. H. Lawrence, the
English writer, speaking
about his paintings
Again, the key question is how to accomplish that cognitive
L->R shift. As I said in Chapter Four, the most efficient way
seems to be to present the brain with a task the left brain either
can't or won't handle. You have already experienced a few of
those tasks: the Vase/Faces drawings and the upside-down draw-
ing. And to some extent, you have already begun to experience
and recognize the alternate state of right-hemisphere mode. You
are beginning to know that while you are in that slightly different
subjective state of mind, you slow down so that you can see more
clearly.
As you think back over experiences with drawing since you
started this book and over experiences of alternative states of
consciousness you may have had in connection with other activi-
ties (freeway driving, reading, etc., mentioned in Chapter One),
think again about the characteristics of that slightly altered state.
It is important that you continue to develop your awareness and
recognition of R-mode state.
Lewis Carroll described an analo-
gous shift in Alice's adventures in
Through the Looking Glass:
"Oh, Kitty, how nice it would be if
we could only get through into
Looking Glass House! I'm sure it's
got, oh! such beautiful things in it!
Let's pretend there's a way of get-
ting through into it, somehow,
Kitty. Let's pretend the glass has
got all soft like gauze, so that we
can get through. Why, it's turning
to a mist now, I declare! It'll be
easy enough to get through...."
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
84

Let's review the characteristics of the R-mode one more time.
First, there is a seeming suspension of time. You are not aware of
time in the sense of marking time. Second, you pay no attention
to spoken words. You may hear the sounds of speech, but you do
not decode the sounds into meaningful words. If someone speaks
to you, it seems as though it would take a great effort to cross
back, think again in words, and answer. Furthermore, whatever
you are doing seems immensely interesting. You are attentive and
concentrated and feel "at one" with the thing you are concentrat-
ing on. You feel energized but calm, active without anxiety. You
feel self-confident and capable of doing the task at hand. Your
thinking is not in words but in images and, particularly while
drawing, your thinking is "locked on" to the object you are per-
ceiving. On leaving R-mode state, you do not feel tired, but
refreshed.
Our job now is to bring this state into clearer focus and under
greater conscious control, in order to take advantage of the right
hemisphere's superior ability to process visual information and to
increase your ability to make the cognitive shift to R-mode at
will.
"The development of an Observer
can allow a person considerable
access to observing different iden-
tity states, and an outside observer
may often clearly infer different
identity states, but a person him-
self who has not developed the
Observer function very well may
never notice the many transitions
from one identity state to another."
— Charles T. Tart
Alternate States of
Consciousness, 1977
DRAWING ON MEMORIES: YOUR HISTORY AS AN ARTIST
85

Getting Around
Your Symbol System:
Meeting Edges and
Contours

"To empty one's mind of all thought
and refill the void with a spirit
greater than oneself is to extend
the mind into a realm not accessi-
ble by conventional processes of
reason."
— Edward Hill
The Language of Drawing,
1966
W
E HAVE REVIEWED YOUR CHILDHOOD ART and the
development of the set of symbols that formed your
childhood language of drawing. This process paralleled the
development of other symbol systems: speech, reading, writing,
and arithmetic. Whereas these other symbol systems formed use-
ful foundations for later development of verbal and computa-
tional skills, childhood drawing symbols seem to interfere with
later stages of art.
Thus, the central problem of teaching realistic drawing to
individuals from age ten or so onward is the persistence of mem-
orized, stored drawing symbols when they are no longer appro-
priate to the task. In a sense, L-mode unfortunately continues to
"think" it can draw long after the ability to process spatial, rela-
tional information has been lateralized to the right brain. When
confronted with a drawing task, the language mode comes rush-
ing in with its verbally linked symbols. Then afterward, ironically,
the left brain is all too ready to supply derogatory words of judg-
ment if the drawing looks childlike or naive.
In the last chapter I said that an effective way to "set aside"
the dominant left verbal hemisphere and to "bring forward" your
nondominant right brain, with its visual, spatial, relational style,
is to present your brain with a task that the left brain either can't
or won't work at. We have used the Vase/Faces drawings and
upside-down drawings to illustrate this process. Now we'll try
another, more drastic strategy that will force a stronger cognitive
shift and set aside your L-mode more completely.
Nicolaides's contour drawing
I've called the method of the next exercise "Pure Contour Draw-
ing," and your left hemisphere is probably not going to enjoy it.
Introduced by a revered art teacher, Kimon Nicolaides, in his 1941
book, The Natural Way to Draw, the method has been widely used
by art teachers. I believe that our new knowledge about how the
brain divides its workload provides a conceptual basis for under-
standing why Pure Contour Drawing is effective as a teaching
method. At the time of writing his book, Nicolaides apparently
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
88

felt that the reason the contour method improved students' draw-
ing was that it caused students to use both senses of sight and
touch. Nicolaides recommended that students imagine that they
were touching the form as they drew. I suggest an alternate possi-
bility: L-mode rejects the meticulous, complex perceptions of
spatial, relational information, thus allowing access to R-mode
processing. In short, Pure Contour Drawing doesn't suit the left
brain's style. It suits the style of the right brain—again, just what
we want.
Using Pure Contour Drawing to bypass your symbol
system
In my classes, I demonstrate Pure Contour Drawing, describing
how to use the method as I draw—if I can manage to keep talking
(an L-mode function) while I'm drawing. Usually, I start out all
right but begin trailing off in mid-sentence after a minute or so.
By that time, however, my students have the idea.
Following the demonstration, I show examples of previous
students' Pure Contour Drawings. See examples of students'
drawings on page 95.
What you'll need:
• Several pieces of drawing paper. You will draw on the top
sheet and use two or three additional sheets to pad the draw-
ing.
• Your #2 writing pencil, sharpened
• Masking tape to tape your drawing paper to your drawing
board
• An alarm clock or kitchen timer
• About thirty minutes of uninterrupted time
What you'll do:
Please read through the following instructions before you begin
your drawing.
1. Look at the palm of your hand—the left hand if you are
Woman in a Hat, Kimon Nicolaides.
Collection of the author.
"Merely to see, therefore, is not
enough. It is necessary to have a
fresh, vivid, physical contact with
the object you draw through as
many of the senses as possible—
and especially through the sense
of touch."
— Kimon Nicolaides
The Natural Way to Draw,
1941
GETTING AROUND YOUR SYMBOL SYSTEM: MEETING EDGES AND CONTOURS
89

Fig. 6-1.
right-handed and the right if you are left-handed. Bring your
fingers and thumb together to create a mass of wrinkles in
your palm. Those wrinkles are what you are going to draw—
all of them. I can almost hear you saying, "Are you joking?" or
"Forget that!"
2. Sit in a comfortable position with your drawing hand on the
drawing paper, holding the pencil and ready to draw. Then,
put the pencil down and tape the paper in that prearranged
position so it won't shift around while you are drawing.
3. Set the timer for 5 minutes. In this way, you won't have to
keep track of time, an L-mode function.
4. Then, face all the way around in the opposite direction, keep-
ing your hand with the pencil on the drawing paper, and gaze
at the palm of the other hand. Be sure to rest that hand on
some support—the back of a chair or perhaps on your knee—
because you will be holding this rather awkward position for
the allotted 5 minutes. Remember, once you start to draw, you
will not turn to look at the drawing until the timer goes off.
See figure 6-1.
5. Gaze at a single wrinkle in your palm. Place your pencil on
the paper and begin to draw just that edge. As your eyes track
the direction of the edge very slowly, one millimeter at a
time, your pencil will record your perceptions. If the edge
changes direction, so does your pencil. If the edge intersects
with another edge, follow that new information slowly with
your eyes, while your pencil simultaneously records every
detail. An important point: Your pencil can record only what
you see—nothing more, nothing less—at the moment of see-
ing. Your hand and pencil function like a seismograph,
responding only to your actual perceptions.
The temptation to turn and look at the drawing will be very
strong. Resist the impulse! Don't do it! Keep your eyes focussed
on your hand.
Match the movement of the pencil exactly with your eye
movement. One or the other may begin to speed up, but don't let
that happen. You must record everything at the very instant that
90
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

you see each point on the contour. Do not pause in the drawing,
but continue at a slow, even pace. At first you may feel uneasy or
uncomfortable: Some students even report sudden headaches or a
sense of panic.
6. Do not turn around to see what the drawing looks like until
your timer signals the end of 5 minutes.
7. Most important, you must continue to draw until the timer
signals you to stop.
8. If you experience painful objections from your verbal mode
("What am I doing this for? This is really stupid! It won't even
be a good drawing because I can't see what I'm doing," and so
forth), try your best to keep on drawing. The protests from
the left will fade out and your mind will become quiet. You
will find yourself becoming fascinated with the wondrous
complexity of what you are seeing, and you will feel that you
could go deeper and deeper into the complexity. Allow this to
happen. You have nothing to fear or be uneasy about. Your
drawing will be a beautiful record of your deep perception.
We are not concerned about whether the drawing looks like a
hand. We want the record of your perceptions.
9. Soon, this mental chatter will cease, and you will find yourself
becoming intensely interested in the complexity of the edges
you see in your palm and intensely aware of the beauty of
that complex perception. When that change takes place, you
will have shifted to the visual mode and again you will be
"really drawing."
10. When the timer signals the allotted time, turn and look at
your drawing.
After you have finished:
Think back now on how you felt at the beginning of the Pure
Contour Drawing compared to how you felt later, when you were
deeply into the drawing. What did that later state feel like? Did
you lose awareness of time passing? Like Max Ernst, did you
become enamored of what you saw? When you return to the
alternative state you were in, will you recognize it?
"Blind swimmer, I have made
myself see. I have seen. And I was
surprised and enamored of what
I saw, wishing to identify myself
with it...."
— Max Ernst, 1948
GETTING AROUND YOUR SYMBOL SYSTEM: MEETING EDGES AND CONTOURS
91

Pure Contour Drawing is so
effective at producing this strong
shift that many artists routinely
begin drawing with at least a short
session of the method, in order
to start the process of shirting to
R-mode.
Looking at your drawing, a tangled mass of pencil marks, per-
haps you will say, "What a mess!" But look more closely and you
will see that these marks are strangely beautiful. Of course, they
do not represent the hand, only its details, and details within
details. You have drawn complex edges from actual perceptions.
These are not quick, abstract, symbolic representations of the
wrinkles in your palm. They are painstakingly accurate, excruci-
atingly intricate, entangled, descriptive, and specific marks—just
what we want at this point. I believe that these drawings are visual
records of the R-mode state of consciousness. As a witty friend of
mine, writer Judi Marks, remarked on viewing a Pure Contour
Drawing for the first time, "No one in their left mind would do a
drawing like that!"
Why you did this exercise
The most important reason for this exercise is that Pure Contour
Drawing apparently causes L-mode to "reject the task," enabling
you to shift to R-mode. Perhaps the lengthy, minute observation
of severely limited, "non-useful," and "boring" information—
information that defies verbal description—is incompatible with
L-mode's thinking style.
Note that:
• Your verbal mode may object and object, but eventually will
"bow out," leaving you "free" to draw. This is why I asked you
to continue drawing until the timer sounds.
• The marks you make in R-mode are different from and often
more beautiful than marks made in your more usual L-mode
state of consciousness.
• Anything can be a subject for a Pure Contour drawing: a
feather, a piece of shredded bark, a lock of hair. Once you
have shifted to R-mode, the most ordinary things become
inordinately beautiful and interesting. Can you remember the
sense of wonder you had as a child, poring over some tiny
insect or a dandelion?
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
92

The paradox of the Pure Contour Drawing exercise
For reasons that are still unclear, Pure Contour Drawing is one of
the key exercises in learning to draw. But it's a paradox: Pure
Contour Drawing, which doesn't produce a "good" drawing (in
students' estimations), is the best exercise for effectively and effici-
ently causing students later to achieve good drawing. Even more
important, though, this is the exercise that revives our childhood
wonder and the sense of beauty found in ordinary things.
A possible explanation
Apparently, in our habitual use of brain modes, L-mode seeks
quickly to recognize (and name and categorize) by picking out
details, while R-mode wordlessly perceives whole configurations
and seeks how the parts fit together—or perhaps whether the
parts fit together.
In regarding a hand, for example, the nails, the wrinkles and
creases are details and the hand itself is the whole configuration.
This "division of labor" works fine in ordinary life. In drawing a
hand, however, one must give equal attention—visual atten-
tion—to both the configuration and the details and how they fit
together into the whole. Pure Contour Drawing may function as
a sort of "shock treatment" for the brain, forcing it to do things
differently.
Pure Contour Drawing, I believe, causes L-mode to "drop
out," perhaps, as I mentioned before, through simple boredom.
("I've already named it—it's a wrinkle, I tell you. They're all alike.
Why bother with all this looking.") Once L-mode has "dropped
out," it seems possible that R-mode then perceives each wrin-
kle—normally regarded as a detail—as a whole configuration,
made up of even smaller details. Then each detail of each wrinkle
becomes a further whole, made up of ever-smaller parts, and so
on, going deeper and deeper into ever expanding complexity.
There is some similarity, I believe, to the phenomenon of fractals,
in which whole patterns are constructed of smaller detailed
whole patterns, which are constructed of ever smaller, detailed
whole patterns.
"In prose, the worst thing one can
do with words is to surrender to
them. When you think of a con-
crete object, you think wordlessly,
and then, if you want to describe
the thing you have been visualiz-
ing, you probably hunt about till
you find the exact words that seem
to fit it. When you think of some-
thing abstract you are more
inclined to use words from the
start, and unless you make a con-
scious effort to prevent it, the
existing dialect will come rushing
in and do the job for you, at the
expense of blurring or even chang-
ing your meaning. Probably it is
better to put off using words as
long as possible and get one's
meaning clear as one can through
pictures or sensations."
— George Orwell
"Politics and the English
Language," 1968
GETTING AROUND YOUR SYMBOL SYSTEM: MEETING EDGES AND CONTOURS
93

If perhaps you did not attain a shift
to R-mode in your first Pure Con-
tour Drawing, please be patient
with yourself. You may have a very
determined verbal system. I sug-
gest that you try again. You might
try using a crumpled piece of
paper, a flower, or any complex
object that appeals to you. My stu-
dents sometimes have to make two
or even three tries in order to "win
out" against their strong verbal
modes.
Set a timer, perhaps for eight or
even ten minutes. In the beginning,
it takes time to cause a shift to R-
mode. Later on, as American artist
Robert Henri proposed in the
sidebar quotation on page 5, the
shift "to the higher state" will
occur just by starting to draw.
These strange marks on the wall
of a cave were made by Paleolithic
humans. In their intensity, the
marks seem to resemble Pure
Contour Drawing.
— Shamans of Prehistory,
J. Clottes and D. Lewis-
Williams. New York:
Harry N. Abrams, Inc.,
1996
Why Pure Contour Drawing is important
Whatever the actual reason may be, I can assure you that Pure
Contour Drawing will permanently change your ability to per-
ceive. From this point onward, you will start to see in the way an
artist sees and your skills in seeing and drawing will progress
rapidly.
Look at the Pure Contour Drawing of your hand one more
time and appreciate the quality of the marks you made in R-
mode. Again, these are not the quick, glib, stereotypic marks of
symbolic L-mode. These marks are true records of perception.
The next exercise will pull together everything learned so far
and you will be doing a wonderful "real" drawing.
Student showing: A record of an alternative state
Following is a Student Showing of some Pure Contour Drawings.
What strange and marvelous markings are these! Never mind that
the drawings don't resemble greatly the overall configuration of a
hand—that's to be expected. We will attend to the overall con-
figuration in the next exercise, "Modified Contour Drawing."
In Pure Contour Drawing, it is the quality of the marks and
their character that we care about. The marks, these living hiero-
glyphs, are records of perceptions. To be found nowhere in the
drawings are the thin, glib, stereotypic marks of casual, rapid L-
mode symbolic processing. Instead, we see rich, deep, intuitive
marks made in response to the thing-as-it-is, the thing as it exists
out there, marks that delineate the is-ness of the object. Blind
swimmers have seen! And seeing, they have drawn.
Before moving on to the next step, Modified Contour Draw-
ing, let's review the important concept of edges in art.
The first component skill: The perception of edges
Pure Contour Drawing has introduced you to the first compo-
nent skill of drawing: the perception of edges. In drawing, the
term edge has a special meaning, different from its ordinary defini-
tion as a border or outline.
94
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

In drawing, an edge is where two things come together. In the
Pure Contour Drawing you just finished, for example, the edge
you drew' was the place (the wrinkle) where two parts of the flesh
of your palm came together to form a single boundary for both
parts. That shared boundary, in drawing, is described by a line
that is called a contour line. In drawing, therefore, a line (a con-
tour line or, more simply, a contour) is always the border of two
things simultaneously—that is, a shared edge. The Vase/Faces
exercise illustrates this concept. The line you drew was simulta-
neously the edge of the profile and the edge of the vase.
To sum up this concept: In drawing, an edge is always a
shared boundary.
GETTING AROUND YOUR SYMBOL SYSTEM: MEETING EDGES AND CONTOURS
95

Fig. 6-2.
A good definition of "picture
plane" from The Art Pack, Key
Definitions/Key Styles, 1992.
"Picture plane: Often used—
erroneously—to describe the
physical surface of a painting, the
picture plane is in fact a mental
construct—like an imaginary
plane of glass... Alberti (the
Italian Renaissance artist) called it
a 'window' separating the viewer
from the picture itself... "
John Elsum, in his 1704 book The
Art of Painting After the Italian
Manner, gave instructions for mak-
ing "a handy device":
"Take a Square Frame of Wood
about one foot large, and on this
make a little grate [grid] of
Threads, so that crossing one
another they may fall into perfect
Squares about a Dozen at least,
then place [it] between your Eye
and the Object, and by this grate
imitate upon your Table [drawing
surface] the true Posture it keeps,
and this will prevent you from run-
ning into Errors. The more Work is
to be [fore] shortened the smaller
are to be the Squares."
Quoted in A Miscellany of Artists'
Wisdom, compiled by Diana Craig,
Philadelphia: Running Press, 1993,
p. 79.
The child's jigsaw puzzle, Figure 6-2, illustrates this impor-
tant point. The edge of the boat is shared with the water. The
edge of the sail is shared with the sky and the water. Put another
way, the water stop where the boat begins—a shared edge. The
water and the sky stop where the sail begins—shared edges.
Note also that the outer edge of the puzzle—its frame or
format, meaning the bounding edge of the composition—is also
the outer edge of the sky-shape, the land-shapes, and the water-
shape.
A quick review of the five perceptual skills of drawing
In this lesson, we are working on the perception of edges as one
of the component skills of drawing. Recall that there are four oth-
ers and together these five components make up the whole skill of
drawing:
1. The perception of edges (the "shared" edges of contour
drawing).
2. The perception of spaces (in drawing called negative spaces).
3. The perception of relationships (known as perspective and
proportion).
4. The perception of lights and shadows (often called "shad-
ing").
5. The perception of the whole (the gestalt, the "thingness" of
the thing).
Modified Contour Drawing: First, drawing on the
picture plane
What you'll need:
• Your clear plastic Picture Plane
• Your felt-tip marker
• Both of your viewfinders
Before you begin: Please read through all of the instructions
before starting your drawing. In the next section I will define and
fully explain the Picture Plane. For now, you will be simply using
it. Just follow the instructions.
96
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

What you'll do:
1. Rest your hand on a desk or table in front of you (the left
hand if you are right-handed, and the right, if you are left-
handed) with the fingers and thumb curved upward, pointing
toward your face. This is a foreshortened view of your hand.
Imagine now that you are about to draw that foreshortened
form.
If you are like most of my students, you would simply not know
how to go about doing that. It seems far too difficult to draw this
three-dimensional form, with its parts moving toward you in
space. You would hardly know where to start. The viewfinders
and plastic Picture Plane will help you get started.
2. Try out each of the Viewfinders to decide which size fits most
comfortably over your hand, which you should be holding in
a foreshortened position with the fingers coming toward you.
Men often need the larger, women the smaller-sized Viewfin-
der. Choose one or the other.
3. Clip the Viewfinder you have chosen on top of your clear-
plastic Picture Plane.
4. Use your felt-tip marker to draw a "format" line on the plastic
Picture Plane, running your marker around the inside of the
opening of the Viewfinder. A format line forms the outer
boundary of your drawing. See Figure 6-4.
5. Now, holding you hand in the same foreshortened position as
before, balance the Viewfinder/plastic Picture Plane on the
tips of your fingers and thumb. Move it about a bit until the
picture-plane seems balanced comfortably.
6. Pick up your uncapped marking pen, gaze at the hand under
the plastic Picture Plane and close one eye. (I'll explain in the
next segment why it is necessary to close one eye. For now,
please just do it.) See Figure 6-5.
7. Choose an edge to start your drawing. Any edge will do. With
the marking pen, begin to draw on the plastic Picture Plane
the edges of the shapes just as you see them. Don't try to "sec-
ond guess" any of the edges. Do not name the parts. Do not
wonder why the edges are the way they are. Your job, just as in
Fig. 6-3.
Fig. 6-4.
Fig. 6-5.
GETTING AROUND YOUR SYMBOL SYSTEM: MEETING EDGES AND CONTOURS
97

Fig. 6-6. Albrecht Dürer
(1471—1528), Hands in Adoration.
Black and white tempera on blue
paper. Albertina Museum, Vienna.
Fig. 6-7. Vincent Van Gogh,
Sketches with Two Sowers. St. Remy,
1890.
Upside-Down Drawing and in Pure Contour Drawing, is to
draw exactly what you see, with as much detail as you can
manage with the marking pen (which is not as precise as a
pencil).
8. Be sure to keep your head in the same place and keep one eye
closed. Don't move your head to try to "see around" the form.
Keep it still. (Again, I'll explain why in the next segment.)
9. Correct any lines you wish by just wiping them off with a
moistened tissue on your forefinger. It is very easy to redraw
them more precisely.
After you have finished:
Place the plastic Picture Plane on a plain sheet of paper so that
you can clearly see what you have drawn. I can predict with
confidence that you will be amazed. With relatively little effort,
you have accomplished one of the truly difficult tasks in draw-
ing—drawing the human hand in foreshortened view. Great
artists in the past have practiced drawing hands over and over.
Observe the examples by Albrecht Dürer and Vincent Van Gogh,
Figures 6-6 and 6-7.
How did you accomplish this so easily? The answer, of
course, is that you did what a trained artist does: You "copied"
what you saw on the picture-plane—in this instance, an actual
plastic plane. I fully define and explain the Picture Plane in the
next section. For now, you are simply using it. I have found that
the explanation makes more sense after students have used the
plastic plane.
For further practice: I suggest that you erase your felt-tip pen
drawing from the Picture Plane with a damp tissue and do several
more, with your hand in a different position each time. Try for
the really "hard" views—the more complicated the better. Oddly
enough, the flat hand is the hardest to draw; a complex position is
actually easier. Therefore, arrange your hand with the fingers
curved, entwined, crossed, fist clenched, whatever. Try to include
some foreshortening. Remember, the more you practice each of
these exercises, the faster you will progress. Save your-last (or
98
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

best) drawing for the next exercise.
This brings us to a crucial question—that is, an all-important
question in terms of your understanding: What is drawing?
The quick answer: Drawing is "copying" what you see on the
picture-plane. In the drawing you did just now, your own hand in
foreshortened view, you "copied" the "flattened" image of your
hand that you "saw" on the plastic Picture Plane.
And now, a more complete answer to the question, "What is
drawing?"
In art, the concept of "the picture plane" is extremely abstract
and difficult to explain, and even more difficult to comprehend.
But this concept is one of the most important keys to learning to
draw, so stay with me. I'll try to be clear.
The picture plane is a mental concept. See this in your
"mind's eye": the picture plane is an imaginary transparent plane,
like a framed window, that is always hanging out in front of the
artist's face, always parallel to the "plane" of the artist's two eyes.
If the artist turns, the plane also turns. What the artist sees "on
the plane" actually extends back into the distance. But the plane
enables the artist to "see" the scene as though it were magically
smashed flat on the back of the clear glass plane—like a photo-
graph, in a sense. Put another way, the 3-D image behind the
framed "window" is converted to a 2-D (flat) image. The artist
then "copies" what is seen "on the plane" onto the flat drawing
paper.
This trick of the artist's mind, so difficult to describe, is even
more difficult for beginning students to discover on their own. In
this course, therefore, you need an actual picture plane (your
plastic Picture Plane) and actual window frames (the Viewfin-
ders).
These devices seem to work like magic in causing students to
"get" what drawing is—that is, to understand the fundamental
nature of drawing perceived objects or persons.
To further help beginners in drawing, I asked you to draw
crosshairs on your sheet of plastic (the plastic Picture Plane).
These two "grid" lines represent vertical and horizontal, the two
constants that the artist absolutely depends on to assess relation-
It might help your understanding
of the picture plane to realize that
photography grew out of drawing.
In the years before photography
was invented, artists generally
understood and used the concept
of the picture-plane. You can
imagine the artists' excitement
(and, perhaps, dismay) to see that
a photograph could, in an instant,
capture the image on the picture-
plane—an image that would have
taken an artist hours, days, or even
weeks to render in a drawing.
Artists, deposed from realistic
depiction, began exploring other
aspects of perception, such as the
effects of light (Impressionism).
After photography became com-
mon, the concept of the picture
plane was less necessary and began
to fade away.
GETTING AROUND YOUR SYMBOL SYSTEM: MEETING EDGES AND CONTOURS
99

The picture plane is an imaginary
vertical surface, like a window,
through which you look at your
subject. In this way, you copy your
three-dimensional view of the
world to your two-dimensional
surface onto your drawing paper.
Dozens of picture planes and per-
spective devices are recorded in
the U.S. Patent Office. Here are two
examples.
1OO
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

ships. Early on in my classes, I used a grid of many lines, but I
found that students were counting up—"two spaces over and
three down." This is just the kind of L-mode activity we didn't
want. I then reduced the "grid" lines to one vertical and one hori-
zontal and found that was sufficient.
Later on, you will need neither the plastic Picture Plane with
its gridlines nor the Viewfinders. You will replace these technical
devices with the imaginary, internalized mental picture-plane
that every artist uses, whether consciously or subconsciously. The
actual plane (your plastic Picture Plane) and the actual Viewfin-
ders are simply very effective aids during the time you are learn-
ing how to draw.
Try this: Fasten your Viewfinder, the one with the largest
opening, on top of the Picture Plane, using your clips. Close one
eye and hold the Picture Plane/Viewfinder together up in front
of your face. See Figure 6-8.
Look at the "framed" image, whatever is in front of your eye
(singular). You can change the "composition" by bringing the
Viewfinder closer to or farther away from your face, much as a
camera viewfinder works. Check out the angles of the edges of
the ceiling, or perhaps of a table, relative to the crosshairs—that
is, relative to vertical and horizontal. These angles may surprise
you. Next, imagine that you are drawing with your felt-tip
marker what you see on the plane, just as you did in drawing your
hand. See Figure 6-9.
Then turn to see another view, and then another, always
keeping the picture-plane parallel to the front of your face. Don't
slant it in any direction! One way to practice not slanting the
plane is to bring the plastic Picture Plane right up to your face,
then quickly extend your arms straight out together.
Next, choose a view that you like, framed by your Viewfinder
on the plastic Picture Plane. Imagine that you are "copying" what
you see on the plane onto a piece of drawing paper. Remember,
all of the angles, sizes, spaces, and relationships will be just what
you see on the plane. See Figure 6-10.
These two images, your (imagined) drawing on the paper and
the image on the plastic Picture Plane will be (approximately)
Fig. 6-8.
Fig. 6-9.
Fig. 6-10.
GETTING AROUND YOUR SYMBOL SYSTEM: MEETING EDGES AND CONTOURS
IOI

"Dear Theo,
In my last letter you will have
found a little sketch of that per-
spective frame I mentioned. I just
came back from the blacksmith,
who made iron points for the sticks
and iron corners for the frame. It
consists of two long stakes; the
frame can be attached to them
either way with strong wooden
pegs.
"So on the shore or in the meadows
or in the fields one can look
through it like a window [the artist's
emphasis]. The vertical lines and
the horizontal line of the frame
and the diagonal lines and the
intersection, or else the division in
squares, certainly give a few point-
ers which help one make a solid
drawing and which indicate the
main lines and proportion ... of
why and how the perspective
causes an apparent change of
direction in the lines and change of
size in the planes and in the whole
mass.
"Long and continuous practice
with it enables one to draw quick
as lightning—and once the draw-
ing is done firmly, to paint quick as
lightning, too."
From Letter 223, The Complete
Letters of Vincent Van Gogh, Green-
wich, Conn.: The New York
Graphic Society, 1954, p. 432-33.
the same. If perfectly drawn—very hard to do!—they will be
identical. At its most basic level, that is what drawing is. To reiter-
ate, basic realistic drawing is copying what is seen on the picture-
plane.
"If that is so," you may object, "why not just take a photo-
graph?" I believe one answer is that the purpose of realistic draw-
ing is not simply to record data, but rather to record your unique
perception—how you personally see something—and, moreover,
how you understand the thing you are drawing. By slowing down
and closely observing something, personal expression and com-
prehension occur in ways that cannot occur simply by taking a
snapshot. (I am referring, of course, to casual photography, not
the work of artist-photographers.)
Also, your style of line, choices for emphasis, and subcon-
scious mental processes—your personality, so to speak—enters
the drawing. In this way, again paradoxically, your careful obser-
vation and depiction of your subject give the viewer both the
image of your subject and an insight into you. In the best sense,
you have expressed yourself.
Use of the picture-plane has a long tradition in the history of
art. The great Renaissance artist Leone Battista Alberti discov-
ered that he could draw in perspective the cityscape beyond his
window by drawing directly on the glass pane the view he saw
behind the pane. Inspired by Leonardo da Vinci's writing on the
subject, German artist Albrecht Dürer developed the picture-
plane concept further, building actual picture-plane devices.
Dürer's writings and drawings inspired Vincent Van Gogh to
construct his own "perspective device," as he called it, when he
was laboriously teaching himself to draw (see Figure 6-11). Later
on, after Van Gogh had mastered basic drawing, he discarded his
device, just as you will.
Note that Van Gogh's device must have weighed twenty
pounds or more. I can picture him in my mind's eye laboriously
dismantling the parts, tying them up, carrying the bundle—along
with his painting materials—on his long walk to the seashore,
unbundling and setting the device up, and then repeating the
whole sequence to get home at night. This gives us some insight
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
IO2

Fig. 6-12. The artist using his device at the seashore.
From The Complete Letters of Vincent Van Gogh.
Greenwich: The New York Graphic Society, 1954.
The drawings are reproduced by permission of
The New York Graphic Society.
Fig. 6-n. Vincent Van Gogh's perspective device.
into how resolutely Van Gogh labored to improve his drawing
skills (see Figure 6-12).
Another renowned artist, the 16th-century Dutch master
Hans Holbein, who had no need for help with his drawing, also
used an actual Picture Plane. Art historians recently discovered
that Holbein used a glass pane on which he directly drew images
of his sitters for the overwhelming number of portrait drawings
required of him when he lived in the English court of Henry VIII.
Art historians speculate that Holbein, one of the great draughts-
men of art history, did this to save time—the overworked artist
could then quickly transfer the drawing on glass to paper and get
on to the next portrait.
One more important point: "Drawing" means drawing a sin-
gle view.
Recall that when you drew your hand directly on the plastic
Picture Plane, I asked you to keep your hand still and your head
still in order to see one view only on the Picture Plane. Even a
slight movement of your hand or a slight change in the position of
your head will give you a different view of your hand. I some-
GETTING AROUND YOUR SYMBOL SYSTEM: MEETING EDGES AND CONTOURS
I03

Professor Elliot Elgart of the Uni-
versity of California at Los Angeles
Art Department told me in con-
versation that he has often
observed beginning drawing stu-
dents, presented for the first time
with a reclining model, tilt their
heads far to one side while drawing
the model. Why? To see the model
in the position they are used to,
which is standing up!
Seeing perspective drawing as
depicting three-dimensional space
is apparently a learned percept,
culturally determined. Individuals
from remote cultures sometimes
do not decipher photographs or
realistic drawings.
times see students bend their heads around to see something they
couldn't see with their head in the original position. Don't do it!
If you can't see that fourth finger, you don't draw it. To repeat:
Keep your hand and your head in an unchanged position and
draw just what you see.
For the same reason—to see one view only—you kept one
eye closed. By closing one eye, you removed binocular vision, the
slight variance in images, called "binocular disparity," that occurs
when we view an object with both eyes open.
Binocular vision allows us to see the world as three-dimen-
sional. This ability is sometimes called "depth perception." When
you close one eye, the single image is two-dimensional—that is, it
is flat, like a photograph. The paper we draw on is also two-
dimensional or flat.
Here is yet another of the paradoxes of drawing:
The flat, two-dimensional image you see (with one eye
closed) on the picture-plane, when copied onto your drawing
paper, miraculously "looks" three-dimensional to the person who
views your drawing. One necessary step in learning to draw is to
believe that this miracle will happen. Often, students struggling
with a drawing will ask, "How can I make this table look like it's
going back in space?" or "How do I make this arm look like it's
coming toward me?" The answer, of course, is to draw—to
copy!—just what you see flattened on the picture-plane. Only
then will the drawing convincingly depict these "movements"
through three-dimensional space (see Figure 6-13).
You may be wondering, "Is it always necessary to close one
eye while drawing?" Not always, but most artists do quite a lot of
one-eye closing while drawing. The closer the viewed object, the
more eye-closing. The farther away the object, the less eye clos-
ing, because the binocular disparity referred to above diminishes
with distance.
In this next exercise, you will use your technical aids (your
plastic Picture Plane and your Viewfinders) to enable you to do a
realistic drawing of your own hand—a "real" drawing depicting a
three-dimensional form on a flat sheet of paper.
104
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Fig. 6-13. Brian Harking.
Modified Contour Drawing of your hand
What you'll need:
• Several sheets of the smaller drawing paper
• Your graphite stick and some paper napkins or paper towels
• Your #2 writing pencil or your #4B drawing pencil, sharpened
• Your eraser
• Your plastic Picture Plane
• Your felt-tip marker
• The Viewfinder you used for your drawing on the Picture
Plane
• An hour of uninterrupted time
What you'll do:
Before you begin: Please read through all of the instructions.
In this drawing, we are modifying the instructions for Pure Con-
tour Drawing. You will sit in a normal position and therefore be
able to glance at your drawing to monitor its progress (see Figure
6-14). Nevertheless, I hope you will use the same focused concen-
tration that you used in Pure Contour Drawing.
GETTING AROUND YOUR SYMBOL SYSTEM: MEETING EDGES AND CONTOURS
Students often become very frus-
trated at the start of a drawing—
perhaps because the starting of a
drawing is always difficult. Also I
think students beginning in draw-
ing believe that drawings just "flow
out." They don't. You will be mak-
ing numerous intense relational
calculations at the start, and it's
only after the drawing is well
started—in fact, nearing comple-
tion—that it begins to "flow."
105

Fig. 6-14. The position for Modi-
fied Countour Drawing is the usual
drawing position.
Most of my students greatly enjoy
this process of toning their paper,
and the physical action of "work-
ing up" the tone seems to help
them get started with a drawing.
A possible reason is that, having
marked the paper and made it
their own, so to speak, they escape
the intimidation of that blank sheet
of white paper staring at them.
1. Tape a stack of several sheets of paper to your drawing board.
Tape all four corners securely, so that the paper will not shift
around. One of your hands will be "posing" and must remain
still. The other will be drawing and perhaps erasing. If the
paper shifts under your hand while you are drawing or eras-
ing, it is very distracting.
2. Draw a format on your drawing paper, using the inside edge
of your Viewfinder.
3. The next step is to tone your paper. Make sure you have a
stack of several sheets of paper to pad your drawing. Begin to
tone your paper by rubbing the edge of the graphite stick
very lightly over the paper, staying inside the format. You
want to achieve a pale, even tone—don't worry too much
about staying within the lines. You can clean up the edges at a
later time. Figure 6-15.
4. Once you have covered the paper with a light application of
graphite, begin to rub the graphite into the paper with your
106
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Fig. 6-15.
Fig. 6-16.
Fig. 6-17.
paper towels. Rub with a circular motion, applying even pres-
sure right up to the edge of the format. You want to achieve a
very smooth, silvery tone. Figure 6-16.
Next, lightly draw horizontal and vertical crosshairs on your
toned paper. The lines will cross in the center just as they do
on your plastic Picture Plane. Use the crosshairs on the plas-
tic plane to mark the position of the crosshairs on the format
of your toned paper. A caution: Don't draw the lines too dark.
They are only guidelines and later you may want to eliminate
them. Figure 6-17.
Retrieve your Picture Plane with the felt-tip drawing that
you did at the start of this chapter, or, if you wish, you can do
a new drawing (Figure 6-18). Place the plane down on a light
surface, perhaps a sheet of paper, so that you can clearly see
the drawing on the plastic. This image will act as a guide for
you when you next draw your hand without the actual plane.
Figure 6-19.
Fig. 6-18. Pose your hand under the
Picture Plane.
Fig. 6-19. Draw the edges as you see
them on the Picture Plane.
GETTING AROUND YOUR SYMBOL SYSTEM: MEETING EDGES AND CONTOURS
I07

Fig. 6-20. Transfer the main points
from your drawing or plastic to
your toned drawing paper.
Fig. 6-21.
Try to observe the shapes of the
lights and shadows. I realize you
haven't yet had any instruction of
the fourth drawing skill, the per-
ception of lights and shadows. I've
found, however, that students do
well just plunging in and they often
enjoy it very much.
7. An important step: Now, you will transfer the main points
and edges of your drawing on plastic to your drawing paper
(Figure 6-20). The formats are the same size, so it is a one-to-
one scale transfer. Using the crosshairs, place the point where
an edge of your hand contacts the format. Transfer several of
these points. Then, begin to connect the edges of your hand,
fingers, thumb, palm, wrinkles, and so on with the points you
have established. This is just a light sketch to help you place
the hand within the format. Recall that drawing is copying
what you see on the picture plane. For this drawing, you will
take this actual step, to get used to the process. Don't worry
about erasing the ground if you have to change a line. Erase,
then just rub the erased area with your finger or a paper nap-
kin and the erasure disappears.
8. Once this rough, light sketch is on your paper, you are ready
to start drawing.
9. Reposition your "posing" hand, using the drawing-on-plastic
to guide the positioning. Then, set aside your drawing-on-
plastic, but place it where you can still refer to it.
10. Then, closing one eye, focus on a point on some edge in your
posing hand. Any edge will do to make a start. Place your
pencil point on this same point in the drawing. Then, gaze
again at this point on your hand in preparation to draw. This
will start the mental shift to R-mode and help to quiet any
mutterings from L-mode.
11. When you begin to draw, your eyes—or rather, eye—will
move slowly along the contour and your pencil will record
your perceptions at the same slow speed that your eye is mov-
ing. Just as you did in Pure Contour Drawing, try to perceive
and record all of the slight undulations of each edge (Figure
6-21). Use your eraser whenever needed, even to make tiny
adjustments in the line. Looking at your hand (with one eye
closed, remember), you can estimate the angle of any edge by
comparing it to the crosshairs. Check these angles in your
drawing-on-plastic that you did earlier, but also try to see
these relationships by imagining a picture-plane hovering
108
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

over your hand, with its helpful crosshairs and the edge of the
format to guide you.
12. About 90 percent of the time, you should be looking at your
hand. That is where you will find the information that you
need. In fact, all the information you need to do a wonderful
drawing of your hand is right in front of your eyes. Glance at
the drawing only to monitor the pencil's recording of your
perceptions, to check for relationships of sizes and angles, or
to pick a point to start a new contour. Concentrate on what
you see, wordlessly sensing to yourself, "How wide is this part
compared to that? How steep is this angle compared to that?"
And so on.
13. Move from contour to adjacent contour. If you see spaces
between the fingers, use that information as well: "How wide
is that space compared to the width of that shape?" (Remem-
ber, we are not naming things—fingernails, fingers, thumb,
palm. They are all just edges, spaces, shapes, relationships.)
Be sure to keep one eye closed at least a good portion of the
time. Your hand is quite close in proximity to your eyes, and
the binocular disparity can confuse you with two images.
When you come to parts that impose their names on you—
fingernails, for example—try to escape the words. One good
strategy is to focus on the shapes of the flesh around the finger-
nails. These shapes share edges with the fingernails. Therefore, if
you draw the shapes around the nails, you will have also drawn
the edges of the fingernails—but you'll get both right! In fact, if
mental conflict sets in over any part of the drawing, move to the
next adjacent space or shape, remembering the "shared edge"
concept. Then, return later with "new eyes" to the part that
seemed difficult. (Figure 6-22)
14. You may want to erase out the spaces around your hand. This
makes the hand "stand out" from the negative spaces.
You can work up the drawing with a little shading by observing
where you see areas of light (highlights) and areas of shadow
appear on your posing hand. Erase out the highlights and draw in
the shadows.
Fig. 6-22. Drawing the hand by
using shapes and spaces.
GETTING AROUND YOUR SYMBOL SYSTEM: MEETING EDGES AND CONTOURS
IO9

Suggestions for practice: Using the
method for Modified Contour
Drawing, draw a preliminary
"copy" of the object first on the
Picture Plane. Then draw the
object itself, using the drawing-on-
plastic as a guide. Try these sub-
jects:
A shoe, or shoes
A pair of eyeglasses
A kitchen whisk or wine
bottle opener
A flower
Drawing takes many forms. In this
course, you are acquiring the basic
perceptual skills of drawing, com-
parable to learning the basic
ABC's of reading and writing.
15. Finally, when the drawing begins to become intensely inter-
esting, like a complicated and beautiful jigsaw puzzle gradu-
ally taking shape under your pencil, you will be really
drawing.
After you have finished: This is your first "real" drawing and I can
assume with some confidence that you are pleased with the
results. I hope you now see what I meant about the miracle of
drawing. Because you drew what you saw on the flat picture-
plane, your drawing appears authentically three-dimensional.
Furthermore, some very subtle qualities will show in your
drawing. For example, a sense of the volume—the three-dimen-
sional thickness—of the hand will be there, as well as the precise
tension of certain muscles or the pressure of a finger on the
thumb. And all of this comes from simply drawing what you see
on the plane.
In the following group of drawings, the hands are three-
dimensional, believable, and authentic. They seem to be made of
flesh, muscles, skin, and bones. Even very subtle qualities are
depicted, such as the pressure of one finger on another, the ten-
sion of certain muscles, or the precise texture of the skin.
I've included some demonstration drawings by me and others
of our teaching staff. As you see, these drawings are done on a
toned ground, which we'll also be using in the next exercise.
Before we move on to the next step, think back on your men-
tal state during the drawing of your hand. Did you lose track of
time? Did the drawing at some point become interesting, even
fascinating? Did you experience any distraction from your verbal
mode? If so, how did you escape it?
Also, think back on this basic conception of the picture-plane
and our working definition of drawing: "copying" what you see on
the picture-plane. From now on, each time you pick up the pencil
to draw, the strategies learned in this drawing will become better
integrated and more "automatic."
You might want to do a second Modified Contour Drawing of
your hand, perhaps this time holding some complex object: a
twisted handkerchief, a flower, a pinecone, a pair of eyeglasses.
For this drawing, you can again work on a lightly "toned" ground.
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
110

GETTING AROUND YOUR SYMBOL SYSTEM: MEETING EDGES AND CONTOURS 
III

112 
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

The next step: Tricking L-mode with empty space
So far, we-have located some gaps in the abilities of the left hemi-
sphere. It has problems with mirror images (as in the Vase/Faces
drawing). It can't deal with upside-down perceptual information
(as in the upside-down Stravinsky drawing). It refuses to process
slow, complex perceptions (as in the Pure and Modified Contour
drawings). We used those gaps to give R-mode a chance to
process visual information without interference from L-mode.
The next lesson on negative space is designed to reestablish
your grasp of the unity of spaces and forms in composition, which
you had as a child.
GETTING AROUND YOUR SYMBOL SYSTEM: MF.KTING EDGES AND CONTOURS
113

Perceiving the
Shape of a Space:
The Positive Aspects
of Negative Space

I
N THIS CHAPTER, we'll take up the next component skill of
drawing—the perception of negative spaces. You will use your
new skills of seeing and drawing complicated edges in order to
draw the edges of negative spaces.
This exercise will be a stretch for some, a joy for others.
There is an antic or whimsical quality to seeing negative spaces.
In a sense, you are seeing what is not there. In American life, it is
often a new experience to realize that spaces are important. We
tend to focus on objects; we are an objective culture. In other cul-
tures, working "within the space of a problem." is common prac-
tice. My aim is to make spaces become "real" for you and to
provide a new experience in seeing.
In this chapter, you will also learn to find and use a "Basic
Unit" that will enable you to correctly size the first shape you
draw. And you will dip into lights and shadows by working on a
toned ground.
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
46

Let's quickly review the five basic skills of drawing. Remem-
ber, these are perceptual skills: The perception of
• Edges (line of contour drawing)
• Spaces (negative spaces)
• Relationships (proportion and perspective)
• Lights and shadows (shading)
• The gestalt (the "thingness" of the thing)
What are negative spaces and positive forms?
Two terms traditionally used in art are "negative spaces" and
"positive forms." In the drawings of the bighorn sheep, for exam-
ple, the sheep is the positive form and the sky behind and ground
below the animal are the negative spaces.
The word "negative" in negative spaces is a bit unfortunate
because it carries, well, a negative connotation. I have searched in
vain for a better term, so we'll stick with this one. The terms nega-
tive spaces and positive forms have the advantage of being easy to
PERCEIVING THE SHAPE OF A SPACE: THE POSITIVE ASPECTS OF NEGATIVE SPACE 
II7

Fig. 7-1. Jeanne O'Neil.
"Expression to my way of thinking
does not consist of the passion mir-
rored upon a human face or
betrayed by a violent gesture. The
whole arrangement of my picture
is expressive. The place occupied
by the figures or objects, the empty
spaces around them, the propor-
tions, everything plays a part."
— Henri Matisse
"Notes d'un peintre,"
1908
remember and they are, after all, commonly used in the whole
field of art and design. The main point is that negative spaces are
just as important as the positive forms. For the person just learn-
ing to draw, they are perhaps more important!
Why is learning to see and draw negative spaces so important?
When a person just beginning in drawing tries to draw a chair,
that person knows too much, in an L-mode sense, about chairs.
For example, seats have to be big enough to hold a person; all four
chair legs are usually all the same length; chair legs sit on a flat
surface, and so forth. This knowledge does not help, and in fact
can greatly hinder, drawing a chair. The reason is that, when seen
from different angles, the visual information may not conform to
what we know.
Visually—that is, as seen on the plane—a chair seat may
appear as a narrow strip, not nearly wide enough to sit on. The
legs may appear to be all of different lengths. The curve of the
back of a chair may appear to be entirely different from what we
know it to be (Figure 7-1).
What are we to do? An answer: Don't draw the chair at all!
Instead, draw the spaces of the chair.
Why does using negative space make drawing easier? I
believe that it's because you don't know anything, in a verbal
sense, about these spaces. Because you have no pre-existing
memorized symbols for space-shapes, you can see them clearly
and draw them correctly. Also, by focusing on negative spaces,
you can cause L-mode again to drop out of the task, perhaps after
a bit of protest: "Why are you looking at nothing? I do not deal
with nothing! I can't name it. It's of no use ..." Soon, this chatter
will cease—again, just what we want.
An analogy to clarify the concept of negative spaces
In drawing, negative space-shapes are real. They are not just
empty "air."
The following analogy may help you to see that. Imagine that
you are watching a Bugs Bunny cartoon. Imagine that Bugs
118
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Bunny is running at top speed down a long hallway, at the end of
which is a closed door. He smashes through the door, leaving a
Bugs-Bunny shaped hole in the door. What's left of the door is
negative space. Note that the door has an outside edge (its for-
mat). This edge is the outside edge of the negative space-shape.
In this analogy, the hole in the door is the positive form (Bugs
Bunny) gone poof!
Now, take your Viewfinder/plastic Picture Plane and look at
a chair. Close one eye and move the Viewfinder backward and
forward, up and down, as though framing a snapshot. When you
have found a composition that pleases you, hold the Viewfinder
very still. Now, gazing at a space in the chair, perhaps the space
between two back slats, imagine that the chair is magically pul-
verized and—like Bugs Bunny, in a poof!—disappears, leaving
only the negative spaces, the one you are gazing at and all the rest
of the spaces. They are real. They have real shapes, just like the
remains of the door in the analogy above. These negative space-
shapes are what you are going to draw. In short, you will draw the
spaces, not the chair.
The reason? Recall our definition of edges: All edges are
shared edges where two things come together. The negative
spaces share edges with the (now absent) chair. If you draw the
edges of the spaces, you also will have drawn the chair, because it
shares edges with the spaces. But the chair will "look right,"
because you will be able to see and draw the spaces accurately.
(See the examples of negative-space drawings of chairs.)
Note that the format is also the outer edge of the chair's nega-
tive spaces (another shared edge) and together the chair-form
and the space-shapes fill the format completely. Technically
speaking, the whole image, made up of positive forms and nega-
tive space-shapes, is called the composition. The artist composes
the forms and the spaces within the format, arranging them
according to certain "rules" called the Principles of Art.
Art teachers often laboriously try to teach their students "the
rules of composition," but I have discovered that if students pay
close attention to negative spaces in their drawings, many compo-
sitional problems are automatically solved.
PERCEIVING THE SHAPE OF A SPACE: THE POSITIVE ASPECTS OF NEGATIVE SPACE
119
Demonstration drawing by
instructor Brian Bomeisler.

Unity: A most important principle
of art.
If negative spaces are given equal
importance to the positive forms,
all parts of a drawing seem inter-
esting and all work together to
create a unified image. If, on the
other hand, the focus is almost
entirely on the positive forms, the
drawing may seem uninteresting
and disunified—even boring—no
matter how beautifully rendered
the positive form may be. A strong
focus on negative spaces will make
these basic instructional drawings
strong in composition and beauti-
ful to look at.
Fig. 7-2. A variety of formats.
Defining composition
In drawing, the term composition means the way the components
of a drawing are arranged by the artist. Some key components of
a composition are positive shapes (the objects or persons), nega-
tive spaces (the empty areas), and the format (the relative length
and width of the bounding edges of a surface). To compose a
drawing, therefore, the artist places and fits together the positive
shapes and the negative spaces within the format with the goal of
unifying the composition.
The format controls composition. Put another way, the shape
of the drawing surface (usually rectangular paper) will greatly
influence how an artist distributes the shapes and spaces within
the bounding edges of that surface. To clarify this, use your R-
mode ability to image a tree, perhaps an elm or a pine. Now fit
the same tree into each of the formats in Figure 7-2. You will find
that—to "fill the space"—you have to change the shape of the
tree and the spaces around the tree for each format. Then test
again by imaging exactly the same tree in all of the formats. You
will find that a shape that fits one format is all wrong for another.
Experienced artists fully comprehend the importance of the
shape of the format. Beginning students in drawing, however, are
curiously oblivious to the shape of the paper and the boundaries
of the paper. Because their attention is directed almost exclu-
sively toward the objects or persons they are drawing, they seem
to regard the edges of the paper almost as nonexistent, almost like
the real space that surrounds objects and has no bounds.
This obliviousness to the edges of the paper, which bound
both the negative spaces and positive shapes, causes problems
with composition for nearly all beginning art students. The most
serious problem is the failure to unify the spaces and the
shapes—a basic requirement for good composition.
The importance of composing within the format
In Chapter Five, we saw that young children have a strong grasp
of the importance of the format. Children's consciousness of the
bounding edges of the format controls the way they distribute the
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
I2O

Fig. 7-3. Joan Miro, Personages with Star (1933). Courtesy of The Art Institute
of Chicago.
forms and spaces, and young children often produce nearly flaw-
less compositions. The composition by a six-year-old in Figure 7-
4 compares favorably with the Spanish artist Miro's composition
in Figure 7-3.
Unfortunately, as you have seen, this ability lapses as children
approach adolescence, perhaps due to lateralization, increasing
dominance of the language system, and the left hemisphere's
penchant for recognizing, naming, and categorizing objects. Con-
centration on things seems to supersede the young child's more
holistic or global view of the world, where everything is impor-
tant, including the negative spaces of sky, ground, and air. Usually
it takes years of training to convince students, in the way experi-
enced artists are convinced, that the negative spaces, bounded by
the format, require the same degree of attention and care that the
positive forms require. Beginning students generally lavish all
their attention on the objects, persons, or forms in their drawings,
and then more or less "fill in the background." It may seem hard
to believe at this moment, but if care and attention are lavished
Fig. 7-4.
PERCEIVING THE SHAPE OF A SPACE: THE POSITIVE ASPECTS OF NEGATIVE SPACE 
121

Fig. 7-5. Albrecht Dürer (1471-1528),
Nude Woman with a Staff(1508).
Courtesy of The National Gallery
of Canada, Ottawa. The negative
shapes surrounding the figure are
beautifully varied in size and con-
figuration.
Fig. 7-6. Paul Cezanne (1839—1936),
The Vase of Tulips. Courtesy of The
Art Institute of Chicago. By mak-
ing the positive forms touch the
edge of the format in several
places, Cezanne enclosed and sep-
arated the negative shapes, which
contribute as much to the interest
and balance of the composition as
do the positive forms.
on the negative spaces, the forms will take care of themselves. I'll
be showing you specific examples of that.
The quotations by the playwright Samuel Beckett and the
Zen philosopher Alan Watts (on page 123) state this concept con-
cisely. In art, as Beckett says, nothing (in the sense of empty
space) is real. And as Alan Watts says, the inside and outside are
one. You saw in the last chapter that in drawing, the objects and
the spaces around them fit together like the pieces of a puzzle.
Every piece is important and they share edges. Together they fill
up all of the area within the four edges—that is, within the for-
mat.
Look at the example of this fitting together of the spaces and
shapes in the still-life painting by Paul Cezanne (Figure 7-6) and
the figure drawing by Dürer (Figure 7-5). Notice how varied and
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
122

interesting the negative spaces are. Even in the Dürer, which is
almost symmetrical, the negative spaces are beautifully varied.
Now, back to the drawing lessons.
Summing up,, then, negative spaces have two important functions:
1. Negative spaces make "difficult" drawing tasks easy—for
example, areas of foreshortening or complicated forms or
forms that don't "look like" what we know about them,
become easy to draw by using negative space. The chair
drawings in the margin and the horns of the sheep on page 116
are good examples.
2. Emphasis on negative spaces unifies your drawing and
strengthens composition and—perhaps most important,
improves your perceptual abilities.
I realize that it is counter-intuitive—that is, it goes against com-
mon sense—to think that focusing on the spaces around objects
will improve your drawing of the objects. But this is simply
another of the paradoxes of drawing and may help to explain why
it is so difficult to teach oneself to draw. So many of the strategies
of drawing—using negative space, for example—would never
occur to anyone "in their left mind."
Our next bit of preparation is to define the "Basic Unit." What
is it and how does it help with drawing?
Choosing a Basic Unit
On looking at a finished drawing, students just beginning to draw
often wonder how the artist decided where to start. This is one of
the most serious problems that plague students. They ask, "After
I've decided what to draw, how do I know where to start?" or
"What happens if I start too large or too small?" Using a Basic
Unit to start a drawing answers both these questions, and ensures
that you will end with the composition you so carefully chose
before you started a drawing.
After years of teaching classes and workshops, struggling to
find words to explain how to start a drawing, I and my fellow
teachers finally worked out a method that helped us to communi-
"Nothing is more real than
nothing."
— Samuel Beckett
"You can never have the use of the
inside of a cup without the outside.
The inside and the outside go
together. They're one."
— Alan Watts
PERCEIVING THE SHAPE OF A SPACE: THE POSITIVE ASPECTS OF NEGATIVE SPACE
123

Fig-7-7.
cate how a trained artist does this. We had to carefully introspect
what we were doing when starting a drawing and then figure out
how to teach the process, which is fundamentally non-verbal,
extremely rapid, and "on automatic." I have called this method,
"Choosing a Basic Unit." This Basic Unit becomes the key that
unlocks all of the relationships within a chosen composition: All
proportions are found by comparing everything to the Basic Unit.
The Basic Unit—A definition
In Chapter Six, I stated that all parts of a composition (negative
spaces and positive forms) are locked into a relationship that is
bounded by the outside edge of the format. For realistic drawing,
the artist is bound to that relationship in which all the parts fit
together: The artist is not at liberty to change the proportional
relationships. I'm sure you can see that if you change one part,
something else necessarily gets changed. In Chapter Six I used a
child's jigsaw puzzle to illustrate the important concept of shared
edges. I'll use the same puzzle to illustrate the Basic Unit (Figure
7-7).
The Basic Unit is a "starting shape" or "starting unit" that you
choose from within the scene you are looking at through the
Viewfinder (the sailboat on the water). You need to choose a Basic
Unit of medium size—neither very small nor very large, relative
to the format. In this instance, you could choose the straight edge
of the sail. A Basic Unit can be a whole shape (the shape of a win-
dow or the shape of a negative space) or it can be just a single
edge from point to point (the top edge of a window, for example).
The choice depends only on what is easiest to see and easiest to
use as your Basic Unit of proportion.
In the jigsaw puzzle, I chose to use the straight edge of the sail
as my Basic Unit.
Once chosen, all other proportions are determined relative to
your Basic Unit. The Basic Unit is always called "One." You can
lay your pencil down on the puzzle to compare the relationships.
For example, you can now ask yourself, "How wide is the boat
compared to my Basic Unit, the long edge of the sail?" (One to
124
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

one and one-third.) "How wide is the sail relative to my Basic
Unit?" (One to two-thirds.) "Where is the sea/sky edge from the
bottom of the format?" (One to one and one-quarter.) Note that
for each proportion, you go back to your Basic Unit to measure it
on your pencil and then you make the comparison with another
part of the composition. I'm sure you can see the logic of this
method and how it will enable you to draw in proportion.
As I teach you how to find and use a Basic Unit, this method
of starting may seem a bit tedious and mechanical at first. But it
resolves many problems, including problems of starting and of
composition as well as problems of proportional relationships. It
soon becomes quite automatic. In fact, this is the method most
experienced artists use, but they do it so rapidly that someone
watching would think that an artist "just starts drawing."
An anecdote about French artist Henri Matisse illustrates this
point and also illustrates the almost subconscious process of find-
ing a Basic Unit. John Elderfield, curator of drawings at the
Museum of Modern Art in New York, in his wonderful catalog of
the Matisse Retrospective Exhibition of 1992, states: "There is a
1946 film of Matisse painting Young Woman in White, Red Background
[see Figure 7-8].... When Matisse saw the slow-motion sequence
of the film, he felt 'suddenly naked,' he said, because he saw how
his hand 'made a strange journey of its own' in the air before
drawing the model's features. It was not hesitation, he insisted: 'I
was unconsciously establishing the relationship between the sub-
ject I was about to draw and the size of my paper.' " Elderfield
goes on to say, "This can be taken to mean that he had to be aware
of the entire area he was composing before he could mark a par-
ticular section of it."
Clearly, Matisse was finding his "starting shape," the head of
the model, to make sure he would have it the right size to show
the whole figure in his painting. The curious thing about
Matisse's remark, I think, is that he felt "suddenly naked" when
he saw himself apparently figuring out how big to make that first
shape. I think this indicates the almost entirely subconscious
nature of this process.
Later on, you too will rapidly find a starting shape or a Basic
Fig. 7-8. Henri Matisse, Young
Woman in White, Red Background,
1946.
PERCEIVING THE SHAPE OF A SPACE: THE POSITIVE ASPECTS OF NEGATIVE SPACE
125

Fig. 7-9.
Unit or your "One"—or whatever you may eventually call it. And
someone watching you will think that you "just started drawing."
Getting off to a good start
I hope that you will become used to quickly choosing a Basic
Unit to ensure a good composition. I imagine that you have
already grasped the (visual) logic of starting your drawing this
way, but allow me to put it into words once more.
When students are first learning to draw, they almost desper-
ately want to get something down on the paper. Often, they just
plunge in, drawing some object in the scene in front of them
without paying attention to the size of that first shape in relation
to the size of the format.
The size of the first shape that you draw controls the subse-
quent size of everything in the drawing. If that first shape is inad-
vertently drawn too small or too large, the resulting drawing may
be an entirely different composition from the one you intended to
depict.
Students find this frustrating, because it often happens that
the very thing that interested them in the scene turns out to be
"off the edge" of the paper. They don't get to draw that part at all
simply because the first shape they drew was too large. Con-
versely, if the first shape is too small, students find that they must
include much that is of no interest to them in order to "fill out"
the format.
The method I am recommending to you, of correctly sizing
the first shape (your Basic Unit) that you set down, prevents this
inadvertent problem and becomes quite automatic with a bit of
practice. Later on, when you have discarded all of your drawing
aids—the Viewfinders and plastic Picture Plane, you will use
your hands to form a rough "viewfinder" (as in Figure 7-9), and
you will still size the first shape (which, in these lessons, we are
calling your Basic Unit) correctly for your chosen composition.
126
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Your Negative Space drawing of a chair
What you'll need:
• Your Viewfinder with the larger opening
• Your Picture Plane
• Your felt-tip marker
• Your masking tape
• Several sheets of drawing paper
• Your drawing board
• Your pencils, sharpened
• Your eraser
• Your graphite stick and several dry paper towels or paper
napkins
• About an hour of interrupted time—more, if possible, but at
least an hour
Getting set up to draw
You'll be taking some preliminary steps, so please read all of the
instructions before you start. The following are the preliminary
steps for every drawing and take only a few minutes, once you
have learned the process.
• choosing a format and drawing it on your paper
• toning your paper (if you choose to work on a toned ground)
• drawing your crosshairs
• composing your drawing
• choosing a Basic Unit
• drawing the chosen Basic Unit on the Picture Plane with a
felt-tip marker
• transferring the Basic Unit to your paper
• then, starting the drawing
I'll describe each step.
1. The first step is to draw a format on your drawing paper. For
your Negative Space drawing of a chair, use the outside edge
of your Viewfinder or the plastic Picture Plane. The drawing
will be larger than the opening of your Viewfinder.
PERCEIVING THE SHAPE OF A SPACE: THE POSITIVE ASPECTS OF NEGATIVE SPACE 127

As in any field, the "rules" of art
are made to be broken by artists
working at advanced levels. While
acquiring basic drawing skills,
however, I think it is best to stay
with the task at hand—learning
how to see and draw. Once you
have mastered basic drawing, you
can take it as far as you want and
break the rules intentionally, not
by accident.
2. The second step is to tone your paper. Make sure you have a
stack of several sheets of paper to pad your drawing. Begin to
tone your paper by rubbing the edge of the graphite stick
very lightly over the paper, staying inside the format.
3. Once you have covered the paper with a light application of
graphite, begin to rub the graphite into the paper with your
paper towels. Rub with a circular motion, applying pressure
evenly and going right up to the edge of the format. You want
to achieve a very smooth, silvery tone.
4. Next, lightly draw horizontal and vertical crosshairs on your
toned paper. The lines will cross in the center, just as they do
on your plastic Picture Plane. Use the crosshairs on the plas-
tic plane to mark the position of the crosshairs on the format
of your toned paper. A caution: Don't make the lines too dark.
They are only guidelines, and later you may want to elimi-
nate them.
5. The next step is to choose a chair to use as the subject of your
drawing. Any chair will do—an office chair, a plain straight
chair, a stool, a cafeteria chair, whatever. If you are lucky, you
may find a rocking chair or a bentwood chair or something
else very complicated and interesting. But the simplest kind
of chair will be fine for your drawing.
6. Place the chair against a fairly simple background, perhaps a
room corner or a wall with a door. A blank wall is just fine and
will make a beautiful, simple drawing, but the choice of set-
ting is entirely up to you. A lamp placed nearby may throw a
128
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OK THE BRAIN

wonderful shadow of the chair on the wall or floor—a shadow
that can become part of your composition.
7. Sit in front of your "still life"—the chair and setting you have
chosen—at a comfortable distance of about eight to ten feet.
Take the cap off your felt-tip marker and place it close beside
you.
8. Next, use your Viewfinder to compose your drawing. Fasten
the Viewfinder onto your clear plastic Picture Plane. Hold
the Viewfinder/ Picture Plane in front of your face, close one
eye, and, moving the device forward or backward, "frame" the
chair in a composition that you like. (Students are very good
at this. They seem to have an intuitive "feel" for composition.)
If you wish, the chair can nearly touch the format so that the
chair pretty much "fills the space."
9. Hold the Viewfinder very still. Now, gazing at a space in the
chair, perhaps between two back slats, imagine that the chair
is magically pulverized and—like Bugs Bunny, in a poof!—
disappears. What is left are the negative spaces. They are real.
They have real shapes, just like the remains of the door in the
analogy above. These negative space-shapes are what you are
going to draw. I repeat: You will draw the spaces, not the chair.
See Figure 7-10.
Choosing a Basic Unit
1. When you have found a composition you like, hold the
Viewfinder/plastic Picture Plane in that position. Pick up the
felt-tip marker. Next, choose a negative space within the
drawing—perhaps a space-shape between two rungs or
between two back-slats. This space-shape should be fairly
simple, if possible, and neither too small nor too large. You
are looking for a manageable unit that you can clearly see for
its shape and size. This is your Basic Unit, your "starting
shape," your "One." See Figure 7-10 for an example.
2. With one eye closed, focus on that particular negative
space—your Basic Unit. Keep your eye focused on your Basic
Unit until it "pops" into focus as a shape. (This always takes a
moment—perhaps it is L-mode's protesting time!)
PERCEIVING THE SHAPE OF A SPACE: THE POSITIVE ASPECTS OF NEGATIVE SPACE
Fig. 7-10
Fig. 7-11.
129

Note that:
•The toned format on your paper is
larger in size than the format of the
opening of your Viewfinder.
Though the sizes are different, the
proportion of the two formats—
meaning the relationship of width
to length—is the same.
•Your felt-tip drawing of your Basic
Unit on the plastic Picture Plane
and your drawing on the toned
paper will be the same, but the one
on your paper will be larger.
•Stated another way, the images are
the same, but the scale is different.
Note that in this instance, you
"scale up." At other times, you may
"scale down."
3. With your felt-tip marker, carefully draw your Basic Unit on
the plastic Picture Plane. This shape will be the start of your
negative space drawing on your toned paper (Figure. 7-11).
4. The next step is to transfer your Basic Unit onto the paper
you have toned. You will use your crosshairs to place it and
size it correctly. (This is called "scaling up." See the sidebar
for an explanation.) Looking at your drawing on the plastic
plane, say to yourself: "Relative to the format and to the
crosshairs, where does that edge start? How far over from that
side? From the crosshair? From the bottom?" These assess-
ments will help you draw your Basic Unit correctly. Check it
three ways: The shape on your toned paper, the actual space-
shape in the chair-model, and the shape in the Picture Plane
drawing should all be proportionally the same.
5. Check each angle in your Basic Unit the same way, by com-
paring three ways as above. To determine an angle, say to
yourself, "Relative to the edge of the format (vertical or hori-
zontal), what is that angle?" You can also use the crosshairs
(vertical and horizontal) to assess any angles in your Basic
Unit. Then, draw the edge of the space at an angle just as you
see it. (Simultaneously, of course, you are drawing the edge of
the chair.)
6. One more time, check your drawing of your Basic Unit, first
with the actual chair-model and then with the rough sketch
on the plastic Picture Plane. Even though the scale is differ-
ent in each, the relative proportions and angles will be the
same.
It is worth taking time to make sure your Basic Unit is correct.
Once you have this first negative space-shape correctly sized and
placed within the format in your drawing, all of the rest of the
drawing will be in relationship to that first shape. You will experi-
ence the beautiful logic of drawing and you will end with the
composition you so carefully chose at the start.
Drawing the rest of the negative spaces of the chair
1. Remember to focus only on the shapes of the negative spaces.
130
THK NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Try to convince yourself that the chair is gone, pulverized,
absent. Only the spaces are real. Try also to avoid talking to
yourself or questioning why things are the way they are—for
example, why any space-shape is the way it is. Draw it just as
you see it. Try not to "think" at all, in terms of L-mode logic.
Remember that everything you need is right there in front of
your eye and you need not "figure it out." Remember also that
you can check out any problem area by returning to your
plastic Picture Plane and, remembering to close one eye,
drawing the troublesome part directly on the plastic plane.
2. Draw the spaces of the chair one after another. Working out-
ward from your Basic Unit, all the shapes will fit together like
a jigsaw puzzle. You don't have to figure out anything about
the chair. In fact, you don't have to think about the chair at all.
And don't question why the edge of a space goes this way or
that. Just draw it as you see it. See Figure 7-12.
3. Again, if an edge is at an angle, say to yourself, "What is that
angle compared to vertical?" Then, draw the edge at the angle
you see it.
4. Gauge horizontals in the same way: What is the angle, com-
pared to horizontal (that is, the top or bottom edges of your
format)?
5. As you draw, try to take conscious note of what the mental
mode of drawing feels like—the loss of the sense of time, the
feeling of "locking on" to the image, and the wonderful sense
of amazement at the beauty of the perceptions. During the
process, you will find that the negative spaces will begin to
seem interesting in their strangeness and complexity. If you
have a problem with any part of the drawing, remind yourself
that everything you need to know in order to do this drawing
is right there, perfectly available to you.
6. Continue working your way through the drawing, searching
out relationships, both angles (relative to vertical or horizon-
tal) and proportions (relative to each other). If you talk to
yourself at all during the drawing, use only the language of
relationships: "How wide is this space compared to the one I
have just drawn?" "What is this angle compared to horizontal?"
Fig. 7-12.
Fig. 7-13.
PERCEIVING THE SHAPE OF A SPACE: THE POSITIVE ASPECTS OF NEGATIVE SPACE
131

Fig. 7-14.
Fig. 7-15.
"How far does that space extend relative to that whole edge of
the format?" Soon, you will be "really drawing." The drawing
will begin to seem like a fascinating puzzle, the parts fitting
together in an entirely satisfying way (Figure 7-14).
7. When you have finished drawing the edges of the spaces, you
may want to "work up" the drawing a bit by using your eraser
to remove the tone in some areas, perhaps erasing the nega-
tive spaces and leaving the chair in tone (Figure 7-15). If you
see shadows on the floor or on the wall behind, you may want
to add them to your drawing, perhaps adding in some tone
with your pencil, or erasing out the negative spaces of the
shadows. You may also want to "work up" the positive form of
the chair itself, adding some of the interior contours.
After you have finished:
I feel confident that your drawing will please you. One of the
most striking characteristics of negative-space drawings is that no
matter how mundane the subject—a chair, an eggbeater, a can
opener—the drawing will seem beautiful.
Perhaps negative-space drawings remind us of our longing
for unity, or perhaps of our actual unity with the world around us.
No matter what the explanation, we simply like to look at nega-
tive-space drawings. Don't you agree?
With only this brief lesson, you will begin to see negative
spaces everywhere. My students often regard this as a great and
joyful discovery. Practice seeing negative spaces as you go
through your everyday routine and imagine yourself drawing
those beautiful spaces. This mental practice at odd moments is
extremely helpful in putting perceptual skills "on automatic,"
ready to be integrated into a learned skill that you own.
What follows is one last example of the usefulness of negative
spaces.
The cognitive battle of perception
Figures 7-16 and 7-17 show an interesting graphic record of the
struggle and its resolution in two drawings by a student of a cart
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
132

and slide projector. In Figure 7-16, the first drawing, the student
had great difficulty reconciling his stored knowledge of what the
objects were "supposed to look like" with what he saw. Notice in
the drawing that the legs of the cart are all the same length, and a
symbol is used for the wheels. When he shifted to using a viewfin-
der and drawing only the shapes of the negative spaces, he was far
more successful (Figure 7-17). The visual information apparently
came through clearly; the drawing looks confident and as though
it were done with ease. And, in fact, it was done with ease,
because using negative space enables one to escape the mental
crunch that occurs when perceptions don't match conceptions.
It's not that the visual information gathered by regarding
spaces rather than objects is really less complex or is in any way
easier to draw. The spaces, after all, share edges with the form.
But by looking at the spaces, we free R-mode from the domina-
tion of L-mode. Put another way, by focusing on information that
does not suit the style of the verbal system, we cause the job to be
shifted to the mode appropriate for drawing. Thus, the conflict
ends, and in R-mode, the brain processes spatial, relational infor-
mation with ease.
Showing all manner of negative spaces
These drawings are intriguingly pleasurable to look at, even
when the positive forms are as mundane as schoolroom chairs.
One could speculate that the reason is that the method of draw-
ing raises to a conscious level the unity of positive and negative
shapes and spaces. Another reason may be that the technique
results in excellent compositions with particularly interesting
divisions of shapes and spaces within the format.
Learning to see clearly through drawing can surely enhance
your capacity to take a clear look at problems and to be better
able to see things in perspective. In the next chapter, we'll take up
the perception of relationships, a skill you can put to use in as
many directions as your mind can take you.
Fig. 7-16.
Fig. 7-17.
PERCEIVING THE SHAPE OF A SPACE: THE POSITIVE ASPECTS OF NEGATIVE SPACE 
133

Demonstration drawing by
instructor Lisbeth Firmin.
Demonstration drawing by the
author.
Demonstration drawing by the
author.
Student drawing.
Student drawing by Sandy DePhillippo.
134 THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Winslow Homer (1836-1910), Child Seated in a Wicker
Chair (1874). Courtesy of the Sterling and Francine
Clark Art Institute.
Observe how Winslow Homer used negative space in
his drawing of a child in a chair. Try copying this
drawing.
Peter Paul Rubens (1577-1640). Studies of Arms and Legs.
Courtesy of Museum Boymans-Van Beuningen,
Rotterdam.
Copy this drawing. Turn the original upside down and
draw the negative spaces. Then turn the drawing right
side up and complete the details inside the forms. These
"difficult" foreshortened forms become easy to draw if
attention is focused on the spaces around the forms.
PERCEIVING THE SHAPE OF A SPACE: THE POSITIVE ASPECTS OF NEGATIVE SPACE 65

Relationships
in a New Mode:
Putting Sighting
in Perspective

Lupe Ramirez.
I
n this chapter, you will learn the third basic skill of drawing,
how to see and draw relationships. You will learn how to
draw "in perspective" and "in proportion." Another term for
acquiring this skill is "learning how to sight."
Learning this skill is perhaps comparable to learning the
rules of grammar in reading and writing. Just as good grammar
causes words and phrases to hang together logically and to com-
municate ideas clearly, skillful sighting of proportions and per-
spective causes edges, spaces, relationships, lights and shadows to
come together with visual logic. Clear perception of relation-
ships enables us to depict on a flat surface the world we see
around us. Moreover, just as learning how to use grammar skill-
fully gives us power with words, learning how to draw in perspec-
tive and in proportion will give your drawings power through the
illusion of space.
In speaking of grammar, I am referring to the mechanics of
language, not the tedious naming of the parts of speech. By
mechanics, I mean getting the subject and verb to agree, using the
rules of word order and sentence structure, and so on. I couldn't
parse a complicated sentence today if I tried my best (which prob-
ably indicates its usefulness or lack thereof), but I've learned and
practiced the mechanics of language for so long they are on auto-
matic. This is what we are aiming for in this chapter: You will learn
to use perspective and proportion in your drawing. You will not
learn tedious and cumbersome terminology of vanishing points,
converging parallel lines, and perspective of ellipses. You will
learn the mechanics of sighting, which is what most artists use.
Some of my students, nevertheless, still complain that learn-
ing to sight seems so "left-brained" after the R-mode joy of draw-
ing edges and negative spaces. Indeed, there are lots of little steps
and instructions in the beginning. But almost every skill requires
a component similar to sighting in drawing. For example, learn-
ing to drive a car requires that at some point you learn the rules of
the road. Tedious? Yes, but without them, you are very likely to
be arrested or to have an accident. Significantly, once these rules
are learned and "on automatic," you drive a car by the rules with-
out even thinking of them.
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
138

It is the same with drawing. Once you have worked your way
through the next exercise, you will have learned the "rules of the
road" of drawing. With a bit of practice, sighting goes on auto-
matic and you will hardly be aware of taking sights and compar-
ing proportions. Best of all, you will have achieved the power to
depict three-dimensional space in your drawings.
Students of drawing who learn everything except how to
sight relationships greatly handicap their drawing and find them-
selves constantly making baffling mistakes in proportion and per-
spective. This problem plagues students new to drawing and, I
might add, some rather advanced students as well.
Why does this skill seem so difficult? First, it is a two-part
skill. The first part is sighting angles relative to vertical and hori-
zontal, and the second part is sighting proportions relative to each
other. In addition, the skill requires that one deal with ratios and
comparisons that seem quite "left-brained." And, finally, it
requires that one confronts and deals with paradoxes. For exam-
ple, we can know that a ceiling is flat and the corner is a right
angle. But on the picture plane, the edges of the ceiling are not
horizontal and the corner angles are not right angles at all. They
are oblique angles. As you can imagine, we'll have to carefully
outmaneuver your L-mode, which will soon be saying, "This
doesn't make sense!" Or, "This is too complicated! I'll never get
it!" Or, "This stuff is stupid!"
On my word, learning how to sight relationships is not bor-
ing; it is powerful—it unlocks space. I agree, the skill is compli-
cated, but you've learned other complicated things before
this—how to read and write, for example. And sighting is
definitely not stupid; it is intellectually fascinating—witness the
many great thinkers of the Renaissance who grappled with the
problem of how to depict space on a flat surface.
Once L-mode complaints are set aside, I believe you will
actually enjoy learning this skill. I'm sure you can see the connec-
tion between learning to see and draw what is right there in front
of your eyes and learning to be a more "clear-sighted" person,
able to deal with contradictory information and the many para-
doxes of our world. Be prepared for all of the objections. Your
Demonstration drawing
by Grace Kennedy.
Demonstration drawing
by the author.
RELATIONSHIPS IN A NEW MODE: PUTTING SIGHTING IN PERSPECTIVE
139

Fig. 8-1. Roll up a tube of paper and
check the relationship of sizes of a
nearby object (someone's head, for
example) and a similar object far-
ther away. You will be surprised at
the apparent change in size.
Fig. 8-2. Laurie Kuroyama.
Notice the great change in head
size from near to far.
Fig. 8-3.
L-mode will have a field day, but stay with me! I'll try to be as
clear as possible.
On dealing with the two-part skill of sighting angles
and proportions
The term sighting really means seeing, but seeing in the artist's
special way—seeing relationships on the picture plane (See Fig-
ures 8-1 and 8-2). All of sighting is comparison: What is this angle
compared to vertical? How big is the apple compared to the
melon? How wide is the table compared to its length? All com-
parisons are made relative to constants: Angles are compared to
the constants vertical and horizontal. Sizes (proportions) are also
compared to a constant—our Basic Unit.
On dealing with ratios: The root of the word "relationship" is
ratio. In mathematics, ratios are expressed as numbers—1:2 means
one of this to two of that. Ratios seem like a left-brained concept
because they are strongly connected in our minds with mathe-
matics. But we use ratios in many ordinary activities. In cooking,
for example, candy is one part liquid to two parts sugar—that is,
1:2. In map reading, city X is three times as far as city Y—the ratio
is 3:1. In drawing, ratios become handy tags to assess proportional
relationships among the parts of a composition. The artist
chooses something to be "One," our Basic Unit, and that unit is
rationalized or proportionalized with all other parts.
To illustrate, the width of a window can be called "One," the
Basic Unit. In comparison, let's say that the window is twice as
long as it is wide. The ratio is 1:2. The artist draws the width, calls
it "One," measures it as "One" and then measures off two Basic
Units, counting "One to one, two." The ratio is 1:2. It's an easy way
to tag and remember a proportion long enough to transfer it into
your drawing.
On dealing with paradox: Seen flattened on the plane, a table
may appear (by taking a sight) to be narrower than you know it to
be (see Figure 8-3). The sighted ratio might be 1:8, for example.
You must learn to "swallow" this visual paradox and draw what
you have seen on the plane. Only then will the table, in your
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
140

Sighting can be used to determine
the relationship of lengths and
widths of forms. When drawing a
table viewed from an oblique
angle, for example, an artist first
determines angles of the edges rel-
ative to horizontal and vertical by
sighting, as in Figure 8-4.
The next perception required is
how wide the table is (from this
viewpoint) in relation to its length.
This apparent width relative to
length will vary from viewpoint to
viewpoint, depending on where the
viewer's eye level happens to be.
1. Holding the pencil on a plane
parallel to your eyes and at arm's
length, with the elbow locked to
keep the scale constant, measure
the width of the table. Place the
eraser of the pencil so it coincides
with one corner of the table and
place your thumb at the other cor-
ner. This is your Basic Unit (Figure
8-5).
2. Still keeping your elbow locked
and with the pencil still parallel to
your eyes, carry that measurement
to the long side of the table (Figure
8-5). How long is the table, relative
to its width? In this instance, the
ratio is one to one and a half (1:1+1/2)
(Figure 8-6).
3. Next, you will take a sight on the
table legs by holding your pencil
vertically, taking note of the angle
of one leg relative to vertical. Are
the table legs perfectly vertical or
are they at an angle? Draw the leg
closest to you. You can take a sight
on the length of the leg relative
(again) to the width, your Basic
Unit (Figure 8-7).
Fig. 8-6.
RELATIONSHIPS IN A NEW MODE: PUTTING SIGHTING IN PERSPECTIVE
Fig. 8-4.
141

"Point of view is worth eighty points
— Alan Kay, computer
scientist and Disney
Fellow
drawing appear, paradoxically, to be the size and shape you know-
it to be. Moreover, the angles of the tabletop may appear to be
different from what you know to be right angles. You must "swal-
low" this paradox as well.
Perspective and proportion
Learning to draw in perspective requires that we see things as
they are out there in the external world. We must put aside our
prejudgments, our stored and memorized stereotypes and habits
of thinking. We must overcome false interpretations, which are
often based on what we think must be out there even though we
may never have taken a really clear look at what is right in front
of our eyes.
I'm sure you can see the connection to problem solving. One
of the first steps in solving problems is to scan the relevant factors
and to put things "into perspective" and "into proportion." This
process requires the capacity to see the various parts of a problem
in their true relationship.
Defining perspective
The term "perspective" comes from the Latin word "prospectus,"
meaning "to look forward." Linear perspective, the system most
familiar to us, was perfected during the Renaissance by European
artists. Linear perspective enabled artists to reproduce visual
changes of lines and forms as they appear in three-dimensional
space.
Various cultures have developed different conventions or
perspective systems. Egyptian and Oriental artists, for example,
developed a kind of stair-step or tiered perspective, in which
placement from bottom to top of the format indicated position in
space. In this system, which is often used intuitively by children,
the forms at the very top of the page—regardless of size—are
considered to be the farthest away. More recently, artists have
rebelled against rigid conventions of perspective and have
invented new systems employing abstract spatial qualities of col-
ors, textures, lines, and shapes.
142
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OK THE BRAIN

Traditional Renaissance perspective conforms most closely
to the way people in our Western culture perceive objects in
space. In our perceptions, parallel lines appear to converge at
vanishing points on a horizon line (the viewer's eye level) and
forms appear to become smaller as distance from the viewer
increases. For this reason, realistic drawing depends heavily on
these principles. The Dürer etching (Figure 8-8) illustrates this
perceptual system.
Dürer's device
The great sixteenth-century Renaissance artist, Albrecht Dürer,
invented a device to help him draw in proportion and in perspec-
tive. Your plastic Picture Plane is a simplified version of Dürer's
device. Let's look at the artist's depiction of his device in Figure
8-8. Dürer's draughtsman, holding his head in a stationary posi-
tion (note the vertical marker for his viewpoint), looks through an
upright wire grid. The artist peers at his model from a viewpoint
that foreshortens his visual image of the model—that is, a view-
point in which the main axis of the woman's figure from head to
foot coincides with the artist's line of sight. This view causes the
more distant parts of the figure (the head and shoulders) to
appear to be smaller than they actually are, and the nearby parts
(the knees and lower legs) to appear to be larger.
Fig. 8-8. Albrecht Dürer, Draughts-
man Making a Perspective Drawing
of a Woman (1525). Courtesy of
The Metropolitan Museum of Art,
New York. Gift of Felix M.
Warburg, 1918.
RELATIONSHIPS IN A NEW MODE: PUTTING SIGHTING IN PERSPECTIVE
143

Fig. 8-9. What Dürer saw: Sighting
parts one by one.
A foreshortened view of a leg
and foot, as seen flattened on the
Picture Plane.
In front of Dürer's draughtsman on his drawing table is a
paper the same size as the wire grid, marked off with an identical
grid of lines. The artist draws on the paper what he perceives
through the grid, matching in his drawing the exact angles and
curves and lengths of lines compared to the verticals and hori-
zontals of the grid. In effect, he is copying what he sees flattened
on the picture plane. If he copies just what he sees, he will pro-
duce on the paper a foreshortened view of the model. The pro-
portions, shapes, and sizes will be contrary to what the artist
knows about the actual proportions, shapes, and sizes of the
human body; but only if he draws the untrue proportions he per-
ceives will the drawing look true to life.
What did Dürer see through his grid? (See Figure 8-9.) Dürer
sights point one, the top of the left knee, and marks that point on
his gridded paper. Next, he sights point two, the top of the left
hand, and then point three, the top of the left knee. Beyond these
points he sights the torso and the head. He connects all the points
and ends with a foreshortened drawing of the entire figure.
The problem with foreshortening in drawing is that what we
know about the subject of a drawing somehow intrudes into the
drawing, and we draw what we know rather than what we see.
The purpose of Dürer's device, using the grid and the fixed view-
point, was to force himself to draw the form exactly as he saw it,
with all of its "wrong" proportions. Then, paradoxically, the
drawing "looked right." A viewer of the drawing, then, might
144
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

wonder how the draughtsman was able to make the drawing look
"so real."
The achievement, therefore, of Renaissance perspective was
to codify and systematize a method of bypassing artists' knowl-
edge about shapes and forms. The science of "formal" perspective
provided a means by which they could draw forms just as they
appeared to the eye—including distortions created optically by a
form's position in space relative to the viewer's eye.
The system worked beautifully and solved the problem
of how to create an illusion of deep space on a flat surface, of
re-creating the visible world. Dürer's simple device evolved into
a complicated mathematical system, enabling artists from the
Renaissance onward to overcome their mental resistance to
optical distortions of the true shapes of things and to draw
realistically.
Formal perspective versus "informal" perspective
But the system of formal perspective is not without problems.
Followed to the letter, strictly applied perspective rules can result
in rather dry and rigid drawings. Perhaps the most serious prob-
lem with the formal perspective system is that it is so "left-
brained." It employs the style of left-hemisphere processing:
analysis, sequential logical cogitation, and mental calculations
within a pre-prescribed system. There are vanishing points, hori-
zon lines, perspective of circles and ellipses, and so on. The sys-
tem is detailed and cumbersome, the antithesis of R-mode style
with its antic/serious, pleasurable quality. For example, in any-
thing but the simplest one-point perspective setup (Figure 8-10),
vanishing points may be several feet beyond the edge of the
drawing paper, requiring pins and strings to mark them.
Fortunately, once you understand "informal" perspective
(sighting), you don't really need to know formal perspective at all.
That's not to say the study of perspective is not useful and inter-
esting. In my view, knowledge never hurts! But sighting is suffi-
cient for basic drawing skills.
Graham Collier, professor of art,
states that in the early days of the
inception and development of
Renaissance perspective it was
used creatively and imaginatively
to impart what must have been a
thrilling sense of space to art.
"Effective as perspective is, how-
ever, it becomes a deadening
influence on an artist's natural way
of seeing things once it is accepted
as a system—as a mechanical
formula."
— Graham Collier
Form, Space, and Vision,
1963
Fig. 8-10. The classic perspective
illustration. Note that vertical lines
remain vertical; horizontal edges
converge at a vanishing point (or
points) on the horizon line (which
is always at the artist's eye level).
That's one-point perspective in a
nutshell. Two-point and three-
point perspective are complex sys-
tems, involving multiple vanishing
points that often extend far beyond
the edges of the drawing paper and
requiring a large drawing table,
T-squares, straight-edges, etc., to
draw. Informal sighting is much
easier and is sufficiently accurate
for most drawing.
RELATIONSHIPS IN A NEW MODE: PUTTING SIGHTING IN PERSPECTIVE
145

Fig. 8-11. Draw the top of the door-
way on your plastic Picture Plane.
This is your Basic Unit.
Fig. 8-12. Transfer your Basic Unit
to your toned drawing paper. Since
the paper is larger than the Picture
Plane, you need to scale up (pro-
portionally enlarge) your Basic
Unit.
A brief practice in sighting before you do a "real"
perspective drawing
What you'll need:
• Your drawing board
• Several sheets of scratch paper
• Your drawing pencils, sharpened, and your eraser
• Your plastic Picture Plane and your felt-tip marker
• Your larger Viewfinder
What you'll do:
First, you will practice sighting proportions and angles, using
your pencil as a sighting device. Once you've practiced a bit, then
you'll do your "real" sighting drawing. Begin by seating yourself
in front of a doorway, at about ten feet away.
Hold up your Viewfinder/Picture Plane and compose your
drawing so that you can see the whole doorway. Hold the Picture
Plane very still and use your felt-tip marker to draw the top of
the doorway on the plastic plane. See Figure 8-n. (The line will
be somewhat shaky.) This is your Basic Unit. Transfer this unit to
a piece of paper, estimating the size and position so that it is the
same as on your Picture Plane. Set the Picture Plane aside. See
Figure 8-12.
Now, pick up your pencil. Hold it at arm's length toward the
top of the doorway with the flat (eraser) end out and with your
elbow locked. Close one eye and move the pencil so that the end
coincides with one side of the top of the doorway. (Choose either
the outside of the molding or the inside edge.) Then, with one
eye still closed, move your thumb along the pencil until
your thumbnail coincides with the other side of the doorway.
Hold that measure. You have "taken a sight" on the width of the
doorway.
A test: What happens if you open both eyes or if you relax your elb
Keep your thumb at the same position and try bending your
elbow just slightly, just barely pulling the pencil toward you.
146
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

What happens? The "measurement" has changed, hasn't it?
Therefore, the reason you must lock your elbow when sighting
proportions is to maintain the same scale. When your elbow is
locked, you are always taking sights using the same position.
Then, relock your elbow, and resight the width of the door-
way on your pencil (Figure 8-13). We'll call this your Basic Unit,
or your "One." Now, keeping your thumb in the same position,
turn your pencil vertically and find the relationship (the ratio or
proportion) of width to length.
Still holding the pencil at arm's length, and still with one eye
closed and your elbow locked, measure from the top corner: "One
(width), to one (height)" (Figure 8-14), then drop down, measure
"One to two" (Figure 8-15), drop it again and measure the remain-
der, "One to two and two-thirds" (Figure 8-16). You have now
"taken a sight" on the proportion of the width relative to the
height of the doorway. This proportion is expressed as a ratio:
1:2+2/3, or, in words, "One to two and two-thirds."
Now, turn back to your sketch
By sighting the doorway, you determined that the width-to-
height proportion of the doorway was 1:2+2/3. That is the propor-
tion of the doorway "out there" in the real world. Your job is to
transfer that proportion from "out there" into your drawing.
Fig. 8-15. Measure "One..."
Fig. 8-14. "... to one..
Fig. 8-15. "... two..."
Fig. 8-16. "... and two-thirds."
RELATIONSHIPS IN A NEW MODE: PUTTING SIGHTING IN PERSPECTIVE
147

Fig. 8-17. Measure "One..."
Obviously, the door in your drawing will be smaller—much
smaller—than the real doorway. But it must be proportionally the
same, width to length.
Now, therefore, use your pencil and thumb to take a new
measure: the width you have drawn on your paper (Figure 8-17).
Then turn the pencil to vertical on your paper and measure off
"One to one, two, and two-thirds" (Figures 8-18, 8-19, and 8-20).
Make a mark and draw in the two sides of the doorway. The door-
way you have just drawn has the same proportion—width to
height—as the real doorway you were looking at.
To set this idea, draw a new "One," smaller than the first one.
Now, measure that width with your pencil and again mark off the
proportional height. This doorway will be smaller, but it will be
proportionally the same as your first drawing and the real door-
way.
Summing up: In sighting proportions, you find out what the
proportions are "out there" in the real world and then, holding
the proportion in your mind as a ratio (your Basic Unit or
"One"—in relation to something else), remeasure in the drawing
to transfer the proportion to the drawing. Obviously, in drawings,
sizes are almost always on a different scale (smaller or larger) than
what we see "out there," but the proportions are the same.
Fig. 8-18. "... to one..."
Fig. 8-19. "... two ..."
Fig. 8-20. "... and two-thirds.
I48
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

As a clever student of mine put it: "You use your pencil to find
the ratio 'out there.' You remember it, wipe the measure off the
pencil, and remeasure with your pencil in the drawing."
The next step: Sighting angles
Remember, sighting is a two-part skill. You have just learned
the first part: sighting proportions. Your pencil, used as a sighting
device, enables you to see "How big is this compared to that?"
"How wide is that compared to my Basic Unit?" And so on. Pro-
portions are sighted relative to each other and to your Basic Unit.
Sighting angles is different. Angles are sighted relative to ver-
tical and horizontal. Remember, both angles and proportions
must be sighted on the plane.
Take up your Viewfinder/Picture Plane and your felt-tip
marker again and seat yourself in front of another corner of a
room. Hold up the Picture Plane and look at the angle formed
where the ceiling meets the two walls. Be sure to keep the Picture
Plane vertical in front of your face, on the same plane as the plane
of your two eyes. Don't tilt the plane in any direction.
Again, compose your view, and use your marker on the Pic-
ture Plane to draw the corner (a vertical line). Then, on the plane,
draw the edges where the ceiling meets the two walls, and, if pos-
sible, the edges where the floor meets the walls.
Then, put your Picture Plane down on a piece of paper so
you can see the drawing and transfer those lines to a piece of
drawing paper.
You have just drawn a corner in perspective. Now, let's do that
without the aid of the Picture Plane.
Move to a different corner or a different position. Tape a
piece of paper to your drawing board. Now, take a sight on the
vertical corner. Close one eye and hold your pencil perfectly ver-
tically at the corner. Having checked, you can now draw a vertical
line for the corner.
Next, hold up your pencil perfectly horizontally, staying on
the plane, to see what the angles of the ceiling are relative to hor-
izontal (Figure 8-21). You will see them as angles between the
pencil and the edges of the ceiling. Remember these angles as
Fig. 8-21.
Fig. 8-22.
Verticals in human-built structures
remain vertical. Horizontals—that
is, edges parallel to the face of the
earth—appear to change and con-
verge and must be sighted. But you
can pretty much count on verticals
remaining vertical. In your draw-
ing, they will be parallel to the
edges of your paper. There are
exceptions, of course. If you stand
at street level, looking up, to draw
a tall building, those vertical edges
will converge and must be sighted.
This situation, however, is fairly
rare in drawing.
RELATIONSHIPS IN A NEW MODE: PUTTING SIGHTING IN PERSPECTIVE
149

Fig. 8-23. Later, when you have
learned to sight and have discarded
the actual Picture Plane, you must
still remember to sight on the plane
and be careful to not "poke
through" the imaginary plane.
shapes. Then, again estimating, draw the angles into your draw-
ing. Use the same procedure for the floor angles (Figure 8-22).
These fundamental sighting movements or measuring ges-
tures in drawing are not difficult to master, once you have a real
understanding of the purpose of the movements.
• The purpose of closing one eye, as I explained earlier, is to
see a 2-D image only, not a 3-D binocular image.
• The purpose of locking the elbow is to ensure using a single
scale in sighting proportions. Relaxing the elbow even
slightly can cause errors by changing the scale of the sights.
In sighting angles, it is not necessary to take the sights at arm's
length, but you must stay on the plane.
• The purpose of comparing angles to vertical or horizontal is
obvious. Angles can vary infinitely around 360 degrees. Only
true vertical and true horizontal are constant and reliable.
And since the edges of the paper (and the edges of the format
you have drawn) also represent vertical and horizontal, any
angle can be assessed on the plane and transferred into the
drawing in relation to those constants.
Some important points about sighting angles
• All angles are sighted relative to the two constants: vertical
and horizontal.
• In your drawing, the edges of your format represent the con-
stants vertical and horizontal. Once you have determined an
angle "out there" in the real world, you will draw it into the
drawing relative to the edges of your format.
• All angles are sighted on the picture-plane. This is a solid
plane. You cannot "poke through" it to align your pencil with
an edge as it moves through space. You determine the angle as
it appears on the plane (Figure 8-23).
• You can sight angles by holding your pencil either vertically
or horizontally and comparing the angle with the edge of the
pencil. You can also use the crosshairs on your clear plastic
Picture Plane or even the edge of one of the Viewfinders. You
just need some edge that you can hold up in a vertical or hori-
150
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

zontal position on the plane to compare the angle you intend
to draw. The pencil is simply the easiest to use and doesn't
interrupt your drawing.
• Visual information seen on the plane is nearly always differ-
ent from what you know about things. Say you are facing a
corner of a room. You know that the ceiling is flat—that is,
horizontal—and that it meets the wall at right angles. But if
you hold up your pencil perfectly horizontally, close one eye,
and, staying on the plane, line up the corner so that it touches
the center of your horizontal pencil, you will find that the
edges of the ceiling go off at odd angles. Perhaps one angle is
steeper than the other. See Figure 8-22, page 149.
• You must draw these angles just as you see them. Only then
will the ceiling look flat and the right angles of the walls
appear to be correct in your finished drawing. This is one of
the great paradoxes of drawing.
• You must put these paradoxical angles into your drawing just
as you perceive them. To do this, you remember the shape of
one of the triangles made by the edge of the ceiling and your
horizontal pencil. Then, imagining a horizontal line in your
drawing (parallel to the top and bottom edges of your for-
mat), draw the same triangle. Use the same process to draw
the other angled edge of the ceiling. See Figure 8-21, page 149,
for an illustration of this.
I usually recommend that students not try to designate an angle
by degrees: a 45-degree angle; a 30-degree angle; etc. It really is
best to simply remember the shape the angle makes when com-
pared to vertical and horizontal and carry that visual shape in
your mind to draw it. You may have to double-check angles a few
times at first, but my students learn this skill very quickly.
The decision whether to use vertical or horizontal as the con-
stant against which to see a particular angle occasionally puzzles
students. I recommend that you choose whichever will produce
the smaller angle.
I realize that sighting sounds very
"left-brained" at this point. But
remember we are searching out
relationships. The right hemi-
sphere is specialized for the
perception of relationships—how-
things compare. As I said before,
the "counting up" of sighting is just
a simple way of "tagging" our per-
ceptions. The Basic Unit is always
"One," because it is the first part of
a comparison. After you practice
sighting a bit, you are hardly aware
of the process and it is very rapid.
Also, with practice in drawing, you
will be doing a lot of
"eyeballing," meaning estimating
rather than needing to sight
everything. But for any difficult
perception, as in foreshortening,
an experienced artist gladly
uses sighting. Like negative space,
sighting helps to make drawing
easy.
RELATIONSHIPS IN A NEW MODE: PUTTING SIGHTING IN PERSPECTIVE
151

Try to remember that drawing
always produces an approximate
version of the subject, even for a
person highly skilled in drawing.
Drawing is not photography. The
person who is drawing consciously
or subconsciously edits, empha-
sizes (or minimizes), or otherwise
slightly changes various aspects of
the subject. Students are often very
critical of their work because it is
not an exact rendition, but the sub-
conscious choices made during
drawing are part of the expressive-
ness of drawings.
Please note that in public places
you will attract an audience of
viewers who will very likely want to
talk with you—not a good situation
for maintaining an R-mode, word-
less state of mind. On the other
hand, if you would like to make
some new friends, drawing in a
public spot will work every time.
For some reason, people who ordi-
narily would not approach a
stranger do not hesitate to talk
with someone who is drawing.
A "real" perspective drawing
What you'll need:
• Your drawing board
• Several sheets of drawing paper, in a stack for padding
• Your masking tape
• Your drawing pencils, sharpened, and your eraser
• Your graphite stick and several paper towels or paper napkins
• Your plastic Picture Plane and your felt-tip marker
• Your larger Viewfinder
Before you start:
Tape a stack of several sheets of drawing paper to your drawing
board. Draw a format on your drawing paper and tone the paper
within the format to a medium gray tone. Draw the crosshairs on
the toned paper.
1. Choose your subject. Learning how to draw "in proportion"
and "in perspective" are the two great challenges—the
Waterloo, even—of most drawing students in art schools. You
will want to prove to yourself that you can achieve this skill.
Therefore, pick your subject with that objective in mind:
Choose a view or a site that you think would be really hard to
draw—one with lots of angles or a complicated ceiling or a
long view down a hall. See the student drawing on page 153.
The best way to choose a site is to walk around, using your
Viewfinder to find a composition that pleases you—much in
the same way as composing with a camera's viewfinder.
Possible sites:
• A kitchen corner
• A hallway
• A view through an open doorway
• A corner of any room in your house
• A porch or balcony
• Any street corner where you can sit in your car or on a bench
and draw
• An entrance to any public building, inside or out
THE NKW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
152

Set yourself up to draw at your chosen site. You will need two
chairs, one for sitting on and one on which to lean your draw-
ing board. If you are drawing outside, folding chairs are con-
venient. Make sure that you are directly facing your chosen
view.
2. Clip your larger Viewfinder and the plastic Picture Plane
together. Draw a format edge on the plastic plane by running
the felt-tip marker around the inside edge of the Viewfinder
opening. Closing one eye, move the Viewfinder/plastic Pic-
ture Plane backward and forward to find the best composi-
tion—the one you like best.
3. Having found a composition you like, choose your Basic Unit.
Your Basic Unit should be of medium size and of a shape that
is not too complicated. It might be a window or a picture on
the wall or a doorway. It can be a positive form or a negative
space. It can be a single line or a shape. Draw your Basic Unit
directly on the plastic with your felt-tip marker.
RELATIONSHIPS IN A NEW MODE: PUTTING SIGHTING IN PERSPECTIVE
A student's drawing of an interest-
ing and challenging view.
153

After you have drawn your Basic
Unit on the plastic Picture Plane,
you may also wish to draw one or
two of the more important edges
on the plastic Picture Plane, but be
aware that the line will be very
shaky and uncertain. The essential
piece of information is your Basic
Unit, and that is really all you
need.
A perspective drawing by Cindy
Ball-Kingston. You will find inter-
esting compositions in unexpected
places.
4. Set aside your Viewfinder/plastic Picture Plane on a piece of
white paper so that you can see what you have drawn on it.
You will next draw your Basic Unit on your paper. It will be
the same shape but larger, just as your toned format is larger
than the Viewfinder opening.
5. Transfer your Basic Unit onto the toned paper using your
crosshairs as a guide. On both the Picture Plane and on your
toned paper, the crosshairs divide the drawing area into four
quadrants. Refer to Figures 8-11 and 8-12 on page 146 for how
to transfer your Basic Unit from your Picture Plane to your
toned paper by using these quadrants.
How to re-find your composition: Sometimes it is useful to go
back to the Picture Plane to check on an angle or proportion. To
re-find your composition, simply hold up your Viewfinder/plas-
tic Picture Plane, close one eye and move the plane forward or
backward until your Basic Unit "out there" lines up with the felt-
tip drawing of Basic Unit on the plastic plane. Then check out
any angle or proportion that may be puzzling you.
For most people just learning to draw, the hardest part of
drawing is believing their own sights of both angles and propor-
tions. Many times I have watched students take a sight, shake
their heads, take the sight again, again shake their heads, even say
out loud, "It [an angle] can't be that steep," or, "It [a proportion]
can't be that small."
With a little more experience in drawing, students are able to
accept the information they obtain by sighting. You just have to
swallow it whole, so to speak, and make a decision not to second-
guess your sights. I say to my students, "If you see it so, you draw
it so. Don't argue with yourself about it."
Of course, the sights have to be taken as correctly and care-
fully as possible. When I demonstrate drawing in a workshop, stu-
dents see me making a very careful, deliberate movement to
extend my arm, lock my elbow, and close one eye in order to
carefully check a proportion or an angle on the plane. But these
movements become quite automatic very quickly, just as one
quickly learns to brake a car to a smooth stop.
154
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

To complete your perspective drawing:
1. Again, you will fit the pieces of your drawing together like a
fascinating puzzle. Work from part to adjacent part, always
checking the relationships of each new part to the parts
already drawn. Also, remember the concept of edges as
shared edges, with the positive forms and negative spaces
fitted into the format to create a composition. Remember that
all the information you need for this drawing is right there
before your eyes. You now know the strategies artists use to
"unlock" that visual information and you have the correct
devices to help you.
2. Be sure to use negative spaces as an important part of your
drawing as in Figure 8-24. You will add strength to your
drawing if you use negative space to see and draw small items
such as lamps, tables, signs with lettering, and so on. If you do
not, and focus only on the positive shapes, they will tend to
weaken your drawing. If you are drawing a landscape, trees
and foliage in particular are much stronger when their nega-
tive spaces are emphasized.
3. Once you have completed the main parts of the drawing, you
can focus on the lights and shadows. "Squinting" your eyes a
bit will blur the details and allow you to see large shapes of
lighted areas and shadowed areas. Again using your new
sighting skills, you can erase out the shapes of lights and use
your pencil to darken in the shapes of shadows. These shapes
are sighted in exactly the same way as you have sighted the
other parts of the drawing: "What is the angle of that shadow
relative to horizontal? How wide is that streak of light relative
to the width of the window?"
4. If any part of the drawing seems "off" or "out of drawing," as
such errors are called, check out the troublesome area with
your clear plastic Picture Plane. Look at the image on the
plane (with one eye closed, of course) and alternately glance
down at your drawing to double-check angles and propor-
tions. Make any corrections that seem reasonably easy to
make.
Fig. 8-24. Remember to emphasize
negative spaces in your drawing.
RELATIONSHIPS IN A NKW MODE: PUTTING SIGHTING IN PERSPECTIVE
155

Artist/teacher Robert Henri sends
a stern warning to his students:
"If in your drawing you habitually
disregard proportions you become
accustomed to the sight of distor-
tion and lose critical ability. A per-
son living in squalor eventually
gets used to it."
— The Art Spirit, 1923.
After you have finished:
Congratulations! You have just accomplished a task that many
university art students would find daunting if not impossible.
Sighting is an aptly named skill. You take a sight and you see
things as they really appear on the picture-plane. This skill will
enable you to draw anything you can see with your own eyes. You
need not search for "easy" subjects. You will be able to draw any-
thing at all.
The skill of sighting takes some practice to master, but very
soon you will find yourself "just drawing," taking sights automati-
cally, at times even without needing to measure proportions or
assess angles. I think it's significant that this is called "eyeballing."
Also, when you come to the difficult foreshortened parts, you will
have just the skills needed to make the drawing seem easy.
Fig. 8-25. Charles White, Preacher
(1952). Courtesy of the Whitney
Museum.
This drawing by Charles White
demonstrates a foreshortened
view. Study it. Copy it, turning the
drawing upside down if necessary.
You might use the length of the
man's left hand from the wrist to
the tip of the pointing finger as
your Basic Unit. Perhaps you'll be
surprised to find that the ratio of
the head to the model's left hand is
1:1+2/3.
Each time you experience the fact
that drawing just what you see
works the wonder of creating the
illusion of space and volume on the
flat surface of the paper, the meth-
ods will become more securely
integrated as your way of seeing—
the artist's way of seeing.
156
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Fig. 8-26. Edgar Degas (1834-1917),
Dancer Adjusting Her Slipper (1873).
Courtesy of The Metropolitan
Museum of Art, bequest of Mrs.
H. O. Havemeyer, 1929. The H. O.
Havemeyer Collection
The Use of Sighting in Figure
Drawing
This technique of using the con-
stants, vertical and horizontal,
against which to gauge angles is an
important basic skill in drawing
figures as well as objects. Many
artists' sketches still show traces
of sight lines drawn in by the artist,
as in the Edgar Degas drawing
entitled Dancer Adjusting Her Slip-
per (Figure 8-26). Degas was proba-
bly sighting such points as the
location of the left toe in relation
to the ear and the angle of the arm
compared to vertical.
Note that Degas's Basic Unit was
from the topmost edge of the hair
to the neckband. The artist used
the same Basic Unit in Figure 11-6,
shown in the chapter on color.
The visible world is replete with foreshortened views of peo-
ple, streets, trees, and flowers. Beginning students sometimes
avoid these "difficult" views and search instead for "easy" views.
With the skills you now have, this limiting of subject matter for
your drawing is unnecessary. Edges, negative spaces, and sight-
ings of relationships work together to make drawing foreshort-
ened forms not just possible—they become downright enjoyable.
As in learning any skill, learning the "hard parts" is challenging
and exhilarating.
RELATIONSHIPS IN A NEW MODE: PUTTING SIGHTING IN PERSPECTIVE
157

Looking ahead
The technique I have just taught you, "informal perspective,"
relies only on sights taken on the plane. Most artists use informal
perspective, even though they may have complete knowledge of
formal perspective. One of the advantages of learning informal
sighting is that it can be used for any subject matter, as you will
see in the next exercise. You will be drawing a profile portrait,
putting to use your skills of perceiving edges, spaces, and propor-
tional relationships in drawing the human head.
Remember that realistic drawings of perceived subjects
always require the same basic perceptual skills—the skills you are
learning right now. Of course, this is true of other R-mode global
skills. For example, once you have learned to drive, you can very
likely drive any make of automobile.
In your next drawing, you will enjoy drawing the human
head, a most intriguing and challenging subject.
Randa Cardwell
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
158

Instructor Dana Crowe.
RELATIONSHIPS IN A NEW MODE: PUTTING SIGHTING IN PERSPECTIVE
159

Facing Forward:
Portrait Drawing
with Ease

H
UMAN FACES HAVE ALWAYS FASCINATED ARTISTS. To Catch
a likeness, to show the exterior in such a way that the inner
person can be seen, is a challenging, inviting prospect. Moreover,
a portrait can reveal not only the appearance and personality (the
gestalt) of the sitter but also the soul of the artist. Paradoxically,
the more clearly the artist sees the sitter, the more clearly the
viewer can see through the likeness to perceive the artist. These
revelations beyond the likeness are not intentional. They are sim-
ply the result of close, sustained R-mode observation. .
Therefore, because we are searching for you through the
images you draw, you will be drawing human faces in the next set
of exercises. The more clearly you see, the better you will draw,
and the more you will express yourself to yourself and to others.
Since portrait drawing requires very fine perceptions in order
to produce a likeness, faces are effective for training beginners in
seeing and drawing. The feedback on the correctness of percep-
tion is immediate and certain, because we all know when a draw-
ing of a human head is correct in its general proportions. And if
we know the sitter, we can make even more precise judgments
about the accuracy of the perceptions.
But perhaps more important for our purposes, drawing the
human head has a special advantage for us in our quest for ways to
gain conscious access to our right-hemisphere functions. The
right hemisphere of the human brain is specialized for the recog-
nition of faces. People with right-hemisphere injury caused by a
stroke or accident often have difficulty recognizing their friends
or even recognizing their own faces in the mirror. Left-hemi-
sphere-injured patients usually do not experience this deficit.
Beginners often think that drawing people is the hardest of all
kinds of drawing. It isn't, actually. As with any other subject mat-
ter, the visual information is right there, ready and available.
Again, the problem is seeing. To restate a major premise of this
book, drawing is always the same task—that is, every drawing
requires the basic perceptual skills you are learning. Aside from
complexity, one subject is not harder or easier than another.
However, certain subjects often seem harder than others, proba-
bly because embedded symbol systems, which interfere with
162
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

clear perceptions, are stronger for some subjects than for others.
Most people have a very strong, persistent symbol system for
drawing the human head. For example, a common symbol for an
eye is made of two curved lines enclosing a small circle (the iris).
Your own unique set of symbols, as we discussed in Chapter Five,
was developed and memorized during childhood and is remark-
ably stable and resistant to change. These symbols actually seem
to override seeing, and therefore few people can draw a realistic
human head. Even fewer can draw recognizable portraits.
Summing up, then, portrait drawing is useful to our goals for
these reasons: First, it is a suitable subject for accessing the right
hemisphere, which is specialized for recognition of human faces
and for making the fine visual discriminations necessary to
achieve a likeness. Second, drawing faces will help you to
strengthen your ability to perceive proportional relationships,
since proportion is integral to portraiture. Third, drawing faces is
excellent practice in bypassing embedded symbol systems. And
fourth, the ability to draw portraits with credible likenesses is a
convincing demonstration to your ever-critical left hemisphere
that you have—dare we say it?—talent for drawing. And you'll
find that drawing portraits is not difficult once you can shift to the
artist's way of seeing.
In drawing your profile portrait, you will be using all of the
skills you have learned so far:
• How to perceive and draw edges
• How to perceive and draw spaces
• How to perceive and draw relationships
• How to perceive and draw (a bit of) lights and shadows
(I will present more in-depth instruction on lights and shad-
ows in Chapter Ten.)
• And in addition, you will acquire a new skill, how to perceive
and draw the gestalt of your model—the character and per-
sonality behind the drawn image—by focussing intently on
the first four skills.
Our main strategy for accessing R-mode remains the same: to
present the brain with a task that L-mode will turn down.
FACING FORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASE
A reminder: The global skill of
drawing has five component skills.
163

Fig. 9-1. The four figures are the
Fig. 9-2. Mark the size of one figure
on a piece of paper.
Fig. 9-3. Cut out a notch the size of
one figure and measure each of the
figures by fitting it into the cut-out
notch.
The importance of proportion in portrait drawing
All drawing involves proportion, whether the subject is still life,
landscape, figure drawing, or portrait drawing. Proportion is
important whether an artwork's style is realistic, abstract, or com-
pletely nonobjective (that is, without recognizable forms from the
external world). Realistic drawing in particular depends heavily
on proportional correctness. Therefore, realistic drawing is espe-
cially effective in training the eye to see the thing-as-it-is in its
relational proportions. Individuals whose jobs require close esti-
mations of size relationships—carpenters, dentists, dressmakers,
carpet-layers, and surgeons—develop great facility in perceiving
proportion. Creative thinkers in all fields benefit from enhanced
awareness of part-to-whole relationships—from seeing both the
trees and the forest.
On believing what you think you see
One of the problems of seeing comes from the brain's ability to
change visual information for the purpose of fitting incoming
information to pre-existing concepts or beliefs. The parts that are
important (that is, provide key information), or the parts that we
decide are larger, or the parts that we think should be larger, we
see as larger than they actually are. Conversely, parts that are
unimportant, or that we decide are smaller, or that we think
should be smaller, we see as being smaller than they actually are.
Let me give you a couple of examples of this perceptual phe-
nomenon. Figure 9-1 shows a diagrammatic landscape with four
men. The man at the far right appears to be the largest of the four.
But all four figures are exactly the same size. Lay a pencil along-
side first the left-hand man and the right-hand man to measure
and test the validity of that statement. Even after measuring and
proving to yourself that the figures are the same size, however,
you will probably find that the man on the right will still look
larger (Figure 9-2,9-3).
The reason for this misperception of proportionate size prob-
ably derives from our past knowledge and experience of the effect
164
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

of distance on the apparent size of forms: Given two objects of the
same size, one nearby and one at a distance away, the distant
object will appear to be smaller. If they look the same size, the far
object must be a great deal larger than the near object. This makes
sense, and we don't quarrel with the concept. But coming back to
the drawing, apparently the brain enlarges the far object to make
the concept truer than true. This is overdoing it! And this is pre-
cisely the kind of overdoing—of overlaying memorized verbal
concepts onto visual perceptions—that causes problems with
proportion for beginning drawing students.
Even after we have measured the men in the drawing and
have determined with irrefutable evidence that they are the same
size, we still wrongly see the right-hand man as being larger than
the left. On the other hand, if you turn this book upside down and
view the drawing in the inverted orientation that the verbal, con-
ceptual mode apparently rejects, you will find that you can more
easily see that the two men are the same size. The same visual
information triggers a different response. The brain, apparently
now less influenced by the verbal concept of diminishing size in
distant forms, allows us to see the proportion correctly.
For an even more striking example of perceptual illusion,
look at the drawing of two tables, Figure 9-4. Will you believe me
that the two tabletops are exactly the same shape and size? You
may have to use your plastic Picture Plane and trace one of the
tabletops, then slide the Plane over the other tabletop to believe
this. This wonderfully original illusion drawing is by Roger N.
Shepard, a renowned psychologist of perception and cognition.
On not believing what you see
One more example: Stand in front of a mirror at about arm's
distance away. How large would you say is the image of your head
in the mirror? About the same size as your head? Using a felt-tip
pen or a crayon, extend your arm and make two marks on the
mirror—one at the top of the reflected image (the outside con-
tour of your head) and one at the bottom contour of your chin
(Figure 9-5). Step to one side to see how long the image is in
Fig. 9-4. From Mind Sights by
Roger N. Shepard, 1990. Repro-
duced by permission of the author.
FACING FORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASF
165

Fig. 9-5.
inches. You'll find it's about four and one half to five inches, or
one-half the true size of your head. Yet, when you remove the
marks and look again at yourself in the mirror, it seems that the
image must be life-size! Again, you are seeing what you believe,
not believing what you see.
Drawing closer to reality
Once we have accepted that the brain is changing information
and not telling us that it has done so, some of the problems of
drawing become clearer, and learning to see what is actually "out
there" in the real world becomes very interesting. Note that this
perceptual phenomenon is probably essential to ordinary life. It
reduces the complexity of incoming data and enables us to have
stable concepts. The problems start when we try to see what is
166
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

really "out there," for purposes of checking reality, solving real
problems, or drawing realistically. To accomplish that, we shall
try to prove in a logical way that certain proportions are what
they are.
The mystery of the chopped-off skull
Most people find it quite difficult to perceive the relative propor-
tions of the features and the skull.
In this introduction to profile-portrait drawing, I'll concen-
trate on two critical relationships that are persistently difficult for
beginning drawing students to correctly perceive: the location of
eye level in relation to the length of the whole head; and the loca-
tion of the ear in the profile view. I believe these are two exam-
ples of perceptual errors caused by the brain's propensity to
change visual information to better fit its concepts.
Let me explain. To most people, the eye level line (an imagi-
nary horizontal line that passes through the inside corners of the
eyes) appears to be about one-third of the way down from the top
of the head. The actual measure is one-half. I think this misper-
ception occurs because we tend to see that the important visual
information is in the features, not in foreheads and hair areas.
Apparently, the top half of the head seems less compelling than
the features, and therefore is perceived as smaller. This error in
perception results in what I've called the "chopped-off-skull
error," my term for the most common perceptual error made by
beginning drawing students (Figures 9-6, 9-7).
I stumbled on this problem one day while teaching a group of
beginning drawing students at the university. They were working
on portrait drawings and one after another had "chopped off" the
skull of the model. I went through my "Can't you see that the eye
level line is halfway between the bottom of the chin and the top
edge of the hair?" queries. The students said, "No. We can't see
that." I asked them to measure the model's head, then their own
heads, and then each others' heads. "Was the measure one to
one?" I asked. "Yes," they said. "Well," I said, "now you can see on
the model's head that the proportional relationship is one to one,
Fig. 9-6. A student drawing illus-
trating the chopped-off-skull
Fig. 9-7. The same facial features
traced from the student's drawing
with two corrections: the size of
the skull and placement of the eye
on the right-hand side of the draw-
ing.
FACING FORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASE
167

Fig. 9-8. Central axis.
Fig 9-9
isn't that true?" "No," they said, "we still can't see it." One student
even said, "We'll see it when we can believe it."
This went on for a while until finally the light dawned and I
said, "Are you telling me that you really can't see that relation-
ship?" "Yes," they said, "we really can't see it." At that point I real-
ized that brain processes were actually preventing accurate
perception and causing the "chopped-off-skull" error. Once we
all agreed on this phenomenon, the students were able to accept
their sightings of the proportion, and soon the problem was
solved.
Now we must put your own brain into a logical box (by show-
ing it irrefutable evidence) that will help it accept your sightings
of the proportions of the head.
Drawing a blank to see better than ever
1. Draw a "blank," an oval shape used by artists to represent the
human skull in diagrams. The shape is shown in Figure 9-8.
Draw a vertical line through the center of the blank, dividing
the shape in half. This is called the central axis.
2. Next, you will locate the horizontal "eye level line," which
crosses the central axis at a right angle. Use your pencil to
measure on your own head the distance from the inside cor-
ner of your eye to the bottom of your chin. Do this by placing
the eraser end (to protect your eye) at the inside corner of
your eye and marking with your thumb where your chin hits
the pencil, as in Figure 9-9. Now, holding that measurement,
raise the pencil, as in Figure 9-10, and compare the first dis-
tance (eye level to chin) with the distance from your eye level
to the top of your head (feel across from the end of the pencil
to the topmost part of your head). You will find that those two
distances are approximately the same.
3. Repeat the measurement in front of a mirror. Regard the re-
flection of your head. Without measuring, visually compare
the bottom half with the top half of your head. Then use your
pencil to repeat the measurement of eye level one more time.
168
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

4. If you have newspapers or magazines handy, check this pro-
portion in photographs of people, or use the photo of English
writer George Orwell, Figure 9-11. Use your pencil to mea-
sure. You will find that:
Eye level to chin equals eye level to the top of the skull.
This is an almost invariant proportion.
5. Check the photographs again. In each head, is the eye level at
about the middle, dividing the whole shape of the head about
in half? Can you clearly see that proportion? If not, turn on
television to a news program and measure heads right on the
television screen by placing your pencil flat on the screen,
measuring first eye level to chin, then eye level to the top
edge of the head. Now, take the pencil away and look again.
Can you see the proportion clearly now?
Fig. 9-10.
FACING FORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASE
169

Fig. 9-12.
Many "police artists" are officers
more or less assigned to putting
together composite drawings of
suspects from witnesses' descrip-
tions. The resulting drawings often
display the perceptual error I've
described in this section.
When you finally believe what you see, you will find that on
nearly every head you observe, the eye level is at about the
halfway mark. The eye level is almost never less than half—that
is, almost never nearer to the top of the skull than to the bottom
of the chin (See Figure 9-12). And if the hair is thick, the top half
of the head—eye level to the topmost edge of the hair—is bigger
than the bottom half.
The "chopped-off skull" creates the masklike effect so often
seen in children's drawings, abstract or expressionistic art, and in
so-called "primitive" or "ethnic" art. This masklike effect of
enlarging the features relative to the skull size, of course, can
have tremendous expressive power, as seen, for example, in works
by Picasso, Matisse, and Modigliani, and great works of other
cultures. The point is that master artists, especially of our own
time and culture, use the device by choice and not by mistake.
Let me demonstrate the effect of misperception.
Irrefutable evidence that the top of the head is
important after all
First, I have drawn the lower part of the faces of two models, one
in profile and one in three-quarter view (see Figure 9-13). Con-
trary to what one would expect, most students have few serious
problems in learning to see and draw the features. The problem is
not the features; it's in perceiving the skull that things go wrong.
What I want to demonstrate is how important it is to provide the
full skull for the features—not to cut off the top of the head
because your brain is less interested and makes you see it as
smaller.
In Figure 9-13 are two sets of three drawings: First, the fea-
tures only, without the rest of the skull; second, the identical fea-
tures with the cut-off-skull error; and third, the identical features,
this time with the full skull, which complements and supports the
features.
You can see that it's not the features that cause the problem of
wrong proportion; it's the skull. Now turn to Figure 9-14 and see
that Van Gogh in his 1880 drawing of the carpenter apparently
170
THE: NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Fig. 9-13. The features only.
The cut-off-skull error, using the 
The same features again, this time
same features. 
with the full skull.
FACING FORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASE
171

Fig. 9-14. Vincent Van Gogh
(1853-1890), Carpenter (1880).
Courtesy of Rijksmuseum Kroller-
Miiller, Otterlo.
Van Gogh worked as an artist only
during the last ten years of his life,
from the age of 27 until he died at
37. During the first two years of
that decade, Van Gogh did draw-
ings only, teaching himself how to
draw. As you can see in the drawing
of the carpenter, he struggled with
problems of proportion and place-
ment of forms. By 1882, however—
two years later—in his Woman
Mourning, Van Gogh had overcome
his difficulties with drawing and
increased the expressive quality of
his work.
made the "chopped-off skull" error in the carpenter's head. Also,
see the Dürer etching in Figure 9-16 in which the artist demon-
strates the effort of diminishing the relative proportion of the
skull to the features. Are you convinced? Is your logical left hemi-
sphere convinced? Good. You will save yourself innumerable
hours of baffling mistakes in drawing.
172
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Fig. 9-15. Vincent Van Gogh,
Woman Mourning(1882). Courtesy
of Rijksmuseum Kroller-Müller,
Otterlo.
Drawing another blank and getting a line on the
profile
Draw another blank now, this time for a profile. The profile blank
is a somewhat different shape—like an oddly shaped egg. This is
because the human skull (Figure 9-17), seen from the side, is a
different shape than the skull seen from the front. It's easier to
FACING I'ORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASE
173

Fig. 9-16. Albrecht Dürer, Four
Heads (1513 or 1515). Courtesy
of The Nelson Gallery-Atkins
Museum. Kansas City, Missouri
(Nelson Fund).
draw the blank if you look at the shapes of the negative spaces
around the blank in Figure 9-17. Notice that the negative spaces
are different in each corner.
If it helps you to see, draw in some symbolic shapes for nose,
eye, mouth, and chin, making sure that you have first drawn the
eye level line at the halfway point on the blank.
Fig. 9-17. The side-view blank.
Note that (a) eye level to chin
equals (b) eye level to highest part
of the skull.
174
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Placing the ear in a profile portrait
The next measurement is extremely important in helping
you perceive correctly the placement of the ear, which in turn
will help you perceive correctly the width of the head in profile
and prevent chopping off the back of the skull.
On almost every head, the position of the ear doesn't vary
much. On your own face, use your pencil again to measure the
length from the inside corner of your eye to the bottom of your
chin (Figure 9-18). Now, holding that measurement, lay the pencil
horizontally along your eye level line (Figure 9-19) with the
eraser end at the outside corner of your eye. That measurement
coincides with the back of your ear. 
/
Putting that another way, the length from eye level to chin
equals the distance from the back of the eye to the back of the ear.
Make a mark for the ear placement on the eye level line of the
blank, as in Figure 9-20. This proportion may seem a little com-
plex, but if you will learn the measurement, it will save you from
another stubborn problem in drawing the human head: Most
beginning students draw the ear too close to the features when
drawing a profile. When the ear is placed too close to the features,
the skull is once more chopped off, this time at the back. Again,
the reason for the problem may be that the expanse of cheek and ,
jaw is uninteresting and boring, and therefore beginning students
fail to perceive the width of the space correctly.
You can memorize this important measurement as a saying or
mnemonic, similar to "i" before "e," except after "c." To place the
ear in a profile portrait, memorize this mnemonic: eye level-to-
chin equals back-of-the-eye to the back-of-the-ear.
Note that enlarging the features and diminishing the skull
produce strong, expressive, symbolic effects, a device you can
always use later if you wish. Right now, for this "basic training,"
we want you to be able to see things as they really are in their cor-
rect proportion.
Visualizing is another useful technique for teaching the cor-
rect placement of the ear. Since you now know that two measure-
ments are equal—from eye level to chin, and from the back of the
FACING FORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASE
175

Fig. 9-21. Check the location of the
bottom of the ear relative to the
upper lip.
Fig. 9-22. Locate also the point
where the neck joins the skull (the
place that bends) relative to the
upper lip.
Correct point in relation to the fa-
cial features.
A common error: misplacement of
the point where the neck joins the
skull.
eye to the back of the ear—you can visualize an equal-sided
right-angle triangle (an isosceles triangle) connecting these three
points, as shown in the drawing in Figure 9-12, page 170. This is an
easy way to place the ear correctly. The isosceles triangle can be
visualized on the model. See Figure 9-20, page 175.
Practice seeing proportional relationships now by looking at
photographs or drawings of people in the profile view and visual-
izing the isosceles triangle, as in Figure 9-12. This technique will
save you from a lot of problems and errors in your profile draw-
ings.
We still need to make two more measurements on the profile
blank. First, holding your pencil horizontally, just under your ear,
slide the pencil forward as in Figure 9-21. You come to the space
between your nose and mouth. This is the level of the bottom of
your ear. Make a mark on the blank.
Again, holding your pencil horizontally just under your ear,
slide the pencil backward this time. You will come to the place
where your skull and neck connect—the place that bends, as in
Figure 9-22. Mark this point on the blank. The point is higher
than you think. In symbolic drawing, the neck is usually placed
below the circle of the head, with the point that bends on the
level of the chin. This will cause problems in your drawing: The
neck will be too narrow. Make sure that you perceive on your
model the correct place where the neck begins at the back of the
skull.
176
THE NEW DRAW ING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Now you will need to practice these perceptions. Look at
people. Practice perceiving faces, observing relationships, seeing
the unique forms of each individual face.
You are ready now to draw a profile portrait. You will be using
all of the skills you have learned so far:
• Focusing, on complex edges and negative spaces until you feel
the shift to an alternative state of consciousness, one in which
your right hemisphere leads and your left hemisphere is
quiet. Remember that this process requires an uninterrupted
block of time.
• Estimating angles in relation to the vertical and horizontal
edges of the paper
• Drawing just what you see without trying to identify or attach
verbal labels to forms (you learned the value of this in the
upside-down drawing)
• Drawing just what you see without relying on old stored-and-
memorized symbols from your childhood drawing
• Estimating relationships of sizes—how big is this form com-
pared to that one?
And finally:
• Perceiving proportions as they really are, without changing
or revising visual information to fit preconceptions about
what parts are important. They are all important, and each
part must be given its full proportion in relation to the other
parts. This requires bypassing the brain's propensity to
change incoming information without "telling" you what it
has done. Your sighting tool—your pencil—will enable you
to "get at" the true proportions.
If you feel that you need to review any of the techniques at this
point, turn to the previous chapters to refresh your memory.
Reviewing some of the exercises, in fact, will help to strengthen
your new skills. Pure Contour Drawing is particularly useful in
strengthening your newfound method of gaining access to your
right hemisphere and quieting the left.
FACING FORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASE
177

If, as occasionally happens, your
L-mode remains active as you start
to draw, the best remedy is to do a
short session of Pure Contour
Drawing, drawing any complex
object—a crumpled piece of paper
is fine. Pure Contour Drawing
seems to force the shift to R-mode
and therefore is a good warm-up
exercise for drawing any subject.
A warm-up exercise
To illuminate for yourself the connection of edges, spaces, and
relationships in portrait drawing, I suggest that you copy (make a
drawing of) John Singer Sargent's beautiful profile portrait of
Mme. Pierre Gautreau, which Sargent drew in 1883 (Figure 9-23).
You may wish turn it upside down.
For the past forty years or so, most art teachers have not rec-
ommended copying masterworks as an aid to learning to draw.
With the advent of modern art, many art schools rejected tradi-
tional teaching methods and copying master drawings went out
of favor. Now, copying drawings and paintings is coming back
into favor as an effective means of training the eye in art.
I believe that copying great drawings is very instructive for
beginning students. Copying forces one to slow down and really
see what the artist saw. I can practically guarantee that carefully
copying any masterwork of drawing will forever imprint the
image in your memory. Therefore, because copied drawings
become an almost permanent file of memorized images, I recom-
mend that you copy only the work of major and minor masters of
drawing. We are fortunate these days to have reproductions of
great works readily and inexpensively available.
For how to do an exercise copy of Sargent's profile portrait of
Mme. Pierre Gautreau, also known as "Madame X," please read all
of the instructions before you begin.
What you'll need:
• Your drawing paper
• Your #2B writing pencil and #4B drawing pencils, sharpened,
and your eraser
• Your plastic Picture Plane
• An hour of uninterrupted time
What you'll do:
These instructions will be appropriate for either right-side-up or
upside-down drawing of the Sargent portrait.
178
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Fig. 9-23. John Singer Sargent.
Mme. Pierre Gautreau, 1883
FACING FORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASK
179
1. As always, in starting a drawing, you will first draw a format.
Center one of the Viewfinders on your drawing paper and use
your pencil to draw around the outside edges. Then, lightly
draw crosshairs on your paper.
2. You will be using your new skills of seeing edges, spaces, and
relationships in this drawing. Since the original is a line draw-
ing, lights and shadows are not relevant in this exercise.
3. Lay your clear plastic Picture Plane directly on top of the
Sargent and note where the crosshairs fall on the portrait
drawing. You will immediately see how this will help you in

"People have many illusions which
block them from acting in their
own best interest as a species, as
well as individuals. In dealing with
the present problems of life, we
must first be able to see the reali-
ties of our lives."
—Jonas Salk
The Anatomy of Reality,
1983
Fig. 9-24.
deciding on your Basic Unit and starting your copy of the
drawing. You can check proportional relationships right on
the original drawing and transfer them to your copy.
Ask yourself the following series of questions. (Note that I must
name the features in order to give these verbal instructions, but
when you are drawing, try to clear your mind of words.) Looking
at the Sargent drawing and using the crosshairs as in Figure 9-24,
ask yourself the following:
1. Where is the point where the forehead meets the hairline?
2. Where is the outermost curve of the tip of the nose?
What are the angles of the forehead?
3. What is the negative shape that lies between those two points?
4. If you draw a line between the tip of the nose and the outer-
most curve of the chin, what is the angle of that line relative
to vertical (or horizontal)?
5. What is the negative shape defined by that line?
6. Relative to the crosshairs, where is the curve of the front of
the neck?
7. What is the negative space made by the chin and neck?
8., 9., and 10. Check the position of the back of the ear, bend of
the neck, and the slant of the back.
Continue in this fashion, putting the drawing together like a jig-
saw puzzle: Where is the ear? How big is it relative to the profile
you have just drawn? What is the angle of the back of the neck?
What is the shape of the negative space made by the back of the
neck and the hair? And so on. Draw just what you see, nothing
more. Notice how small the eye is relative to the nose, and notice
the size of the mouth relative to the eye. When you have
unlocked the true proportion by sighting, you will be surprised, I
feel quite sure. In fact, if you lay one finger over the features in
Sargent's drawing, you will see what a small proportion of the
whole form is occupied by the main features. This is often quite
surprising to beginning drawing students.
180
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Now, the real thing: A profile portrait of a person
Now you are ready to draw a real portrait of a person. You'll be
seeing the wondrous complexity of contours, watching your
drawing evolve from the line that is your unique, creative inven-
tion, and observing yourself integrating your skills into the draw-
ing process. You will be seeing, in the artist's mode of seeing, the
astounding thing-as-it-is, not a pale, symbolized, categorized,
analyzed, memorized shell of itself. Opening the door to see
clearly that which is before you, you will draw the image by
which you make yourself known to us.
If I were personally demonstrating the process of drawing a
portrait profile, I would not be naming parts. I would point to the
various areas and refer to features, for example, as "this form, this
contour, this angle, the curve of this form," and so on. For the sake
of clarity in writing, unfortunately, I'll have to name the parts. I
fear that the process may seem cumbersome and detailed when
written out as verbal instructions. The truth is that your drawing
will seem like a wordless, antic dance, an exhilarating investiga-
tion, with each new perception miraculously linked to the last
and to the next.
With that caution in mind, read through all of the instruc-
tions before you start and then try to do the drawing without
interruption.
What you'll need:
1. Most important, you'll need a model—someone who will
pose for you in profile view. Finding a model is not easy.
Many people strenuously object to sitting perfectly still for
any period of time. One solution is to draw someone who is
watching television. Another possibility is to catch someone
sleeping—preferably upright in a chair, though that doesn't
seem to happen too often!
2. Your clear plastic Picture Plane and your felt-tip marking
pen
3. Two or three sheets of your drawing paper, taped in a stack
onto your drawing board
FACING FORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASE 
l8l

Fig. 9-25.
Fig. 9-26.
4. Your drawing pencils and eraser
5. Two chairs, one to sit on and one on which to lean your draw-
ing board. See Figure 9-25 for setting up to draw. Note that it's
also helpful to have a small table or a stool or even another
chair on which to put your pencils, erasers, and other gear.
6. An hour or more of uninterrupted time
What you'll do:
1. As always, start by drawing a format. You may use the outside
edge of your Picture Plane as a template.
2. Lightly tone your paper. This will allow you to erase out
lighted areas and to add graphite for shadowed areas. I'll give
complete instructions for the fourth perceptual skill, perceiv-
ing lights and shadows, in the next chapter. You have already
had some experience with "shading," however, and I find that
my students greatly enjoy adding at least some lights and
shadows to this exercise. On the other hand, you may prefer
to do a line drawing without toning the paper, as John Singer
Sargent did in his profile portrait of Mme. Gautreau.
Whether you tone the paper or not, be sure to add the
crosshairs.
3. Pose your model. The model can be facing either right or left,
but in this first profile drawing, I suggest that you place your
model facing to your left if you are right-handed, and to the
right if you are left-handed. With this arrangement, you will
not be covering up the features as you draw the skull, hair,
neck and shoulders.
4. Sit as close to your model as possible. Two to four feet is
about ideal, and this distance can be managed even with the
intervening chair for propping up your drawing board. Check
the setup again in Figure 9-25.
5. Next, use your plastic Picture Plane to compose your draw-
ing. Close one eye and hold up the Picture Plane with a
clipped-on Viewfinder; move it backward and forward until
the head of your model is placed pleasingly within the for-
mat—that is, not too crowded on any edge and with enough
of the neck and shoulders to provide "support" for the head.
182
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

A composition you certainly don't want is one in which the
model's chin is resting on the bottom edge of the format.
6. When you have decided on your composition, hold the plas-
tic Picture Plane as steadily as possible. You will next choose
a Basic Unit—a convenient size and shape to guide propor-
tions as you draw. I usually use the span from the model's eye
level to the bottom of the chin. You, however, might prefer to
use another Basic Unit—perhaps the length of the nose or the
span from the bottom of the nose to the bottom of the chin
(Figure 9-27).
7. When you have chosen your Basic Unit, mark the unit with
your felt-tip marker directly on your plastic Picture Plane.
Then, transfer the Basic Unit to your drawing paper, using
the same procedure that you have learned in previous exer-
cises. You may need to review the instructions on pages
126-130 and Figures 8-11 and 8-12, page 146. You may want to
also mark the topmost edge of the hair and the back of the
head at the point opposite eye level. You can transfer these
marks to your paper as a rough guide for the drawing (Figure
9-28).
8. At this point, you can begin to draw, confident that you will
end up with the composition you have so carefully chosen.
Again, I must remind you that although this process seems cum-
bersome now, later on it becomes so automatic and so rapid that
you will hardly be aware of how you start a drawing. Allow your
mind to roam over the many complicated processes you accom-
plish without thinking of the step-by-step methods: making a U-
turn on a two-way street; cracking and separating an egg yolk
from the white; crossing a busy intersection on foot where there
is no stoplight; making a phone call from a pay phone. Imagine
how many steps you would need to put instructions into words
for any one of those skills.
In time, and with practice, starting a drawing becomes almost
completely automatic, allowing you to concentrate on the model
and on composing your drawing. You will hardly be aware of
choosing a Basic Unit, sizing it and placing it on the drawing
paper. I recall an incident when one of my students realized that
Fig. 9-28.
FACING FOREWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASE
183
Fig. 9-27.

Fig. 9-29.
she was "just drawing." She exclaimed, "I'm doing it!" The same
thing will happen to you—in time, and with practice.
9. Gaze at the negative space in front of the profile and begin to
draw that negative shape. Check the angle of the nose relative
to vertical. It may help to hold up your pencil vertically to
check that shape, or you may want to use one of your
Viewfinders. Remember that the outside edge of the negative
shape is the outer edge of the format, but to make a negative
space easier to see, you may want to make a new, closer edge.
See Figure 9-29 for how to check the angle formed by holding
your pencil on the plane against the tip of the nose and the
outermost curve of the chin.
10. You may choose to erase out the negative space around the
head. This will enable you to see the head as a whole, sepa-
rated from the ground. On the other hand, you may decide to
darken the negative spaces around the head or to leave the
tone as it is, working only within the head. See the demon-
stration drawings at the end of the chpter for examples. These
are aesthetic choices—some of the many that you'll make in
this drawing.
11. If your model wears glasses, use the negative shapes around
the outside edges of the glasses (remembering to close one
eye to see a 2-D image of your model). See Figure 9-30.
12. Place the eye in relation to the innermost curve of the bridge
of the nose. Check the angle of the eyelid relative to horizon-
tal.
13. Use the shape under the nostril as a negative shape (Figure
9-31).
14. Check the angle of the centerline of the mouth. This is the
only true edge of the mouth—the upper and lower contours
only mark a color change. It's usually best to draw this color-
change boundary lightly, especially in portraits of males.
Note that, in profile, the angle of the centerline of the
mouth—the true edge—often descends relative to horizontal.
Don't hesitate to draw this angle just as you see it. See Figure
9-32.
15. Using your pencil to measure (Figure 9-33), you can check the
184
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

position of the ear (if it is visible). To place the ear in profile
portrait, recall our mnemonic: Eye level-to-chin equals back-
of-the-eye to the back-of-the-ear. Remember also that this
measure forms an isosceles triangle, which can be visualized
on the model. See Figure 9-34.
16. Check the length and width of the ear. Ears are nearly always
bigger than you expect them to be. Check the size against the
features of the profile.
17. Check the height of the topmost curve of the head—that is,
the topmost edge of the hair or of the skull if your model
happens to have a shaved head or thin hair. See Figure 9-35.
18. In drawing the back of the head, sight as follows:
• Close one eye, extend your arm holding your pencil perfectly
vertically, lock your elbow, and take a sight on eye level to
chin.
• Then, holding that measure, turn your pencil to horizontal
and check how far it is to the back of the head. It will be 1 (to
the back of the ear) and something more—perhaps 1:1+1/2 or
even 1:2 if the hair is very thick. Keep that ratio in your mind.
• Then, turn back to your drawing to transfer the ratio. Using
the pencil, re-measure eye level to chin in the drawing. Hold-
ing that measure with your thumb, turning your pencil to the
horizontal position, measure from the back of the eye to the
back of the ear, then to the back of the head (or hair). Make a
mark. Perhaps you will not believe your own sights. If care-
fully taken, they are true, and your job is to believe what your
eyes tell you. Learning to have faith in one's perceptions is
one of the principal keys to drawing well. I'm sure you can
extrapolate the importance of this to other areas of life.
Fig. 9-31. Look for the shape of the
space under the nostril. This shape
will vary from model to model and
should be specifically observed on
each individual.
Fig. 9-32.
Fig. 9-33.
Fig. 9-34.
FACING FORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASE
185

Fig. 9-35.
186
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
19. In drawing your model's hair, what you want not to do is to
draw hairs. Students often ask me, "How do you draw hair?" I
think the question really means, "Give me a quick and easy
way to draw hair that looks good and doesn't take too long."
But the answer to the question is, "Look carefully at the
model's (unique) hair and draw what you see." If the model's
hair is a complicated mass of curls, the student is likely to
answer, "You can't be serious! Draw all of that?"
But it really isn't necessary to draw every hair and every curl.
What your viewer wants is for you to express the character of the
hair, particularly the hair closest to the face. Look for the dark
areas where the hair separates and use those areas as negative
spaces. Look for the major directional movements, the exact turn
of a strand or wave. The right hemisphere, loving complexity, can
become entranced with the perception of hair, and the record of
your perceptions in this part of a portrait can have great impact,
as in the portrait of Proud Maisie (Figure 9-36). To be avoided are
the thin, glib, symbolic marks that spell out h-a-i-r on the same
level as if you lettered the word across the skull of your portrait.
Given enough clues, the viewer can extrapolate and, in fact,
enjoys extrapolating the general texture and nature of the hair.
See the demonstration drawings at the end of this chapter for
examples.
Drawing hair is largely a light-shadow process. In the next
chapter, we'll take up the perception of lights and shadows in
depth. For now, I'll set down some brief suggestions. To draw
your model's hair, gaze at it with your eyes squinted to obscure
details and to see where the larger highlights lie and where the
larger shadows fall. Notice particularly the characteristics of the
hair (wordlessly, of course, though I must use words for the sake
of clarity). Is the hair crinkly and dense, smooth and shiny, ran-
domly curled, short and stiff? Take notice of the overall shape of
the hair and make sure that you have matched that shape in your
drawing. Begin to draw the hair in some detail where the hair
meets the face, transcribing the light-shadow patterns and the
direction of angles and curves in various segments of the hair.

Fig. 9-37. Note the position of the
ear. The placement fits our
mnemonic for locating the ear in
profile view: Eye level-to-chin
equals back-of-the-eye to the
back-of-the-ear.
Fig. 9-36. Anthony Frederick
Augustus Sandys (1832-1904), Proud
Maisie. Courtesy of the Victoria
and Albert Museum, London.
20. Finally, to complete your profile portrait, draw in the neck
and shoulders, which provide a support for the profile head.
The amount of detail of clothing is another aesthetic choice
with no strict guidelines. The major aims are to provide
enough detail to fit—that is, to be congruent with—the draw-
ing of the head, and to make sure that the drawing of details
of clothing adds to, and does not detract from, your drawing
of the head. See Figure 9-36 for an example.
FACING FORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASE
187

Fig. 9-38.
Fig. 9-40.
Some further tips
Eyes: Observe that the eyelids have thickness. The eyeball is
behind the lids (Figure 9-38). To draw the iris (the colored part of
the eye)—don't draw it. Draw the shape of the white (Figure 9-
39). The white can be regarded as negative space, sharing edges
with the iris. By drawing the (negative) shape of the white part,
you'll get the iris right because you'll bypass your memorized
symbol for iris. Note that this bypassing technique works for
everything that you might find "hard to draw." The technique is
to shift to the next adjacent shape or space and draw that instead.
Observe that the upper lashes grow first downward and then
(sometimes) curve upward. Observe that the whole shape of the
eye slants back at an angle from the front of the profile (Figure
9-38). This is because of the way the eyeball is set in the sur-
rounding bony structure. Observe this angle on your model's
eye—this is an important detail.
Neck: Use the negative space in front of the neck in order to
perceive the contour under the chin and the contour of the neck
(Figure 9-40). Check the angle of the front of the neck in relation
to vertical. Make sure to check the point where the back of the
neck joins the skull. This is often at about the level of the nose or
mouth (Figure 9-22).
Collar: Don't draw the collar. Collars, too, are strongly symbolic.
Instead, use the neck as negative space to draw the top of the
collar, and use negative spaces to draw collar points, open necks
of shirts, and the contour of the back below the neck, as in
Figures 9-40 and 9-41. (This bypassing technique works, of
course, because shapes such as the spaces around collars cannot
be easily named and have generated no preexisting symbols to
distort perception.)
After you have finished:
Congratulations on drawing your first profile portrait. You are
now using the perceptual skills of drawing with some confidence,
I feel sure. Don't forget to practice seeing the angles and propor-
188
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE: RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
Fig. 9-39.
Fig. 9-41.

tions you have just sighted. Television is wonderful for supplying
models for practice, and the television screen is, after all, a "pic-
ture-plane." Even if you can't draw these free models because
they rarely stay still, you can practice eyeballing edges, spaces,
angles, and proportions. Soon, these perceptions will occur auto-
matically, and you will be really seeing.
Showing of profile portraits
Study the drawings on the following pages. Notice the variations
in styles of drawing. Check the proportions by measuring with
your pencil.
In the next chapter, you will learn the fourth skill of drawing,
the perception of lights and shadows. The main exercise will be a
fully modeled, tonal, volumetric self-portrait and will bring us
full-circle to your "Before Instruction" self-portrait for compari-
son. Your "After Instruction" self-portrait will be either a "three-
quarter" view or a "full-face" view. I'll define the three portrait
views for you before we turn to lights and shadows.
FACING FORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASE
189

Another example of two styles of drawing. Instructor
Brian Bomeisler and I sat on either side of Grace
Kennedy, who is also one of our instructors, and drew
these demonstration drawings for our students. We
were using the same materials, the same model, and
the same lighting.
Demonstration drawing by the author.
Demonstration drawing by instructor Brian Bomeisler.
I9O 
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

"Portrait of Joy" by student Jerome
Broekhuijsen.
A student drawing by Heather Tappen.
Demonstration drawing by the author.
"Portrait of Scott" demonstration drawing by
instructor Beth Firmin.
FACING FORWARD: PORTRAIT DRAWING WITH EASE
191

The Value
of Logical Lights
and Shadows

Fig. IO-I. Drawing by student
Elizabeth Arnold.
Light logic. Light falls on objects
and (logically) results in the four
aspects of light/shadow:
1. Highlight: The brightest light,
where light from the source falls
most directly on the object.
2. Cast shadow: The darkest shadow,
caused by the object's blocking of
light from the source.
3. Reflected light: A dim light,
bounced back onto the object by
light falling on surfaces around the
object.
4. Crest shadow: A shadow that lies
on the crest of a rounded form,
between the highlight and the
reflected light. Crest shadows and
reflected lights are difficult to see
at first, but are the key to "round-
ing up" forms for the illusion of
3-D on the flat paper.
N
ow that you have gained experience with the first three
perceptual skills of drawing—the perception of edges,
spaces, and relationships—you are ready to put them together
with the fourth skill, the perception of lights and shadows. After
the mental stretch and effort of sighting relationships, you will
find that drawing lights and shadows is especially joyful. This is
the skill most desired by drawing students. It enables them to
make things look three-dimensional through the use of a tech-
nique students often call "shading," but which in art terminology
is called "light logic."
This term means just what it says: Light falling on forms cre-
ates lights and shadows in a logical way. Look for a moment at
Henry Fuseli's self-portrait (Figure 10-2). Clearly, there is a
source of light, perhaps from a lamp. This light strikes the side of
the head nearest the light source (the side on your left, as Fuseli
faces you). Shadows are logically formed where the light is
blocked, for example, by the nose. We constantly use this R-mode
visual information in our everyday perceptions because it enables
us to know the three-dimensional shapes of objects we see
around us. But, like much R-mode processing, seeing lights and
shadows remains below the conscious level; we use the percep-
tions without "knowing" what we see.
Learning to draw requires learning consciously to see lights
and shadows and to draw them with all their inherent logic. This
is new learning for most students, just as learning to see complex
edges, negative spaces, and the relationships of angles and pro-
portions are newly acquired skills.
Seeing values
Light logic also requires that you learn to see differences in tones
of light and dark. These tonal differences are called "values."
Pale, light tones are called "high" in value, dark tones "low" in
value. A complete value scale goes from pure white to pure black
with literally thousands of minute gradations between the two
extremes of the scale. An abbreviated scale with twelve tones in
evenly graduated steps between light and dark is shown in Figure
194
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

11-4 in the color section following page 210.
In pencil drawing, the lightest possible light is the white of
the paper. (See the white areas on Fuseli's forehead, cheeks, and
nose.) The darkest dark appears where the pencil lines are packed
together in a tone as dark as the graphite will allow. (See the dark
shadows cast by Fuseli's nose and hand.) Fuseli achieved the
many tones between the lightest light and the darkest dark by
various methods of using the pencil: solid shading, crosshatching,
Fig. 10-2. Henry Fuseli (1741—1825),
Portrait of the Artist. Courtesy of
The Victoria and Albert Museum,
London.
Find the four aspects of light logic
in Fuseli's self-portrait.
1. Highlights: Forehead, cheeks, etc.
2. Cast shadows: Cast by the nose,
lips, hands.
3. Reflected lights: Side of the nose,
side of the cheek.
4. Crest shadows: Crest of the nose,
crest of the cheek, temple.
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
195

"Shadows are capricious. They
change constantly—with time of
day, wattage of light bulbs, place-
ment of lamps, and changes in your
own location. Although you
depend on shadow for visual infor-
mation about the form of an object,
you are not usually aware of it as a
quality separate from the object
itself. You usually discount the
shadow and exclude it from con-
scious perception of the object.
After all, shadows change, but
objects do not."
— Carolyn M. Bloomer
Principles of Visual
Perception, New York:
Van Nostrand Reinhold,
1976
and combinations of techniques. Many of the white shapes he 
j
actually erased out, using an eraser as a drawing tool. (See the
highlights on Fuseli's forehead.)
In this chapter, I'll show you how to see and draw lights and
shadows as shapes and how to perceive value relationships to
achieve "depth" or three-dimensionality in your drawings. These
skills lead directly to color and subsequently to painting, as I out-
lined in the Preface.
As we proceed, keep in mind the following: The perception of
edges (line) leads to the perception of shapes (negative spaces and
positive shapes), drawn in correct proportion and perspective
(sighting). These skills lead to the perception of values (light
logic), which leads to the perception of colors as values, which
leads to painting.
The role of R-mode in perceiving shadows
In the same curious way that L-mode apparently will pay almost
no attention to negative space or upside-down information, it
seems also to ignore lights and shadows. L-mode, after all, may be
unaware that R-mode perceptions help with naming and catego-
rizing.
You will therefore need to learn to see lights and shadows at a
conscious level. To illustrate for yourself how we interpret rather
than see lights and shadows, turn this book upside down and look
at Gustave Courbet's Self-portrait, Figure 10-3. Upside down, the
drawing looks entirely different—simply a pattern of dark areas
and light areas.
Now, turn the book right side up. You will see that the dark/
light pattern seems to change and, in a sense, disappear into the
three-dimensional shape of the head. This is another of the many
paradoxes of drawing: If you draw the shapes of lighted areas and
shadowed areas just as you perceive them, a viewer of your draw-
ing will not notice those shapes. Instead, the viewer will wonder
how you were able to make your subject so "real," meaning three-
dimensional.
196
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

These special perceptions, like all drawing skills, are easy to
attain once you have made a cognitive shift to the artist's mode of
seeing. Research on the brain indicates that the right hemisphere,
as well as being able to perceive the shapes of particular shadows,
is also specialized for deriving meaning from patterns of shadows.
Apparently, this derived meaning is then communicated to the
conscious verbal system, which names it.
Fig. 10-3. Self-portrait, Gustave
Courbet, 1897. Courtesy of The
Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford,
Connecticut.
THE VAI.UE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
197

Fig. 10-4.
How does R-mode accomplish the leap of insight required to
know what these patterns of light and dark areas mean? Appar-
ently R-mode is able to extrapolate from incomplete information
to envision a complete image. The right brain seems undeterred
by missing pieces of information and appears to delight in "get-
ting" the picture, despite its incompleteness.
Look, for example, at the patterns in Figure 10-4. In each of
the drawings, notice that you first see the pattern, then you per-
ceive it as a gestalt, and then you name it.
Patients with right-hemisphere injuries often have great diffi-
culty making sense of complex, fragmentary shadow patterns
such as those in Figure 10-4. They see only random light and dark
shapes. Try turning the book upside down to approximate seeing
the patterns as these patients do—as unnamable shapes. Your task
in drawing is to see the shadow-shapes in this way even when the
image is right side up, while holding at arm's length, so to speak,
knowledge of what the shapes mean.
This "trick of the artist" is great fun. I'm sure you will enjoy
these last exercises in which you will put together all of the basic
skills—edges, spaces, relationships, lights and shadows, and,
finally, expressing your unique response to the gestalt—the
"thingness of the thing." In this chapter, we'll work with the
remaining two of the three basic portrait poses.
The three basic portrait poses
In portrait drawing, artists have traditionally posed their models
(or themselves in self-portraits) in one of three views:
• Full face: The model faces the artist directly with both sides
198
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

of the model's face fully visible to the artist.
• Profile: The view you drew in the last exercises. The model
faces toward the artist's left or right and only one side (one
half) of the model's face is visible to the artist.
• Three-quarter view: The model makes a half-turn toward the
artist's left or right, making visible to the artist three-quarters
of the model's face—the profile (one half) plus one quarter of
the remaining half-face.
Note that the full-face and profile views are relatively invariant,
while the three-quarter view can vary from an almost profile to
an almost full-face pose and still be called a "three-quarter view."
John Singer Sargent, 1856-1925.
Study for "Madame X." Courtesy of
The Metropolitan Museum of
Art, Gift of Mrs. Frances Ormond
and Miss Emily Sargent, 1931
John Singer Sargent, 1856-1925. Olimpio Fusco, c.
1905-15? Courtesy of The Corcoran Gallery of
Art, Washington.
Dante Gabriel Rossetti, 1828-82. Jane Burden, Later
Mrs. William Morris, as Queen Guinevere. Courtesy
of The National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin.
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
199

Fig. 10-5.
Fig. 10-6.
A warm-up exercise: A copy of the Courbet self-
portrait
Imagine that you are honored by a visit from the nineteenth-cen-
tury French artist, Gustave Courbet (pronounced goos-tav koor-
bay), and that he has agreed to sit for a portrait drawing, wearing
his jaunty hat and smoking his pipe. The artist is in a rather seri-
ous mood, quiet and thoughtful. See Figure. 10-3, page 197.
Imagine further that you have arranged a spotlight so that it
shines from above and in front of Courbet, illuminating the top of
his face but leaving the eyes and much of the face and neck in
rather deep shadow. Take a moment to consciously see how the
lights and shadows logically fall relative to the source of light.
Then turn the book upside-down to see the shadows as a pattern
of shapes. The wall behind is dark, silhouetting your model.
What you'll need:
1. Your #4B drawing pencil
2. Your eraser
3. Your clear plastic Picture Plane
4. A stack of three or four sheets of drawing paper
5. Your graphite stick and some paper napkins
What you'll do:
Please read through all of the instructions before starting.
1. As always, draw a format edge on your drawing paper, using
the outside edge of one of your Viewfinders. This format is in
the same proportion, width to height, as the reproduction.
2. Tone your paper with a rubbed graphite ground to a
medium-dark silvery gray—about the tone of the wall behind
Courbet. Lightly draw the crosshairs as shown in Figure 10-5.
You may wish to copy this drawing upside down.
3. Set your Picture Plane on top of the reproduction of the
Courbet drawing. The crosshairs on the plastic Picture Plane
will instantly show you where to locate the essential points of
the drawing. I suggest that you work upside down for at least
2 0 0
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

the first "blocking in" of the lights and shadows (Figure. 10-6).
4. Decide on a Basic Unit, perhaps the light-shape from the cen-
ter of the hat brim to the top of the upper lip, or perhaps the
pipe stem, or you may decide on another Basic Unit. Remem-
ber that everything in Courbet's drawing is locked into a rela-
tionship. For this reason, you can start with any Basic Unit
and end up with the correct relationships. Then, transfer your
Basic Unit to the drawing paper, following the instructions on
page 130 and in Figures 8-11 and 8-12, page 146.
Note: The step-by-step procedure I offer below is only a sug-
gestion about how to proceed. You may wish to use an
entirely different sequence. Also note that I am naming parts
of the drawing only for instructional purposes. As you draw,
try your best to see the shapes of lights and darks wordlessly. I
realize that this is like trying not to think of the word "ele-
phant," but as you continue to draw, thinking wordlessly
becomes second nature.
5. You will be "drawing" with an eraser. Sharpen your eraser
into a drawing tool by cutting one end into a wedge shape as
shown in Figure 10-7.
Begin by erasing out the major shapes of light, on the face,
hat, and shirtfront, always checking the size and position of
those shapes against your Basic Unit. You might think of
these light-shapes as negative shapes that share edges with
the dark forms. By correctly seeing and erasing the light
shapes, you'll have the dark shapes "for free."
6. Next, carefully erase the lightest parts of the hat, the side of
the neck, and the coat. Your toned ground supplies the mid-
dle value of the hat and coat (Figure. 10-8).
7. Using your #4B pencil, darken in the area around the head,
the shadow under the hat brim, the shadows below the eye-
brows, under the nose, under the lower lip, the beard, the
shadow of the beard, and the shadows under the shirt collar
and the coat collar. Carefully observe the shapes of these shad-
ows. Keep your tones quite smooth, either crosshatching or
working a continuous tone or combining the two. Ask your-
self: Where is the darkest dark? Where is the lightest light?
Fig. 10-7. Drawing with an eraser.
a. A rubbed graphite ground of
middle value
b. An eraser trimmed for precise
erasing of light areas. Then use a
#4B or #6B pencil to darken shad-
owed areas
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
2 O I

Fig. 10-8.
Fig. 10-9.
Notice also that there is almost no information in the shad-
owed areas. They are nearly uniform tones. Yet, when you
turn the book right side up, the face and features emerge out
of the shadows. These perceptions are occurring in your own
brain, imaging and extrapolating from incomplete informa-
tion. The hardest part of this drawing will be resisting the
temptation to give too much information! Let the shadows
stay shadowy, and have faith that your viewer will extrapolate
the features, the expression, the eyes, the beard, everything
(Figure. 10-9).
8. At this point you have the drawing "blocked in." The rest is
all refinement, called "working up" the drawing to a finish.
Note that, because the original drawing was done in charcoal
and you are working in pencil, the exact roughness of the
charcoal medium is difficult to reproduce in pencil. But also,
even though you are copying Courbet's self-portrait, your
drawing is your drawing. Your unique line quality and choice
of emphasis will differ from Courbet's.
9. At each step, pull back a little from the drawing, squint your
eyes a bit, and move your head from side to side slightly to see
if the image is beginning to emerge. Try to see (that is, to
image) what you have not yet drawn. Use this emerging,
imagined image to add to, change, reinforce what is there in
the drawing. You will find yourself shifting back and forth:
drawing, imaging, drawing again. Be parsimonious! Provide
only enough information to the viewer to allow the correct
image to occur in the viewer's imagined perception. Do not
overdraw.
At this point, I hope you will be really seeing, really drawing,
really experiencing the joy of drawing. Later, when drawing a
person from life, you will find yourself wondering why you
never noticed how beautiful the person is, noticing perhaps
for the first time the shape of the nose or the expression of the
eyes (Figure. 10-10).
10. As you are working up the drawing, try to focus your atten-
tion on the original. For any problem that you encounter, the
answer is in the original. For example, you will want to
202
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Fig. 10-10. A copy in pencil of
Courbet's Self-portraitby instruc-
tor Brian Bomeisler.
achieve the same facial expression: the way to accomplish that
is to pay careful attention to the exact shapes of the lights and
the shadows. For example, notice the exact angle (relative to
vertical or horizontal) of the shadow in the corner of the
mouth. Notice the exact curve of the shadow under Courbet's
right eye and the exact shape of that small shadow under the
right cheekbone. Try not to talk to yourself about the facial
expression.
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
2O1

Fig. IO-II. Berthe Morisot
(1841-1895). Self-Portrait, c. 1885.
Courtesy of The Art Institute of
Chicago.
11. Draw just what you see, no more, no less. You'll notice that
the whites of the eyes are barely lighter than the dark shadow
surrounding the eye. You will be tempted to erase out the
whites because, well, you know they are called "whites of the
eyes." Don't do it! Allow the viewer of your drawing to "play
the game" of "seeing" what is not there. Your job is to barely
suggest, just as Courbet did.
After you have finished:
In drawing the Courbet portrait, you were bound to be impressed
by this work, its subtlety and strength, and how the personality
and character of Courbet emerge from the shadows. I'm sure that
this exercise has provided you with a taste for the power of light/
shadow drawing. An even greater satisfaction, of course, will
come from doing your own self-portrait.
Taking the next step
I'm sure you are aware that we have moved from seeing and
drawing every detailed edge, as in Pure Contour Drawing, to pre-
cisely seeing and drawing negative space, to seeing exact propor-
tional relationships, to accurately seeing and drawing the large
and small shapes of lights and shadows. As you continue to draw
after completing these lessons, you will begin to find your own
unique style of using these fundamental components. Your per-
sonal style may evolve into a rapid, vigorous calligraphy (as in the
Morisot Self-Portrait, Figure 10-11), a beautifully pale, delicate
style of drawing, or a strong, dense style. Or your style may
become more and more precise, as in the Sheeler drawing, Figure
10-12. Remember, you are always searching for your way of seeing
and drawing. No matter how your style evolves, however, you
will always be using edges, spaces, relationships, and (usually)
lights and shadows, and you will depict the thing itself (the
gestalt) in your own way.
In this lesson, we are relying on the skills you've developed
with the first three components to learn the fourth, lights and
shadows, so the viewer can correctly see what you have left out.
204
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Fig. 10-12. Charles Sheelcr
(1883-1965), Feline Felicity, 1934.
Conte crayon on white paper.
Courtesy of The Fogg Art
Museum, Harvard University.
Purchase-Louise E. Bettens Fund.
For this process to work, it is helpful to see the exact shapes of
lights and shadows as positive and negative shapes, and to cor-
rectly see the angles and proportions of lights and shadows.
More than the other components, this fourth skill apparently
strongly triggers the brain's ability to envision a complete form
from incomplete information. By suggesting a form with light/
shadow shapes, you cause to viewer to see something that is not
actually there. And the viewer's brain apparently always gets it
right. If you provide the right clues, your viewers will see mar-
velous things that you don't even have to draw! For examples, see
the self-portrait by Edward Hopper, Figure 10-13.
The truth is, you can cause yourself to see what is actually
THE VALUF. OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS

Fig. 10-13. Edward Hopper (1882-
1967), Self-Portrait, 1903. Conte
crayon on white paper. Courtesy
of the National Portrait Gallery,
Smithsonian Institution. The artist
shadowed the left side of his head
in an almost even tone. Yet the
viewer "sees" the eye that is bare-
ley suggested.
not there, and you should strive for this phenomenon. Learning
this "trick of the artist" is quite intriguing. As you are drawing,
constantly squint you eyes to see if you can yet "see" the form you
intend. And when you "see" it—that is, the envisioned image is
there—stop! So many times in workshops, watching a beginning
student draw, I find myself urgently saying, "Stop! It's there.
You've got it. Don't overwork it!" There is an amusing saying in
art circles that every artist needs someone standing right behind
with a sledgehammer to let the artist know when the artwork is
finished.
206
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Crosshatching a lighter shadow
Before we advance to the next drawing, your self-portrait, I want
to show you how to "crosshatch." This is a technical term for cre-
ating a variety of tones or values in a drawing by laying down a
sort of "carpet" of pencil strokes, often crossing the strokes at
angles. Figure 10-14 is an example of a tonal drawing built almost
entirely of crosshatches. I'll also review the proportions of the
head in frontal view and in three-quarter view.
In former years, I thought that crosshatching was a natural
activity, not requiring teaching. Apparently, this is not the case.
The technique must be taught and must be learned. In fact, I now
believe that the ability to Crosshatch is a mark of a trained artist.
If you glance through this book at the many reproductions, you
will see that almost every drawing has some area of hatching. You
will also notice that crosshatching has almost as many forms as
there are artists to use them. Each artist, it seems, develops a per-
sonal style of hatching, almost a "signature," and, very quickly, so
will you.
At this point, I will show you the technique and a few of the
traditional styles of hatching. You will need paper and a carefully
sharpened pencil.
1. Hold your pencil firmly and make a group of parallel marks,
called a "set" (shown in Figure 10-15), by placing the pencil
point down firmly, fingers extended. Swing off each mark by
moving the whole hand from the wrist. The wrist remains sta-
tionary and the fingers pull the pencil back just a bit for each
successive hatch. When you have finished one "set" of eight to
ten hatch marks, move your hand and wrist to a new position
and hatch a new set. Try swinging the mark toward you, and
also try swinging it away from you in an outward movement
to see which seems more natural for you. Try changing the
angle of the marks.
2. Practice making sets until you have found the direction, spac-
ing, and length of marks that seem right for you.
3. The next step is to make the "cross" sets. In classical hatching,
the cross set is made at an angle only slightly different from
Fig. 10-14.
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND .SHADOWS
2O7

Fig. 10-15.
Fig. 10-16.
Fig. 10-18. Some examples of various 
Fig. 10-19. Alphonse Legros, red chalk on paper.
styles of crosshatching. 
Courtesy of The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.
208
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

the original set, as shown in Figure 10-16. This slight angle
produces a very pretty moire pattern that causes a drawing to
seem to shimmer with light and air. Try this. Figure 10-17
shows how to use crosshatching to create a three-dimensional
form.
4. By increasing the angle of crossing, a different style of cross-
hatch is achieved. In Figure 10-18, see various examples of
styles of hatching: full cross (hatch marks crossing at right
angles), cross-contour (usually curved hatches), and hooked
hatches (where a slight hook inadvertently occurs at the end
of the hatch), as in the topmost example of hatching styles in
Figure 10-18. There are myriad styles of hatching.
5. To increase the darkness of tone, simply pile up one set of
hatches onto others, as shown in the left arm of the figure
drawing by Alphonse Legros, Figure 10-19.
6. Practice, practice, practice. Instead of doodling while talking
on the telephone, practice crosshatching—perhaps shading
geometric forms such as spheres, or cylinders. (See the exam-
ples in Figure 10-20.) As I mentioned, crosshatching is not a
naturally occurring skill for most individuals, but it can be
rapidly developed with practice. I assure you that skillful,
individualized use of hatching in your drawings will be grati-
fying to you and much admired by your viewers.
Shading into a continuous tone
Areas of continuous tone are created without using the separate
strokes of crosshatching. The pencil is applied in either short,
overlapping movements or in elliptical movements, going from
dark areas to light and back again, if necessary, to create a smooth
tone. Most students have little trouble with continuous tone,
although practice is usually needed for smoothly modulated
tones. Charles Sheeler's complex light/shadow drawing of the cat
sleeping on a chair (Figure 10-12) superbly illustrates this tech-
nique.
Soon you will bring together all of your new skills, the basic
component skills of drawing: perceptions of edges, spaces, and
Fig. 10-20.
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
2O9

I believe that this training for pre-
cise perceptions is one of the great
bonuses of learning to draw. One
really does learn to see better
through drawing, to see with
greater precision and finer dis-
crimination. I feel sure that you
can extrapolate the importance of
this to general thinking skills. We
often describe creative intelligence
as "the ability to see things
clearly."
shapes, relationships of angles and proportions, lights and shad-
ows, the gestalt of the thing drawn, and the skills of crosshatching
and continuous tone.
Drawing on the logic of light for a fully modeled,
tonal, volumetric self-portrait
In these lessons, we began with line drawing and we end with a
fully realized drawing. The terms in the subhead above are the
technical terms that describe the drawing you will do next. From
this exercise onward, you will practice the five perceptual skills of
drawing with constantly changing subject matter. The basic skills
will soon become integrated into a global skill, and you will find
yourself "just drawing." You will shift flexibly from edges to
spaces to angles and proportions, lights and shadows. Soon, the
skills will be on automatic and someone watching you draw will
be baffled by how you do it. I feel sure that you will find yourself
seeing things differently, and I hope that, for you, as for many of
my students, life will seem much richer by having learned to see
and draw.
Before you start your drawing, we need to review briefly the
proportions of the frontal or full-face view and the three-quarter
view. You will use one of these views for your Self-Portrait.
The frontal view
Keeping this book open to the diagram on page 212, sit in front of
a mirror with the book, a piece of paper, and a pencil. You are
going to observe and diagram the relationships of various parts of
your own head, as you go step by step through the exercise.
1. First, draw a blank (an oval shape) on your paper and draw
the central axis dividing the diagram. Then, observe and
measure on your own head the eye level line. It will be
halfway. On the blank, draw in an eye level line. Be sure to
measure to make sure you make this placement accurately.
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
2IO

Fig. 10-21. Vincent Van Gogh
(etching, 1890), B-10, 283. Courtesy
of The National Gallery of Art,
Washington, D.C., Rosenwald
Collection. An interesting example
of the expressive effect of skewed
features.
Fig. 10-22.
2. Now, looking at your own face in the mirror, visualize a cen-
tral axis that divides your face and an eye level line at a right
angle to the central axis. Tip your head to one side, as in Fig-
ure 10-23. Notice that the central axis and the eye level line
remain at a right angle no matter what direction you tip your
head. (This is only logical, I know, but many beginners ignore
this fact and skew the features as in the example in Figure
10-22.)
3. Observe in the mirror: What is the width of the distance
between your eyes, compared to the width of one eye? Yes, it's
the width of one eye. Divide the eye level in fifths, as shown in
Figure 10-24. Mark the outside corners of the eyes.
4. Observe your face in the mirror. Between eye level and chin,
where is the end of the nose? This is the most variable of all
the features of the human head. You can visualize an inverted
triangle on your own face, with the wide points at the outside
corners of your eyes and the center point at the bottom edge
of your nose. This method is quite reliable. Mark the bottom
edge of your nose on the blank. See Figure 10-24.
Fig. 10-23.
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS

Fig. 10-24. The full-face view dia-
gram. Note that this diagram is
only a general guide to propor-
tions that vary from head to head.
The differences, however, are often
very slight and must be carefully
perceived and drawn to achieve a
likeness.
Where is the level of the centerline of the mouth? About a
third between the nose and chin. Make a mark on the blank.
Again, observe in the mirror: If you drop a straight line down
from the inside corners of your eyes, what do you come to?
The edges of your nostrils. Noses are wider than you think.
Mark the blank.
If you drop a line straight down from the center of the pupils
of your eyes, what do you come to? The outside corners of
your mouth. Mouths are wider than you think. Mark the
blank.
212
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

8. If you move your pencil along a horizontal line on the level of
your eyes, what do you come to? The tops of your ears. Mark
the blank.
9. Coming back from the bottoms of your ears, in a horizontal
line, what do you come to? In most faces, the space between
your nose and mouth. Ears are bigger than you think. Mark
the blank.
10. Feel on your own face and neck: How wide is your neck com-
pared to the width of your jaw just in front of your ears? You'll
see that your neck is almost as wide—in some men, it's as
wide or wider. Mark the blank. Note that necks are wider
than you think.
11. Now test each of your perceptions on people, photographs of
people, images of people on the television screen. Practice
often, observing—first without measuring, then if necessary
corroborating by measuring—perceiving relationships be-
tween this feature and that, perceiving the unique, minute
differences between faces; seeing, seeing, seeing. Eventually,
you will have memorized the general measurements given
above and you won't have to analyze in the left-hemisphere
mode as we have been doing. But for now it's best to practice
observing the specific proportions.
Now we'll turn to the three-quarter view
Recall our previous definition of the three-quarter view: one-half
of the head plus one-quarter. Still sitting in front of a mirror, pose
your head in this view by starting with a full, frontal view and
then turning (either left or right) so that you can only partly see
one side of your head. You are now seeing one full side plus one-
quarter—in other words a three-quarter view.
Artists of the Renaissance loved the three-quarter view, once
they had finally worked through the problems of the proportions.
I hope you will choose this view for your self-portrait. It's some-
what complicated, but fascinating to draw.
Young children rarely draw people with heads turned to the
three-quarter view. Children generally draw either profiles or the
"When drawing a face, any face, it
is as if curtain after curtain, mask
after mask, falls away... until a
final mask remains, one that can
no longer be removed, reduced.
By the time the drawing is finished,
I know a great deal about that face,
for no face can hide itself for long.
But although nothing escapes the
eye, all is forgiven beforehand.
The eye does not judge, moralize,
criticize. It accepts the masks in
gratitude as it does the long bam-
boos being long, the goldenrod
being yellow."
— Frederick Franck
The Zen of Seeing, 1973
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
213

Fig. 10-25. A sketch by the author
from a three-quarter view portrait
by the German artist Lucas
Cranach (1472-1553), Head of a Youth
with a Red Cap.
full, frontal view. Around age ten or so, children begin to attempt
three-quarter view drawings, perhaps because this view can be
particularly expressive of the personality of the model. The
problems young artists encounter with this view are the same old
problems: the three-quarter view brings visual perceptions into
conflict with the symbolic forms developed throughout child-
hood for profile and full-face views, which by age ten are embed-
ded in the memory.
What are those conflicts? First, as you see in Figure 10-15,the
nose is not the same as a nose seen in profile. In three-quarter
view, you see the top and the side of the nose, making it seem
very wide. Second, the two sides of the face are different
widths—one side narrow, one side wide. Third, the eye on the
turned side is narrower and shaped differently from the other eye.
Fourth, the mouth from its center to the corner is shorter on the
turned side and shaped differently from the mouth on the other
side of the centerline. These perceptions of nonmatching fea-
tures conflict with the memorized symbols for features that are
214
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

usually more symmetrical.
The solution to the conflict is of course to draw just what you
see without questioning why it is thus or so and without changing
the perceived forms to fit with a memorized-and-stored set of
symbols for features. To see the thing-as-it-is in all of its unique
and marvelous complexity—that is always the key.
My students have found it helpful if I point out some specific-
aids to seeing the three-quarter proportions. Let me again take
you through the process step by step, giving you some methods
for keeping your perceptions clear. Again note that if I were
demonstrating the three-quarter-view drawing, I would not be
naming any of the parts, only pointing to each area. When you
are drawing, do not name the parts to yourself. In fact, try not to
talk to yourself at all while drawing.
1. Again, sit in front of a mirror with paper and a pencil. Now,
close one eye and pose in the three-quarter view so that the
tip of your nose nearly coincides with the outer contour of
the turned cheek, as in Figure 10-25. You can see that this
forms an enclosed shape (see Figure 10-26).
2. Observe your head. Perceive the central axis—that is, an
imaginary line that passes through the very center of the face.
In three-quarter view, the central axis passes through two
points: a point at the center of the bridge of the nose and a
point at the middle of the upper lip. Image this as a thin wire
that passes right through the form of the nose (Figure 10-27).
By holding your pencil vertically at arm's length toward your
reflection in the mirror, check the angle or tilt of the central
axis of your head. Each person may have a different charac-
teristic tilt to the head, or the axis may be perfectly vertical.
3. Next, observe that the eye level line is at right angles to the
central axis. This observation will help you to avoid skewing
the features as I mentioned on page 212. Next measure on
your head to observe that the eye level line is at half of the
whole form.
5. Now, practice making a line drawing of a three-quarter view
on your scratch paper. You will be using the method of
modified contour drawing: drawing slowly, directing your
Fig. 10-26. First, see this whole area
as a shape.
Fig. 10-27. Observe the tilt of the
central axis compared to vertical
(your pencil). The eye level line is
at a right angle compared to the
central axis.
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
2I5

Fig. 10-28.
Fig. 10-29.
A three-quarter portrait, Kandalu,
by the author. Note the tilt of the
central axis.
gaze at edges, and perceiving relational sizes, angles, etc.
Again, you can start anywhere you wish. I tend to start with
that shape between the nose and the contour of the turned
side of the cheek because that shape is easy to see, as in Fig-
ure 10-25. Note that this shape can be used as an "interior"
negative shape—a shape you have no name for. I'll describe a
definite order for the drawing, but you may prefer a different
order.
6. Direct your eyes at the shape and wait until you can see it
clearly. Draw the edges of that shape. Because the edges are
shared, you will have also drawn the edge of the nose. Inside
the shape you have drawn is the eye with the odd configura-
tion of the three-quarter eye. To draw the eye, don't draw the
eye. Draw the shapes around the eye. You may want to use the
order 1, 2, 3, 4 as shown in Figure 10-28, but any order will
work as well. First the shape over the eye (1), then the shape
next to it (2), then the shape of the white part of the eye (3),
216
THE NEW DRAW ING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

then the shape under the eye (4). Try not to think about what
you are drawing.Just draw each shape, always shifting to the
next adjacent shape.
7. Next, locate the correct placement of the eye on the side of
the head closest to you. Observe on your model that the
inside corner lies on the eye level line. Note especially how
far away from the edge of the nose this eye is. This distance is
nearly always a distance equal to the full width of the eye on
the near side of your head. Be sure to look at Figure 10-28 for
this proportion. The most common error beginning students
make in this view of the model is to place the eye too close to
the nose. This error throws all of the remaining perceptions
off and can spoil the drawing. Make sure that you see (by
sighting) the width of that space and draw it as you see it.
Incidentally, it took the early Renaissance artists half a
century to work out this particular proportion. We benefit,
of course, from their hard-won insights (Figures 10-28 and
10-29).
8. Next, the nose. Check on your reflection where the edge of
the nostril is in relation to the inside corner of the eye: Drop a
line straight down, following (that is, parallel to) the central
axis (Figure 10-29). Remember that noses are bigger than you
think.
9. Observe where the corner of your mouth lies in relation to
the eye (Figure 10-29). Then observe the centerline of the
mouth and the exact curve. This curve is important in catch-
ing the expression of the model. Don't talk to yourself about
this. The visual perceptions are there to be seen. By seeing
clearly and drawing exactly what you see—exact angles,
edges, spaces, proportions, lights, and shadows. In R-mode,
you do respond—but not in words.
10. Observe the upper and lower edges of your lips, remember-
ing that the line is usually light because these are not true
edges or strong contours.
11. On the turned side of your head, observe the shapes of the
spaces around the mouth. Again, note the exact curve of the
centerline on this side.
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
217

Fig. 10-30. A three-quarter self-
portrait by instructor Brian
Bomeisler.
12. The ear. The mnemonic for placing the ear in profile view
must be slightly changed to account for the added quarter in
three-quarter view.
Profile:
Eye level-to-chin = back-of-the-eye to the back-of-the-ear
becomes
Three-quarter:
Eye level-to-chin = front-of-the-eye to the back-of-the-ear
You can perceive this relationship by measuring it on your reflec-
tion in the mirror. Then note where the top of the ear is, and then
the bottom. See Figure 10-30.
Ready to draw!
Now that we've reviewed crosshatching and the general propor-
tions for the frontal and three-quarter views, you are ready for
the last drawing exercise, your Self-Portrait in fully articulated
lights and shadows.
What you'll need:
• Your drawing paper—three or four sheets (for padding),
taped to your drawing board.
• Your pencils, sharpened, and your eraser
• A mirror and tape for attaching the mirror to a wall, or you
may want to sit in front of a bathroom mirror or dressing table
mirror
• Your felt-tip marker
• Your graphite stick
• A paper tissue or towel for rubbing in a ground
• A dampened tissue for correcting marker-pen marks on
plastic
• A floor lamp or a table lamp to illuminate one side of your
head (Figure 10-31 shows an inexpensive spot lamp)
• A hat, scarf, or headdress, if that idea appeals to you
Fig. 10-31.
218
THE NEW DRAW ING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

What you'll do:
1. First, prepare your drawing paper with a ground. You may
choose any level of tone. You may want to do a "high-key"
(meaning light) drawing by starting with a pale ground, or
you may decide to use the drama of a dark ground for a "low-
key" (meaning dark) drawing. Or, perhaps you prefer a mid-
dle value. Be sure to lightly draw in the crosshairs.
Note that in this drawing, you will not need your plastic Pic-
ture Plane. The mirror itself becomes the picture-plane. Try
to think that through—I'm sure you will see the logic of it.
2. Once your ground is prepared, set yourself up to draw. Check
the setup in Figure 10-32. You will need one chair to sit in and
one chair or small table to hold your drawing tools. As you
see in the diagram, you will lean your drawing board against
the wall. Once you are seated, adjust the mirror on the wall so
that you can comfortably see your image. Also, the mirror
should be just at arm's length from where you are sitting. You
want to be able to take sightings directly on the mirror as well
as directly on your face and skull as you observe the measure-
ments in the mirror.
3. Adjust the lamp and test out various poses by turning your
head, raising or lowering your chin, and adjusting your hat or
headdress, until you see in the mirror a composition in lights
and shadows that you like. Decide whether to draw a full-face
view or a three-quarter view, and decide which way you will
turn, left or right, if you choose the three-quarter view.
4. Once you have carefully chosen your composition in the mir-
ror and the pose is "set," try to keep all of your gear in the
same places until the drawing is finished. If you stand up to
take a break, for example, try not to move your chair or the
lamp. Students often find it very frustrating if they can't
recapture exactly the same view when they sit down again.
5. You are now ready to draw. The instructions that follow are
really only a suggestion for one procedure among myriad
possible procedures. I suggest that you read through all of the
remaining instructions and then begin to draw following the
Fig. 10-32.
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL. LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
219

Fig. 10-33.
suggested procedure. Later on, you'll find your own way to
proceed.
A self-portrait in pencil
1. Gaze at your reflection in the mirror, searching for negative
spaces, interesting edges, and the shapes of lights and shad-
ows. Try to suppress language entirely, particularly verbal
criticism of your face or features. This is not easy to do,
because this is a new use of a mirror—not for checking or
correcting, but to reflect an image in an almost impersonal
way. Try to regard yourself the way you would regard a still-
life setup or a photograph of a stranger.
2. Choose a Basic Unit. This is entirely up to you. I generally
use eye level to chin, and I often draw in a central axis (a line
that vertically bisects the head, running through the center of
the bridge of the nose and the center of the mouth). Next,
draw in the eye level line.
These two guidelines, the central axis and the eye level line,
always cross at right angles, whether in full-face view or three-
quarter and whether the person's head is tilted relative to vertical
or is held perfectly upright. I suggest drawing the central axis and
eye level line directly on the mirror with your felt-tip pen. (You
may prefer to start your drawing another way, perhaps relying
only on the crosshairs printed on your mirror. Please feel free to
do so.) You must, however, be sure to mark the top and bottom of
your Basic Unit directly on the mirror.
3. The next step, of course, is to transfer your Basic Unit to your
drawing paper with its crosshairs and toned ground. Just
make marks at the top and bottom of your Basic Unit. You
may wish to add marks for the top edge and side edges of the
image in the mirror. Transfer these marks to your drawing.
4. Next, squint your eye a bit to mask out some of the detail in
your mirror image and find the large lighted shapes. Note
where they are located relative to your Basic Unit and to the
crosshairs on the mirror and in your drawing and to the cen-
tral axis/eye level lines, if you are using them.
2 2 0
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

5. Begin your drawing by erasing out the largest lighted shapes,
as in Figure 10-34. Try to avoid any small forms or edges.
Right now you are trying to see the large lights and shadows.
6. You may wish to erase out the ground around the head, leav-
ing the toned ground as the middle value of the head. You
may, on the other hand, want to lower the value (darken) the
negative spaces. These are aesthetic choices. Figure 10-34
shows both.
7. You may want to add some graphite to the shadowed side
of the face. For this, I recommend your #4B pencil, not the
graphite stick, which is somewhat hard to control and
becomes rather greasy if pressed hard on the paper.
8. I'm sure you've noticed that I have said nothing about eyes,
nose, or mouth up to this point. If you can resist the impulse
to draw the features first, and allow them to "come out" of the
light/shadow pattern, as I describe in the margin, you will be
able to exploit the full power of this kind of drawing.
9. Rather than drawing the eyes, for example, I recommend that
you rub your #4B pencil point on a scrap of paper, rub your
forefinger over the graphite, and, checking back in the mirror
for the location of the eyes, rub your graphited finger where
the eyes should be. Suddenly you will be able to "see" the
eyes, and you need only to reinforce that ghostly perception.
10. Once you have the large shapes of lights and shadows drawn,
begin to look for some of the smaller shapes. For example,
you may find a shadowed shape under the lower lip or under
the chin or under the nose. You may see a shadow-shape on
the side of the nose or under the lower lid. You can slightly
tone the shadow-shape with your pencil, using crosshatching,
or, if you wish, rub the tone in with your finger to smooth it.
Be sure that you place and tone the shadow-shapes exactly as
you see them. They are the shapes they are because of the
bone structure and the particular light that falls on the shape.
11. At this point, you are ready to decide whether you want to
leave the drawing at this somewhat rough or "unfinished"
stage, or whether you want to work the drawing up to a "high
Fig. 10-34.
This lesson leads to one of the two
additional basic skills I mentioned
in the Introduction: the "dialogue"
that goes on in drawing from the
imagination. This is drawing at a
more advanced level. You check
the information "out there" or in
your imagination and just barely
indicate placement of the first
marks. This causes an imagined
image in the mind of the artist, who
then draws what he or she has
already "seen." Thus drawing
becomes a kind of dialogue
between the artist's intent and
what develops on the paper. The
artist makes a mark. That mark
generates a further image. The
artist reinforces the imagined
addition, which triggers more
imaging, and so on.
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
221

Fig. 10-35. A diagram of the three-
quarter self-portrait shown in Fig.
10-37.
Fig. 10-36. The full-face view dia-
gram.
finish." Throughout this book, you will find numerous exam-
ples of drawings at various degrees of "finish."
12. I will briefly list again some of the main proportions to watch
for. Remember that your brain may not be helping you to see
what is really "out there," and these reminders may encour-
age you to take sights on everything!
• For a full-face self-portrait: Eye level to chin = eye level to
the top of the skull.
• If the hair is thick, the upper part will be greater than half.
• The space between the eyes is approximately one eye-width.
• Determine the length of the nose by imaging an inverted tri-
angle with the outside points at the outside corners of the
eyes and the point at the bottom edge of the nose. This is a
variable proportion. The inverted triangle is a particular
shape for each particular model.
• The outside edges of the nostrils of the nose are usually
directly under the inside corners of the eyes. This proportion
also varies.
• The outside corners of the mouth fall under the pupils of the
eyes. This proportion varies. Note with special care the posi-
tion and shape of the outer corners of the mouth, where
much of the subtle expression of a face is located.
• The tops of the ears fall approximately at or slightly above
eye level line.
• The bottoms of the ears are approximately at (or slightly
above or below) the upper lip. Note that if the head is tilted
up or down, the location of the ears—as seen on the picture
plane—relative to the eye level line will change.
• Observe the neck, collar, and shoulders relative to the head.
Make sure that the neck is wide enough by checking the
width in relation to the width of the face. Use negative space
for the collar (draw the spaces under and around the collar).
Notice how wide the shoulders are. A frequent, student error
is making the shoulders too narrow. Sight the width relative
to your Basic Unit.
• In drawing the hair, look for the largest lights and shadows of
the hair first and then work down to the finer details later.
222
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Note the major directions in which the hair grows and the
places where it parts to shows a darker tone underneath. Note
and draw details of how the hair grows and what its texture is
close to the face. Give your viewer enough information about
the hair to know what it is like.
The portrait drawings throughout this book will demonstrate
various ways of drawing different types of hair. There is obvi-
ously no one way of drawing hair just as there is no one way to
draw eyes, noses, or mouths. As always, the answer to any drawing
problem is to draw what you see.
If you have decided on a three-quarter view, please review
the proportions for that view that I provided earlier in this chap-
ter. Also, see Figure 10-35. One caution: Beginning students some-
times begin to widen the narrow side of the face and then,
because that makes the face seem too wide, they narrow the near
side of the face. Often, the drawing ends up a frontal view, even
though the person was posing in three-quarter view. This is very
frustrating for students, because they often can't figure out what
happened. The key is to accept you perceptions. Draw just what
you see! Don't second-guess your sightings.
Now that you have read all of the instructions, you are ready
to begin. I hope you will find yourself quickly shifting into R-
mode.
Fig. 10-37. The completed drawing:
A self-portrait by instructor Brian
Bomeisler.
After you have finished:
When the drawing is finished, observe in yourself that you sit
back and regard the drawing in a different way from the way you
regarded the drawing while working on it. Afterward, you regard
the drawing more critically, more analytically, perhaps noting
slight errors, slight discrepancies between your drawing and the
model. This is the artist's way. Shifting out of the working R-
mode and back to L-mode, the artist assesses the next move, tests
the drawing against the critical left brain's standards, plans the
required corrections, notes where areas must be reworked. Then,
by taking up the brush or pencil and starting in again, the artist
shifts back into the working R-mode. This on-off procedure con-
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
223

"One of life's most fulfilling
moments occurs in that split sec-
ond when the familiar is suddenly
transformed into the dazzling aura
of the profoundly new.... These
breakthroughs are too infrequent,
more uncommon than common;
and we are mired most of the time
in the mundane and the trivial.
The shocker: what seems mundane
and trivial is the very stuff that dis-
covery is made of. The only differ-
ence is our perspective, our
readiness to put the pieces
together in an entirely new way
and to see patterns where only
shadows appeared just a moment
before."
— Edward B. Lindaman
Thinking in Future Tense,
1978
tinues until the work is done—that is, until the artist decides that
no further work is needed.
Before and after: A personal comparison
This is a good time to retrieve your pre-instruction drawings and
compare them with the drawing you have just completed. Please
lay out the drawings for review.
I fully expect that you are looking at a transformation of your
drawing skills. Often my students are amazed, even incredulous,
that they could actually have done the pre-instruction drawings
they now find in front of them. The errors in perception seem so
obvious, so childish, that it even seems that someone else must
have done the drawing. And in a way, I suppose, this is true. L-
mode, in drawing, sees what is "out there" in its own way—linked
conceptually and symbolically to ways of seeing and drawing
developed during childhood. These drawings are generalized.
Your recent R-mode drawings, on the other hand, are more
complex, more linked to actual perceptual information from "out
there," drawn from the present moment, not from memorized
symbols of the past. These drawings are therefore more realistic.
A friend might remark upon looking at your drawings that you
had uncovered a hidden talent. In a way, I believe this is true,
although I am convinced that this talent is not confined to a few,
but instead is as widespread as, say, talent for reading.
Your recent drawings aren't necessarily more expressive than
your "Before-Instruction" drawings. Conceptual L-mode draw-
ings can be powerfully expressive. Your "After-Instruction" draw-
ings are expressive as well, but in a different way: They are more
specific, more complicated, and more true to life. They are the
result of newfound skills for seeing things differently, of drawing
from a different point of view. The true and more subtle expres-
sion is in your unique line and your unique "take" on the
model—in this instance yourself.
At some future time, you may wish to partly reintegrate sim-
plified, conceptual forms into your drawings. But you will do so
by design, not by mistake or inability to draw realistically. For
224
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

now, I hope you are proud of your drawings as signs of victory in
the struggle to learn basic perceptual skills and to control the
processes of your brain.
Now that you have, with great care, seen and drawn your own
face and the faces of other human beings, surely you under-
stand what artists mean when they say that every human face is
beautiful.
A showing of portraits
As you look at the portraits on the following pages, try to men-
tally review how each drawing developed from start to finish.
Go through the measurement process yourself. This will help
to reinforce your skill and train your eye. Three of the drawings
are instructional demonstration drawings from our five-day
workshop.
A suggestion for a next drawing
A drawing suggestion that has proven to be amusing and interest-
ing is a self-portrait as a character from art history. A few such
examples might include "Self-Portrait as the Mona Lisa"; "Self-
Portrait as a Renaissance Youth"; "Self-Portrait as Venus Rising
from the Sea."
"The object, which is back of every
true work of art, is the attainment of
a state of being, a state of high func-
tioning, a more than ordinary
moment of existence.... We make
our discoveries while in the state
because then we are clear-
sighted."
— Robert Henri
The Art Spirit, 1913
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
125

Two additional self-portraits by
instructor Brian Bomeisler. Note
how they differ one from another.
You will find that your self-
portraits will differ, reflecting the
mood, feeling, and surroundings of
each sitting. Remember, drawing is
not photography.
A beautiful self-portrait in
light/shadow by instructor Grace
Kennedy.
226
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

A three-quarter self-portrait by
student Mauro Imamoto. The
composition is especially fine.
THE VALUE OF LOGICAL LIGHTS AND SHADOWS
227

Drawing
on the Beauty
of Color

"No one knows how far back in time
the human passion for color
evolved, but... its transmigration
from one culture to another can be
traced from archaeological frag-
ments as old as recorded history."
— Enid Verity
Color Observed, 1980
Miss Helen Keller, who was both
blind and deaf, writes of color:
"I understand how scarlet can dif-
fer from crimson because I know
that the smell of an orange is not
the smell of a grapefruit... With-
out color or its equivalent, life to
me would be dark, barren, a vast
blackness.... Therefore, I habitu-
ally think of things as colored and
resonant. Habit accounts for part.
The soul sense accounts for
another part. The brain with its
five-sensed construction asserts its
right and accounts for the rest.
The unity of the world demands
that color be kept in it whether I
have cognizance of it or not.
Rather than be shut out, I take part
in it by discussing it, happy in the
happiness of those near me who
gaze at the lovely hues of the sun-
set or the rainbow."
— Helen Keller
The World I Live In, 1908
I
N AN AGE LIKE OURS, color is not the luxury it was in past
centuries. We are inundated by manufactured color—sur-
rounded, immersed, swimming in a sea of color. Because of sheer
quantity, color is perhaps in danger of losing some of its magic. I
believe that using color in drawing and painting helps us to
recapture the beauty of color and to experience once again the
almost hypnotic fascination it once had for us.
Human beings have made colored objects from earliest times,
but never in such great quantity as now. In past centuries, colored
objects were most often owned by only a few wealthy or powerful
persons. For ordinary people, color was not available, except as
found in the natural world and as seen in churches and cathe-
drals. Cottages and their furnishings were made of natural mate-
rials—mud, wood, and stone. Homespun cloth usually retained
the neutral colors of the original fibers or, if dyed with vegetable
dyes, was often quick to soften and fade. For most people, a bit of
bright ribbon, a beaded hatband, or a brightly embroidered belt
was a treasure to guard and cherish.
Contrast this with the fluorescent world we live in today.
Everywhere we turn, we encounter human-made color: televi-
sion and movies in color, buildings painted brilliant colors inside
and out, flashing colored lights, highway billboards, magazines
and books in full color, even newspapers with full-page color dis-
plays. Intensely colored fabrics that would have been valued like
jewels and reserved for royalty in times past are now available to
nearly everyone, wealthy or not. Thus, we have largely lost our
former sense of the wondrous specialness of color. Nevertheless,
as humans, we can't seem to get enough color. No amount seems
too much—at least not yet. True, quite a few individuals objected
to the "colorization" of vintage black-and-white films. These
arguments, however, were lost to commerce; most people pre-
ferred the colorized versions.
But what is all this color for? In the natural world of animals,
birds, and plants, color always has a purpose—to attract, repel,
conceal, communicate, warn, or assure survival. For present-day
humans, has color even begun to lose its purpose and meaning?
Now that we have this huge bulk of manufactured color, is its use
230
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Fig 11-3. Color Wheel. Complements are directly
opposite each other on the wheel. The complement
of each primary color (yellow, red, and blue) is a
secondary color (violet, green, and orange). The
complement of each tertiary color is another
tertiary color.
Because any complementary pair always
contains, between the two hues, all three primary
colors, complements completely cancel color
when mixed together in equal quantities. This
characteristic is the key to controlling intensity
of hues.
Exercise: The pattern for making your own color
wheel is on page 234.
Fig. 11-4. Value scale. A scale in even steps
between the opposites, the white of the paper and
the darkest dark the pencil will make.
The inset strip is the same value throughout. The
apparent change in value is a perceptual illusion,
caused by the differences in contrast between the
light-to-dark tones of the scale and the constant
value of the central strip.
Exercise: Make a value scale of twelve steps, using
pencil.
Fig. 11-5. Heather Heilman, age 6, The Park, 12x18".
Courtesy of The International Child Art Collection,
Junior Arts Center, Los Angeles, California.
Children tend to use symbolic color as well as
symbolic forms. These symbol systems are linked to
language acquisition: "Trees have green leaves and
brown trunks." Learning perceptual skills helps older
children to see beyond these symbolic systems.
Exercise: Review Chapter Five on childhood draw-
ing, then redraw your own childhood landscape,
this time in color.

Fig. 11-6. Edgar Degas, Ballet Dancer in Position Facing 3/4 Front (1872). Soft black graphite
accented with black crayon, heightened with white on pink paper. 16+1/8 x 11+1/4. The Fogg Art
Museum, Harvard. Bequest of Meta and Paul J. Sachs.
Exercise: To experience the impact of color on drawing, compare this drawing with another
Degas dancer on page 157. See page 237 for a drawing exercise.

Fig. 11-7. Kathe Kollwitz, Self-Portrait (c. 1891/92).
Pen and black ink with brush and gray wash,
heightened with white gouache, on brown wove
paper. 15+13/16 x 12+11/16". The Art Institute of Chicago.
Gift of Margaret Day Blake, Mr. and Mrs. Alan Press,
and Prints and Drawings Purchase, 1980.
Over her lifetime, the German artist Kathe Kollwitz
produced more than fifty probing images of herself.
This serious, contemplative self-portrait was drawn
when the artist was about twenty-five and reflects
her early training in engraving.
Exercise: Try a heightened self-portrait, using the
procedure described below.
The artist sits in front of a mirror, cheek resting on
hand. The light, as you see, comes from above and to
the left of the sitter (note the shadow cast by the nose
and the crest shadow along the wrist).
Working on brown paper, quickly paint a dark
negative space around the head, using a brush and
black ink mixed with water. The brown of the paper
supplies the middle value for the face.
Use a tiny brush to draw in the details of the face
in black ink, and the same tiny brush to heighten the
drawing with white gouache. The heightening lines
follow the curve of the surface of the face, almost as
though you are feeling your way across the forms.
Fig.11-8. HenriToulouse Lautrec, At the Circus:
Work in the Ring (1899). Colored pencil with pastel and
black crayon on ivory wove paper. 21.8 x 31.6 cm.
The Art Institute of Chicago. Gift of Mr. and Mrs. B. E.
Bensinger.
Exercise: For practice with color, negative space,
and sighting, copy this drawing using colored pencil
and pastels, but change the colors to those of your
own choice to see the effect of color on drawing.

Fig. 11-9. Jean-Baptiste-Simeon Chardin (French, 1699-1779),
Self Portrait with a Visor (c.1776|. Pastel on blue laid paper
mounted on canvas. 18 x 14+13/16 (457 x 374 mm). The Art Institute
of Chicago, Clarence Buckingham Collection and Harold Joachim
Memorial Fund.
Fig.11-10. Jean-Baptiste-Simeon Chardin, Portrait of Madame
Chardin (c. 1776). Pastel on blue laid paper mounted on canvas.
18 x 14+15/16 (457 x 378 mm). The Art Institute of Chicago,
Helen Regerstein Collection.
Toward the end of a long career as a successful painter of still lifes and scenes of everyday
life, Jean-Baptiste-Simeon Chardin turned to pastels, a new medium for him, and to
portraiture, an unexplored subject. Only twelve Chardin pastels are known to exist today,
foremost among them the two masterpieces shown above. These portraits illustrate a point
made in the text: rich and profound color can be achieved by using very few hues. The basic
hues in each of the portraits are the complements blue and orange, each transformed into a
complex harmonious medley of balanced values and intensities.
Exercise: Try a portrait or self-portrait on colored paper using only two complementary hues
plus white and black. The masterworks above can guide your efforts to gain control of color.

Fig, 11-11. Elizabeth Layton, Self-Portrait in a Mirror. Colored pencil on paper. Reproduced
with kind permission of the artist.
Elizabeth Layton first began drawing at age 68 with the hope of finding relief from severe
depression following a stroke. Drawing proved therapeutic (she calls it "cure by contour")
and she continued to draw. Since then, herwork has been exhibited nationwide and is greatly
admired. She believes that everyone can learn to draw and that children in particular should
be taught to draw at an early age.
Fig. 11-12. Photograph of Elizabeth Layton. Reproduced with kind permission of the artist.
Exercise: Try a colored-pencil self-portrait in a mirror, including your hands.

Fig. 11-13. Richard Diebenkorn, Untitled
(Ocean Park) (1977). Acrylic, gouache,
cut-and-pasted paper. 18+1/4 x 32+3/4"
(47.6 x 83.2 cm). Collection, The Museum of
Modern Art, New York. Purchase.
Exercise: Working within an unusual format
(tall and narrow, short and wide, circular,
oval), divide the space and manipulate the
quantities of hues to achieve a pleasing,
harmonious balance and tension (a sense of
connection or "pull") between color areas.
Fig. 11-14. Brian Bomeisler, Adam and Eve.
1984. Mixed media on paper. 10 x 9".
Collection of the artist.
This New York artist explores color, light,
and scale through themes from mythology
and literature.
Exercise: Experiment with scale by using
contrasting sizes-very large to very small.
Experiment with light by changing the values
of a hue to achieve luminosity in color.
Observe how the artist achieved a wonder-
ful sense of luminous color in Adam and Eve.

Fig. 11-15. Odilon Redon (1840-19161, Head of a Young Girl. Pastel on blue-gray laid paper. 20+5/8 x 14+7/8. The Fogg
Art Museum, Harvard.
Exercise: See page 243 for an exercise based on this exceptional drawing.

Fig. 11-16. Student Gary Berberet, Sell-Portrait. Pastel on gray paper. 18 x 24".
Exercise: Try an intense, close-up self-portrait in pastel on colored paper. Remember that you always
have an available model-yourself. The addition of props such as hats can stimulate interest in each
new self-portrait.

Fig. 11-17. Student Laura Wright, Umbrella
Still Lite. A monochromatic color harmony
based on varying values and intensities of
orange.
Exercise: Construct a still life with some
randomly chosen objects. Do a negative-
space drawing on colored paper (or do a
preliminary drawing and transfer it to
colored paper, using carbon paper).
Choose colored pencils that are variations
of one hue, the hue of the colored paper.
Fig. 11-18. Student Ken Ludwig, Large Stuffed
Eagle. Rubbed pastel on white paper with
pen and black ink. 18 x 24".
A few analogous colors can produce a
surprising range of harmonious hues. Strong
contrast is supplied by the black ink and
white paper.
Exercise: Draw an animal or bird from life,
if possible, or from photographs. (Habitat
groups at natural history museums are
wonderful as models-they hold very still.)
Rub analogous hues of colored chalk into
white paper and draw with pen and ink.

Fig. 11-19. Piet Mondrian, RedAmarylis with Blue Background (c. 1907). Watercolor. 18+3/8x 13". The Museum of
Modern Art, New York. The Sidney and Harriet Janis Collection.
Exercise: Prismacolor watercolor pencils convert to watercolor when dampened with a wet brush. Using
these pencils, try a "portrait" of a flower or plant, paying attention to negative space and using contrasting
colors, guided by the superb drawing above.

Fig. 11-20. David Hockney, Celia in a Black Dress with White Flowers, 1972. Crayon on paper. 17 x 14". Collection of the artist.
Exercise: Try a half-length or full-length portrait or self-portrait in colored pencil on white paper. Place an object or objects in front
of the figure and use negative space to delineate the space between. Three distances are described: from the artist's eyes to the
objects to the figure.

Fig. 11-21. Paul Gauguin, Tahitian Woman. Pastel on paper.
21+5/8x19+1/2. The Brooklyn Museum, New York.
Exercise: Combine warm and cool hues in a pastel drawing.
Fig. 11-22. Student Thu Ha Huyung, Girl in a Flowered Hat.
Colored pencil on yellow paper. 18 x 24".
Exercise: For a colorful drawing, try a portrait using two sets
of complements and black and white on colored paper.
Fig. 11-23. Hans Baldung Grien, Self-Portrait(1502).
Offentliche Kunstsammlung, Kupferstichkabinett Basel.
Exercise: This drawing combines three-quarter view and
full-face in one drawing, with strangely intriguing results.
You might deliberately try this distortion as a step into more
abstract portraiture.
Fig. 11-24. Student drawing. The Arrow Hotel. Negative space
and contrasting colors transform an urban scene.
Exercise: See page 240 for suggestions on drawing an urban
landscape.

mostly indiscriminate? Or is purpose and meaning still sublimi-
nally inherent in color as a remnant of our biological heritage? Is
the pencil I write with painted yellow for a purpose? Did I choose
to wear blue today for a reason?
And what is color? Is it merely, as scientists tell us, a subjective
experience, a mental sensation that can only occur if three
requirements are fulfilled: that there is an observer, an object, and
sufficient light in the narrow band of wavelengths called the "visi-
ble spectrum"? It certainly is true that at twilight the world turns
to shades of gray. Is the world really colorless, only seeming to
become full of color again when we turn the lights on?
If color is a mental sensation, how does it happen? Scientists
tell us that when light falls on an object—for example, an
orange—the surface of the orange has the particular property of
absorbing all the wavelengths of the spectrum except that which,
when reflected back to our eyes and processed through the visual
system, causes the mental sensation we have named the color
"orange." My writing pencil is coated with a chemical substance
(paint) that absorbs all wavelengths except that which, when refl-
ected back to my eyes, is "yellow." Is the orange really orange? Is
the pencil really yellow? We cannot know, because we cannot get
outside of our own eye/brain/mind system to find out. What we
do know is that when the sun goes down, color disappears.
Placing color in the brain
Given sufficient light to perceive colors, scientists also tell us that
the brain's reaction to colors seems to depend on the differences
in thinking modes of the various sections of the brain.
Very bright, intense colors (and colors that shine and glitter)
draw a response from the so-called "primitive" brain, the limbic
system. This response is an emotional one, perhaps connected to
our biological heritage of color as communication. For example,
many people say, "When I get mad, I see red!" The inverse of this
exclamation perhaps describes the situation whereby an intense
red elicits an emotional, aggressive response.
The main role of L-mode, generally located in the left hemi-
sphere, is to tag colors with names and attributes, such as "bright
In the Middle Ages, color was used
in heraldry, the practice of design-
ing the insignia for armor that
"heralded" or announced the
wearer's status, family connections,
and history as a warrior.
Color helped to carry the message
of the design:
White = fate and purity
Gold 
= honor
Red 
= courage and zeal
Blue 
= purity and sincerity
Green = youth and fertility
Black 
= grief and penitence
Orange = strength and endurance
Purple = royalty and high birth
The limbic system is a group of
structures, as yet incompletely
defined, that generally includes
areas deep in the brain. These
areas are transitional in structure
between the "new" cortex and
older portions such as the olfac-
tory brain. Scientists believe that
the limbic system is involved in
patterns of strong emotions.
— H. B. English and
Ava C. English
A Comprehensive Dictio-
nary of Psychological and
Psychoanalytical Terms,
1974
DRAWING ON THE BEAUTY OF COLOR
231

"In my own case the sight of vivid
blue has always been accompanied
by an emotion of vague delight.
And in one experience of travel,
this feeling rose into ecstasy. It was
when I beheld for the first time the
grandest vision of blue in this
world the glory of the Gulf Stream;
a magical splendor that made me
doubt my senses—a flaming azure
that looked as if a million summer
skies had been condensed into
pure fluid color for the making of
it."
— Lafcadio Hearn
Exotics and Retrospectives,
1968
"He knows all about art, but he
doesn't know what he likes."
© 1943james Thurber, © 1971 Helen
W. Thurber and Rosemary
Thurber Sauers.
blue," "lemon yellow," or "burnt umber," and to translate into
words our emotional reactions to colors. (As an example, read in
the marginal note how the Irish-Greek writer Lafcadio Hearn
translated into words his emotional reactions to the color blue.)
Additionally, L-mode is specialized for designating sequenced
steps in mixing colors—for example, "to mix orange, add yellow
to red," or "to darken blue, add black."
The right hemisphere (or R-mode) is specialized for the per-
ception of relationships of hues, particularly for subtle linkages of
one hue to another. R-mode is biased toward discovering patterns
of coherence, specifically toward combinations of hues that bal-
ance opposites—for example, red/green, blue/orange, dark/
light, dull/bright.
In his 1976 essay "The Dialectics of Color," Dr. Peter Smith
states: "Since the right hemisphere has a strong interest in the
way things fit together to form a closed system, it may be said to
be a decisive factor in the esthetic response." This closed system
may be what artists speak of as unified, harmonious color—that
is, color in relationships that are locked into balance. Perhaps R-
mode recognizes the satisfying wholeness of properly unified
color and reacts with a pleasurable sense of "Yes. That's it. That's
right."
The converse is also true: R-mode recognizes unbalanced or
disunified color arrangements and perhaps longs for unity and
the missing parts of the closed system. An individual may experi-
ence this longing as vague dislike—a sense that something is
missing or out of place.
R-mode has another important role in color: seeing which
combination of colors has produced a particular color. Given a
range of grays, for example, R-mode sees which one is warmed
with red, which is cooled with blue.
Learning the basics of color
Nearly everyone is interested in color, yet most people have sur-
prisingly little comprehensive knowledge about it. We often take
it for granted that we know enough about color to know what we
232
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

black
white
ultramarine blue
Copenhagen blue
dark green
canary yellow
scarlet red
magenta
vermilion
violet
slate gray
sand
warm gray light
warm gray medium
cream
orange
"Perhaps the most important point I
can make is that you are not to
think of painting as something sep-
arate from drawing."
— Kimon Nicolaides
The Natural Way to Draw,
1941
Some basic information about
color:
The three main attributes of color
are:
hue
value
intensity
Hue is simply the name of the color.
This is the L-mode attribute.
Value is the lightness or darkness of
a hue, relative to the value scale.
Value is an R-mode attribute.
Intensity is the brightness or dull-
ness of a hue, relative to the utmost
brightness available in pigments—
generally color straight out of the
tube. Intensity is an R-mode
attribute.
To balance color, remember the
following:
Every hue has its complement.
For every hue of a given intensity,
there is the same hue at the oppo-
site intensity.
For every hue of a given value,
there is the same hue at the oppo-
site value.
DRAWING ON THE BEAUTY OF COLOR
233
sienna brown
dark brown
sepia
burnt umber
yellow ochre
lemon yellow
flesh
olive green
like, and we feel that's sufficient. Yet knowing something of the
enormous body of knowledge about color increases pleasure in
color, as in almost every subject. In the following pages, you will
add a few color skills to your newly acquired basic perceptual
skills of drawing.
Something odd happens when a student of drawing begins to
add color to the gray, black, and white of drawing. No matter how
satiated by our modern color-loaded surroundings, students
focus on color as though seeing it for the first time, almost with
the naive pleasure of children. And color in drawing does indeed
add a tremendous emotional charge to drawing. For an example
of this, compare Edgar Degas's drawing of the ballet dancer on
pink paper (Figure 11-6) with the almost identical Degas drawing
on page 157 of Chapter Eight. But I must caution you: I am not
saying that color makes a drawing better. It doesn't. Color
changes drawing, adding an element of drama and verve that
moves it closer to painting.
For the basic exercises described in this chapter, you will
need to buy a few new drawing supplies. I will add to the list of
supplies as each technique is introduced.
First, buy a set of colored pencils. "Prismacolor" is a good
brand, but there are many others. Prismacolor offers a complete
set of sixty pencils, or you can buy individual colors. I suggest the
following:
Also, buy six sheets of colored paper at least 9" x 12" or larger.
Construction paper is fine, or you may prefer another type of
paper. Any colored paper that is not too smooth or shiny will do.
Avoid bright, intense colors. Choose instead soft green, gray,

sand, blue, brown, or, as in Degas's dancer, soft pink. You will
need a plastic eraser and a kneaded eraser. Buy a hand-held pen-
cil sharpener, or a small knife if you prefer to hand-sharpen your
pencils.
A wheel of color
Starting with rock-bottom basics, make a color wheel. The
thought of this probably takes you right back to sixth grade, but
let me assure you that some of the best minds in human history
have delved into color wheels—for example, the great English
Fig. 11-1. For the arrangement
of colors, see Fig. 11-2.
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
234
Fig. 11-2.

physicist and mathematician Isaac Newton and the German poet
and scholar Johann Goethe.
What is the purpose of constructing a color wheel? Simply
put, to set in your mind the structure of color. The three primary
hues—yellow, red, and blue—are the basic building blocks of
color. Theoretically, all other colors are derived from these three.
Next come the three secondary hues—orange, violet, and
green—born of primary parents. And then follows the third gen-
eration, the six tertiary (third-level) hues—yellow-orange, red-
orange, red-violet, blue-violet, blue-green, and yellow-green.
The color wheel has a total of twelve hues, arranged like the
numbers on the face of a clock.
Use your colored pencils to match the color wheel (Figure 11-
3) in the color section. You can trace the pattern in Figure 11-1
onto a piece of bond paper, or you can color directly on the pat-
tern in the book. Bear down hard with your colored pencils to
produce the most intense hues possible.
"Hues which approach red have
almost universally been considered
as warm colors and those which
tend toward blue as cool. Fire and
sunlight and the glow of brisk cir-
culation of blood are all associated
with warmth.
"The colors of the sky and distant
mountains and cool waters are
generally bluish. When the body is
chilled its color tends toward a
bluish hue. These reasons natu-
rally make us associate red,
orange, and yellow with warmth,
and blue, blue-green, and blue-
violet with coolness."
— Walter Sargeant
The Enjoyment and Use of
Color, 1923
DRAWING ON THE BEAUTY OF COLOR
235

Psychologist Guy T. Buswell, in his
1935 study, How People Look at Pic-
tures, noted that although initial
fixation tends to be roughly in the
center of a painting, the eye gener-
ally moves first to the left and then
to the right. Dr. Buswell speculated
that this is a carry-over from read-
ing.
Russian artist Wassily Kandinsky
agreed with Buswell about center-
to-left-to-right scanning, but dis-
agreed about the reason.
Kandinsky's explanation:
"The picture is facing us, therefore
its sides are reversed. Just as when
we meet someone, we shake their
right hand—which is on the left as
we face each other."
Kandinsky continued: "The left
side of an image is dominant,
therefore, just as our right hand is
(usually) the leading or strongest
hand."
— W. Kandinsky
Point and Line to Plane,
1945
Those of you familiar with color wheels will notice that I
have used the usual order for colors on the wheel: yellow at the
top, violet at the bottom; the cool colors of green, blue-green,
blue, and blue-violet on the right side; the warm hues of yellow,
yellow-orange, orange, red-orange, and red on the left (see Fig-
ure 11-2).
I believe that this is the correct placement in terms of the
complicated crossover system of the brain, the visual system, and
the language of art. The left side of an image is addressed by the
(usually) dominant right eye, which is controlled by the left
hemisphere (stay with me; it is complicated!). In the language of
art, the left side of an image carries the connotations of domi-
nance, aggression, and forward movement. The right side,
scanned after the left side, is addressed by the left eye, controlled
by the right brain. The right side of an image, in the language of
art, carries the connotations of passivity, defensiveness, and
blocked movement.
In this zigzag fashion, the left hemisphere, right eye, and the
left side of the color wheel are linked to the sun, daylight, and
warmth—and also to dominance, aggression, and forward move-
ment. Conversely, the right hemisphere, left eye, and right side of
the wheel are linked to the moon, nighttime, and coolness—and
thus also to passivity, defensiveness, and distance. Most color
wheels are oriented in this fashion, apparently purely on intu-
ition. Russian artist Wassily Kandinsky, one of the great colorists
of art history, put his intuitions into words in the margin quota-
tion.
The purpose, then, of constructing the color wheel is to set in
your mind which colors are opposite each other on the wheel.
Blue is opposite orange, red is opposite green, yellow-green is
opposite red-violet. These opposites are called complements.
The root of the word "complement" is "complete." This means
that complements form the closed system previously, proposed by
Dr. Peter Smith as a requirement for an esthetic response. Per-
ceived together in proper relationship, complements seem to sat-
isfy the needs of R-mode and the visual system for completion.
You can use your color wheel to practice determining which
236
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

hues are complements. This knowledge should be learned so
thoroughly that it becomes as automatic as 2 + 2 = 4.
Taking the first steps in color drawing
Before you begin, please read all of the instructions.
I will use the Degas drawing on pink paper (Figure 11-6) as
the basis for instructions, but please choose any subject that
appeals to you: a group of objects for a still-life drawing, a person
who will pose for a figure drawing or a portrait, another repro-
duction of a master drawing, a photograph that appeals to you, or
a self-portrait (the artist always has one available model!).
1. Choose a sheet of colored paper, not necessarily pink.
2. The original Degas drawing measures 16+1/8" x 11+1/4". Measure
and lightly draw with pencil a format of that size.
3. Choose two colored pencils, one dark and one light, in colors
you feel harmonize with the color of your paper.
Some suggestions on this point: If your paper is soft blue,
for example, choose pencils of the opposite (that is, the com-
plementary) hue—in this case, orange. Your choice, then,
could be flesh (pale orange) and dark brown (which is actually
a dark orange). If your paper is soft violet, your choices could
be cream (pale yellow) and dark purple (or burnt umber,
which has a slightly violet cast). Degas used "soft black
graphite" (which has a slightly greenish cast) for his dark
tones, which he accented with black crayon, and a cool white
to complement his (warm) pink paper.
An aside
An important point: have confidence in your color choices!
Guided by some basic L-mode knowledge of the structure of
color (for example, the use of complements), your R-mode will
know when color is right. Within the guidelines, follow your intu-
ition. Try out the hues on the back of the paper. Then say to
yourself, "Does that feel right?" and listen to what you feel. Don't
argue with yourself—I should say, with your L-mode. We have
limited your choices to three: the paper and two pencils. Given
The brain's "need" for the comple-
ment is most clearly demonstrated
by the phenomenon called "after-
image," which is still not entirely
understood.
To cause an after-image, color a
circle of intense red about an inch
or so in diameter. Make a tiny
black dot in the center of the red.
Make a similar dot in the center of
a second, blank sheet of paper.
Holding the two sheets side-by-
side, gaze at the red-hued circle
for about a minute. Then quickly
shift your gaze to the dot on the
second, blank sheet. You will "see"
the complement to red (green)
emerge on the blank paper the
same shape, the same size as the
original red circle.
You can experiment with any hue,
and your mind/brain/visual sys-
tem will produce the exact com-
plement of any hue. This is termed
the negative after-image. If you
experiment with two hues, both
complements will appear. In some
instances, the original hue (called a
positive after-image) will appear as
an after-image, but in the negative
spaces of the original shapes,
which appear empty of color.
DRAWING ON THE BEAUTY OF COLOR
237

"Color can overwhelm.... One
must understand that when it
comes to color less is often more—
a lesson taught us by the masters
but ignored by many artists."
—Joe Singer
Hovi to Paint in Pastels, 1976
In his 1926 work, the color theorist
Albert Munsell stressed the con-
cept of balance to create color har-
monies and established a
numerical code which is still the
most widely used system for iden-
tifying color.
Munsell recommended balancing
hues with their complements, val-
ues with their opposite values,
intensities with opposite intensi-
ties, areas of strong color balanced
by weak (low-intensity) color, large
areas balanced by small, warm col-
ors balanced by cool colors.
— Albert Munsell
A Color Notation
these limits, you are sure to produce harmonious color.
Bear in mind that color most often "goes wrong" when stu-
dents without knowledge of color use too many hues. They often
throw together a variety of hues, chosen at random from the color
wheel. Such combinations are difficult—often impossible—to
balance and unify, and even beginning students sense that some-
thing isn't working. This is the reason for limiting the palette in
these first exercises to a few hues and their related lights and
darks. And I encourage you to continue to limit your palette until
you have wider experience with color.
Having said that, I will reverse the thought and suggest that at
some point, you may want to go wild with color, throwing every-
thing together to see what happens. Buy a sheet of brightly col-
ored paper and use every color you have on it. Create discordant
color. Then try to pull it together, perhaps with dark or dull col-
ors. You may be able to make it work—or you may like it in its
discordant state! Much of contemporary art uses discordant color
in very inventive ways. Let me emphasize, however, that you
should attempt discordant color by design and not by mistake.
Your R-mode will always perceive the difference, perhaps not
immediately, but over a period of time. Ugly color is not the same
as discordant color. Discordant color is not the same as harmo-
nious color. For these first exercises, we shall concentrate on cre-
ating harmonious color, because it more readily provides basic
knowledge about color.
Now, to continue:
4. Notice that Degas gridded his drawing with evenly spaced
horizontal and vertical guide lines, just as he gridded his
dancer without color on page 157. A grid with squares about
2+1/2" will be about right for the size of your format.
Try to follow Degas's thinking in his use of the grid: What
points was he looking for? Note the obvious points of crossed
grid lines at the elbow and at the dancer's right toe.
Start with the grid, using your dark-colored pencil to
lightly draw the lines. Call up your new skills of drawing:
edges, spaces, relationships of angles and proportions, and
238
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

light logic. Use the grid as a boundary for the negative spaces
around the head, arms, hands, and feet. Use negative space to
draw the ballet shoes. Carefully work out the proportions of
the head: Check the eye level and the central axis. Notice
what a small proportion of the whole head is occupied by the
features; do not enlarge these features! Check the position of
the ear (review proportions in Chapter Eight, if necessary).
Complete the "dark" drawing before starting on the "light."
5. Now, for the fun part—the heightening of the drawing.
Heightening is the technical term that refers to the technique
of using pale-colored chalk or pencil to depict light falling on
a subject.
First, determine the logic of the light falling on the
dancer. Where is the source of the light? As you can see, this
light source is located just above the dancer and slightly off to
her left. Light falls on her forehead and right cheek. Her head
throws a shadow on her right shoulder, and the light streams
across her left shoulder and falls on her chest and left breast.
Bits of light fall on her left toe and right heel as well.
Now use your light-colored pencil to heighten the draw-
ing. You may need to alternately use your dark pencil to
deepen the shadow-shapes. Grasp with your mind that the
middle tones are supplied by the value of the colored paper.
Try to see the color of the paper as value. This is difficult.
Imagine for a moment that the world has turned to shades of
gray, as though twilight has fallen, draining color from your
paper but leaving the value in the form of a gray. Where on a
value scale would that gray be, relative to white and black?
Then, relative to that value, where is the darkest dark in
Degas's drawing? Where is the lightest light? Your task is to
match these values in your drawing.
When you have finished: Pin your drawing to a wall, stand
back, and enjoy your first small step into color. Some student
drawings using colored pencil are shown in the color section. As
you see, very few colors were used in each of the drawings. Stu-
dent Thu Ha Huyung used the largest number of colors (four
plus black and white) in her Girl in a Flowered Hat (Figure 11-22).
"To me, painting—all painting—
is not so much the intelligent use
of color as the intelligent use of
value. If the values are right the
color cannot help but be right."
—Joe Singer
How to Paint in Pastels, 1976
Based on his teaching at Yale
University, the great colorist Josef
Albers wrote that there are no
rules of color harmony, only rules
of relationships of quantity of colors:
"Independent of harmony rules,
any color 'goes' or 'works' with any
other color, presupposing that
their quantities are appropriate."
—Josef Albers
The Interaction of Color,
1962
Another view on harmony in color:
"After learning to see color as value,
the next step is learning to see
color as color."
— Professor Don Dame
California State
University, Long Beach
DRAWING ON THE BEAUTY OF COLOR
239

A Heightened Self-Portrait
A wonderful example for this exer-
cise is found in Figure 11-7, the self-
portrait by the German artist
Kathe Kollwitz.
Exercise:
1. Set up lights and a mirror.
Arrange your drawing materials so
that you can both draw and
observe yourself.
2. Take the pose and spend a few
moments studying the logic of the
lights and shadows created by your
lighting setup. Where is the light-
est light? The darkest dark? Where
are the cast shadows and the crest
shadows? Where are the highlights
and the reflected lights?
3. Lightly sketch your self-por-
trait on colored paper, checking
the proportions carefully.
4. Quickly paint in the negative
space, using black ink thinned
slightly with water and a fairly
large brush (a one-inch-wide
housepainter's brush will do, with
ink poured in a small bowl).
5. Use a dark colored pencil to
define features and shadows.
6. Use a white or cream pencil to
heighten the drawing, using
hatches that follow the curves of
your face and features.
The colors she used were canary yellow and ultramarine blue
(near complements), magenta and dark green (near comple-
ments), and black and white (opposites).
Thu Ha's color is harmonious because it is balanced and col-
ors are repeated from area to area. (See Josef Albers's statement
in the margin of page 239.) The pale magenta of the lips is
repeated in the pink flower. The green of the leaves reappears in
the hair. The blue of the blouse reappears in the eyes and hat.
The black is used for the shadow-shapes, and the white heightens
the lights. And, finally, the yellow of the hair is a lighter value of
the ochre paper that forms the ground and middle value.
If you haven't yet tried a colored-pencil portrait on a colored
ground, I urge you to find a model or to draw a self-portrait, fol-
lowing the suggestions in the margin. Because the colored ground
so beautifully supplies the middle-value tones, you are sure to
enjoy this project. With the middle-value ground in place, it
almost seems that the drawing is half-complete before you start.
Recall that in Chapter Ten your rubbed-graphite ground sup-
plied the middle-value tones, the eraser provided the lights, and
the darkest dark of your pencil supplied the dark shadows. The
transition from that drawing to drawing in color on a colored
ground is a very short step.
Another project: An ugly corner as cityscape
You might also enjoy trying a cityscape similar to the student
drawing The Arrow Hotel in Figure 11-24. This drawing was the
result of an assignment to my students to "Go out and find a truly
ugly corner." (Regrettably, ugly corners are all too easy to find in
most of our cities.) Using the perceptual skills of seeing edges,
spaces, and relationships of angles and proportions, students were
directed to draw exactly what they saw—including signs, letter-
ing, everything—placing great emphasis on negative space. The
project was completed by following the directions for the
cityscape provided below.
I believe you'll agree that ugliness was transformed into
something approaching beauty in the student's drawing. This is
240
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

another instance of the transformative power of the artist's way of
seeing. One of the great paradoxes of art is that subject matter is
not of prime importance in creating beauty.
Directions for the cityscape:
1. Find your corner, the uglier the better.
2. Sit in your car to do the drawing, or use a folding stool to sit
on the sidewalk.
3. You will need an 18" x 24" board to draw on, and an 18" x 24"
piece of ordinary white paper. Draw a format edge about an
inch in from the edges of the paper. Use a pencil to draw the
cityscape. A viewfinder and a transparent grid will help in
sighting angles and proportions.
4. Use negative space almost exclusively to construct the draw-
ing. All details, such as telephone lines, lettering, street signs,
and girders, are to be drawn in negative space. This is the key
to success in this drawing. (But that is true for almost every
bit of drawing that you do!) Remember that negative space,
clearly observed and drawn, reminds the viewer of that for
which we all long—unity, the most basic requirement of a
work of art.
5. When you have finished the drawing, return home and
choose a piece of 18" x 24" colored paper or colored card-
board. Transfer your on-site drawing to the colored paper,
using carbon paper or graphite transfer paper, available in art
supply stores. Be sure to transfer your format edge to the col-
ored ground.
6. If you want to try a simple complementary arrangement as
used in The Arrow Hotel, choose two colored pencils that
harmonize with your paper, one dark and one light. The Arrow
Hotel provides a satisfying color scheme because the color
is balanced: the yellow-green of the paper is balanced by
the dark, dull red-violet pencil, and the light tones are
supplied by the cream-colored pencil, which relates to the
yellow-green ground and acts as a near-complement to the
red-violet.
About cityscapes, American
abstract artist Stuart Davis said:
"I am an American, born in
Philadelphia of American stock.
I paint what I see in America.
"Some things that have made me
want to paint... skyscraper archi-
tecture, the brilliant color of gaso-
line stations; chain store fronts and
taxi-cabs; electric signs... Earl
Hines' hot piano and jazz music in
general."
— Stuart Davis, 1943
A half-serious caution: If you draw
in a public place, you will soon be
besieged by spectators wondering
what in the world you are draw-
ing—and why. I can't help you with
this problem.
One thing is certain: A lonely per-
son need only to start drawing in
public places to be lonely no more.
DRAWING ON THE BEAUTY OF COLOR
24I

Because most people believe they
prefer bright colors, the following is
a difficult concept to grasp:
Just as negative spaces are equally
important as objects, dull colors
(low-intensity colors) are equally
important as bright (high-inten-
sity) colors.
The simplest way to reduce the
intensity of a given hue is to add a
neutral gray or black. This
method, however, often seems to
drain color from a hue in the same
way that twilight dims and weakens
colors.
A second way is to mix a color with
some of its complementary hue.
This method seems to leave the color
unabated, and richly, strongly
dull—not weakly dull. Low-inten-
sity hues mixed this way greatly
assist in harmonizing color
schemes.
Believing that the second way is
preferable, my friend and col-
league Professor Don Dame, an
expert colorist, frequently refuses
to allow his students to even buy
black.
Expanding harmonious color
We have explored complementary color schemes in the exercises
above. Two additional ways of arranging harmonious color are
monochromatic schemes and analogous schemes.
Monochromatic color, meaning variations of a single hue, is
an interesting experiment with color. Choose a colored paper and
use all the pencils you have in hues related to that color. In her
Umbrella Still Life (Figure 11-17), student Laura Wright used varia-
tions on a theme of orange—the color orange in all its transfor-
mations, from dark brown to the pale orange of the paper.
Analogous color is an arrangement of hues close to one
another on the color wheel—red, orange, and yellow; blue, blue-
green, and green, for example. Student Ken Ludwig's drawing,
Large Stuffed Eagle (Figure, 11-18), is an analogous arrangement of
red, red-orange, yellow-orange, and pink chalk rubbed into white
paper. (Using pastel chalk is explained in the next section.) Ken
used pen and black India ink in short, hatched strokes to draw the
eagle. You might try this combination of a rubbed chalk ground
(which again supplies the middle value) and ink lines for a variety
of subjects—animals, birds, flowers—to practice analogous color.
Pressing on to a pastel world
Your next purchase should be a set of pastels, which are pure pig-
ments pressed into round or square chalks (sometimes called
"pastel crayons") using a minimum of binder. You can buy a basic
set of twelve chalks (ten hues plus black and white) or a larger set
of up to one hundred hues. But be assured that the small basic set
is sufficient for these first exercises.
I must warn you that pastels have some serious drawbacks.
They are quite soft and break easily. They rub off on your hands
and clothes, spread colored dust wafting through the air, and pro-
duce a drawing that is extremely fragile.
But there is a positive side. Pastels are almost pure pigment,
and the colors are lovely—as clear and brilliant as oil paints. Pas-
tels, in fact, are the drawing medium closest to painting. Pastel
drawings are often referred to as "pastel paintings."
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
242

Because pastels come in a wide range of pure and mixed
hues, a student beginning in color can experience something very
close to painting without the difficulties encountered in mixing
paints on a palette, contending with turpentine, stretching canvas,
and dealing with other technical problems of painting.
For many reasons, therefore, pastels are an ideal medium to
provide a transitional midpoint between drawing and painting.
For an example of the proximity of pastels to painting, look at the
exquisite pastel paintings by the eighteenth-century French artist
Jean-Baptiste-Simeon Chardin in Figures 11-9 and 11-10. Chardin,
often called the "artists' artist," has portrayed himself in his green
eyeshade and his wife in her demure headdress. Examine
Chardin's marvelous use of color, bold yet restrained. These two
drawings are masterpieces of portraiture and of pastel painting.
One of the main differences between exercises with colored
pencil and pastel drawing is in the quantity of applied color rela-
tive to the ground. Student Gary Berberet's Self-Portrait (Figure
11-16) illustrates expanded use of color to construct the entire
image.
For the exercise that follows, I will use as my model the pastel
drawing Head of a Young Girl, by the French painter Odilon Redon
(Figure 11-15). Redon's free use of pastel color in the negative
space of the drawing will inspire you to experiment with this
medium.
Redon's mystical and lyrical work spanned the end of the
nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth. His pastel
drawings have been linked to the writing of Poe, Baudelaire, and
Mallarme, and all are connected conceptually to Surrealism, a
period in early twentieth-century art that focused on dream sym-
bolism. The yellow lizard in Redon's drawing, juxtaposed to the
dreamlike serenity of the girl's head, is reminiscent of Surrealist
symbolism.
Before you begin, please read all of the instructions.
1. Find a model or a suitable subject. Arrange a light so that the
background is illuminated, providing a pale negative space
behind your model's head.
Surrealist artists were fascinated
by psychological meanings of col-
ors. Oddly, each hue has both a
positive and negative connotation
in most cultures. For example, con-
sider the following:
White: innocence and ghostliness
Black: 
restful strength and
depression
Yellow: nobility and treason
Red: 
ardent love and sin
Blue: 
truth and despondency
Purple: dignity and grief
Green: growth and jealousy
DRAWING ON THE BEAUTY OF COLOR
243

To correct a mistake in pastel,
begin by brushing off the wrong
marks with a paintbrush. Then use
a kneaded eraser (a soft malleable
eraser available in craft or art sup-
ply stores) to "lift" or blot the
color without rubbing. You can
even scrape the paper carefully
with a small knife, then blot again
and draw in your corrections.
2. Choose a piece of pastel paper in any soft color. Pastel paper
has a sharp "tooth" to grasp and hold the dry pigment. Redon
used a soft gray-blue paper.
3. Choose a medium-dark pastel crayon for the line drawing of
the head. Choose three harmonizing light pastels for the light
negative space behind the head.
4. Pose your model and draw the head in semi-profile—that is,
with the model turned very slightly off true profile view.
5. Calling on your five basic drawing skills, draw the head using
the dark pastel you have chosen. (Redon used a sepia pastel, a
dulled violet.) Using your imagination, or using objects in the
room, complete your composition by adding objects or parts
of objects. (Redon added part of a clock—a recurrent Surre-
alist symbol—and a falling lizard.)
6. Using your three pale pastels, work up the negative space sur-
rounding the head. Use crosshatching rather than filling the
area solidly, so that light and air are retained in your drawing.
A special point: Look at your three pale pastels and decide which
is the darkest (lowest) in value, which is in the middle, and which
is the lightest. Then use the lowest-value chalk for the first layer
of hatches, the middle for the next, and the lightest for the last
and final layer of hatches. This sequencing of colors from dark
first to light last is the sequencing required for most painting
mediums (with the exception of watercolor, which is usually
worked from light first to dark last). In working with pastels, the
dark-to-light sequencing helps to keep your colors clear and
fresh. Reversing this sequence can result in muddy color. This
point will help you to see why practice with pastels eases the
transition to painting.
7. Complete your drawing with bold colors of your choice. You
may prefer to harmonize your color by staying with comple-
ments or analogous hues, or you may prefer discordant hues
that are anchored in the composition by repeating or echoing
areas of each color. (In Redon's drawing, you will notice that
each of the intense hues is echoed in one or more additional
small areas.)
244
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Start your drawing now. You will need about an hour and per-
haps a bit more to complete the drawing. Be sure to give your
model a rest at midpoint in the hour! Try to work without inter-
ruption, and ask your model not to converse with you while you
are drawing. Your R-mode needs to be completely free of distrac-
tion.
When you have finished: Pin up your drawing, stand back,
and regard your work. Check the balance of the color. Then turn
your drawing upside down and check the color again. If any hue
seems to pop out of the composition, somehow not locked into
the color arrangement, some slight adjustment needs to be made.
The color may need to be repeated somewhere, or it may need
darkening, lightening, or dulling (by lightly hatching a bit of the
complement over the hue). Have faith in your judgment and in
your R-mode ability to perceive coherence—and incoherence.
When the color is right, you will know it!
Summing up
In this book, we have covered the basic skills of drawing: from
edges to negative spaces to relationships to lights and shadows to
color in drawing. These skills will lead you directly to the world
of painting and new ways of expressing yourself through art.
Drawings stand on their own as works of art, and paintings
stand on their own as works of art. But drawing also becomes part
of painting—the underpinning, so to speak—just as language
skills become the underpinning of poetry and literature. So,
drawing merges with painting and a new direction beckons. Your
journey has only just begun.
On the question of the purpose
of painting, the French nineteenth-
century artist Eugene Delacroix
wrote:
"I have told myself a hundred times
that painting—that is, the material
thing called a painting—is no more
than a pretext, the bridge between
the mind of the painter and that of
the spectator."
— Eugene Delacroix
in Artists on Art, 1967
DRAWING ON THE BEAUTY OF COLOR
245

The Zen of Drawing:
Drawing Out
the Artist Within

"In oneself lies the whole world and
if you know how to look and learn,
then the door is there and the key
is in your hand. Nobody on earth
can give you either the key or the
door to open, except yourself."
—J. Krishnamurti
You Are the World
"The life of Zen begins with the
opening of satori. Satori may be
defined as intuitive looking into, in
contradiction to intellectual and
logical understanding. Whatever
the definition, satori means the
unfolding of a new world hitherto
unperceived."
— D. T. Suzuki, "Satori,"
in The Gospel According
to Zen
A
T THE BEGINNING OF THIS BOOK I said that drawing is a
. magical process. When your brain is weary of its verbal
chatter, drawing is a way to quiet the chatter and to grasp a fleet-
ing glimpse of transcendent reality. By the most direct means
your visual perceptions stream through the human system—
through retinas, optic pathways, brain hemispheres, motor path-
ways—to magically transform an ordinary sheet of paper into a
direct image of your unique response, your vision of the percep-
tion. Through your vision, the viewer of the drawing—no matter
what the subject—can find you, see you.
Furthermore, drawing can reveal much about you to yourself,
some facets of you that might be obscured by your verbal self.
Your drawings can show you how you see things and feel about
things. First, you draw in R-mode, wordlessly connecting your-
self to the drawing. Then shifting back to your verbal mode, you
can interpret your feelings and perceptions by using the powerful
skills of your left brain—words and logical thought. If the pattern
is incomplete and not amenable to words and rational logic, a
shift back to R-mode can bring intuition and analogic insight to
bear on the process. Or the hemispheres might work coopera-
tively in countless possible combinations.
The exercises in this book, of course, encompass only the
very beginning steps toward the goal of knowing your two minds
and how to use their capabilities. From here on, having caught a
glimpse of yourself in your drawings, you can continue the jour-
ney on your own.
Once you have started on this path, there is always the sense
that in the next drawing you will more truly see, more truly grasp
the nature of reality, express the inexpressible, find the secret
beyond the secret. As the great Japanese artist Hokusai said,
learning to draw never ends.
Having shifted to a new mode of seeing, you may find
yourself looking into the essence of things, a way of knowing
tending toward the Zen concept of satori, as described in the
quotation of D. T. Suzuki. As your perceptions unfold, you take
new approaches to problems, correct old misperceptions, peel
248
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

away layers of stereotypes that mask reality and keep you from
clear seeing.
With the power of both halves of the brain available to you
and the myriad possible combinations of the separate powers of
the hemispheres, the door is open to your becoming more
intensely aware, more capable of controlling some of the verbal
processes that can distort thinking—sometimes even to the
extent of causing physical illness. Logical, systematic thinking is
surely essential for survival in our culture, but if our culture is to
survive, understanding how the human brain molds behavior is
our urgent need.
Through introspection, you can embark on that study,
becoming an observer and learning, to some degree at least, how
your brain works. In observing your own brain at work, you will
widen your powers of perception and take advantage of the capa-
bilities of both its halves. Presented with a problem, you will have
the possibility of seeing things two ways: abstractly, verbally, logi-
cally—but also holistically, wordlessly, intuitively.
Use your twofold ability. Draw everything and anything. No
subject is too hard or too easy, nothing is unbeautiful. Everything
is your subject—a few square inches of weeds, a broken glass, an
entire landscape, a human being.
Continue to study. The great masters of the past and of the
present are readily available at reasonable cost in books of draw-
ings. Study the masters, not to copy their styles, but to read their
minds. Let them teach you how to see in new ways, to see the
beauty in reality, to invent new forms and open new vistas.
Observe your style developing. Guard it and nurture it. Pro-
vide yourself with time so that your style can develop and grow
sure of itself. If a drawing goes badly, calm yourself and quiet
your mind. End for a time the endless talking to yourself. Know
that what you need to see is right there before you.
Put your pencil to paper every day. Don't wait for a special
moment, an inspiration. As you have learned in this book, you
must set things up, position yourself, in order to evoke the flight
to the other-than-ordinary state in which you can see clearly.
"Set yourself to practice drawing,
drawing only a little each day, so
that you may not come to lose your
taste for it, or get tired of it....
Do not fail, as you go on, to draw
something every day, for no matter
how little it is, it will be well worth
while, and will do you a world of
good."
— Cennino Cennini
Il Libro Dell'Arte, c. 1435
THE ZEN OF DRAWING: DRAWING OUT THE ARTIST WITHIN
249

Through practice, your mind will shift ever more easily. By
neglect, the pathways can become blocked again.
Teach someone else to draw. The review of the lessons will
be invaluable. The lessons you give will deepen your insight
about the process of drawing and may open new possibilities for
someone else.
Drawing skills six and seven
In the Introduction, I mentioned that I have proposed two addi-
tional skills beyond the five basic component skills of seeing
edges, spaces, relationships, lights and shadows, and the gestalt.
My colleagues and I have not found more than these seven skills
over the past decade, and it's possible there are no more. Again,
mediums, styles, and subject matter form an endless study, and all
seven of the basic skills benefit by a lifetime of practice and
refinement. But for basic understanding of the perceptual
processes of drawing, the seven skills seem sufficient at this time.
I'll briefly review skills six and seven.
Perceptual skill six: Drawing from memory
Skill six is essentially drawing from memory. Students yearn for
this skill, but it is difficult. Drawing is a visual task and most
artists have great problems drawing from memory except for
those images they have drawn before. If someone asked me to
draw a picture of an antique railway engine, for example, I could
not do that because I don't know what it looks like. If I could see a
picture, or go to view the object, then I could draw it. Curiously,
this occasionally comes as a surprise to people who don't draw.
They seem to think that an artist is someone who can draw any-
thing.
Drawing from memory can be trained. The nineteenth-cen-
tury French artist Edgar Degas, so the story goes, forced his stu-
dents to study the model posing in the basement of a building and
then climb to the seventh floor to do their paintings of the posed
model. No doubt this was effective visual memory training!
250
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

For training yourself in visual memory, the key is to decide to
remember—in a sense, to take a visual "snapshot" of an image
you want to retain in memory. This means developing your abil-
ity to image—to see something with your mind's eye well enough
that later you can "look at" the image. Then, using the first five
skills, you draw the image "seen in the mind's eye."
Additionally, whatever you draw will etch itself into your
memory. Call up those images; see again the master drawings you
have studied, the faces of friends you have drawn. Image also
scenes that you have never viewed, and draw what you see
through your mind's eye. Drawing will give the image a life and
reality of its own.
Perceptual skill seven: The "dialogue"
Skill seven takes us all the way to the art of the museums,
I believe. I briefly outlined some main aspects of this skill in
Chapter Ten, page 221. The artist has a vague idea, let's say, to
draw a creature that never existed, perhaps a winged dragon. The
artist has a vague imagined image and begins to draw, making a
few marks that perhaps indicate the head of the dragon. Those
marks trigger an imagined extension and elaboration of, say, the
head and neck. The artist "sees" or envisions these elaborated
details on the paper. The artist then draws in the imagined exten-
sion with new marks. That triggers an expanded image, perhaps
the body and wings, now "seen" on the drawing. The artist is now
able to draw those parts. And so the drawing progresses as a result
of this "dialogue" between the imagined creature in the drawing
which the artist makes real with the pencil marks. This dialogue
continues until the artwork is finished.
You experienced this skill to some extent in your light/
shadow drawings, and you can now nurture this beginning. You
will find it most satisfying, I assure you. One way to practice the
dialogue is to find or make stained paper, stained perhaps with
spilled coffee or smeared paint or even mud. Let the paper dry
and then try to "see" images in the stains. Reinforce these images
with pencil or pen or colored pencil. This is the so-called "da
THE ZEN OF DRAWING: DRAWING OUT THE ARTIST WITHIN
251

"It is not to be despised, in my opin-
ion, if, after gazing fixedly at the
spot on the wall, the coals in the
grate, the clouds, the flowing
stream, one remembers some of
their aspects; and if you look at
them carefully you will discover
some quite admirable inventions.
Of these the genius of the painter
may take full advantage, to com-
pose battles of animals and of men,
of landscapes or monsters, of dev-
ils and other fantastic things."
Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519)
Vinci device." Renaissance artist Leonardo da Vinci recom-
mended that student artists should practice seeing fanciful
images in the stained walls of the city in order to improve their
imaging abilities.
Clearly, these skills have other applications. Use your imag-
ing ability to solve problems. Look at a problem from several
viewpoints and different perspectives. See the parts of the prob-
lem in their true proportion. Instruct your brain to work on the
problem while you sleep or take a walk or do a drawing. Scan the
problem to see all of its facets. Image dozens of solutions without
censoring or revising. Play with the problems in the antic/serious
intuitive mode. The solution is very likely to present itself nicely
when you least expect it.
Drawing on the capabilities of the right side of your brain,
develop your ability to see ever more deeply into the nature
of things. As you look at people and objects in your world, imag-
ine that you are drawing them, and then you will see differently.
You will see with an awakened eye, with the eye of the artist
within you.
252
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Afterword:
Is Beautiful
Handwriting
a Lost Art?
T
ODAY, HANDWRITING IS NO LONGER a
subject of interest. Like the times tables,
moral sayings, and polite manners at tea parties,
handwriting—if it is thought of at all—is rele-
gated to quaint customs of the past century. Yet
when I ask a group of people, "How many of
you would like to improve your handwriting?"
nearly all the hands go up. If I ask "Why?" the
answers vary: "I want my handwriting to look
better ... to be more readable ... to be good
enough to be proud of."
This response has surprised me. Handwrit-
ing has virtually been discarded as a school sub-
ject, at least beyond the third or fourth grade.
Out of curiosity, I scoured my home library of
books on the topics of education, school art pro-
grams, drawing, painting, art history, the brain
and brain-hemisphere functions for index
Forgers copy signatures upside down. This trick proba-
bly works for the same reason that upside-down draw-
ing works. As an exercise, try copying the signatures
above upside down.
AFTERWORD: IS BEAUTIFUL HANDWRITING A LOST ART?

The Palmer method drill.
entries on handwriting. I found nothing, not a
word on the subject.
Next, I searched the university library,
indexes of books on art education, drawing, and
brain function—again, nothing. Early education
books, of course, had entries on teaching the
alphabet letters and words, and I found a few
books specifically on handwriting—most of
them published in England, where handwriting
skills apparently still receive considerable
attention. When I opened these books and
skimmed through them, however, I was struck
by my immediate reaction of sinking dismay at
the tedium of the exercises. All of the worst
aspects of public education came flooding back
to me as memories of boring tasks, boringly
taught, with no possibility of escape.
And yet I know that handwriting is impor-
tant, and the group response I described above
indicates that others feel that way too. In fact, of
all the ways we express ourselves nonverbally,
none is quite so personal as our handwriting—
so personal and important that our signatures
are legally protected as a mark of identity.
Unlike other ways we use to express our indi-
viduality, we have sole ownership of our hand-
writing. It is a personal possession that no other
person is allowed to use or imitate.
In past centuries, handwriting was consid-
ered an art. Every school had its master or mis-
tress of penmanship, and in the nineteenth
century much time and attention was consumed
in perfecting the extravagant loops and swirls of
Copperplate script. In America in the early
decades of this century, our schoolchildren
assiduously studied the venerable Palmer
method, derived from a beautiful Spencerian
254
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE Of THE BRAIN

script. By the late 1930s, however, the Palmer
method had given way to an unlovely manu-
script printing called "ball-and-stick" lettering
for very young children, with a shift from letter-
ing to cursive, or "real," writing by around
fourth grade. This shift was mainly a matter of
making joining marks between the "ball-and-
stick" letters.
Responding to educational theories in the
1940s and 1950s about encouraging individuality
and avoiding rote learning, teachers encouraged
each child to use the style of writing that felt
comfortable, within limits of legibility and cor-
rectness of letter forms. Children had a choice
of size and slant of letters, sometimes even the
choice of staying with printing, and teachers
expected that each child's handwriting would
more or less settle down to a legible form.
Beauty was not an issue. Legibility was suffi-
cient.
But writing is an art form. Using line, one of
the most basic elements of art, handwriting can
function as a means of artistic self-expression.
Like drawing, handwriting employs certain con-
ventional forms that have agreed-upon mean-
ings. Over centuries, the letters of the alphabet
have evolved into shapes of great beauty that
communicate verbally, yet at the same time can
convey subtle nonverbal intentions and reflec-
tions of the mind of the writer/artist. This is
what we have lost. In my opinion, legibility is
not enough. Educational theorists have sold
handwriting short.
Can we regain this lost art? I think we can,
by linking writing once again to the esthetic
purposes of drawing. There is little difference
between making a drawing in line and "draw-
The Palmer method is joined, looped, and linked.
This is surely the low-water mark of handwriting—
awkward to the hand, without flow, and totally unre-
lated to the historical development of handwriting.
AFTERWORD: IS BEAUTIFUL HANDWRITING A LOST ART?
Ball-and-stick letters are round, unjoined, and upright.

Have soft eyes and a gentle manner.
Shodo painting by William Reed.
Write your signature three times. First, your usual sig-
nature; next, your best "hand"; last, your "odd hand"
signature.
ing" a signature, sentence, or paragraph. The
purpose is the same: to convey information
about the subject and to express the personality
of the writer/artist. This nonverbal expression
is subconsciously perceived and understood
by the reader/viewer. Consider what William
Reed, an expert onjapanese calligraphy, has to
say:
Shodo paintings [cursive calligraphy] are like
pictures of the subconscious mind. They are not
final statements, but rather instant snapshots of
the personality at the time of writing. That per-
sonality can be developed and strengthened
through AY practice. On the other hand, careless
calligraphy is also a form of practice, reinforcing
bad habits and stunting the growth of the per-
sonality.
While we may never attain the disciplined aes-
thetic of the Oriental mind, surely we can bring
beauty back into handwriting—not the ornate
beauty of past centuries, but rather a modern
beauty of ease, clarity, and coherence. I will rec-
ommend a few general principles and a few
exercises, and I will hope against hope that you
won't get that awful sinking feeling of boredom.
I urge you, at the least, to give the exercises a
try.
The basic perceptual skills of writing/
drawing
1. First, review the short section on hand-
writing in Chapter Two. Then, on a sheet of
plain paper, write your signature just as you
usually sign your name.
2. Underneath that signature, write your name
again, this time using your most beautiful
256
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

"hand." Write slowly, drawing the letters
with care.
3. Last, write your name one more time un-
derneath the second version. This time,
however, use the other hand: If you are
right-handed, use your left hand, and if left-
handed, use your right hand.
Now, compare these three "drawings." The line
expresses everything, and the communication is
very clear. All you have to do is ask yourself, "If
three people of equal qualifications were to
apply for a position and these were their signa-
tures, who would get the job?"
To improve your handwriting, therefore, the
first step is to decide that it does matter; your
writing sends a distinct message. The next step
is to think about what message you want to con-
vey. Reliability? Intelligence? Masculinity?
Femininity? Humor? Sophistication? Clarity?
(These, of course, are all positive messages.
Writing can also convey such negative messages
as carelessness, indifference, deviousness, lazi-
ness, instability, and egotism. But I'll assume you
won't choose one of these qualities.)
Keeping style in mind as a final goal, let us
see how the perceptual skills of drawing can
help your handwriting to become more beauti-
ful.
Drawing the contours of the alphabet
1. The perception of edges: Try a Pure Con-
tour Drawing of your handwriting. Tape a
piece of paper down. Choose a pen or pencil
that you like, with the width of line that
feels comfortable to you. Turn away from
the taped-down paper, so that it is out of
As children grow and change, so will their handwriting.
— Ornella Santoli
How to Read Handwriting
Christopher Jarman designed this alphabet with the
aim of using simple, economical letters that can be
written with any type of writing implement.
AFTERWORD: IS BEAUTIFUL HANDWRITING A LOST ART?
The "looped" style, based on the Palmer method.

Student example of "pure" or "blind contour" hand-
writing.
Signature of George III, king of England.
An actual "blind contour" signature: George III, when
blind.
Write your signature again. Using graph paper helps to
see the negative spaces.
sight. Holding the pen or pencil, place your
writing hand on the paper and hold this
book in the other hand, open to this page.
2. Choose one of the alphabets illustrated here
and copy each letter, first the lowercase,
then the capitals. Draw each letter very
slowly, millimeter by millimeter, at the same
slow pace that your eyes move along the
contours, paying attention to each detail
and observing the beauty of each form.
3. When you have finished the alphabets, low-
ercase and capitals, write your name three
times, very slowly, visualizing in your
mind's eye the ideal forms of the letters.
Then, turn and look at your writing. I think
you will be surprised. Even unable to see
what you were writing, and even with the
awkward position of Pure Contour Draw-
ing, you will find your handwriting im-
proved immediately, becausejow were paying
close attention to details of the letterforms. Notice
how beautifully spaced your letters are, and
how you stayed "on the line," even though
you couldn't see what you were doing.
4. Next, using the technique of Modified Con-
tour Drawing, repeat the exercise above.
Place your plastic grid or a sheet of lined
paper under your writing paper, to provide a
guideline. Place this book where you can see
the examples of alphabets. Choose one and
copy it letter by letter, drawing very slowly.
Then, write your signature again three
times, or copy a few sentences from the text.
When you have finished: Compare your last "draw-
ings" with the first. You will have made progress
already, simply by paying attention and slowing
down.
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
Negative-space letters.

Using the negative spaces of
handwriting
In Japanese as well as in European/American
calligraphy, the negative spaces of the letters are
as important as the lines we generally think of as
constituting the letters. Examine the alphabets,
first for enclosed, rounded negative spaces: a, b, d,
g, o, p, q.
1. Practice these rounded negative spaces. Try
not to think that you are drawing the letter o,
for example. Think—decide!—that you are
drawing the space inside and that it is a
beautiful shape, embraced by the line with
its precise closure. Write your signature
again, paying special attention to any
closed, rounded negative shapes.
2. Next search the lowercase alphabets for
closed, elongated negative shapes, some
above the line, some below: kf,g,j, k, I, q,y, z.
Draw these letters now, again focusing on
the negative shapes. Try to make all the
closed, elongated negative shapes the same
in size and in shape. Write your signature
again, paying special attention to closed,
elongated negative shapes.
3. Continue with each of the main shapes of
spaces—for example, the negative shape of
n, m, h, v, ID, y. These letters have mounded
negative spaces. Draw a series of m's and n's,
really concentrating on the negative
mounds. Make each negative mound the
same—same size, same shape.
4. Try the open negative space of the letters c, k,
v, iv, and 2. Check the margin model for the
exact shape of these spaces.
Fill in your loops to check their consistency of size.
Each letter needs its own negative space.
AFTERWORD: IS BEAUTIFUL HANDWRITING A LOST ART?
259

Decide on a slant, then use sighting to keep the slant
consistent.
j. Try the pointed negative space of the letters
i,j, t. Make sure that you place the dot over
the i so that it precisely lines up with the tip
of the letter.
6. Try the negative shapes of the "odd" letters
s, r, x. Note that each letter can be visualized
in negative space in two ways:
a. The interior negative spaces: the spaces
inside the letters.
b. The exterior negative spaces: the spaces
outside the letters.
For exterior negative spaces, imagine a format
drawn around each letter. For the "short" lower-
case letters, the basic format is a square. For let-
ters with ascenders ("tall" letters), imagine a
rectangle two boxes high, resting on the line.
For letters with descenders (g,y, etc.), the two-
box rectangle drops half of the rectangle below
the line.
The key point about the exterior negative
spaces is that each letter needs its space (its for-
mat). Notice how the slanted letter fits inside
the format. To practice exterior negative spaces,
obtain a sheet of graph paper for ready-made
formats.
Sighting a beautiful hand
In art, the word relationships expresses a constant
theme. As you have learned, art is relation-
ship—parts brought into beautiful relationships
with one another and with the whole, thus cre-
ating that most treasured attribute of art, unity.
The same holds true for the art of handwriting.
Precisely the same skills will shape your hand-
writing into closely related parts, fitted into a
rhythmic, coherent, unified whole, thus creating
260
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

beauty—beautiful handwriting.
Recall that in learning to draw, you learned
the skill of perceiving relationships of angles
(angles relative to the constants, vertical and
horizontal) and proportions (in relation to one
another). Let's apply that skill to handwriting.
The main task is first to decide on a slant—
an angle relative to vertical—and, second, to
use the slant without deviation. This gives your
handwriting a beautiful rhythm. More than any
other aspect, consistent slant will give your
writing coherence and unity.
It doesn't really matter what angle you
choose, but be aware that slant conveys a mes-
sage, subconsciously understood by your reader.
A slightly forward slant conveys energy and
measured, forward action. A backward slant
conveys caution, a conservative pace. An
extreme forward slant conveys eagerness, or
perhaps a bit of recklessness. Perfectly vertical
writing conveys sobriety, a bias toward formal-
ity.
(Please be assured that these ideas are not
taken from graphology. Graphologists have
gone off into fanciful theories; for example,
"Large loops on the letter y indicate that the
writer is greedy, because the loops look like
money bags." This is nonsense.)
Slant of line is part of the language of art
and, without question, the language of line used
in handwriting is related to the principles of
art—the basic precepts of composition, balance,
movement, rhythm, and placement. Just as art
expresses the intent of the artist, so does hand-
writing.
To practice consistent slant, place one sheet of ruled
paper over another.
Decide on the proportions that are pleasing to you,
then use them consistently.
AFTKRWORD: IS BEAUTIFUL HANDWRITING A LOST ART?
261

In drawing, different styles of line have names: the bold
line, the pure line, the repeated line, the lost-and-found
line, the nervous line, the hard line, the soft line, and
many others.
Consistency is the key
To control consistency of slant and proportions,
try the following exercises:
1. Place one sheet of lined paper over another,
with the lines of the bottom sheet running
vertically, at right angles to the horizontal
lines of the top sheet. Adjust the bottom
sheet until the angle seems right to you.
(You may want to try several different
slants.) Practice writing your signature, or
copying a paragraph of text, aligning the
slant to a perfectly consistent angle. At the
same time, focus on forming the negative
spaces of the letters.
2. The second part of sighting relationships is
sighting proportions. In handwriting, this
aspect is second in importance only to con-
sistent slant. The main task is to decide on
size relationships for your writing and to use
the proportions consistently.
There are several proportions you will need to
decide on. First, try out some alternatives, then
decide on a proportional space to leave between
words (the width of the letter ois one possible
choice). Then, use that proportional spacing
consistently. Decide on the size relationship
between short and tall letters, and use that rela-
tionship consistently. Decide on how far down
the descenders will drop relative to the tall let-
ters and the short letters, and use that relation-
ship consistently. The key word, of course, is
consistency. But also keep in mind that these rela-
tionships carry subtle messages, as you can see
in the examples on page 263.
3. Practice sighting angles and proportions.
Write your signature and copy a few sen-
262
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

tences from the text. As you write, allow
your eyes to scan the whole picture you are
creating with your "drawing" to check that
the relationships are consistent.
Seeing the lights and shadows in
handwriting
This aspect of handwriting emerges from the
"value" of your hand, the lightness or dark-
ness—that is, fineness or heaviness—of your
line, the closeness or distance of the individual
letters to one another.
Your writing tool, of course, affects the line.
The most important point here is that you
should use a certain pen or pencil by choice, not
by accident.
I find it so odd that art students are often
extremely fussy about having just the right pen-
cil, perfectly sharpened, for drawing. But when
it comes to writing, they will unthinkingly use
the dullest, scratchiest pencil or pen. Each activ-
ity deserves the same care. Drawing, sketching,
handwriting—it's all the same. In each, you are
expressing yourself.
Therefore, I recommend that you try out
the lightness or darkness of various kinds of
pencils or pens, then decide on one that fits your
style of writing and conveys the message you
want to send. A heavy, dark line, for example,
conveys power and muscular (or intellectual)
strength. A thin, fine, precise line conveys a fine
sensibility and elegance. A medium line that
varies in width (from a flexible pen point, for
example) conveys an aesthetic, almost poetic,
personality, a person aware of the nuances of
meaning in visual information. A wide, sturdy
Conscious choice of handwriting style gives you
control over the effect your writing has on others.
AFTERWORD: IS BEAUTIFUL HANDWRITING A LOST ART?
263

Handwriting can stand considerable mauling before it
becomes entirely illegible, but why make it so hard for
others to read?
line conveys a rugged, natural personality, close
to the earth.
Another means by which the lights and
shadows are conveyed in handwriting is through
the closeness of the letters. If you write the let-
ters of words very closely, with the lines of writ-
ing spaced closely, your writing will be dark and
close. If you write letterforms that are spaced
more openly and your lines are far apart, your
handwriting will be full of light and air.
Dark writing is neither better nor worse
than light, but it ;> different. Again, the point is:
What do you want to convey to the viewer of
your handwriting? Dark writing conveys inten-
sity and passion, like someone whispering
intensely in your ear. Light writing conveys
openness and enthusiasm, like someone calling
"Hello!" from across the room. The choice is
yours, but it should be a conscious choice.
264
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN
... gives ease and pleasure to your reader.

Summing up
Once you have absorbed and practiced the basic
fundamentals of beautiful handwriting, you will
be free to develop your individual style. As your
handwriting changes to a more artistic style, you
will find it interesting to observe the reactions
these changes cause. I think you will be pleas-
antly surprised.
I hope this brief review of the expressive
qualities of handwriting is helpful and inspiring.
I believe the Japanese are right in their insis-
tence on the importance of nonverbal messages
and in their conviction that the way we write
affects our personalities.
I urge my readers who are parents to let
teachers know that you are interested in beauty,
wherever it might be encouraged. Help teachers
to understand that you want your children to
experience handwriting as an art form so that
they will know the joy of creating beauty in
simple acts of daily life.
I believe teachers will welcome your inter-
est in beauty. Teachers, after all, are the very
ones whose eyes and sensibilities are assaulted
by ugly handwriting, the very ones who must
struggle with illegibility and with nonverbal
messages of disunity, carelessness, and indiffer-
ence.
Making one's handwriting more beautiful
may seem a very small way to increase the total
amount of beauty in the world. But, still, the
widest ocean is made up of very small drops of
AFTERWORD: IS BEAUTIFUL HANDWRITING A LOST ART?
z65

Postscript
For teachers and parents
As a teacher and a parent, I've had a very personal interest in
seeking new ways of teaching. Like most other teachers and par-
ents, I've been well aware—painfully so, at times—that the whole
teaching/learning process is extraordinarily imprecise, most of
the time a hit-and-miss operation. Students may not learn what
we think we are teaching them and what they do learn may not be
what we intended to teach them at all.
I remember one clear example of the problem of communi-
cating what is to be learned. You may have heard of or gone
through a similar experience with a student or your child. Years
ago, the child of a friend whom I was visiting arrived home from
his day at school, all excited about something he had learned. He
was in the first grade and his teacher had started the class on
reading lessons. The child, Gary, announced that he had learned
a new word. "That's great, Gary," his mother said. "What is it?"
He thought a moment, then said, "I'll write it down for you." On a
POSTSCRIPT
267

little chalkboard the child carefully printed, HOUSE. "That's
fine, Gary," his mother said. "What does it say?" He looked at the
word, then at his mother, and said matter-of-factly, "I don't
know."
The child apparently had learned what the word looked like—
he had learned the visual shape of the word perfectly. The
teacher, however, was teaching another aspect of reading—what
words mean, what words stand for or symbolize. As often hap-
pens, what the teacher had taught and what Gary had learned
were strangely incongruent.
As it turned out, my friend's son always learned visual mater-
ial best and fastest, a mode of learning consistently preferred by a
certain number of students. Unfortunately, the school world is
mainly a verbal, symbolic world, and learners like Gary must
adjust, that is, put aside their best way of learning and learn the
way the school decrees. My friend's child, fortunately, was able to
make this change, but how many other students are lost along the
way?
This forced shift in learning style must be somewhat compa-
rable to a forced change in handedness. It was a common practice
in former times to make individuals who were naturally left-
handed change over to right-handedness. In the future, we may
come to regard forcing children to change their natural learning
modes with the same dismay that we now regard the idea of forc-
ing a change in handedness. Soon we may be able to test children
to determine their best learning styles and choose from a reper-
toire of teaching methods to ensure that children learn both visu-
ally and verbally.
Teachers have always known that children learn in different
ways and, for a long time now, people who have the responsibility
for educating youngsters have hoped that the advances in brain
research would shed some light on how to teach all students
equally well. Until about fifteen years ago, new discoveries about
the brain seemed to be useful mainly to science. But these discov-
eries are now being applied to other fields and the recent research
that I've outlined in this book promises to provide a firm basis for
fundamental changes in techniques of education.
268
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

David Galin, among other researchers, has pointed out that
teachers have three main tasks: first, to train both hemispheres—
not only the verbal, symbolic, logical left hemisphere, which has
always been trained in traditional education, but also the spatial,
relational, holistic right hemisphere, which is largely neglected in
today's schools; second, to train students to use the cognitive style
suited to the task at hand; and third, to train students to be able to
bring both styles—both hemispheres—to bear on a problem in an
integrated manner.
When teachers can pair the complementary modes or fit one
mode to the appropriate task, teaching and learning will become
a much more precise process. Ultimately, the goal will be to
develop both halves of the brain. Both modes are necessary for
full human functioning and both are necessary for creative work
of all kinds, whether writing or painting, developing a new theory
in physics, or dealing with environmental problems.
This is a difficult goal to present to teachers, coming as it does
at a time when education is under attack from many quarters. But
our society is changing rapidly, and the difficulties of foreseeing
what kinds of skills future generations will require are increasing.
Although we have so far depended on the rational, left half of the
human brain to plan for our children's future and to solve the
problems they might encounter on the way to that future, the
onslaught of profound change is shaking our confidence in tech-
nological thinking and in the old methods of education. Without
abandoning training in traditional verbal and computational
skills, concerned teachers are looking for teaching techniques
that will enhance children's intuitive and creative powers, thus
preparing students to meet new challenges with flexibility, inven-
tiveness, and imagination and with the ability to grasp complex
arrays of interconnected ideas and facts, to perceive underlying
patterns of events, and to see old problems in new ways.
What can you, as parents and teachers, hope to accomplish
right now in terms of teaching both halves of children's brains?
First, it's important that you know the specialized functions and
styles of our hemispheres. Books such as this one can provide you
with a basic understanding of the theory and also with the expe-
POSTSCRIPT
269

rience of making cognitive shifts from one mode to another.
I believe that this personal experiential knowledge is extremely
important, perhaps essential, before teachers try to transmit the
knowledge to others.
Second, you need to help students to become aware of the
different ways they can respond to the same material. For exam-
ple, you might have students read one passage for facts and ask
for verbal or written responses. The same passage might then be
read for meaning or underlying content accessible through
imagery and metaphoric thought. For this learning mode, you
might require as a response a poem, painting, dance, riddle, pun,
fable, or song. As another example, certain kinds of arithmetic
and mathematics problems require linear, logical thought. Others
require imaginary rotations of forms in space or manipulations of
numbers, which are best accomplished by mentally producing
patterned visualizations. Try to discover—either through noting
your own thought processes or observing your students—which
tasks utilize the style of the right hemisphere, which require the
style of the left, and which require complementary or simultane-
ous styles.
Third, you might experiment with varying the conditions in
your classroom—at least those conditions over which you have
some control. For example, talking among students or constant
talking by a teacher probably tends to lock students fairly rigidly
into left-hemisphere mode. If you can cause your students to
make a strong shift to R-mode, you will have a condition that is
very rare in modern classrooms: silence. Not only will the stu-
dents be silent, they will be engaged in the task at hand, attentive
and confident, alert and content. Learning becomes pleasurable.
This aspect alone of R-mode is worth striving for. Be sure that
you yourself encourage and maintain this silence.
As additional suggestions, you might experiment with rear-
ranging the seating or the lighting. Physical movement, especially
patterned movement such as dancing, might help to produce the
cognitive shift. Music is conducive to R-mode shifts. Drawing and
painting, as you have seen in this book, produce strong shifts to
R-mode. You might experiment with private languages, perhaps
270
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

inventing a pictorial language with which the students can com-
municate in your classroom. I recommend using the chalkboard
as much as possible—not just to write words but also to draw pic-
tures, diagrams, illustrations, and patterns. Ideally, all information
should be presented in at least two modes: verbal and picto-
graphic. You might experiment with reducing the verbal content
of your teaching by substituting nonverbal communication when
that mode seems suitable.
Last, I hope you will consciously use your intuitive powers to
develop teaching methods and communicate those methods to
other teachers through workshops or teachers' journals. You are
probably already using many techniques—intuitively or by con-
scious design— that cause cognitive shifts. As teachers, we need
to share our discoveries, just as we share the goal of a balanced,
integrated, whole-brain future for our children.
As parents, we can do a great deal to further this goal by help-
ing our children develop alternate ways of knowing the world—
verbally/analytically and visually/spatially. During the crucial
early years, parents can help to shape a child's life in such a way
that words do not completely mask other kinds of reality. My
most urgent suggestions to parents are concerned with the use of
words, or rather, not using words.
I believe that most of us are too quick to name things when
we are with small children. By simply naming a thing and letting
it go at that when a child asks, "What is that?" we communicate
that the name or label is the most important thing, that naming is
sufficient. We deprive our children of their sense of wonder and
discovery by labeling and categorizing things in the physical
world. Instead of merely naming a tree, for example, try also
guiding your child through an exploration of the tree both physi-
cally and mentally. This exploration may include touching,
smelling, seeing from various angles, comparing one tree with
another, imagining the inside of the tree and the parts under-
ground, listening to the leaves, viewing the tree at different times
of the day or during different seasons, planting its seeds, observ-
ing how other creatures—birds, moths, bugs—use the tree, and
so on. After discovering that every object is fascinating and com-
POSTSCRIPT
271

Drawings by a fourth-grade
student: Three lessons, April 15 to
April 19,1977. Instructional period:
four days.
plex, a child will begin to understand that the label is only a small
part of the whole. Thus taught, a child's sense of wonder will sur-
vive, even under our modern avalanche of words.
In terms of encouraging your child's artistic abilities, I rec-
ommend providing a very young child with plenty of art materi-
als and the kind of perceptual experiences described above. Your
child will progress through the developmental sequence of child
art in a relatively predictable manner, just as children progress
through other sequential stages. If your child asks for help with a
drawing, your response should be, "Let's go look at what you're
trying to draw." New perceptions will then become part of the
symbolic representations.
Both teachers and parents can help with the problems of ado-
lescent artists, which I discussed in the text. As I mentioned, real-
istic drawing is a stage that children need to pass through at
around age ten. Children want to learn to see, and they deserve
all the help they require. The sequence of exercises in this
book—including the information on hemisphere functions in
somewhat simplified form—can be used with children as young
as eight or nine. Subjects that suit the interests of adolescents (for
example, well-drawn realistic cartoons of heroes and heroines in
action poses) can be used for upside-down drawing. Negative
space and contour drawing also appeal to children at this age, and
they readily incorporate the techniques into their drawing. (See
the illustration of a ten-year-old fourth-grade student's progress
over four days of instruction.) Portrait drawing has a special
appeal for this age group, and adolescents can do quite accom-
plished drawings of their friends or family members. Once they
overcome their fear of failure at drawing, youngsters will work
hard to perfect their skills, and success enhances their self-con-
cept and self-confidence.
But more important for the future, drawing, as you have
learned through the exercises in this book, is an effective way of
gaining access to and control over the functions of the right hemi-
sphere. Learning to see through drawing may help children to
later become adults who will put the whole brain to use.
272
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

For art students
Many successful contemporary artists believe that realistic draw-
ing skills are not important. It is true, generally speaking, that
contemporary art does not necessarily require drawing skill, and
good art—even great art—has been produced by modern artists
who can't draw. They are able to produce good art, I suspect,
because their aesthetic sensibilities have been cultivated by
means other than the traditional, basic teaching methods of art
schools: drawing and painting from the model, the still life, and
the landscape.
Since contemporary artists often dismiss drawing ability as
unnecessary, beginning art students are placed in a double bind.
Very few students feel secure enough about their creative abili-
ties and about their chances for success in the art world to dis-
pense altogether with schooling in art. Yet when they encounter
the kind of modern art shown in galleries and museums—art that
doesn't appear to require traditional skills at all—they feel that
traditional methods of instruction don't apply to their goals. To
break the double bind, students often avoid learning to draw real-
istically and settle as quickly as possible into narrow conceptual
styles, emulating contemporary artists who often strive for a
unique, repeatable, recognizable "signature" style.
The English artist David Hockney calls this narrowing of
options a trap for artists (see the quotation in the margin). It is
surely a dangerous trap for art students, who too often force
themselves to settle into repetitive motifs. They may try to make
statements with art before they know what they have to say.
Based on my teaching experience with art students at various
skill levels, I'd like to make several recommendations to all art
students, especially beginning art students. First, don't be afraid
to learn to draw realistically. Gaining skills in drawing, the basic
skill of all art, has never blocked the sources of creativity. Picasso,
who could draw like an angel, is a prime illustration of this fact,
and the history of art is replete with others. Artists who learn to
draw well don't always produce boring and pedantic realistic art.
The artists who do produce such art would no doubt produce
"To me, moving into more natural-
ism was a freedom. I thought, if I
want to I could paint a portrait;
this is what I mean by freedom.
Tomorrow if I want, I could get up,
I could do a drawing of someone, I
could draw my mother from mem-
ory, I could even paint a strange
little abstract picture. It would all
fit in to my concept of painting as
an art. A lot of painters can't do
that—their concept is completely
different. It's too narrow; they
make it much too narrow. A lot of
them, like Frank Stella, who told
me so, can't draw at all. But there
are probably older painters, Eng-
lish abstract painters, who were
trained to draw. Anybody who'd
been in art school before I had
must have done a considerable
amount of drawing. To me, a lot of
painters were trapping themselves;
they were picking such a narrow
aspect of painting and specializing
in it. And it's a trap. Now there's
nothing wrong with the trap if you
have the courage to just leave it,
but that takes a lot of courage."
— David Hockney
POSTSCRIPT
273

boring and pedantic abstract or nonobjective art as well. Drawing
skill will never hinder your work but will certainly help it.
Second, be clear in your mind about why learning to draw
well is important. Drawing enables you to see in that special,
epiphanous way that artists see, no matter what style you choose
to express your special insight. Your goal in drawing should be to
encounter the reality of experience—to see ever more clearly,
ever more deeply. True, you may sharpen your aesthetic sensibil-
ities in ways other than drawing, such as meditation, reading, or
travel. But it's my belief that for an artist these other ways are
chancier and less efficient. As an artist you will be most likely to
use a visual means of expression, and drawing sharpens the visual
senses.
And last, draw every day. Carrying a small sketchbook will
help you remember to draw frequently. Draw anything—an ash-
tray, a half-eaten apple, a person, a twig. I repeat this recommen-
dation given in the last chapter of the text because for art students
it is especially important. In a way, art is like athletics: If you don't
practice, the visual sense quickly gets flabby and out of shape.
The purpose of your daily sketchbook drawing is not to produce
finished drawings, just as the the purpose of jogging is not to get
somewhere. You must exercise your vision without caring overly
much about the products of your practice. You can periodically
cull the best examples from your drawings, throwing out the rest
or even throwing out everything. In your daily drawing sessions,
the desired goal should be to see ever more deeply.
2 7 4 
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Glossary
Abstract Art. A translation into drawing, painting, sculpture,
or design of a real-life object or experience. Usually
implies the isolation, emphasis, or exaggeration of some
aspect of the artist's perception of reality. Should not be
confused with nonobjective art.
Awareness. Consciousness; the act of "taking account" of an
object, person, or the surroundings. Possible synonyms
are seeing or cognition.
Basic Unit. A "starting shape" or "starting unit" chosen from
within a composition for the purpose of maintaining
correct size relationships in a drawing. The Basic Unit is
always termed "One" and becomes part of a ratio, as in
"1:2."
Blank. An egg-shaped oval, drawn on paper to represent the
basic shape of the human head. Because the human
skull, seen from the side, is a different shape than the
skull seen from the front, the side-view blank is a some-
what differently shaped oval than front-view blank.
Central Axis. Human features are more or less symmetrical
and are bisected by an imaginary vertical line in the
middle of the face. This line is called the central axis. It
is used in drawing to determine the tilt of the head and
to place the features.
Cerebral Hemispheres. The outermost part of the fore-
brain, clearly separated into two halves on the right and
left sides of the brain. Consists essentially of the cere-
bral cortex, corpus callosum, basal ganglia, and limbic
system.
Cerebrum. The main division of the brain in vertebrates,
consisting of two hemispheres. It is the last part of the
brain to evolve and is of critical importance in all kinds
of mental activity.
Cognitive Shift. A transformation from one mental state to
another, e.g., from L-mode to R-mode or vice versa.
Composition. An ordered relationship among the parts or
elements of a work of art. In drawing, the arrangement
of forms and spaces within the format.

Conceptual Images. Imagery from internal sources (the
"mind's eye") rather than from external, perceived
sources; usually simplified images; often abstract rather
than realistic.
Contour Line. In drawing, a line that represents the shared
edges of a form, a group of forms, or forms and spaces.
Corpus Callosum. A massive, compact bundle of axons con-
necting the right and left cerebral cortices. The corpus
callosum allows the two halves, or hemispheres, of the
cerebral cortex to communicate directly with one
another.
Creativity. The ability to find new solutions to a problem or
new modes of expression; the bringing into existence of
something new to the individual and to the culture.
Writer Arthur Koestler added the requirement that the
new creation should be socially useful.
Crosshatching. A series of intersecting sets of parallel lines
used to indicate shading or volume in a drawing.
Edge. In drawing, the place where two things meet (for
example, where the sky meets the ground); the line of
separation between two shapes or a space and a shape.
Expressive Quality. The slight individual differences in the
way each of us perceives and represents our perceptions
in a work of art. These differences express an individ-
ual's inner reactions to the perceived stimulus as well as
the unique "touch" arising from individual physiological
motor differences.
Eye Level, In perspective drawing, a horizontal line on
which lines above and below it in the horizontal plane
appear to converge. In portrait drawing, the propor-
tional line that divides the head in half horizontally; the
location of the eyes at this halfway mark on the head.
Foreshortening. A way to portray forms on a two-dimen-
sional surface so that they appear to project from or
recede behind a flat surface; a means of creating the illu-
sion of spatial depth in figures or forms.
Format. The particular shape of a drawing or painting sur-
face—rectangular, circular, triangular, etc.; the propor-
tion of the surface, e.g., the relationship of the length to
the width in a rectangular surface.
Grid. Evenly spaced lines, running horizontally and verti-
cally at right angles, that divide a drawing or painting
into small squares or rectangles. Often used to enlarge a
drawing or to aid in seeing spatial relationships.
Hemispheric Lateralization. The differentiation of the two
cerebral hemispheres with respect to function and mode
of cognition.
Holistic. In terms of cognitive functions, the simultaneous
processing of an array of information in a total configu-
ration as opposed to sequential processing of its sepa-
rate parts.
Image. Verb: to call up in the mind a mental copy of some-
thing not present to the senses; see in the "mind's eye."
Noun: a retinal image; the optical image of external
objects received by the visual system and interpreted by
the brain.
Imagination. A recombination of mental images from past
experiences into a new pattern.
Intuition. Direct and apparently unmediated knowledge; a
judgment, meaning, or idea that occurs to a person
without any known process of reflective thinking. The
judgment is often reached as a result of minimal cues
and seems to "come from nowhere."
Key. In drawing, the lightness or darkness of an image. A
high-key drawing is light or pale in value; a low-key
drawing is dark or low in value.
Learning. Any relatively permanent change in behavior as a
result of experience or practice.
Left Hemisphere. The left half (oriented according to your
left) of the cerebrum. For most right-handed individuals
and a large proportion of left-handed individuals, verbal
functions are in the left hemisphere.
L-Mode. A state of information processing characterized as
linear, verbal, analytic, and logical.
Negative Spaces. The areas around positive forms that share
edges with the forms. Negative spaces are bounded by
the outer edges by the format. "Interior" negative spaces
canbepartof positive forms: For example, the whites of
the eyes can be regarded as interior negative spaces use-
ful for drawing the irises.
276
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Nonobjective Art. Art that makes no attempt to reproduce
the appearance of real-life objects or experiences or to
produce the illusion of reality. Also called "nonrepre-
sentational art."
Perception. The awareness, or the process of becoming
aware, of objects, relations, or qualities—either internal
or external to the individual—by means of the senses
and under the influence of previous experiences.
Picture Plane. An imaginary construct of a transparent
plane, like a framed window, that always remains paral-
lel to the vertical plane of the artist's face. The artist
draws on paper what he or she sees beyond the plane as
though the view were flattened on the plane. Inventors
of photography used this concept to develop the first
cameras.
Realistic Art. The objective depiction of objects, forms, and
figures attentively perceived. Also called "naturalism."
Right Hemisphere. The right half (oriented according to
your right) of the cerebrum. For most right-handed
individuals and a large proportion of left-handed indi-
viduals, spatial, relational functions are in the right
hemisphere.
R-Mode. A state of information processing characterized as
simultaneous, holistic, spatial, and relational.
Scanning. In drawing, checking points, distances, degrees of
angles relative to vertical or horizontal, relative sizes,
etc.
Sighting. In drawing, measuring relative sizes by means of a
constant measure (the pencil held at arm's length is the
most usual measuring device); determining relative
points in a drawing—the location of one part relative to
some other part. Also, determining angles relative to the
constant's vertical and horizontal.
Split-Brain Patients. Individuals who had been suffering
from intractable epileptic seizures and whose medical
problems were relieved by a surgical operation. The
procedure separates the two hemispheres by severing
the corpus callosum. The procedure is rarely done and
split-brain patients are few in number.
States of Consciousness. A largely unresolved concept,
consciousness is used in this book to mean the aware-
ness, continually changing, of what passes in one's own
mind. An alternate state of consciousness is one that is
perceived as noticeably different from ordinary, waking
consciousness. Familiar alternate states are daydream-
ing, sleep dreaming, and meditation.
Symbol System. In drawing, a set of symbols that are consis-
tently used together to form an image, for example, a
figure. The symbols are usually used in sequence, one
appearing to call forth another, much in the manner of
writing familiar words, in which writing one letter leads
to writing the next. Symbol systems in drawn forms are
usually set in childhood and often persist throughout
adulthood unless modified by learning new ways to
draw.
Value. In art, the darkness or lightness of tones or colors.
White is the lightest, or highest, value; black is the dark-
est, or lowest, value.
Visual Information Processing. The use of the visual sys-
tem to gain information from external sources and the
interpretation of that sensory data by means of cogni-
tion.
Zen. A system of thought that emphasizes a form of medita-
tion called zazen. Zazen begins with concentration,
often on puzzles wholly impervious to solution through
reason. Concentration leads to samadhi, a "state of one-
ness" in which the meditator gains insight into the unity
of things in the world. The meditator strives to move
through further stages to the final stage of Zen, satori, or
"no mind," a brilliantly clear state of mind in which the
details of every phenomenon are perceived, yet without
evaluation or attachment.
277

Bibliography
Albersjosef. The Interaction of Color. New Haven: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 1962.
Arguelles,J. The Transformative Vision, Berkeley, Calif.:
Shambhala Publications, 1975.
Arnheim, R. Art and Visual Perception. Berkeley, Calif.: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1954.
Ayrton, M. Golden Sections. London: Methuen, 1957.
Berger, J. Ways of Seeing. New York: Viking Press, 1972.
Bergquist,J. W. The Use of Computers in EducatingBoth Halves of
the Brain. Proceedings: Eighth Annual Seminar for
Directors of Academic Computational Services, August
1977. P.O. Box 1036, La Canada, Calif.
Blakemore, C. Mechanics of the Mind. Cambridge; At the Uni-
versity Press, 1977.
BlissJ., andj. Morella. TheLeft-Handers' Handbook. New York:
A & W Visual Library, 1980.
BogenJ. E. "The Other Side of the Brain." Bulletin of the Los
Angeles Neurological Societies34 (1969): 73—105".
. "Some Educational Aspects of Hemispheric Spe-
cialization." UCLA Educator 17 (1975): 24-32.
BrunerJ. S. "The Creative Surprise." In Contemporary
Approaches to Creative Education, edited by H. E. Gruber,
G. Terrell, and M. Wertheimer. New York: Atherton
Press, 1962.
. On Knowing: Essays for the Left Hand. New York:
Atheneum, ip6>.
Buswell, Guy T. Hoiv People Look at Pictures. Chicago: Chicago
University Press, 193$".
Bu/.an, T. Use Both Sides of Your Brain. New York: E. P. Durton,
1976.
Carra, C. "The Quadrant of the Spirit." Valori Plastici 1
(April—May 1919): 2.
Carroll, L., pseud. See Dodgson, C. L.
Collier, G. Form, Space, and Vision. Englewood Cliffs, NJ.:
Prentice-Hall, 1963.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
279

Connolly, C. The Unquiet Grave: A Word Cycle by Palinurus.
New York: Harper and Brothers, 194J.
Corballis, M., and I. Beale. The Psychology of Left and Right.
Hillsdale, NJ.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1976.
Cottrell, Sir Alan. "Emergent Properties of Complex Sys-
tems." In The Encyclopedia of Ignorance, edited by R. Dun-
can and M. Weston-Smith. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1977.
Critchley, M. Music and the Brain. Springfield, 111.: Charles C.
Thomas, 1977.
Davis, Stuart. Quoted in "The Cube Root." In ArtNewsXLl,
'943.22~23-
Delacroix, Eugene. In Artists on Art, edited by Robert Gold-
water and Marco Treves. London: Pantheon Books, 1945.
Descartes, Rene. Fourth Discourse on Method, Optics, Geometry,
and Meteorology, 1637.
Dodgson, C. L. [pseud. Carroll, L.] The Complete Works of
Lewis Carroll, edited by A. Woollcott. New York: Modern
Library, 1936.
Edwards, B. "Anxiety and Drawing." Master's thesis, Califor-
nia State University at Northridge, 1972.
. "An Experiment in Perceptual Skills in Drawing."
Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Los Ange-
les, 1976.
Edwards, B., and D. Narikawa. Art, Grades Four to Six. Los
Angeles: Instructional Objectives Exchange, 1974.
English, H. B., and Ava C. English. A Comprehensive Dictionary
of Psychological and Psychoanalytical Terms. New York:
David McKay Company, Inc., 1974.
Ernst, M. Beyond Painting. Translated by D. Tanning. New
York: Wittenborn, Schultz, 1948.
Ferguson, M. The Brain Revolution. New York: Taplinger Pub-
lishing, 1973.
Flam, J. Matisse on Art. New York: Phaidon, 1973.
Franck, F. The Zen of Seeing. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1973.
Franco, L., and R. VV. Sperry, "Hemisphere Lateralization for
Cognitive Processing of Geometry," Neuropsychologia,
1977, Vol. 15,107—14.
Friend, D. Composition: A Painter's Guide to Basic Problems and
Solutions. New York: Watson-Guptill Publications, 1975-.
Gardner, H. The Shattered Mind: The Person After Damage. New
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 197J.
Gazzaniga, M. "The Split Brain in Man." In Perception: Mecha-
nisms and Models, edited by R. Held and W. Richards, p.
33. San Francisco, Calif: W. H. Freeman, 1972.
Gladwin, T. "Culture and Logical Process." In Explorations in
Cultural Anthropology, edited by W. H. Goodenough, pp.
167-77. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964.
Goldstein, N. The Art of Responsive Drawing. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice-Hall, 1973.
Gregory, R. L. Eye and Brain: The Psychology of Seeing. 2nd ed.,
rev. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1973.
Grosser, M. The Painter's Eye. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1951.
Hadamard, J. An Essay on the Psychology of Invention in the Math-
ematical Field. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 194J.
Hall, E. T. The Silent Language. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday,
•9J9-
Hearn, Lafcadio. Exotics and Retrospectives. New Jersey: Litera-
ture House, 1968.
Henri, R. The Art Spirit. Philadelphia, Pa.:J. B. Lippincott,
192;.
Herrigel, E. Quoted in The Joy of Drawing. London: The Oak
Tree Press, 1961.
Hill, E. The Language of Drawing. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1966.
Hockney, D. David Hockney, edited by N. Stangos. New York:
Harry N. Abrams, 1976.
Hoffman, Howard. Vision & the Artof'Drawing. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice-Hall, 1989.
Huxley, A. The Art of Seeing. New York: Harper and Brothers,
1942.
. The Doors of Perception.New York: Harper and Row,
'954-
280
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

lames, W. The Varieties of Religious Experience. New York:
Longmans, Green, 1902.
[aynes, J. The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the
Bicameral Mind. Boston: Houghton Mifnin, 1976.
Jung, C. G. Man and His Symbols. Garden City, N.Y.: Double-
day, 1964.
Kandinsky, W. Point and Line to Plane. Chicago: Solomon
Guggenheim Foundation, 1945.
. Concerning the Spiritual in Art. New York: Wittenborn,
'947-
Keller, Helen. The World I Live In. New York: The Century
Company, 1908.
Kipling, R. RudyardKipling's Verse. London: Hodder &
Stoughton, 1927.
Koestler, A. The Sleepwalkers. London: Hutchinson, 1959.
Krishnamurti,J. The Awakening of Intelligence. New York:
Harper and Row, 1973.
. "Self Knowledge." In The First and Last Freedom, p. 43.
New York: Harper and Row, 954.
. You Are the World. New York: Harper and Row, 1972.
LevyJ. "Differential Perceptual Capacities in Major and
Minor Hemispheres," Proceedings of the National Academy
of Science, Vol. 61,1968, IIJI.
. "Psychobiological Implications of Bilateral Asym-
metry." In Hemisphere Function in the Human Brain, edited
by S.J. Dimond and J. G. Beaumont. New York: John
Wiley and Sons, 1974.
LevyJ., C. Trevarthen, and R. W. Sperry. "Perception of
Bilateral Chimeric Figures Following Hemispheric
Deconnexion," Brain, 95,1972,61—78.
Lindaman, E. B. Thinkingin Future Tense. Nashville: Broad-
man Press, 1978.
Lindstrom, M. Children's Art: A Study of Normal Development in
Children's Modes of Visualization. Berkeley, Calif.: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1957.
Lord, J. A Giacometti Portrait. New York: Museum of Modern
Art, 11)6$.
Lowenfeld, V. Creative and Mental Grcnvth. New York: Macmil-
lan, 1947.
Matisse, H. Notes d'un peintre. In Lagranderevue. Paris, 1908.
McFeeJ. Preparation for Art. San Francisco, Calif: Wadsworch
Publishing, 1961.
McKim, R. Experiences in Visual Thinking. Monterey, Calif.:
Brooks/Cole Publishing, 1972.
Munsell, Albert. A Color Notation. Baltimore: Munsell Color
Co., 1926.
Newton, Isaac. Opticks, Book 1, Part 2.1st ed., London, 1704.
Nicolaides, K. The Natural Way to Draw. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1941.
Ornstein, R. The Psychology of Consciousness. 2nd ed., rev. New
York: Harcourt BraceJovanovich, 1977.
Orwell, G. "Politics and the English Language." In In Front of
Your Nose, Vol. 4 of The Collected Essays of George Orwell,
edited by S. Orwell and I. Angus, p. 138. New York: Har-
court Brace and World, 1968.
Paivio, A. Imagery and Verbal Processes.New York: Holt, Rine-
hart and Winston, 1971.
ParedesJ., and M. Hepburn. "The Split-Brain and the Cul-
ture-Cognition Paradox." Current Anthropology 17 (March
1976): 1.
Pascal, B. Pensees: Thoughts on Religion and Other Objects, edited
by H. S. Thayer and E. B. Thayer. New York: Washing-
ton Square Press, 1965.
PiagetJ. The Language and Thought of a Child. New York:
Meridian, i95"J.
Pirsig, R. Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance. New York:
William Morrow, 1974.
Ponomarev, L. In Quest of the Quantum. Trans, by N. Wein-
stein. Moscow: Mir Publishers, 1973.
Reed, William. KLA Practical Guide for Westerners. Tokyo:
Japan Publications, 1986.
Rock, I. "The Perception of Disoriented Figures." In Image,
Object, and Illusion, edited by R. M. Held. San Francisco:
W. H. Freeman, 1971.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
281

Rodin, A. Quoted in The Joy of Draining. London: The Oak
Tree Press, 1961.
Samples, B. TheMetaphoricMind. Reading, Mass.: Addison-
Wesley Publishing, 1976.
. The Wholeschool Book. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wes-
ley Publishing, 1977.
Samuels, M., and N. Samuels. Seeing with the Mind's Eye. New
York: Random House, 1975.
Sargeant, Walter. The Enjoyment and Use of Color. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons, 192;.
Shah, I. The Exploits of the Incomparable Mulla Nasrudin. New
York: E. P. Dutton, 1972.
Shepard, R. N. Visual Learning, Thinking, and Communication,
edited by B. S. Randhawa and W. E. Coffman. New York:
Academic Press, 1978.
Singer, J. How to Paint in Pastels. New York: Watson-Guptil
Publishers, 1976.
Smith, Peter. "The Dialectics of Color." In Color for Architec-
ture, T. Porter and B. Mikellides. New York: Van Nos-
trand Reinhold, 1976.
Sperry, R. W. "Hemisphere Disconnection and Unity in Con-
scious Awareness." American Psychologist!^ (1968): 723—33.
. "Lateral Specialization of Cerebral Function in the
Surgically Separated Hemispheres," in The Psychophysi-
ology of Thinking, edited by F. J. McGuigan and R. A.
Schoonover. New York: Academic Press, 1973,209-29.
Sperry, R. W., M. S. Gazzaniga, and J. E. Bogen, "Interhemi-
spheric Relationships: the Neocortical Commissures;
Syndromes of Hemisphere Disconnection," Handbook of
Clinical Neurology, edited by P. J. Vinken and G. W.
Bruyn. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co.,
1969,273-89.
Stein, G. Picasso. London: B. T. Batsford, 1938.
Suzuki, D. "Satori." [n The Gospel According to Zen, edited by R.
Sohl and A. Carr. New York: New American Library,
1970.
Tart, C. T. "Putting the Pieces Together." In Alternate States of
Consciousness, edited by N. E. Zinberg, 204-6. New York:
Macmillan, 1977.
. States of Consciousness. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1975.
Taylor, J. Design and Expression in the Visual Arts. New York:
Dover Publications, 1964.
Verity, Enid. Color Observed. New York: Van Nostrand Rein-
hold and Company, 1980.
Walter, W. G. The Living Brain. New York: W. W. Norton, 1963.
Wittrock, M. C, et al. The Human Brain. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1977.
Zaidel, E., and R. Sperry. "Memory Impairment after Com-
misurotomy in Man." Brain 97 (1974): 263-72.
282
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Index
Page numbers in italics
refer to illustrations.
abstraction, 80,142,170
adolescents, 69,70, 75-81, yS, jj>, 121,272
after-image, 237
Age of Spiritual Machines, The (Kurzweil),
XXIII
Albers, Josef, 239,240
Alberti, Leone Battista, 96,102
Allan, Heather, 23-24, 24
analog drawing, xiv, xvi
Anglo-Saxon, 36
animals, 29,30,46
Archimedes, 39
Army poster, 60
Arnold, Elizabeth, 194
artists, 2,3,4, 5, 7,54,55, 62, 63,128,162,
206
drawing as metaphor for, 23-24
left-handed, 43
police, 170
Renaissance, 139,142,143-45, H3< H4-
213,217,252
Art of PaintingAfter the Italian Manner,
7"fo(Elsum), 96
Aztecs, 43
B
ball-and-stick letters, 255,2jj
Ball-Kingston, Cindy, 1J4
Basic Unit, 140,141,146-49,146,14-/, 14S,
151,153,154,180,183
in composition, 116,123—26,124,12J, 126,
129—30,131
definition of, 124—26
Beckett, Samuel, 122,123
Berberet, Gary, 243
Bergland, Richard, xx
Bergquist, J. William, 38
Blakemore, Colin, 80
blanks, 168-70,16S, 173-74,174,210-13, z"-
212,222
Bloomer, Carolyn M., 196
Bogenjoseph E., 32,37
bold line, 2j
283

Bomeisler, Brian, 23-24,24, up, 190,203,
218, 223, 226
brain, hemispheres of, xn, XVII, XX,
XXII-XXV, 7,8,28-47,^0,81, 82, 151,
162,165,197-98,248-50
color and, 231-32
conflict between, 33,34
corpus callosum of, xxiv-xxv, 30,
crossover connections of, 29,29, 35,236
cultural customs and, 36-37
developmental changes in, 63
as dominant vs. subordinate, 30—31,32,
35,38, 46, 80,121, 236
educational system and, xxiv, 31,
39-41,268-72
information processing in, 32-31,
injuries of, 30,162,198
language functions in, 30,32, 42-43,
62
lateralization of, 42-43,63-65,88,121
in linguistic terminology, 35-37,38
location controversy regarding, XXII,
xxiv
politics and, 36
reality perception in, 32,35
in split-brain studies, 31—35,38, 46
ways of knowing in, 37,38
jwa/johandedness; L-mode; R-mode
Broekhuijsen, Jerome, 191
broken line, 2j
Bruer,John X, xxiv
Buhler, Karl, 81
Burbank, Brenda, 72
Buswell, Guy X, 236
bypassing technique, 188
C
Caldwell, Randa, IJS
California Institute of Xechnology,
31—34
calligraphy, 25, 204
Japanese, 256,256,259
Carpenter (Van Gogh), 170-72,172
Carra, Carlo, 63
Carroll, Lewis, 41,42,4762, 84
cartoons, 72,76,77, 232
cave painting, 2,94
central axis, 168, iifS, 210,211, 211,215, 2ij, 216
Cezanne, Paul, 122-23,122
Chardin,Jean-Baptiste—Simeon, 243
children, 7, 68-85, '7°> 267-72
adolescent, 69,70,75-81,78,79,111, 272
composition by, 74—75,78,120—21,121
infants, 70-71
portrait views preferred by, 213-14
tiered perspective used by, 142
see also symbol system, childhood
Children's Art (Lindstrom), 6<), 77
Child Seated in a Wicker Cbair(HomeT),
'35
chopped-offskull error, 167-74, tfy «$
169,170,171,172,774,175
circular form, 71
cityscapes, 240—41
Clottes, J., 94
cognitive neuroscience, xxii-xxm
Collier, Graham, 145
color, xxi, 142,157,196, 230—45
after-image of, 237
balanced, 232,233,238,240
basics of, 232-34
brain hemispheres and, 231—32
in cityscapes, 240-41
complementary, 233,236—37,238
cool vs. warm, 235,236,238
emotional response to, 231-32
exercise for, 237-40
harmonious, 232, 238,239, 240,242
hue of, 232,233,235,237
intensity of, 231,232,233, 238,242
pastels and, 242-45
primary, 235
psychological meanings of, 243
secondary, 235
supplies for, 233-34
ugliness and, 240-41
value of, 232,233,238,239,240
wheel of, 234-37,234,23;
colored paper, 233-34, 237-40
colored pencils, 233, 235,237-40
284
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

Compltte Letters of Vincent Van Gogh, The,
102, toj
complexity, stage of, 7^—77,76, 77
composition, 12,74,75, 113,119-26,140,
154,227
Basic Unit in, 116,123-26,124,12j, 126,
129-30,131
by children, 74-75, 78,120-21, m
definition of, 119,120
format in, 120-23,121,122,124,126,127,
'3°. '33
unified, 120,123
computers, xxiii, 28,38
Connolly, Cyril, 40
consciousness, altered states of, 4,5,46,
54,61,62-63,84-85,91,177
contour drawing, 88—113, n7
of handwriting, 257—58, 2j8
see also modified contour drawing;
pure contour drawing
copying of masterworks, 178-80,
200—204
corporate training seminars, xm,
XIV-XVI
corpus callosum, xxiv-xxv.^o, 31-35
Courbet, Gustave, 196,197,200-204
crafts projects, 70
Cranach, Lucas, 214
creativity, 3,5, 6-8,9,40
definition of, 38—39,210
Crick, F.H.C., 28
crosshatching, 195, 207—9, z07> 2°8> z09
Crowe, Dana, /jy
cubes, 79-80,79
cubism, 80
D
Dame, Don, 239, 242
Dancer Adjusting Her Slipper (Degas), 1x7,
233
"da Vinci device," 251-52
Davis, Stuart, 241
Degas, Edgar, 1J7,233,237-39,250
Delacroix, Eugene, 245
DePhillippo, Sandy, 134
"Dialectics of Color, The" (Smith), 232
Draughtsman Making a Perspective Draw-
ingofa ^tfWM(Durer), 143—45,
'43-'44
drawing, 2-9,45,54-55,248-52
altered states of consciousness in, 4,5
by animals, 28
by art students, 273—74
creativity of, 6—8,9
definition of, 99, no
difficulty at start of, 105,123-26
handedness and, 45—46
as learnable skill, 3
as magical ability, 2—3
as metaphor for artist, 23-24
in public places, 152, 241
realistic, 8
seeing and, 4
working up of, 132
drawing materials, 13—14, y
Drawing on the Artist Within (Edwards),
XIV
driving, xvm, xix, 138
freeway, 5,84
Diirer, Albrecht, 6,80, 82, 122-23, E2> >7Z>
•74
picture-plane device of, 102,143-45,
'44. '4J
edges, xiv, xvm, xix, xxi, 14,75,78,116,
138,149,150,157,163,177,196
in contour drawing, 90,92,94-96,
97—98,108,109,117
definition of, 94-95, "9
of format, see formats
shared, 95,96,109,119,124
educational system, xxiv, 31,39-41,
Egyptians, ancient, 142
Einstein, Albert, 56-57, p,$8
Elderfieldjohn, 125
Elgart, Elliot, 104
Elsum, John, <)6
English, H. B. and Ava C, 231
eraser, 52,108,109,132
as drawing tool, 196,201,201
Ernst, Max, 91
esthetic response, 232, 236
expressiveness, xiv, xix, 21-24,73>
170,211, 224
nonverbal, 21—23, 256
eyeballing, 151,156
eyedness, 42
2&S

Fabric of Mind, The (Bergland), XX
facial recognition, xxm, 8, 162, 165
Feline Felicity (Sheeler), 204, 20J, 209
figure drawings, 208,209
by children, 71-73,7/, 74 73,78
sighting in, 1J7
Firmin, Lisbeth, 134, ifii
Flagg, James Montgomery, 60
FlamJ., xxm
flowers, xxv
footedness, 42
foreshortening, 60,97-98,123, rjj, 143-45,
'44. <$>> ¥• <57
formats, 97,106,108,119, 150, 152,153,179
composition within, 120—23,121,122,
124,126,127,130,133
definition of, 96,120
shapes of, 120,120
Four Heads (Diirer), 174
fractals, 93
Franck, Frederick, 4, 213
French,36
Freud, Sigmund, 45
Fuseli, Henry, 194,195-96, ipj
G
Galin, David, 38,269
Gardner, Howard, 6
Gazzaniga, Michael S., 32,33
genetic factors, 42
George III, King of England, 2jS
German horse and rider drawing, 60, 64
gestalt, XIV~XVI, xvm, xix, 96,117,162,
163,198
gestures, 38
Girl in a Flowered Hat (Huyung), 239-40
Gladwin, Thomas, 53
global (whole) skills, xvn-xx, A7A', 158,
210
component skills of, xvm-xx, 96,117
Goethejohann, 235, 2jj
Goldwyn, Samuel, 6
grid, 52,96, 99—101,107,143,144
Grosser, Maurice, 4
H
Halsman, Philippe, J6~,j8
handedness, 30,36,37,40,41—46, 43
ambidexterity in, 41,42,43,45
changed from left to right, 36,42, 43,
45,268
drawing and, 45-46
right/left confusion in, 45
hands, 29,35-37,72,^,?
foreshortened, 97-98
as "hard to draw," 76
in linguistic terminology, 35—36,37
modified contour drawing of, 97—99,
P7,105—12,107,108, lop, m, 112
pre-instruction drawing of, 15,16
pure contour drawing of, 89-92
in split-brain studies, 33-34
handwriting, xxi, 3,2.53—66
consistency of, 262-63
contour drawing of, 257—58,2^8
forging of, J7,2y
hand position in, 43
left-hand preference for, 41-42
lights and shadows in, 263-64
as line, 21—23,1SS~S^>
mirror, 42
negative spaces of, 2j8,259—60,2jp
sighting of, 260-63, 260,261
slant of, z6o, 261, 261,262
upside-down, J7,2y
Harking, Brian, IOJ
Head of Young Girl (Redon), 243,244
Head of a Youth with a Red Cap (Cranach),
214
Hearn, Lafcadio, 232
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 45
Henri, Robert, 5,8, $$, 94,156,225
Hepburn, M. J., 53
heraldry, 231
Herrigel, E., 21
Hill, Edward, 70, 88
Hockney, David, 273
Hokusai, Katsushita, 248
Holbein, Hans, 98, p8
picture plane used by, 103
Homer, Winslow, IJJ
Hopper, Edward, 205, 206
Huxley, Aldous, 7,41
Huyung, Thu Ha, 239-40
286
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

I
/ Ching, 37
imagination, drawing from, xix, 8,221,
251-5:
Imamoto, Mauro, 227
Impressionism, 99
Incas, 43
infants, 70-71
Ingresjean-Auguste Dominique, 25
inventions, XIII
lames, William, 61
Jam Burden, Later Mrs. William Morris, as
Queen Guinevere (Rossetti), ipp
lapanese calligraphy, 256, 256,259
Japanese prints, 23
Jarman, Christopher, 257
K
Kandinsky, Wassily, 236
Kay, Alan, 142
Keller, Helen, 230
Kennedy, Grace, 13P, ipo, 226
Kipling, Rudyard, 40
Kiyonobu I, Torii, 23
Kiyotada, Torii, 23
Klee, Paul, 82
Koestler, Arthur, 38
Kollwitz, Kathe, 240
KrishnamurtiJ., xvi, 248
Kuroyama, Laurie, 140
Kurzweil, Ray, xxm
landscapes, K5
recalled childhood, 74—75,75
stage of, 73-75,74
language, 30,32,52, 62, 65,81,121
of art, 236, 261
grammar of, 138
lateralization of, 42-43
terms for left and right, 35-37,38
Large Stuffed£rfg/t'(Ludwig), 242
Latin, 36,142
Lawrence, D. H., 84
learning, transfer of, xm-xiv
Left-Handers' Handbook, T^(Bliss and
Morella), 43
Legros, Alphonse, 208,209
Leonardo da Vinci, 4,14, 42,43,102,
251-52
Levy, Jerre, 32,33,38,41
Lewis-Williams, D., 94
lights and shadows, xiv, xvm, xx, XXI, 96,
108,109,116,117,128-29,138,155,
163,186,189,194-227
continuous tone in, 209—10
crosshatching in, 195, 207—9,207> 20%>
20(1
exercise for, 200—204
in handwriting, 263—64
R-mode in perception of, 194,196-98,
rp!
seeing and, 204-7
see also self-portraits
limbic system, 231
Lindaman, Edward B., 224
Lindstrom, Miriam, 69, 77
line, xxi, 23,142,196
handwriting as, 21—23,155~5&
styles of, 25,2j, 262
L-mode, xvi, xx, xxn, xxm, 46, 6^, 88,
113,118,129,163,178, 223—24
characteristics of, 33,37,38—40,44,80,
82
cognitive shift from, 50,54—55,57-58,
60—62,63
colors and, 231—32
contour drawing and, 89, 92,93,94,
108
formal perspective as, 145
navigation by, 53,54
sighting as, 138,139—40,145
upside-down images rejected by,
60—61,113
see also brain, hemispheres of; R-
mode; symbol system,
childhood
Ludwig, Ken, 242
M
Marchand, Andre, xxm
Marks,Judi, 92
masklike effect, 170
Matisse, Henri, xxm, 4,118,125, n;, 170
Mayas, 45
memory, drawing from, xix, 250—51
as pre-instruction exercise, 15,16—17
Milne, A. A., 45
287

Miro.Joan, 121, ai
mirror handwriting, 42
mirror images, 50-54,113
Mme. Pierre Gautreau (Sargent), 178-80,
iyp, 180, ipp
models, 104,125,143-44,198-99,213,214,
243-45. y°
for profile portraits, 167-68,170, IJI,
181,182-89, ipo, ipi
modified contour drawing, 94, 96-112,
215-16, 258
on picture plane, 96-104, py, 100, mi
position for, 105,106
toning of paper in, 106—7, l07>IJO
Molloy, Naveen, 77
Morisot, Berthe, 204,204
Munsell, Albert, 238
Myers, Ronald, 31
N
Natural Way to Draw, T/V(Nicolaides),
navigation, 53,54
Nebes, Robert, 32
negative spaces, xiv, xv, 16,96,116-35,116,
7/7,155,/jf, 157,174,177,196
cognitive shift and, 132-33,133
description of, 117-19
of drawn chairs, 118, up, 123, 127—32, np,
131,132,134,iff
functions of, 123
of handwriting, 2j8, 259-60, 2jp
importance of, 118
positive forms vs., 117-19,120,121-22,
722,155, 196
see also composition
Newton, Isaac, 234—35,23J
Nicolaides, Kimon, 3,88—89, Sp, 233
nonverbal expression, 21-23, 2j6
Nude Woman with a Staff(Diiver), 122
O
Observer, objective, 46
Olimpio Fusco (Sargent), ipp
O'Neil,Jeanne, 11S
Ornstein, Robert, 82
Orwell, George, 93,169,169
P
painterly style, 23
painting, xxi, 196,239, 245
Shodo, 256
Palmer method handwriting, 255,2jj, 257
Paredes, J. A., 53
pastels, 242—45
perceptual illusions, 164-67,164, ioj, 166
Vase/Faces, 50-54, jo, 61,95,113
perceptual skills, xiv-xv, xvm-xx, 17-18,
21, 40,96,117
"Perceptual Skills in Drawing"
(Edwards), xn
Personages with Star (Miro), 121
perspective, 9,96,102,104,117,138,
'42~J9. 'S3- >S4- '/•?. 196
definition of, 142—43
distance in, 75,140,143,164-65,1(4
exercise for, 152-56,1J3
foreshortening in, 60,97-98,123, IJJ,
H3-4J. '44, yi. 'S«, '57
formal vs. informal, 145,14J, 158
linear, 142
Renaissance, 139,142,143—45,143,144
tiered, 142
vanishing points in, 143,145,14J
perspective devices, mo, 102-3, ">3
photography, 99,152,169
Picasso, Pablo, 22, 25,57-61, jS, 60,73,79,
170, 273
picture plane, 96-104,^7, mo, mi, 108, no
description of, 99
historical use of, 102-3
portraits and, 103
sighting and, 139,140,144,150—51, ijo,
156
single view through, 103-4
three-dimensional space and, 104
picture plane, plastic, 13,96-98,104,105,
107-8, toy, no, 119,143,146-49,146,
148,153,154,155,178,179-80,181,
182,183
picture-plane devices, 102,143—45,144,
<4S
Pines, Maya, 32
Poincare, Henri, 37,39
police artists, 170
politics, 36,37
Portfolio, 13-14
Portrait of Igor Stravinsky (Picasso), ;8
Portrait of the Artist (Fuseli), 194,195-96,
>9S
portraits, 8,170
288
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

basic poses of, 198—99
copying of masterwork, 178-80,
200—204
picture plane used for, 103
proportions of, see proportions, in
portraits
see also profile portraits; self-portraits
positive forms, 117—19,120,121—22,122,155,
196
Preacber(\\7hite), 156
pre-instruction self-portraits, 14—24,69,
224-25
primitive art, 170
Principles of Art, 119
Prismacolor, 23;
problem solving, xm, 6,55,142
at corporate training seminars,
XIV-XVI
profile portraits, 23-24, 24, yS, 158,162-91,
198,199,213,214,218
blanks for, 168-70,169,173-74,1/4
childhood symbol systems and,
162-63, '77' '^
exercise for, 180-89, '&, '83, '84, '85, '86
188
models for, 167-68,170,lyi, 181,182-89,
ipo, ipi
proportions in, 162,163,164-77; see also
proportions, in portraits
showing of, 189—91
proportion, 96,117,124,131,138,139,
140—51, 156,196, 222—23
Basic Unit of, see Basic Unit
exercise for, 146-51
perceptual illusions of, 164—67, 164,
i6s, 166
ratios in, 139,140—42,141,147-49, iqj,
148, ijf
scale in, 130,141,146,147
proportions, in portraits, 162,163,164—77,
210—18, 222—23
blanks for, 168-70,168, 173-74,174,
210—13,2II>2'2,222
central axis in, 168,168,210,211, 21s, 215,
2ij, 216
chopped-offskull error in, 167-74, '^7'
168, i6p, 1/0, 171, 172,174,175
clothing in, 187,188
collar in, 188,188,222
diagrammed, iyo, 212,222
ear placement in, 167,175-77, '75' '7&
184-85, 187, 213, 218, 222
eye level in, 167-70,174,174,184-85,
210,211, 211,215, 215,216
eyes in, 163,184,188,188,212,214, 216-17
in full-face view, 210-13, 222-23
hair in, 167,170,186, 222—23
neck in, 176,176,187,188,188,213, 222
nose in, 184, 211, 214, 216, 217,222
nostril in, 184, I8J, 222
in three-quarter view, 170, lyi, 213—18,
223, 227
ProudMaisie (Sandys), 186, i8y
Psychology of Left ana1 Right, The (Corbalis
and Beale), 31
Pure Contour Drawing, 88—94,
113,177,178
of handwriting, 257—58, 258
paradox of, 93-94
student showing of, 94,py
pure line, 2j
R
Ramirez, Lupe, IJ8
ratios, 139,140—42,141,147—49, i4y, 14S, ijtf
realism, xvm, xix, 8, 24,35,75, 80,124
stage of, 78-81, y8, yp
recalled childhood landscapes, 74-75, y;
Redon, Odilon, 243,244
Reed, William, 256,2j<f
relationships, xiv, xvm, xix-xx, xxi, 52,
96,109,124,138-59,1)8, ijp, 163
horizontal and vertical in, 99-101,130,
131,139,140,141,144,149-51,14P,
'77
see also perspective; proportion;
sighting
Rembrandt van Rijn, 4,2}
Renaissance, 139,142,143-45,143,144,213,
217, 252
right/left confusion, 45
R-mode, xv, xx, xxn, xxm, 35,45, 6i, 138,
145,162,163,223-24,248,270-71
ah-ha! response and, XVII-XVIII, 39
characteristics of, 33,37,38-40,44,
62-63,65,85
color and, 232, 236
navigation by, 53,54
in perception of lights and shadows,
194,196-98, ip8
see a/ro brain, hemispheres of; L-
mode
289

R-mode, cognitive shifts to, xx, 3,4, 5, 7,
8, 46, 50-65, 81,84-85,88,92,94,
108,178
conscious control of, 62,85, 162
negative spaces and, 132-33, rjj
recognition of, 61-62,85,91,131
upside-down drawing exercise for,
55-62, jv? <ft>, 63, 64
Vase/Faces exercise for, 50-54,/.;, 61
Rockefeller, Nelson, 43
Rodin, Auguste, xxv, 6
Rossetti, Dante Gabriel, igp
Rubens, Peter Paul, IJJ
S
Saint Jerome, Study for the (Diirer), &
Salk.Jonas, 180
Sandys, Anthony Frederick Augustus,
1S7
Santoli, Ornella, 257
Sargeant, Walter, 235
Sargentjohn Singer, 178-80, lyp, JSO, ipp
scale, 130, 141,146,147
of value, 194-95
scanning, left-to-right, 236
scribbling stage, 70-71,7/
seeing, xi, xxv, 3, 4,7,8, 9,16, 45,;;,
81-82,162-68,204-7
self-expression, 21-24
handwriting as, 21—23
see also expressiveness
Self-Portrait(Berberet), 243
Self-Porrrait(Courbei), 196, ipy, 200-204
Self-Portmit (Hopper), 205, 206
Self-Portrait(Monsot), 204, 204
self-portraits, 15,16—21,18, ip-20,194,195,
210-27,240
blanks for, 210—13,2II> 2I2<222
copying of masterwork, 200—204
exercise for, 218-25
full-face, 189,210—13, 2II> 212> 2I4> 222~23»
222,226
pre-instruction, 14—24,69,224—25
proportions in, 210-18,222-23; see also
proportions, in portraits
showing of, 225-27,226,227
suggestion for, 225
three-quarter, 189,210, 213-18, 214,215,
216,21S, 222,22}, 227
sex differences, 75-76,76
Shah, Indries, 35
Sheeler, Charles, 204,20J, 209
Shepard, Roger N., 3,165,10J
Shodo paintings, 256
sighting, xix-xx, 138-59, ijS, ijp 137, ijp
of angles, 139,140-42,141,144,146,
149-51,149, IJO, 177
eyeballing in, 151,156
of handwriting, 260—63, 260,261
paradoxes of, 139,140—42
picture plane and, 139,140,144,150—51,
IJO, 156
second-guessing of, 154
see also perspective; proportion
Singerjoe, 238,239
Sketches with Two Sowers (Van Gogh),pg
Smith, Peter, 232,236
spaces, xiv, xv, xvm, xix, xxi, 16,75,96,
109, log, 113,138,139,163
negative, see negative spaces
three-dimensionality of, 104,139,142,
194. W
Sperry, Roger W., xii-xm, xvn, xx, xxn,
XXIII-XXIV, 31-34
"Split-Brain and the Culrure-Cognition
Paradox, The" (Paredes and
Hepburn), 53
split-brain studies, 31-35,38,46
tests used in, 33-34
stained paper, 251-52
Stein, Gertrude, 4
Stephan, Michael, 50
still-lifes, xi, 8,122-23
Stravinsky, Igor, 57—6i,/.£ 60,113
Studies of Arms and tegs (Rubens), ijj
Study fir "Madame X"(SiLTgent), ipt)
stuttering, 43
Surrealism, 243
Suzuki, D. T, 248
symbol system, childhood, 17-18, &]-6$,
68-85,88,118, 214-15
complexity stage of, 75-77,76,77
landscape stage of, 73-75,74
in pictures that tell stories, 72-73,72,
73
in profile portraits, 162-63, '77. '88
realism stage of, 78-81,7S, 7P
290
THE NEW DRAWING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE BRAIN

scribbling stage of, 70—71,71
seeing influenced by, 81—85
sex differences in, 75-76, 76
T
Tappen, Heather, i?i
Tart, Charles T., 46,54,8j
thinking modes, xm-xiv, xvn, xxn, 31,
32-3J. 38-39. V-
see also L-mode; R-mode
Three Studies of Hands (Holbein), }S
Through the Looking-Glass and What Alice
Found r&re(Carroll), 42, 84
Thurber, James, 232
Tiepolo, Giovanni Battista, yy
tiered perspective, 142
time, sense of, 40,44, 62, 63, 85
toning, 106—7, W7> Ilo> n&, 127—28,128,130,
touch, sense of, 89
Trevarthen, Colwyn, 31,32
Trukese, 53,54
"Two-Sided Man, The" (Kipling), 40
U
Umbrella Still Life (W'right), 242
upside-down drawing, xn, xxiv, 55-62,
j/jg, 60,63, <%, 113,135,177,178, zyj
value, xxi, 12,194-96, 232,233, 238,239,
240
scale of, 194—95
Van Gogh, Vincent, 9,14,98, p8,170-^73,
172,173, 2ii
perspective device of, 102-3, ">3
Vase/Faces illusion, 50-54, jo, 61, 95,113
Vase of Tulips, The (Cezanne), 122
Verity, Enid, 230
Viewfinders, 13,14,96,97—98,99,101,101,
104,105,106,119,124,126,126,146,
•53. '54, '79. * 2
Vogel, Phillip, 32
volume, no
W
Waller, Fats, 50
Watts, Alan, 122,123
website, author's, 14
wheel of color, 234-37,234,23;
White, Charles, ij-<f
white spaces, see negative spaces
Winter Landscape (Rembrandt), 2j
Woman in a ffitf (Nicolaides), 89
Woman Mourningiy^n Gogh), 172,173
Wright, Laura, 242
Y
KB and Yang, 37
YoungJ. Z., 31
Young Woman in White, Red Background
(Matisse), 125,12J
Z
Zen, 24,122, 248
291

Drawing on the Right Side
of the Brain
The Drawing on the Right
Side of the Brain Portfolio
is a complete drawing course.
It includes:
A two-hour VideoCassette
PortfolioBooklet
DrawingBoard
Large DrawingPaper
Small DrawingPaper
Small Template
Large Template
Extra-Large Template
RedGel
Self-PortraitMirror
Small PicturePlane/ViewFinder
Large PicturePlane/ViewFinder
AngleFinder
ProportionFinder
ErasableMarker
GraphiteStick4B
WritingPencil2
DrawingPencikB
DrawingPencil6B
PencilSharpener
KneadedEraser
PlasticEraser
Tape
Portfolio and Video Ordering
O
To order the complete Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain Portfolio or just
the video, complete this order form and mail or fax it to us at:
Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain
1158 26th Street, Box 530
Santa Monica, CA 90403
Fax: 562-856-0909
Internet: 
Or order via the internet at www.drawright.com
Telephone: 888 DRAW IOI (888 372-9101)
Please allow two to four weeks for delivery.
Sales tax will apply for California.
Shipping charges will be added—visit our website or call for a quote.

