You Can Help End This Cruelty
If everyone just cut their meat consumption in half, 
billions of animals would be spared from suffering
Even If You Like Meat…

2
Thank you for accepting this booklet. 
As you read on, please bear in mind that 
opposing the cruelties of factory farming 
is not an all-or-nothing proposition: 
By simply eating less meat, you can help 
prevent farmed animals from suffering.
“When we picture a farm, we picture 
scenes from Old MacDonald and 
Charlotte’s Web, not warehouses with 
10,000 chickens.… When we look, it’s 
shocking. Our rural idylls have been 
transformed into stinking factories.”
The Los Angeles Times
“The High Price of Cheap Food,” 1/21/04
In the past half-century, most U.S. livestock 
production has moved from small family 
farms to factory farms—huge warehouses 
where animals are confined in crowded 
cages or pens or in restrictive stalls. The 
competition to lower costs has led agri­
business to treat animals as mere objects, 
rather than individuals who can suffer.
Hidden from public view, the cruelty that 
occurs on factory farms is easy to ignore. 
But more and more people are taking a 
look at how farmed animals are treated 
and deciding that it’s too cruel to support.
Oppose the Cruelties of Factory Farming
Right: Today’s egg-laying hens are confined in battery cages. 
Above: Most breeding sows spend their adult lives inside stalls 
without room to turn around; others (below) live in crowded pens.

3
“[It is] more economically efficient to put 
a greater number of birds into each cage, 
accepting lower productivity per bird 
but greater productivity per cage.… 
[I]ndividual animals may ‘produce,’ 
for example gain weight, in part 
because they are immobile, yet suffer 
because of the inability to move.… 
Chickens are cheap, cages are expensive.”
Bernard E. Rollin, PhD
Farm Animal Welfare, Iowa State University Press, 2003
Left: A single battery cage holding at least 11 egg-laying hens. 
Above: A broiler house, and pigs on their way to slaughter.
“In my opinion, if most urban meat eaters 
were to visit an industrial broiler house, 
to see how the birds are raised, and 
could see the birds being ‘harvested’ 
and then being ‘processed’ in a poultry 
processing plant, they would not be 
impressed and some, perhaps many 
of them would swear off eating chicken 
and perhaps all meat.
“For modern animal agriculture, the less 
the consumer knows about what’s hap-
pening before the meat hits the plate, the 
better. If true, is this an ethical situation? 
Should we be reluctant to let people know 
what really goes on, because we’re 
not really proud of it and concerned that 
it might turn them to vegetarianism?”
Peter Cheeke, PhD
Oregon State University Professor of Animal Agriculture 
Contemporary Issues in Animal Agriculture, 2004 textbook
“With rising temperatures, rising sea levels, 
melting icecaps and glaciers, shifting 
ocean currents and weather patterns, 
climate change is the most serious 
challenge facing the human race.
“The livestock sector is a major player, 
responsible for 18 percent of greenhouse 
gas emissions measured in CO2 equiva-
lent. This is a higher share than transport.”
FAO of the United Nations
Livestock’s Long Shadow, 2006 (TinyURL.com/z5kad)
Eating less meat not only prevents cruelty, but also protects the planet: 
your dietary habits can actually have as much impact on reducing 
global warming as your driving habits.

“[T]he American laying hen…passes her 
brief span piled together with a half-dozen 
other hens in a wire cage whose floor 
a single page of this [New York Times] 
magazine could carpet. Every natural 
instinct of this animal is thwarted, leading 
to a range of behavioral ‘vices’ that can 
include cannibalizing her cagemates and 
rubbing her body against the wire mesh 
until it is featherless and bleeding.… 
[T]he 10 percent or so of hens that can’t 
bear it and simply die is built into the 
cost of production.… [continued on page 5]
Virtually all U.S. birds raised 
for food are factory farmed. 1 
Inside the densely populated buildings, 
enormous amounts of waste accumulate. 
The resulting ammonia levels commonly 
cause painful burns to the birds’ skin, eyes, 
and respiratory tracts. 2
To reduce losses from birds pecking each 
other, farmers cut a third to a half of the 
beaks off chickens, turkeys, and ducks. 3 
The birds suffer severe pain for weeks. 4 
Some, unable to eat afterwards, starve. 5
Birds
Egg-Laying Hens
Packed in cages (typically less than half 
a square foot of floor space per bird), 6 
hens can become immobilized and die of 
asphyxiation or dehydration. Decomposing 
corpses are found in cages with live birds.
By the time hens are sent to slaughter for 
low egg production, their skeletons are 
so fragile that many suffer broken bones 
during catching, transport, or shackling. 7
Right: Two dead hens are left in battery cages with live birds.
Free-Range?  Birds may be labeled “free-range” if they 
have USDA-certified access to the outdoors. No other criteria—
such as environmental quality or space per bird—are included in 
this term. While free-range farms may be an improvement over 
standard factory farms, they are by no means free of suffering. 
Above: Poults at a free-range turkey farm. Right: A free-range 
turkey whose beak and toes have been trimmed, and a factory-
farmed chicken being debeaked.
4
Below: Male chicks, of no economic value to the egg industry, are 
found dead and dying in a dumpster behind a hatchery. Typically 
they are gassed 5 or ground up alive. 8

In the September 1976 issue 
of the industry journal Hog 
Farm Management, John Byrnes advised: 
“Forget the pig is an animal. Treat him just 
like a machine in a factory.”
Today’s pig farmers have done just that. 
As Morley Safer related on 60 Minutes: 
“This [movie Babe] is the way Americans 
want to think of pigs. Real-life ‘Babes’ see 
no sun in their limited lives, with no hay 
to lie on, no mud to roll in. The sows live 
Pigs
“Piglets in confinement operations are 
weaned from their mothers [2–3 weeks] 
after birth (compared with 13 weeks in 
nature) because they gain weight faster 
on their hormone- and antibiotic-fortified 
feed. This premature weaning leaves the 
pigs with a lifelong craving to suck and 
chew, a desire they gratify in confinement 
by biting the tail of the animal in front of 
them.… The USDA’s recommended solu-
tion to the problem is called ‘tail docking.’ 
Using a pair of pliers (and no anesthetic), 
most but not all of the tail is snipped off. 
Why the little stump? Because the whole 
point of the exercise is not to remove the 
object of tail-biting so much as to render 
it more sensitive. Now, a bite on the tail 
is so painful that even the most demoral-
ized pig will mount a struggle to avoid it.”
The New York Times Magazine
“An Animal’s Place” by Michael Pollan, 11/10/02
	 1		 Peter Cheeke, PhD, textbook Contemporary Issues in Animal Agriculture, 2004.
	 2		 Poultry Perspectives (MD Cooperative Extension), 2002;4(1).
	 3		 Agricultural Research (USDA ARS), 2005 Mar;53(3):4–7.
	 4		 J Appl Anim Welf Sci, 2001;4(3):207–21.
	 5		 Bernard E. Rollin, PhD, Farm Animal Welfare (Iowa State University Press, 2003).
	 6		 USDA APHIS VS, Reference of 1999 Table Egg Layer Management in the U.S., 1/00.
	 7		 Poult Sci, 2004;83:184–92.
	 8		 USDA, Animal Welfare Issues Compendium, 9/97.
	 9	“Pork Power,” 60 Minutes, 6/22/03.
in tiny cages, so narrow they can’t even 
turn around. They live over metal grates, 
and their waste is pushed through slats 
beneath them and flushed into huge pits.” 9
5
For more information on factory farming, including its impacts on resources and the environment, please see OpposeCruelty.org
A confined sow and her piglets. Castrating and tail docking piglets 
are standard procedures often performed without anesthesia. 8

“Do we, as humans, having an ability 
to reason and to communicate abstract 
ideas verbally and in writing, and to 
form ethical and moral judgments using 
the accumulated knowledge of the ages, 
have the right to take the lives of other 
sentient organisms, particularly 
when we are not forced to 
do so by hunger or dietary 
need, but rather do so for 
the somewhat frivolous 
reason that we like the 
taste of meat?”
Peter Cheeke, PhD
Contemporary Issues in Animal Agriculture 
2004 textbook
6
If Slaughterhouses 
Had Glass Walls…
Federal law requires that mammals be 
stunned prior to slaughter (exempting 
kosher and halal, which require animals 
be fully conscious as their necks are cut). 
Common methods of stunning:
◗ Using a captive bolt gun, a metal rod is 
thrust into the animal’s brain. Shooting a 
struggling animal is difficult, and the rod 
often misses its mark. 10
◗ Electrical current produces a seizure; then 
the throat is cut. Insufficient amperage 
can cause an animal to be paralyzed 
without losing sensibility. 10
Birds account for more than 95 percent of land animals killed for food 
in the United States; however, there is no federal law that requires 
they be rendered insensible to pain before being slaughtered.

In January 2007, a Mercy For Animals 
investigator took a job at one of the nation’s 
largest poultry slaughterhouses to witness 
the conditions firsthand:
Birds with broken legs and 
wings, open wounds, and 
large tumors were shackled 
and hung on the slaughter 
line; some of the injured were 
left writhing on the floor for 
hours beforehand. Workers 
punched, kicked, threw, and mutilated live 
birds; they tore eggs from the birds’ bodies 
to toss at coworkers, and ripped the heads 
off birds who were trapped 
inside the transport cages.
In 2005, at an even larger 
facility, a PETA investigator 
saw many birds mangled by 
the throat-cutting machines; 
workers yanked the heads off 
birds who missed the blade.
Recent Undercover Investigations into Poultry Slaughter
Please see OpposeCruelty.org/video to view the undercover footage from these investigations.
	10		 Temple Grandin, PhD, “Animal Welfare and Humane Slaughter,” 11/04.
	11	“Humane Slaughter of Poultry: The Case Against the Use of Electrical Stunning 
Devices,” J Ag & Env Ethics, 7/94.
	12		 USDA FSIS Animal Disposition Reporting System, 2002.
	13		 USDA FSIS, Meat and Poultry Inspection Manual, part 11.
	14	“Modern Meat: A Brutal Harvest,” Washington Post, 4/10/01.
	15	“Don’t Let Stress, Heat be a Downer for Pigs,” Pork (May 2005): 16–18.
Above: At the slaughterhouse, this pig has collapsed in his own vomit. 
For ease of handling, birds raised for meat 
are usually paralyzed via electrical stunning. 
However, it is not known whether stunning 
renders the birds unconscious; 5 the shock 
may be an “intensely painful experience.” 11 
Every year, large numbers of chickens, tur-
keys, ducks, and geese reach the scalding 
tanks alive and are either boiled to death 
or drowned. 12, 13
“Hogs, unlike cattle, are dunked in tanks 
of hot water after they are stunned to 
soften the hides for skinning. As a result, 
a botched slaughter condemns some hogs 
to being scalded and drowned. Secret 
videotape from an Iowa pork plant shows 
hogs squealing and kicking as they are 
being lowered into the water.” 14
“The question is not, Can they reason? 
nor, Can they talk? but, Can they suffer?”
Jeremy Bentham
An Introduction to the Principles of Morals & Legislation, 1789
7
Approximately 200,000 pigs arrive dead at U.S. slaughterhouses 
each year. 12 Many of these deaths are caused by a lack of ventilation 
on transport trucks in hot weather. 15 Shown at left are U.S. pigs on a 
transport truck loaded in Oklahoma and destined for a slaughterhouse 
south of Mexico City—a journey that would last more than 30 hours.

Above: A sow in a gestation cage (left), and a pig with a large 
stomach rupture (right). Below: Pigs with a dead cellmate (left), 
and a rotting corpse left in the aisle between 
pens of live pigs (right).
Not Your Childhood Image
by lauren Ornelas, VivaUSA.org
When I saw what life 
is really like for pigs 
on today’s farms, 
I was left feeling 
sick for days. I 
knew they lived on 
concrete, indoors 
in factory farms. 
However, I was 
not prepared for 
the awful reality 
of their boredom. 
In the gestation shed, 
sows continuously hit their heads against 
their cage doors as if trying to escape. 
After a while, some would give up and 
lie down, while others again took up their 
futile action.
I saw the pens where pigs are fattened up 
for slaughter—essentially concrete cells, each 
holding about a dozen pigs. In one pen, 
there was a pig missing an ear. Another had 
a rupture the size of a grapefruit protruding 
from his stomach. A dead pig was constantly 
nudged and licked by others. The stench in 
these places is overwhelming.
Stories from
Behind the Walls
8
At the larger farms I visited in North Carolina, 
there were thousands of pigs housed in sheds. 
Dead pigs had been left in the pens with 
the living; other pigs had been tossed in 
the aisles—barely alive, unable to reach 
food or water.

During EBAA’s investigation, 39 sick 
and injured chickens were rescued, 
including Yosemite (top of page), 
Laci, and Scooter (below).
“Contrary to what one may hear from the industry, chickens 
are not mindless, simple automata but are complex 
behaviorally, do quite well in learning, show a rich social 
organization, and have a diverse repertoire of calls. 
Anyone who has kept barnyard chickens also recognizes 
their significant differences in personality.”
Bernard E. Rollin, PhD
Farm Animal Welfare, Iowa State University Press, 2003
Emery’s Rescue
by Christine Morrissey, EastBayAnimalAdvocates.org
Emery was destined to become one of 
the many chicken breast fillets advertised 
as “all natural” at the local supermarket. 
However, in a string of luck, this plump 
rooster made an unusual detour from the 
normal life of a bird raised for meat.
During the summer of 2005, rescuers with 
East Bay Animal Advocates discovered the 
disabled four-week-old chicken at a factory 
farm. Leaving the California Central Valley 
behind, Emery relocated to the Bay Area. 
This night changed his life.
A “poster chicken” of the broiler industry, 
Emery has a crippling case of splay leg— 
a limb deformity common among broilers. 
Factory farmed 
chickens suffering 
from splay leg 
often struggle to 
gain access to 
food and water 
and are denied 
veterinary care.
9
Like turkeys, broiler chickens are confined inside sheds with tens 
of thousands of other birds. Forced to live on waste-soaked litter, 
the birds commonly suffer burns on their feet and bodies. 2
Today’s broilers have been bred to reach market weight in six 
weeks—twice as fast as their 1940s counterparts. 8 This rapid 
growth rate has brought an increasing incidence of diseases that 
cause suffering, such as ascites and painful skeletal deformities. 4 
To avoid problems of reproduction and lameness associated with 
obesity, broilers used for breeding are severely feed restricted. 2
Emery, before (above) and after (below) being rescued from the farm.

Newborn male calves are generally of little use to dairy producers. They are usually separated from their mothers at one to four days of age to 
allow dairy farmers to harvest milk. The majority of these calves are raised for “special-fed veal.” Chained by the neck in individual stalls (below), 
they are fed a special milk-replacer diet for 18 to 20 weeks before being slaughtered for their pale-colored meat. 8
If the anticruelty laws that protect 
pets were applied to farmed animals, 
many of the most routine U.S. farm-
ing practices would be illegal in all 
50 states. Are dogs and cats really so 
different from chickens, turkeys, pigs, 
and cows that one group deserves legal 
protection from cruelty, while the other 
deserves virtually no protection at all?
Disregard for farmed animals persists because 
few people realize the ways in which these 
individuals are mistreated, and even fewer actually 
witness the abuse. Once aware, most people are 
appalled—not because they believe in animal rights, but 
because they believe that animals feel pain and that morally 
decent human beings should try to prevent pain whenever possible.
Widening the Circle of Compassion
10
“Historically, man has expanded the reach of his ethical calculations, 
as ignorance and want have receded, first beyond family and tribe, 
later beyond religion, race, and nation. To bring other species 
more fully into the range of these decisions may seem unthinkable 
to moderate opinion now. One day, decades or centuries hence, 
it may seem no more than ‘civilized’ behavior requires.”
The Economist
“What Humans Owe to Animals,” 8/19/95
Right: Ducks and geese are force-fed to produce liver pâté.

Every time you choose compassion, you’re 
making a difference!
Although all factory farming involves cruel 
practices, you can spare more animals from 
suffering by avoiding eggs and the meat of 
birds and pigs.
Making a Difference: What You Can Do
By avoiding the meat of chickens, turkeys, and pigs, you can 
prevent the suffering of more than two thousand of these animals 
during your lifetime!
11
“When I met my first vegetarian, he told me 
he had not eaten meat for fourteen years.
“I looked at him as if he had managed 
to hold his breath that entire time.
“Today I know there is nothing 
rigorous or strange about eating 
a diet that excludes meat.”
Erik Marcus
Vegan: The New Ethics of Eating, 1998
Exploring a meatless 
diet is simple—opposing cruelty can be 
as easy as substituting marinara for meat 
sauce, opting for bean burritos instead of 
beef tacos, and trying some of the many 
new vegetarian products.
We no longer need to make a special trip 
to the health food store for veggie burgers 
or deli slices: today, nearly all major super-
markets carry delicious, cruelty-free fare.

Snacks/Dessert  Nondairy ice cream, 
yogurt, or pudding • Vegan cookies, 
pie, or cake • Fresh or dried fruit 
Nuts or seeds • Trail mix 
Pretzels or popcorn 
Chips and salsa 
Clif Bar
Simple Meal Ideas
Breakfast  Oatmeal • Cold cereal or 
granola with nondairy milk • Fruit smoothie 
Pancakes • Bagel with tofu cream cheese 
Toast with jelly • Tofu scramble with veggie 
sausage • Fruit-filled toaster pastry
Lunch/Dinner  Vegetarian lunchmeat 
sandwich • Grain or soy burger • Veggie 
hot dog • Veggie pizza • Bean burrito 
Peanut butter and jelly • Pasta and tomato 
sauce • Tofu lasagna • Baked tempeh or 
tofu sandwich • Soup or chili (over pasta 
or rice) • Baked, mashed, or fried potatoes 
Tofu, tempeh, or seitan stir-fry
Vegetarian options have come a long way 
in just the past few years. Dozens of differ-
ent kinds of high-protein meat substitutes 
are now on the market, including chicken-, 
turkey-, ham-, and bologna-style lunchmeats 
for quick sandwiches, as well as a wide 
variety of veggie burgers and hot dogs.
12
Turtle Island Foods’ Tofurky deli slices (above) are a veggie favorite. 
Left: A Tofurky beer brat, sizzling hot off the grill!
There are also soy, rice, and almond milks 
and ice creams for those who are interested 
in replacing dairy.
Explore new foods and experiment with 
different flavors and brands to find your 
personal favorites. You might dislike one 
veggie burger, but think another is great!

	16		 J Am Diet Assoc, 2003 Jun;103(6):748–65 (TinyURL.com/2m4wpj).
Staying Healthy
Most vegetarians have excellent health! 
Indeed, according to the American Dietetic 
Association’s official position paper, vege-
tarians on average have lower body weight, 
cholesterol, and blood pressure, and lower 
rates of type 2 diabetes, heart disease, 
prostate cancer, and colon cancer. 16
With a bit of planning, anyone can main-
tain a healthy vegetarian diet. If you decide 
to eat little or no meat, eggs, or dairy, it’s 
important to make sure that you’re getting 
vitamin B12 and that you read “Staying 
Healthy on Plant-Based Diets”—an article 
available at VeganHealth.org/sh and in 
our free Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating.
Cruelty-free selections 
are usually offered 
at Chinese, Indian, 
Italian, Mexican, 
Middle Eastern, 
Thai, and other ethnic 
restaurants, as well as at many chains, 
such as Chevys, Little Caesars, Papa John’s, 
Subway, Johnny Rockets, and Taco Bell.
Our Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating contains a 
vegan foods glossary, simple meal-planning 
tips, and easy recipes, 
including seitan (or 
“wheat meat”). Please 
see page 15 to order 
your free copy today.
Above & left: A Tofurky feast, complete with a turkey-style roast, 
cranberry-apple potato dumplings, stuffing, and gravy!
13

Photos were provided courtesy of Amy’s Kitchen, Animal Protection Institute, 
Compassionate Action for Animals, East Bay Animal Advocates, Farm Sanctuary, 
Noah Hannibal/Animal Liberation Victoria, Iowa Pork Producers Association, 
Kari Nienstedt, Virenda Nyberg, PETA, Turtle Island Foods, USDA, and Viva! USA.
After reviewing this booklet, we hope you’ll 
do what you can to oppose the cruelties of 
animal agriculture. Each time you choose to 
eat less meat and eggs, you’ll remove your 
support from a cruel system and help create 
a more compassionate world.
If you decide you don’t want to eat any 
animal-derived foods, please remember: 
the objective is to reduce suffering, not 
to achieve personal purity or perfection.
Years worth of eating less meat and eggs 
will prevent more suffering than a brief stint 
as a vegan, so it’s more important to take 
an approach you can sustain. You can make 
exceptions, such as eating meat on certain 
occasions, and still make a big difference 
by eating vegetarian the rest of the time.
14
Choose Compassion Whenever Possible

Order a FREE Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating
Our starter guide not only includes meal ideas, cooking tips, and great recipes, but also 
health information, questions & answers, essays, and a list of other helpful resources. 
Please visit OpposeCruelty.org/guide or write to Vegan Outreach at the address 
printed on the back cover of this brochure to order your free copy today!
OpposeCruelty.org
You’ll find lots more information on 
our web site, including our complete 
list of helpful resources. We also offer 
a free weekly electronic publication of 
news and tips. And, elsewhere on the 
Internet, many email lists and social 
groups are available for people 
exploring compassionate eating.
If you would like to share the information in this brochure, 
we can provide you with copies to give to your friends and 
family or to distribute in your community. Contact us 
or visit our web site to learn more!
15

© Vegan Outreach, 2007    Even If You Like Meat… Rev. 6/07    Printed on recycled paper with soy inks
WORKING TO END CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
POB 30865, Tucson, AZ 85751-0865
info@OpposeCruelty.org
Free Recipes at OpposeCruelty.org!
Distributed courtesy of…
Make a Difference!
“There’s a schizoid quality to our relationship with animals, 
in which sentiment and brutality exist side by side. 
Half the dogs in America will receive Christmas 
presents this year, yet few of us pause 
to consider the miserable life of the pig— 
an animal easily as intelligent as a dog 
—that becomes the Christmas ham.”
The New York Times Magazine
“An Animal’s Place” by Michael Pollan, 11/10/02
“I think everybody has that capacity to stop and think 
and say, ‘If I knew you, I wouldn’t eat you.’
“And in some ways, it really is that simple.”
Tom Regan, PhD
North Carolina State University 
Professor of Philosophy 
from A Cow at My Table

