
This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights 
 
 
  
 
restrictions, some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial
review has deemed that any suppres ed content does not materially
 affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the 
right to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent
rights restrictions require it. For valuable information on pricing, previous 
editions, changes to current editions, and alternate formats, please visit
www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword 
 for materials in your areas of interest.
s
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
Electricity for 
Refrigeration, Heating,
and Air Conditioning  Eighth Edition
Russell E. Smith
Athens Technical College
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

© 2011, 2007 Delmar, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein may be 
reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means graphic, electronic, or 
mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, 
Web distribution, information networks, or information storage and retrieval systems, except 
as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the 
prior written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2010925357
ISBN-13: 978-1-1110-3874-8
ISBN-10: 1-1110-3874-0
Delmar Cengage Learning
5 Maxwell Drive
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with oﬃ  ce 
locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil 
and Japan. Locate your local oﬃ  ce at: international.cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by 
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For your lifelong learning solutions, visit delmar.cengage.com
Visit our corporate website at cengage.com
NOTICE TO THE READER
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein or perform 
any independent analysis in connection with any of the product information contained 
herein. Publisher does not assume, and expressly disclaims, any obligation to obtain and 
include information other than that provided to it by the manufacturer. The reader is 
expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions that might be indicated 
by the activities described herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By following the 
instructions contained herein, the reader willingly assumes all risks in connection 
with such instructions. The publisher makes no representations or warranties of any 
kind, including but not limited to, the warranties of ﬁ tness for particular purpose or 
merchantability, nor are any such representations implied with respect to the material 
set forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility with respect to such material. 
The publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages 
resulting, in whole or part, from the readers’ use of, or reliance upon, this material.
Electricity for Refrigeration, Heating, 
 
 and Air Conditioning, Eighth Edition
Russell E. Smith, Athens 
 Technical College
Vice President, Career and Professional 
Editorial: Dave Garza
Director of Learning Solutions: 
Sandy Clark
Senior Acquisitions Editor: 
James DeVoe
Managing Editor: Larry Main
Senior Product Manager: John Fisher
Editorial Assistant: Cris Savino
Vice President, Career and Professional 
Marketing: Jennifer McAvey
Marketing Director: Deborah Yarnell
Marketing Manager: Katie Hall
Marketing Coordinator: Mark Pierro
Production Director: Wendy Troeger
Production Manager: Mark Bernard
Content Project Manager:
David Plagenza
Senior Art Director: Casey Kirchmayer
Technology Project Manager:
Joe Pliss
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Professional Group Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product, submit all requests online at 
www.cengage.com/permissions.Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com
 ber
Printed in the United States
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 14 13 12 11 10
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This page was intentionally left blank

This page was intentionally left blank

 
 
Preface 
iii
iii
Preface 
vi
1 
Electrical Safety 
1
Objectives 1  Key Terms 1  Introduction 2  1.1 Electrical Injuries 3  1.2 Dealing with Shock Victims 7  
1.3 National Electrical Code® 7  1.4 Electrical Grounding 8  1.5 Circuit Protection 11  1.6 Circuit Lockout 
Procedures 13  1.7 Electrical Safety Guidelines 15  Summary 16  Review Questions 17
2 
Basic Electricity 
19
Objectives 19  Key Terms 19  Introduction 20  2.1 Atomic Theory 20  2.2 Positive and Negative 
Charges 22  2.3 Flow of Electrons 23  2.4 Conductors and Insulators 26  2.5 Electric Potential 27  
2.6 Current Flow 28  2.7 Resistance 29  2.8 Electric Power and Energy 30  2.9 Ohm’s Law 33  
2.10 Calculating Electric Power 35  Summary 36  Review Questions 38
3 
Electric Circuits 
40
Objectives 40  Key Terms 41  Introduction 41  3.1 Basic Concepts of Electric Circuits 41  3.2 Series 
Circuits 43  3.3 Parallel Circuits 47  3.4 Series-Parallel Circuits 51  Summary 53  Review Questions 54
4 
Electric Meters 
56
Objectives 56  Key Terms 57  Introduction 57  4.1 Electric Meters 58  4.2 Ammeters 64  
4.3 Voltmeters 68  4.4 Ohmmeters 71  Summary 76  Review Questions 77
5 
Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning
 
Wiring Diagrams 
79
Objectives 79  Key Terms 80  Introduction 80  5.1 Loads 81  5.2 Contactors and Relays 85  
5.3 Magnetic Starters 88  5.4 Switches 89  5.5 Safety Devices 93  5.6 Transformers 95  
5.7 Schematic Diagrams 96  5.8 Pictorial Diagrams 97  5.9 Installation Diagrams 97  
Summary 101  Review Questions 102
6 
Reading Schematic Diagrams 
105
Objectives 105  Key Terms 106  Introduction 106  6.1 Schematic Diagram Design 108  6.2 Reading 
Basic Schematic Diagrams 112  6.3 Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 133  Summary 172  
Review Questions 173
7 
Alternating Current, Power Distribution, and Voltage Systems 
175
Objectives 175  Key Terms 175  Introduction 176  7.1 Basic Concepts of Alternating Current 176  
7.2 Power Distribution 182  7.3 240-Volt–Single-Phase–60-Hertz Systems 183  7.4 Three-Phase Voltage 
Systems 185  7.5 240-Volt–Three-Phase–60-Hertz Delta System 185  7.6 208-Volt–Three-Phase–60-Hertz 
Wye System 187  7.7 Higher-Voltage Systems 188  Summary 191  Review Questions 192
Table of Contents
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8 
Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems 
194
Objectives 194  Key Terms 194  Introduction 195  8.1 Sizing Wire 195  8.2 Disconnect Switches 204  
8.3 Fusible Load Centers 207  8.4 Breaker Panels 208  8.5 Distribution Centers 211  8.6 Installing 
Electrical Circuits for Refrigeration, Heating, and Air-Conditioning Equipment 213  Summary 218  
Review Questions 219
9 
Basic Electric Motors 
221
Objectives 221  Key Terms 222  Introduction 222  9.1 Magnetism 222  9.2 Basic Electric Motors 226  
9.3 Types of Electric Motors 228  9.4 Shaded-Pole Motors 231  9.5 Capacitors 235  
9.6 Split-Phase Motors 240  9.7 Permanent Split-Capacitor Motors 246  9.8 Capacitor-Start–Capacitor-Run 
Motors 249  9.9 Three-Phase Motors 251  9.10 Electronically Commutated Motors 253  
9.11 Hermetic Compressor Motors 259  9.12 Service Call Protocol 270  9.13 Service Calls 272  
Summary 279  Review Questions 281  Practice Service Calls 284
10 Components for Electric Motors 
287
Objectives 287  Key Terms 287  Introduction 288  10.1 Starting Relays for Single-Phase Motors 288  
10.2 Current or Amperage Relays 289  10.3 Potential Relays 291  10.4 Solid-State Starting Relays and 
Devices 297  10.5 Motor Bearings 303  10.6 Motor Drives 305  10.7 Service Calls 309  Summary 315  
Review Questions 316  Practice Service Calls 318
11 Contactors, Relays, and Overloads 
321
Objectives 321  Key Terms 322  Introduction 322  11.1 Contactors 323  11.2 Relays 328  
11.3 Overloads 334  11.4 Magnetic Starters 343  11.5 Push-Button Stations 346  11.6 Service Calls 347  
Summary 352  Review Questions 354  Practice Service Calls 356
12 Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices 
358
Objectives 358  Key Terms 359  Introduction 359  12.1 Transformers 360  12.2 Thermostats 362  
12.3 Staging Thermostats 378  12.4 Programmable Thermostats 381  12.5 Pressure Switches 384  
12.6 Miscellaneous Electric Components 389  12.7 Service Calls 393  Summary 398  Review Questions 399  
Practice Service Calls 402
13 Electronic Control Devices 
405
Objectives 405  Key Terms 405  Introduction 406  13.1 Electronic System Components 408  
13.2 Basic Electronic Control Fundamentals 413  13.3 Simple Electronic Temperature Control 414  
13.4 One-Function Electronic Controls 415  13.5 Electronic Timers 415  13.6 Electronic Devices for Electric 
Motors 418  13.7 Electronic Motor Protection Devices 418  13.8 Heat Pump Electronic Modules 420  
13.9 Electronic Control Modules for Residential Gas Furnaces 423  13.10 Oil Furnace Electronic Controls 428  
13.11 Troubleshooting Electric Controls 428  Summary 430  Review Questions 432
14 Heating Control Devices 
434
Objectives 434  Key Terms 434  Introduction 435  14.1 Heating Fundamentals 436  14.2 Basic Heating 
Controls 438  14.3 Gas Heating Controls 447  14.4 Oil Heating Controls 461  14.5 Electric Heating 
Controls 469  14.6 Hydronic and Steam Controls 470  14.7 Service Calls 474  Summary 479  Review 
Questions 481  Practice Service Calls 483
IV 
Table of Contents
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Table of Contents 
v
15 Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices 
485
Objectives 485  Key Terms 485  Introduction 486  15.1 Electric Motors 486  15.2 Contactors 
and Relays 488  15.3 Overloads 490  15.4 Thermostats 496  15.5 Pressure Switches 500  
15.6 Transformers 501  15.7 Electric Heating Controls 502  15.8 Gas Heating Controls 505  
15.9 Oil Heating Controls 513  15.10 Service Calls 519  Summary 525  Review Questions 527  
Practice Service Calls 529
16 Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems 
536
Objectives 536  Key Terms 537  Introduction 537  16.1 Residential Air-Conditioning Equipment 539  
16.2 Basic Residential Control Circuitry 544  16.3 Packaged Air-Conditioning Control Systems 556  
16.4 Split-System Air-Conditioning Control Systems 565  16.5 Heat Pump Control Systems 571  
16.6 Heat Pump Sequence of Operation 580  16.7 Advanced Residential Control Systems 584  
16.8 Field Wiring 590  16.9 Check, Test, and Start Procedures 598  16.10 Customer Relations 599  
Summary 603  Review Questions 605
17 Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems 
607
Objectives 607  Key Terms 607  Introduction 608  17.1 Commercial and Industrial Heating and 
 Air-Conditioning Equipment 609  17.2 Commercial and Industrial Control Circuitry 614  17.3 Commercial 
Condensing Unit 621  17.4 Commercial and Industrial Packaged Units 624  17.5 Air-Cooled Packaged Unit 
with Remote Condenser 627  17.6 Water-Cooled Packaged Units 631  17.7 Types of Total Commercial 
and Industrial Controls Systems 632  17.8 Pneumatic Control Systems 635  17.9 Electronic Control Systems 
(Direct Digital Controls) 643  Summary 647  Review Questions 650
18  Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, Heating, and Air-Conditioning Control 
Circuitry and Systems 
654
Objectives 654  Key Terms 655  Introduction 655  18.1 Diagnosis of Electrical Components 656  
18.2 Troubleshooting Tools 658  18.3 Troubleshooting with Electrical Meters 665  
18.4 Using Troubleshooting Charts 674  18.5 Hopscotching: A Useful Tool for Troubleshooting 676  
18.6 Troubleshooting Control Systems 688  18.7 Service Calls 692  Summary 698  Review Questions 700  
Practice Service Calls 703
Appendix A 
707
Appendix B 
708
Glossary 
709
Index 
718
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

vi
Electricity for Refrigeration, Heating, and Air 
Conditioning was initially written because 
there was no text that adequately covered the 
electrical principles and practices required of 
an installation or service technician in the 
refrigeration, heating, and air-conditioning 
industry. Much material has been added to 
this text since the first edition because of the 
advancements that have been made in the 
industry such as electronic control devices, 
digital thermostats, digital electrical meters, 
intermittent ignition for furnaces, electroni-
cally commutated motors, direct digital con-
trol systems, and many more. This text is 
written with a blend of theory and practice 
suitable for the vocational/technical student 
or the industry practitioner who wishes to 
upgrade his or her knowledge and skills. The 
purpose of this text is to assemble concepts 
and procedures that will enable the reader to 
work successfully in the industry.
ORGANIZATION
It is difficult to organize an electrical text 
to be used in refrigeration, heating, and air-
conditioning programs in educational insti-
tutions because of the many different types 
of programs and the variety of the delivery 
of information. The information covered in 
this text is organized from the very basics to 
the circuitry and troubleshooting of control 
systems in the industry. The organization is 
industry driven because of the correlation of 
industry standards and the many new devel-
opments that continue to be made. Electrical 
devices are covered in detail in a systematic 
order with the troubleshooting of the com-
ponents following an explanation of how 
they work. Troubleshooting control systems 
should be the objective of most students and 
industry personnel using this text and is cov-
ered in detail.
FEATURES OF THIS EDITION
There are new features as well as existing 
features of this text that are advantages to 
students and instructors alike. Each chapter 
begins with objectives that should be mas-
tered as the student progresses through each 
chapter. Key terms are emphasized at the 
beginning of each chapter in order for the stu-
dent to know what information is ahead, and 
the key terms are highlighted in color in the 
body of the text. Each chapter is concluded 
with a summary that allows the student to 
review information that has been covered in 
the chapter. Many chapters use service calls 
to reinforce service procedures that are com-
monly used in the industry along with some 
procedures that the student has the oppor-
tunity to solve. Important elements of the 
text are highlighted in color in this edition, 
including circuits that are being discussed 
and important concepts and safety cautions. 
In the back of the text, there is a reference 
chart of electrical symbols including switches, 
thermostats, contactors, and relays, and other 
electric devices.
NEW IN THIS EDITION
The art in this edition will be in full color 
with many of the diagrams showing modes 
of operation highlighted in different colors. 
Color photographs will give the reader a 
more realistic view of what components and 
Preface
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

equipment look like. Minor revisions were 
made in chapters covering electrical safety, 
basic electricity, and electric circuits. The 
emphasis in Chapter 4 (Electric Meters) was 
to revise the art so that more current elec-
trical meters were shown. Additional colors 
have been added to the schematic diagrams 
that show the operating sequences of the 
equipment in different colors. Chapters 7–12 
and 14 are greatly improved by utilizing a full 
color art program. The thermostat section 
of Chapter 12 covers the latest in digital and 
programmable thermostats. Troubleshooting 
chapters basically are the same except for 
covering procedures for any new components 
introduced in the text.
Chapter 13 (Electronic Control Devices) 
has been heavily revised to include some of 
the new electronic devices that are available 
today. One function electronic devices such 
as electronic timers are explained. Electronic 
motor protection devices are explained 
including overload protection, single-phase 
protection, phase reversal, and a multifunc-
tion overload protective device. Heat pump 
control modules are covered in this chapter 
as well as Chapter 16. Electronic controls 
modules used in gas and oil heat are covered. 
Basic troubleshooting fundamentals of elec-
tronic controls modules are covered.
Chapter 16 has been completely rewritten 
to emphasize residential air-conditioning 
controls systems. An overview is given of the 
physical construction of the basic types of 
air-conditioning systems along with the air 
supply used in conjunction with an evapora-
tor coil and condensing unit. The basic ele-
ments of a residential control system such 
as compressor control circuitry, condenser 
fan motors circuitry, evaporator fan motor 
circuitry, safety control circuitry, furnace con-
trol circuitry, and heat pump control circuitry. 
Heat pump control circuitry are included cov-
ering heat pump electrical devices including 
reversing valves, defrost controls, and heat 
pump control modules for both split and 
packaged configurations. The sequence of 
operation of a heat pump is covered in detail. 
Gas and oil heating systems are covered with 
their electrical components. A basic overview 
of advanced air-conditioning controls and 
zone controls concludes this chapter. Also 
included in this chapter are procedures for 
both supply and control wiring of residential 
equipment. An example of a check, test, and 
start procedure that is used by technicians on 
the initial start-up of residential equipment is 
covered. One of the most important elements 
of a technicians skills are customer relations 
is included in this chapter.
Chapter 17 has been rewritten to give 
a basic overview of commercial and indus-
trial air-conditioning control systems. The 
basic control circuitry used in commercial 
and industrial control systems are briefly 
covered including compressor motor cir-
cuitry, water chiller control circuitry, blower 
motor circuitry, safety controls circuitry, and 
interlocks. A brief explanation of controls 
systems used in large air-cooled condensing 
units, large commercial and industrial pack-
aged units, air-cooled packaged units with 
a remote condenser and water-cooled pack-
aged units. A brief introductory explanation 
of the types of commercial and industrial 
control systems including pneumatic and 
electronic direct digital control unit in the 
industry are discussed.
Coverage on Green Technology in the 
HVAC industry is placed as a separate text 
element within certain chapters. Topics 
addressed include PCBs, mercury disposal, 
energy efficient motors, programmable ther-
mostats, hybrid heat pump systems, ECM 
 
 
Preface 
vii
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

viii 
Preface
savings, energy efficiency ratings, multi-stage 
equipment, variable speed compressors, and 
zoned air-conditioning systems.
SUPPLEMENTS
Available to instructors and students are 
three supplements: an Instructor Resource 
CD, DVD set, and a Lab Manual. An Instructor’s 
Guide is included on the Instructor Resource. 
Included in the Instructor’s Guide is a short 
description of the material covered in each 
chapter, unit objectives, safety notes, lab 
notes, and answers to the questions in the 
text and Lab Manual. The Lab Manual has a 
section for each chapter in the text. Included 
in the Lab Manual are chapter overviews, key 
terms, review tests, and lab exercises, includ-
ing many of the elements required to com-
plete the lab. The Lab Manual should prove 
to be extremely helpful to the new instructor.
THE INSTRUCTOR’S RESOURCE CD
This educational resource creates a truly 
electronic classroom. It is a CD-ROM (ISBN 
1111038767) containing tools and instructional 
resources that enrich the classroom and make 
the instructor’s preparation time shorter. The 
elements of the instructor resource link directly to 
the text to provide a unified instructional sys-
tem. With the instructor resource you can spend 
your time teaching, not preparing to teach.
Features contained in the instructor resource 
include the following:
• Instructor’s Guide: This PDF file contains a 
short description of the material covered in 
each chapter and answers to questions in 
the text and Lab Manual.
• Lesson Plans: Each chapter has a lesson 
overview, objectives, key terms, and assign-
ments provided.
• ExamView Test Bank: Over 300 questions 
of varying levels of difficulty are provided 
in true/false, fill-in-the-blank, and short 
answer formats so that you can assess 
student comprehension. This versatile tool 
enables the instructor to manipulate the 
data to create original tests.
• PowerPoint Presentations: These slides pro-
vide the basis for a lecture outline to pres-
ent concepts and material. Key points and 
concepts can be graphically highlighted for 
student retention.
• Optical Image Gallery: This database of key 
images taken from the text can be used in 
lecture presentations, tests and quizzes, and 
PowerPoint presentations. Additional Image 
Masters tie directly to the chapters and can 
be used in place of transparency masters.
PREMIUM WEBSITE
We also included a Premium Web site with 
this edition. This Web site contains 12 video 
clips from the accompanying DVD set. The 
access code included with this text enables 
you to access this Web site.  Instructions for 
redeeming your access code and accessing 
the Web site are below. 
Redeeming an Access Code:
1. Go to: http://www.CengageBrain.com
2. Enter the Access code in the Prepaid Code 
or Access Key field, Redeem
3. Register as a new user or log in as an exist-
ing user if you already have an account 
with Cengage Learning or CengageBrain.
com, Redeem
4. Select Go to My Account 
5. Open the product from the My Account page
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Preface 
ix
Accessing a Premium Web site from 
CengageBrain → My Account:
1. Sign in to your account at: http://www
.cengagebrain.com  
2. Go to My Account to view purchases
3. Locate the desired product 
• You will find an eTextbook (CLeBook) and 
• an Online Study Tool (Premium Web site)
4. Click on the Open button next to the 
Premium Web site entry
CLeBook Premium
Discover the browser-based dynamic eBook, 
Cengage Learning’s new CLeBook Premium. 
With familiar web-based search engine inter-
face and tools, this powerful XML platform 
makes research and learning natural and 
intuitive in a digital age. CLeBook Premium 
displays the information you need instantly, 
allows text and images to be enlarged at 
the touch of a button, enables highlighting, 
note-taking, bookmarking, search, and cita-
tion capabilities. In addition to the browser 
view, you can also choose a traditional book 
page layout view.
A student companion site contains sample 
videos from the DVD set. In order to down-
load and view these digital clips, proceed to 
our Student Companion site.
Accessing a Student Companion Site 
from CengageBrain:
1. Go to: http://www.cengagebrain.com
2. Type author, title, or ISBN in the Search 
window
3. Locate the desired product and click on 
the title
4. When you arrive at the Product Page, click 
on the Free Stuff tab
5. Use the “Click Here” link to be brought to 
the Companion site
• Note: you will only see the Click Here link if 
there is a companion product available
6. Click on the Student Resources link in 
the left navigation pane to access the 
resources
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank God for the skills and 
knowledge He has given me and the ability and 
desire to write this text. I thank my wife for 42 
wonderful years of marriage and her encour-
agement, which is priceless. I thank my family 
members for their encouragement and sup-
port through each and every edition. I would 
like to thank my fellow colleagues, especially 
Carter Stanfield, at Athens Technical College 
for their support and encouragement. I would 
like to thank past and present students for sug-
gestions that have made each edition easier 
to write.
I would like to express appreciation to the 
following people for their input as reviewers 
of this edition:
Neal Broyles, Rolla Technical Institute, 
Rolla, MO
William H. Burklo, Indian River Community 
College, Ft. Pierce, FL
John Demree, Burlington County Institute 
of Technology, Medford, NJ
Gary M. DeWitt, Monroe Community College, 
Rochester, NY
Eugene C. Dickson, Indian River Community 
College, Ft. Pierce, FL
Herb Haushahn, College of DuPage, 
Glen Ellyn, IL
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

x 
Preface
Russell K Marcks, Sinclair Community 
College, Dayton, OH
James Mendieta, Western Technical 
Institute, El Paso, TX
Lawrence D. Priest, Tidewater Community 
College, Virginia Beach, VA
Robert Reynard, Western Technical Institute, 
El Paso, TX
Eugene Silberstein, Suffolk Country 
Community College, Brentwood, NY
Greg Skudlarek, Minneapolis Community 
Technical College, Minneapolis, MN
Darius Spence, North Virginia Community 
College, Woodbridge, VA
Richard Wirtz, Columbus State Community 
College, Columbus, OH
I would like to thank each of the following 
manufacturers and manufacturers’ represen-
tatives who have helped with the photographs 
and artwork:
A.W. Sperry Instrument Co., Inc.
American-Standard Air Conditioning
Amprobe Instruments, Inc.
BICC Industrial Cable Company
Carrier Corporation
Chromolox, Wiegand Industrial, Division 
of Emerson Electric Co.
Copeland Corporation
Thomson Delmar Learning
John Fluke Mfg. Co., Inc.
Gould Shawmut
Honeywell, Inc.
Johnson Controls/Penn
Lennox Industries, Inc.
Magnetek, Inc.
Motors & Armatures, Inc.
National Fire Protection Association
Ranco Controls
Sealed Unit Parts Co.
Siemens Electromechanical Components, 
Inc., Potter & Brumfield Products 
Division
Simpson Electric Co.
Sporlan Valve Company
Square D Company
Tecumseh Products Co.
Texas Instruments, Inc.
Thermo Pride Williamson Co.
Therm-O-Disc
The Trane Company, a Division of 
American Standard, Inc.
Westinghouse Electric Corp.
White-Rodgers Division, Emerson 
Electric Co.
York International Corporation
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗ Explain the effect of electric current on the human body.
◗ Understand the injuries that are possible from an electrical shock.
◗ Know the basic procedures in the event of an electrical shock.
◗ Understand the importance of properly grounding tools and appliances.
◗ Safely use electrical hand tools and electrical meters.
◗  Follow the principles of safety when installing and servicing heating and 
air-conditioning equipment.
KEY TERMS
Electrical Safety
C H A P T E R
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) 
Fuse
Circuit breaker 
Ground
Circuit lockout 
Ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI)
Conductor 
Grounding adapter
Double insulated 
Live electrical circuit
Electrical shock 
National Electrical Code® (NEC®)
Electromotive force 
Three-prong plug
1
R
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INTRODUCTION
Electricity is very commonplace in our environment today; in fact it’s hard 
for us to envision life without electricity. No matter what part of our lives 
we examine, electricity plays an important role, from our home life to our 
places of employment. Our homes are filled with personal electric appli-
ances like toothbrushes and hair dryers, small electric appliances like mix-
ers and toasters, major appliances like washers and refrigerator/freezers, 
and large equipment that heat and cool our living spaces. Many people 
work in environments that use large electrical equipment that are powered 
by an extremely high-voltage source. No matter what a person does, he or 
she is likely to come near electrical power sources that are dangerous.
The single most important element to remember when dealing with 
electrical circuits is to respect them. It is impossible for a service techni-
cian to adequately troubleshoot heating and air conditioning with the 
electrical power turned off, so it is imperative to use safe procedures when 
the power is on. Many troubleshooting procedures can be performed with 
the electric power to the equipment interrupted, such as checking the 
condition of electric motors, relays, contactors, transformers, and other 
electrical devices. However, there are other times when troubleshooting 
requires a connection to the power source—checking power available to 
the equipment, checking power available to a specific electrical device, or 
checking the voltage drop across a set of contacts in a relay, for example. 
The important thing for a HVAC/R technician to know is when it is neces-
sary to have the power to the unit on or off.
!CAUTION
Always perform repairs with the power off.
One of the most important things that a service technician must 
learn is how to safely work around equipment when the power is being 
supplied to the equipment. Good service technicians cannot fear being 
shocked, but they must always pay attention to what they are doing and 
not get careless when they are working around live electrical circuits. 
A live electrical circuit is one that is being supplied with electrical energy. 
It is possible for an installation technician to completely install a heating 
and air-conditioning system without the power being turned on until it is 
time to check the system for proper operation. No matter what part of the 
heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning industry a person works in, it is 
imperative that he or she respects electricity and knows how to properly 
work around it without being injured.
2 
CHAPTER 1   Electrical Safety
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 1.1   Electrical Injuries 
3
1.1 
ELECTRICAL INJURIES
Electrical shocks and burns are common hazards to personnel who are 
employed in the heating and air-conditioning industry. It is impossible to 
install or troubleshoot air-conditioning equipment without working close 
to electrical devices that are being supplied with electrical energy. It is 
the responsibility of the technician to develop a procedure for working 
around live electric circuits without coming in contact with conductors 
and electrical components that are being supplied with electrical power.
Electrical shock occurs when a person becomes part of an electrical 
circuit. When electricity passes through the human body, the results can 
range from death to a slight, uncomfortable stinging sensation, depend-
ing upon the amount of electricity that passes through the body, the 
path that the electricity takes, and the amount of time that the electricity 
flows. Technicians should never allow themselves to become the conduc-
tor between two wires or a hot and a ground in an electrical circuit.
The amount of electrical energy needed to cause serious injury is 
very small. The electrical energy supplied to an electrical circuit is called 
electromotive force, and it is measured in volts. In the heating and 
air-conditioning industry, the technician often is in close proximity to 
24 volts, which is used for the control circuits of most residential systems; 
120 volts, which is used to operate most fan motors in gas furnaces; 
240 volts, which is used to operate compressors in residential condensing 
units; and much higher voltages, which are used to operate compres-
sors in commercial and industrial cooling systems. The heating and air-
conditioning technician is often around voltages that can cause serious 
injury or even death.
Your body can become part of an electrical circuit in many ways. First, 
your body can become part of an electrical circuit if you come in contact 
with both a conductor that is being supplied with power and the neutral 
conductor or ground at the same time, as shown in Figure 1.1. The ground 
in an electrical system is a conductor that is used primarily to protect 
against faults in the electrical system and does not normally carry cur-
rent. The neutral is a current-carrying conductor in normal operation 
and is connected to the ground. Another way that you can become part 
of an electrical circuit is to come in contact with both a conductor that is 
being supplied with power and with the ground, as shown in Figure 1.2. 
A conductor is a wire or other device that is used as a path for electrical 
energy to flow. You may become part of the electrical circuit if you touch 
two conductors that are being supplied with electrical energy, as shown 
in Figure 1.3.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4 
CHAPTER 1   Electrical Safety
1.2
F I G U R E
Technician coming in contact 
with a conductor (shorted fan 
motor) and ground. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
The severity of injury from electric shock is directly related to the 
path that current flow takes in the body. The current flow is the amount 
of electrons flowing in a circuit and is measured in amperes. For example, 
if the thumb and index finger of the same hand come in contact with a 
conductor that is supplied with electrical energy and a neutral as shown 
in Figure 1.4, then the path would only be from the thumb to the index 
finger. If you touch a conductor being supplied with electrical energy with 
one hand and another conductor being supplied with electrical energy 
with the other hand, then the electrical path would be from one hand 
Wiring diagram
Fan relay
Small wire
in motor
Frame of 
furnace
Path
240 V
1.1
F I G U R E
Technician becoming 
part of an electrical 
circuit by coming in 
contact with L1 and 
neutral. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 1.1   Electrical Injuries 
5
up the arm and across the heart to the other arm and to the hand, as 
shown in Figure 1.5. If the path is through an arm and a leg, then it would 
also cross or come near to the heart. When the path of electrical flow 
crosses the heart, the risk of serious injury increases. Most fatal electrical 
accidents happen when the electrical flow is passed near or through the 
heart. When the electrical path crosses near or through the heart for only 
a short period of time, it can cause ventricular fibrillation of the heart, 
in which the heart only flutters instead of beats and the blood flow to 
the body stops. Unless the heartbeat is returned to normal quickly with 
immediate medical attention, the person will usually die.
The other injury caused by electrical shock is burns to the body. This 
usually occurs when the technician is shocked with high voltage. Electrical 
burns can come from an electrical arc, such as the arc from a high-voltage 
transformer, the arcing of high voltage, and a short circuit to ground, 
where electrons are allowed to flow unrestricted. For example, if you are 
FIGURE
F I G U R E
Technician touching 
L1 and L2 in an elec-
trical panel. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Electrical path from technician’s 
thumb to index finger. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
1.3
1.4
L1
 N
Electrical panel
Path
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6 
CHAPTER 1   Electrical Safety
working in an electrical panel with a screw-
driver and allow the blade of the screwdriver 
to touch a ground while in contact with a 
conductor that is being supplied with electrical 
energy, the potential difference is tremendous, 
and sparking will usually occur, as shown in 
Figure 1.6. If the resistance is very small, then 
the current flow in the circuit will be very 
large. A current flow through the body of 0.015 
ampere or less can prove fatal. By comparison, 
the current draw of a 60-watt light bulb is only 
0.50 ampere.
The following values can be associated with 
the feel of electrical shock: (1) 0.001  ampere 
(1 milliampere), a person can feel the  sensa tion; 
(2) 0.020 ampere (20 milliampere), a  person 
might not be able to let go; (3) 0.100  ampere 
(20 milliampere) can cause ventricular fibrillation; 
and (4) 0.200 ampere and above (>200 milliam-
pere) can cause severe burns and respiratory 
paralysis.
Another danger of electrical shock is a per-
son’s reaction when shocked. For example, if 
you are working on a ladder and get shocked, 
you could fall off the ladder. If you are using 
an electrical-powered hand tool and a short 
occurs, then you might drop the 
tool, causing personal injury to 
yourself or others. Technicians 
should keep in mind that their 
reactions when getting shocked 
could endanger others, so they 
must be cautious and attentive 
when working near live electrical 
circuits.
Technicians should be aware 
of the danger of electrical shock 
when using ladders that conduct 
electricity, such as aluminum 
ladders. If at all possible, the 
technician should use noncon-
ductive ladders on all jobs. The 
Electrical path across a 
technician’s heart. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
F I G U R E1.5
Electric motor
Junction box
of motor
Path
L1
L2
L1
L2
To unit
Fuses
240 V
Sparks fly
Screwdriver
1.6
F I G U R E
Screwdriver shorted between L2 and 
ground. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 1.3   National Electrical Code® 
7
two primary types of nonconductive ladders used today are wood and 
fiberglass. Nonconductive ladders work as well as the aluminum ladders, 
except that they lack the same ease of handling because of their added 
weight. Whenever you are using a ladder, you should make sure that you 
do not position the ladder under electrical conductors that you might 
accidentally come in contact with when climbing the ladder.
1.2 
DEALING WITH SHOCK VICTIMS
The first concern when assisting an electrical shock victim who is still in 
contact with an electrical source is personal safety. If an electrical acci-
dent occurs, personnel trying to assist a shock victim should not touch 
a person who is in contact with an electrical source. The rescuing party 
should think fast, proceed with caution, and request medical assistance.
Often when someone receives an electrical shock, they cannot let go 
of the conductor that is the source of the electrical energy. The person 
who is trying to help should never come in direct contact with the vic-
tim. If you try to remove a shock victim from an electrical source that is 
holding the victim, you become part of the circuit, and there will be two 
victims instead of one. Rescuers should think before they act. If the switch 
to disconnect the power source is close by, then turn the switch off. If the 
switch to disconnect the electrical power source is not close by or cannot 
be located, then use some nonconductive material to push the victim 
away from the electrical source. The material used to remove the victim 
from the electrical source should be dry to reduce the hazard of shock to 
the person attempting the rescue. If there are wires lying close to the vic-
tim and the rescuer is unsure if they are still connected to a power source, 
then the wires should be moved with a nonconductive material. When 
moving conductors or a victim who is still connected to a power source, 
you should never get too close to the conductors or the person.
As soon as the shock victim is safely away from the electrical source, 
the rescuer should start first aid procedures. The rescuer should see if the 
victim is breathing and has a heartbeat. If these vital signs are absent, 
then cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) should be started as soon as 
possible, or permanent damage may occur. At least one person on each 
service or installation truck should be trained to perform CPR in case of 
an accident requiring it. You should be trained before administering CPR.
1.3 
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE®
The National Electrical Code® and NEC® are registered trademarks of 
the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., Quincy, MA 02269. The 
National Electrical Code® specifies the minimum standards that must 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8 
CHAPTER 1   Electrical Safety
be met for the safe installation of electrical systems. The NEC® is 
revised every four years. Technicians should make sure when using 
the NEC® that the latest edition is being used. The information in the 
NEC® and local codes must be followed and adhered to when making 
any type of electrical connection in a structure. The NEC® is made up 
of nine chapters, with each of the first eight chapters divided into 
articles. Chapter 9 contains miscellaneous tables used in the design 
of electrical systems. The following is a list of the main topics of the 
eight chapters.
Chapter 1  General
Chapter 2  Wiring and Protection
Chapter 3  Wiring Methods and Materials
Chapter 4  Equipment for General Use
Chapter 5  Special Occupancies
Chapter 6  Special Equipment
Chapter 7  Special Conditions
Chapter 8  Communications Systems
Chapter 9  Tables
Chapters 1 through 4 are directly related to the electrical standards of the 
refrigeration, heating, and air-conditioning industry. Articles in Chapter 4 
that apply directly to the industry include
Article 400  Portable Cords and Cables
Article 422  Appliances
Article 424  Fixed Electric Space-Heating Equipment
Article 430  Motors, Motor Controls, and Controllers
Article 440  Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Equipment
1.4 
ELECTRICAL GROUNDING
The ground wire is used in an electrical circuit to allow current to flow 
back through the ground instead of through a person and causing electri-
cal shock. For example, if a live electrical conductor touched the frame 
or case of an air-conditioning unit and was not grounded, then whoever 
touched that air-conditioning unit would become part of the electrical 
circuit if he or she provided a ground. In other words, that person would 
receive an electrical shock, which could cause bodily harm or even death. 
This condition is shown in Figure 1.7. The ground wire forces the path of 
electrical current flow to pass through the electrical device that is used 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 1.4   Electrical Grounding 
9
to protect the circuit, such as a fuse or circuit breaker. The ground wire is 
identified by the color green in almost all cases.
If an electrically powered tool requires a ground, it is equipped with a 
three-prong plug, as shown in Figure 1.8. On this type of plug, the semicir-
cular prong is the grounding section of the plug and should never be cut 
off or removed. The same goes for extension cords; the grounding prong 
should never be removed for convenience. It is important when using a 
power tool that requires a ground that the technician make certain that 
the receptacle is grounded. Electrical tools or cords with a ground prong 
that is altered should be taken out of service until replaced or repaired. 
A grounding adapter shown in Figure 1.9 is a device that permits the 
connection of a three-prong plug to a two-prong receptacle. A grounding 
adapter should not be used on a power tool with a three-prong plug unless 
Junction 
box
Frame
Voltmeter
Ungrounded circuit
Small wire
in motor
touching 
frame
Concrete 
floor and
damp shoes
Fan
relay
Unit suspended from 
wooden structure (not
grounded)
115 V
1.7
F I G U R E
Technician receives electrical shock from grounded 
fan motor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10 
CHAPTER 1   Electrical Safety
there is a sure ground that the grounding wire 
can be attached to. The technician should 
use caution when using grounding adapters, 
because in many older structures grounding is 
not provided at the receptacle box. Most late-
model power tools are double insulated and 
do not require a ground. This type of tool will 
have a plug with only two prongs, as shown in 
Figure 1.10.
A ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) 
is an electrical device that will open the cir-
cuit, preventing current flow to the receptacle 
when a small electrical leak to ground is detected. Figure 1.11 shows a 
ground fault receptacle with an extension cord plugged into it. This type 
of receptacle is recommended for use with portable electric power tools. 
1.8
F I G U R E
Electrical drill with three-prong grounded plug. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Three to two prong grounding 
adapter. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
F I G U R E1.9
GREEN WIRE
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 1.5   Circuit Protection 
11
Ground fault circuit interrupters are also available in the form of circuit 
breakers, as shown in Figure 1.12. Portable ground fault interrupters are 
available for use where permanent units are not available, such as on job 
sites. They are designed to help protect the operator from being shocked. 
Use ground fault circuit interrupters when required by the National 
Electrical Code®.
1.5 
CIRCUIT PROTECTION
Electrical circuits in structures are designed to operate at or below a spe-
cific current (ampere) rating. Each electrical circuit should be protected, 
according to the NEC®. The wire or conductor of each circuit should be 
protected to prevent a higher current than it is designed to carry. The elec-
trical components in the circuit are also a consideration when protection 
is a concern. The standard wire used for receptacles in most residences is 
1.10
F I G U R E
Double-insulated electric drill with two prong plug. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12 
CHAPTER 1   Electrical Safety
#12 TW. The maximum current protection for this type of wire according 
to the NEC® is 20 amperes. However, if there is an electrical component 
in the circuit that requires protection at 10 amperes, the circuit protection 
should be at 10 amperes. If the current in the circuit becomes greater than 
the rating of the protective device, the device opens, disrupting the power 
source from the circuit.
The most common methods of circuit protection in structures 
are fuses, as shown in Figure 1.13, and circuit breakers, as shown in 
Figure 1.14. These devices protect the circuit by interrupting the flow of 
electrical energy to the circuit if the current in the circuit exceeds the 
1.11
F I G U R E
Ground fault circuit interrupter receptacle. (Photo 
by Bill Johnson)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 1.6   Circuit Lockout Procedures 
13
 rating of the fuse or circuit breaker. There are many 
types of fuses available today with special designs 
for particular purposes, but the primary purpose of 
any fuse is protection. Fuses are made with a short 
strip of metal alloy called an element that has a low 
melting point, depending on the rating of the fuse. 
If a larger current flow passes through the fuse than 
is designed to pass through the element, the ele-
ment will melt and open the circuit. Circuit break-
ers look a lot like ordinary light switches placed in 
an electrical panel. If the current in the circuit that 
a circuit breaker is protecting exceeds the breaker’s 
rating, then the switch of the circuit breaker will trip 
and interrupt the electrical energy going to the cir-
cuit. Fuses and circuit breakers should be sized for 
the particular application according to the National 
Electrical Code®. Technicians should never arbitrarily 
adjust the size of the fuse or circuit breaker without 
following the standards in the NEC® and local codes. 
Use only electrical conductors that are the proper 
size for the load of the circuit according to the NEC® 
to avoid overheating and possible fire.
1.6  CIRCUIT LOCKOUT PROCEDURES
Circuit lockout is a procedure that is used to inter-
rupt the power supply to an electrical circuit or 
equipment. When a technician is performing work on a circuit where 
there is a possibility that someone might accidentally restore electri-
cal power to that circuit, the technician should place a padlock and/
or a warning label on the applicable switch or circuit breaker. When 
you are working in a residence, the chance of the homeowner clos-
ing switches that might affect your safety is remote but still possible, 
so use some type of warning tag or verbally inform the homeowner. 
When working in a structure where there are many people who could 
open and close switches, you should make absolutely certain that the 
electrical energy is disconnected from the circuit. Once the circuit is 
opened, mark the circuit so that others will not turn the circuit on 
while the repair is under way. In a commercial and industrial setting, 
this can be accomplished by using safety warning tags, padlocks, or 
locking devices made for that purpose. Figure 1.15 shows a picture of a 
lockout tag-out kit used to safely disable an  electrical device.
1.12
FIGURE
Ground fault circuit 
interrupter breaker. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14 
CHAPTER 1   Electrical Safety
1.14
F I G U R E
Circuit breakers. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
1.13
F I G U R E
Fuses. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 1.7   Electrical Safety Guidelines 
15
1.7 
ELECTRICAL SAFETY GUIDELINES
  1. Follow the National Electrical Code® as a standard when making elec-
trical connections and calculating wire sizes and circuit protection.
  2. Make sure the electrical power supply is shut off at the distribution 
or entrance panel and locked out or marked in an approved manner.
  3. Always make sure that the electrical power supply is off on the unit 
that is being serviced unless electrical energy is required for the ser-
vice procedure.
  4. Always keep your body out of contact with damp or wet surfaces 
when working on live electrical circuits. If you must work in damp 
or wet areas, make certain that some method is used to isolate your 
body from these areas.
  5. Be cautious when working around live electrical circuits. Do not 
allow yourself to become part of the electrical circuit.
1.15
F I G U R E
Lockout tag-out kit. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16 
CHAPTER 1   Electrical Safety
  6. Use only properly grounded power tools connected to properly 
grounded circuits.
  7. Do not wear rings, watches, or other jewelry when working in close 
proximity to live electric circuits.
  8. Wear shoes with an insulating sole and heel.
  9. Do not use metal ladders when working near live electrical circuits.
10. Examine all extension cords and power tools for damage before 
using.
11. Replace or close all covers on receptacles that house electrical wiring 
and controls.
12. Make sure that the meter and the test leads being used are in good 
condition.
13. Discharge all capacitors with a 20,000-ohm, 4-watt resistor before 
touching the terminals.
14. When attempting to help someone who is being electrocuted, do 
not become part of the circuit. Always turn the electrical power off 
or use a nonconductive material to push the person away from 
the source.
15. Keep tools in good condition, and frequently check the insulated 
handles on tools that are used near electrical circuits.
SUMMARY
Electricity cannot be seen but it certainly can be felt. It takes ony a small 
amount of electricity to cause injury or even death. It is imperative that 
heating and air-conditioning technicians respect and be cautious around 
electrical circuits. It only takes a slip or careless move to find oneself in 
danger of electrocution or injury. The technician must be careful and cau-
tious around live electrical circuits.
It would be ideal if you never had to work in close proximity with live 
electrical circuits, but that is not possible, especially when you are called 
on to troubleshoot heating and air-conditioning systems and equipment. 
You will be responsible for your own safety, and you should learn to 
respect and work carefully around live electrical circuits.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
RQ1 
True or False: A heating and air-conditioning ser-
vice technician can usually troubleshoot heating 
and air-conditioning systems without the voltage 
being supplied to the equipment.
RQ2 
What is a live electrical circuit?
RQ3 
Which of the following voltages will a refrigeration, 
heating, and air-conditioning technician come in 
contact with in the industry?
a. 24 volts
b. 120 volts
c. 240 volts
d. all of the above
RQ4 
Electrical shock occurs when a person _________.
a. touches an insulated wire
b. touches an electric motor
c. becomes part of an electric circuit
d.  touches a conductor that has power applied to 
it, but is making contact with a ground
RQ5 
What are the important elements of electrical 
safety when working around live circuits?
RQ6 
Which of the following conditions is the most dan-
gerous and likely to cause serious injury?
a.  The technician touches a ground with his thumb 
and a live wire with his index finger.
b.  The technician touches a live wire with his hand 
but is standing on an insulated platform.
c.  The technician touches a live wire with his right 
hand and accidentally touches his right elbow 
on the metal part of the same unit.
d.  The technician touches a live conductor with his 
right hand and touches a ground with his left 
hand.
RQ7 
Which of the following is the standard by which 
electrical installations are measured in the United 
States?
a. National Electrical Code®
b. United Electrical Code®
c. Basic Electrical Code®
d. none of the above
RQ8 
True or False: A current flow of 0.1 ampere or less 
could be fatal.
RQ9 
What type of ladder should the technician use on 
the job?
a. aluminum
b. fiberglass
c. wood
d. both a and b
e. both b and c
RQ10 
What precautions should be taken when you see a 
coworker receiving an electrical shock?
RQ11 
True or False: It is recommended that at least one 
person on a truck know CPR.
RQ12 
True or False: The correct fuse size for an electrical 
circuit is one that is sized twice as large as needed 
for circuit protection.
RQ13 
What is the difference between a two-prong plug 
and a three-prong plug?
RQ14 
Which prong on a three-prong plug is the ground?
a. the left flat prong
b. the right flat prong
c. the center semicircular prong
d. none of the above
C H A P T E R  1  R E V I E W
 
Review Questions 
17
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18 
CHAPTER 1   Electrical Safety
RQ15 
True or False: A grounding adapter does no good if 
it is not connected to an electrical ground.
RQ16 
An electrical device that will open an electrical cir-
cuit, preventing current flow to the circuit if a small 
leak to ground is detected, is called a _________.
a. GFCI
b. common circuit breaker
c. fuse
d. receptacle
RQ17 
True or False: Receptacles used on the job site 
should be protected with a GFCI.
RQ18 
What precautions should you use when working 
in an area with a large number of people and you 
must disconnect the power from an appliance you 
are working on?
RQ19 
What is the difference between a fuse and a circuit 
breaker?
RQ20 
List at least five electrical safety rules that should 
be followed by refrigeration, heating, and air-
conditioning technicians.
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 1 in the Lab Manual.
C H A P T E R  1  R E V I E W
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 2.1   Diagnosis of Electrical Components 
19
19
OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗  Briefly explain the atomic theory and its relationship to physical objects and 
electron flow.
◗ Explain the flow of electrons and how it is accomplished.
◗  Explain electrical potential, current flow, and resistance and how they 
are measured.
◗ Explain electrical power and how it is measured.
◗ Explain Ohm’s law.
◗  Calculate the potential, current, and resistance of an electrical circuit using 
Ohm’s law.
◗  Calculate the electrical power of a circuit and the Btu/hour rating of an 
 electrical resistance heater.
KEY TERMS
Basic Electricity
C H A P T E RR
Alternating current
Ampere
Atom
Compound
Conductor
Current
Direct current
Electric energy
Electric power
Electric pressure
Electricity
Electrode
Electrolyte
Electron
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20 
CHAPTER 2   Basic Electricity
Element
Field of force
Free electron
Insulator
Kilowatthour
Law of electric charges
Matter
Molecule
Neutron
Nucleus
Ohm
Ohm’s law
Power factor
Proton
Resistance
Seasonal energy efficiency ratio 
(SEER)
Static electricity
Volt
Voltage/Potential difference/
Electromotive force
Watt
INTRODUCTION
Most control systems used in the heating, cooling, and refrigeration indus-
try use electrical energy to maintain the desired temperature. Electrical 
components in systems that require rotation, such as compressors and 
fan motors, use electric motors to accomplish this rotation. Many other 
devices, such as electric heaters, solenoid valves, and signal lights, that 
are incorporated into equipment also require electrical energy for opera-
tion. The use of electricity can be seen in all aspects of the industry.
Along with all the electric devices used in systems today come prob-
lems that are, in most cases, electrical and that must be corrected by 
field service technicians. Thus, it is essential for all industry technicians 
to understand the basic principles of electricity so that they can perform 
their jobs in the industry.
We begin our study of electricity with a discussion of atomic structure.
2.1  
ATOMIC THEORY
Matter is the substance of which a physical object is composed, whether 
it be a piece of iron, wood, or cloth, or whether it is a gas, liquid, or solid. 
Matter is composed of fundamental substances called elements. There 
are 110 elements that have been found in the universe. Elements, in turn, 
are composed of atoms. An atom is the smallest particle of an element 
that can exist alone or in combination. All matter is made up of atoms or 
a combination of atoms, and all atoms are electrical in structure.
Suppose a piece of chalk is broken in half and one piece discarded. 
Then the remaining piece is broken in half and one piece discarded. If this 
procedure is continued, eventually the piece of chalk will be broken into 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 2.1   Atomic Theory 
21
such a small piece that by breaking it once more there will no longer be a 
piece of chalk but only a molecule of chalk. A molecule is the smallest par-
ticle of a substance that has the properties of that substance. If a molecule 
of chalk is broken down into smaller segments, only individual atoms will 
exist, and they will no longer have the properties of chalk. The atom is the 
basic building block of all matter. The atom is the smallest particle that 
can combine with other atoms to form molecules.
Although the atom is a very small particle, it is also composed of 
several parts. The central part is called the nucleus. Other parts, called 
electrons, orbit around the nucleus. Each electron is a relatively small, 
negatively charged particle. The electrons orbit the nucleus in much the 
same way that the planets orbit the sun.
The nucleus, the center section of an atom, is composed of protons 
and neutrons. The proton is a heavy, positively charged particle. The 
proton has an electric charge that is opposite but equal to that of the 
electron. All atoms contain a like number of protons and electrons. 
The neutron is a neutral particle, which means that it is neither positively 
nor negatively charged. The neutrons tend to hold the protons together 
in the nucleus.
The simplest atom that exists is the hydrogen atom, which consists of 
one proton that is orbited by one electron, as shown in Figure 2.1(a). Not 
all atoms are as simple as the hydrogen atom. Other atoms have more 
particles. The difference in each different atom is the number of elec-
trons, neutrons, and protons that the atom contains. The hydrogen atom 
has one proton and one electron. The oxygen atom has eight protons, 
eight neutrons, and eight electrons, as shown in Figure 2.1(b). The silver 
atom contains 47 protons, 61 neutrons, and 47 electrons. The more par-
ticles an atom has, the heavier the atom is. Since there are 110 elements, 
but millions of different types of substances, there must be some way of 
combining atoms and elements to form these substances.
When elements (and atoms) are combined, they form a chemical 
union that results in a new substance, called a compound. For example, 
when two hydrogen atoms combine with one oxygen atom, the com-
pound water is formed. The atomic structure of one molecule of water is 
shown in Figure 2.1(c).
The chemical symbol for a compound denotes the atoms that make 
up that compound. Refrigerant 22 (R-22) is a substance commonly used 
in refrigeration systems. A refrigerant is a fluid that absorbs heat inside 
the conditioned area and releases heat outside the conditioned area. 
The chemical symbol for one molecule of R-22 is CHC1F2. One molecule 
of the refrigerant contains one atom of carbon, one atom of hydrogen, 
two atoms of fluorine, and one atom of chlorine. The  chemical name 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

22 
CHAPTER 2   Basic Electricity
for R-22 is monochlorodifluoromethane. All materials can be identi-
fied according to their chemical makeup, that is, the atoms that form 
their molecules.
2.2 
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE CHARGES
An atom usually has an equal number of protons and electrons. When 
this condition exists, the atom is electrically neutral because the posi-
tively charged protons exactly balance the negatively charged electrons. 
However, under certain conditions, an atom can become unbalanced by 
losing or gaining an electron. When an atom loses or gains an electron, it 
is no longer neutral. It is either negatively or positively charged, depend-
ing on whether the electron is gained or lost. Thus, in an atom, a charge 
exists when the number of protons and electrons is not equal.
Under certain conditions, some atoms can lose a few electrons for 
short periods. Electrons that are in the outer orbits of some materials, 
especially metals, can be easily knocked out of their orbits. Such electrons 
are referred to as free electrons, and materials with free electrons are 
called conductors. When electrons are removed from the atom, the atom 
becomes positively charged, because the negatively charged electrons 
have been removed, creating an unbalanced condition in the atom.
An atom can just as easily acquire additional electrons. When this 
occurs, the atom becomes negatively charged.
2.1
F I G U R E
Atomic structure of a water molecule (one atom of oxygen and two atoms 
of hydrogen). (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
H
H
1+
1+
1+
1+
8+
8n
8+
8n
O
H2O
1 Molecule of water
2 Hydrogen atoms
(a)
(b)
(c)
1 Oxygen atom
+
=
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 2.3   Flow of Electrons 
23
Charges are thus created when there is an excess of electrons or pro-
tons in an atom. When one atom is charged and there is an unlike charge 
in another atom, electrons can flow between the two. This electron flow 
is called electricity.
An atom that has lost or gained an electron is considered unstable. 
A surplus of electrons in an atom creates a negative charge. A shortage 
of electrons creates a positive charge. Electric charges react to each other 
in different ways. Two negatively charged particles repel each other. 
Positively charged particles also repel each other. Two opposite charges 
attract each other. The law of electric charges states that like charges 
repel and unlike charges attract. Figure 2.2 shows an illustration of the 
law of electric charges.
All atoms tend to remain neutral because the outer orbits of electrons 
repel other electrons. However, many materials can be made to acquire a 
positive or negative charge by some mechanical means, such as friction. 
The familiar crackling when a hard rubber comb is run through hair on a 
dry winter day is an example of an electric charge generated by friction.
2.3 
FLOW OF ELECTRONS
The flow of electrons can be accomplished by several different means: 
friction, which produces static electricity; chemical, which produces elec-
tricity in a battery; and magnetic (induction), which produces electricity 
in a generator. Other methods are also used, but the three mentioned 
here are the most common.
2.2
F I G U R E
Like charges repel and unlike charges attract each other. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
(a) Repulsion of two
 
positive charges
(b) Repulsion of two
 
negative charges
(c) Attraction of positive
 
and negative charges
+
+
–
–
+
–
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24 
CHAPTER 2   Basic Electricity
Static Electricity
The oldest method of moving electrons is by static electricity. Static elec-
tricity produces a flow of electrons by permanently displacing an electron 
from an atom. The main characteristic of static electricity is that a pro-
longed or steady flow of current is not possible. As soon as the charges 
between the two substances are equalized (balanced), electron flow stops.
Friction is usually the cause of static electricity. Sliding on a plastic 
seat cover in cold weather and rubbing silk cloth on a glass rod are two 
examples of static electricity produced by friction. Static electricity, no 
matter what the cause, is merely the permanent displacement or transfer 
of electrons. To obtain useful work from electricity, a constant and steady 
flow of electrons must be produced.
Electricity Through Chemical Means
Electricity can also be produced by the movement of electrons due to chemi-
cal means. A battery produces an electron flow by a chemical reaction that 
causes a transfer of electrons between two electrodes. An electrode is a solid 
conductor through which an electric current can pass. One electrode  collects 
electrons and one gives away electrons. The dry cell battery uses two elec-
trodes made of two dissimilar metals inserted in a pastelike electrolyte. 
Electricity is produced when a chemical  reaction occurs in the electrolyte 
between the electrodes, causing an electron flow. The construction of a dry 
cell battery is shown in Figure 2.3. A dry cell battery is shown in Figure 2.4.
Zinc case
(negative
electrode)
Negative
terminal
Positive terminal
Seal
Chemical
paste
Carbon rod
(positive
electrode)
2.3
FIGURE
Construction of a dry 
cell battery. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
2.4
FIGURE
Dry cell battery. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 2.3   Flow of Electrons 
25
The container of a dry cell battery, which is made of zinc, is the nega-
tive electrode (gives away electrons). The carbon rod in the center of the 
dry cell is the positive electrode (collects electrons). The space between 
the electrodes is filled with an electrolyte, usually manganese dioxide 
paste. The acid paste causes a chemical reaction between the carbon elec-
trode and the zinc case. This reaction displaces the electrons, causing an 
electron flow. The top of the dry cell is sealed to prevent the electrolyte 
from drying and to allow the cell to be used in any position. The dry cell 
battery will eventually lose all its power, because energy is being used 
and not being replaced.
The storage battery is different from a dry cell battery because it can 
be recharged. Thus, it lasts somewhat longer than a dry cell battery. But 
it, too, will eventually lose all its energy.
The storage battery consists of a liquid electrolyte and negative and 
positive electrodes. The electrolyte is diluted sulfuric acid. The posi-
tive electrode is coated with lead dioxide and the negative electrode is 
sponge lead. The chemical reaction between the two electrodes and the 
 electrolyte displaces electrons and creates voltage between the plates. 
The storage battery is recharged by reversing the current flow into the 
battery. The storage battery shown in Figure 2.5 is commonly used in 
automobile electric systems.
2.5
FIGURE
Common storage battery used in automobile electrical system. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

26 
CHAPTER 2   Basic Electricity
Electricity Through Magnetism
The magnetic or induction method of producing electron flow uses a 
conductor to cut through a magnetic field, which causes a displacement 
of electrons. The alternator, generator, and transformer are the best 
examples of the magnetic method. The magnetic method is used to sup-
ply electricity to consumers.
The flow of electrons in a circuit produces magnetism, which is used 
to cause movement, or thermal energy, which in turn is used to cause 
heat. A magnetic field is created around a conductor—an apparatus for 
electrons to flow through—when there is a flow of electrons in the con-
ductor. The flow of electrons through a conductor with a resistance will 
cause heat, such as in an electric heater.
The heating, cooling, and refrigeration industry uses magnetism to 
close relays and valves and to operate motors by using coils of wire to 
increase the strength of the magnetic field.
2.4 
CONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS
The structure of an atom of an element is what makes it different from 
the atom of another element. The number of protons, neutrons, and 
electrons and the arrangement of the electrons in their orbits vary from 
element to element. In some elements, the outer electrons rotating 
around the nucleus are easily removed from their orbits. As stated earlier, 
 elements that have atoms with this characteristic are called conductors. 
A conductor can transmit electricity or electrons.
Most metals are conductors, but not all metals conduct electricity 
equally well. The most common conductors are silver, copper, and alu-
minum. The high cost of silver prevents it from being used widely. Its use 
is largely limited to contacts in certain electrical switching devices such 
as contactors and relays. Copper, almost as good a conductor as silver, is 
usually used because it is less expensive.
Materials that do not easily give up or take on electrons are called 
insulators. An insulator retards the flow of electrons. Glass, rubber, and 
asbestos are examples of insulators. Thermoplastic is one of the best 
insulators used to cover wire today. How well an insulator prevents 
 electron flow depends on the strength of the potential applied. If the 
potential is strong enough, the insulator will break down, causing elec-
trons to flow through it.
There is no perfect insulator. All insulators will break down under 
certain conditions if the potential is high enough. Increasing the thick-
ness of the insulation helps overcome this problem.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 2.5   Electric Potential 
27
Conductors and insulators are important parts of electric circuits 
and electric systems. They are widely used in all electric components in 
the industry.
2.5 
ELECTRIC POTENTIAL
In a water system, water can flow as long as pressure is applied to one 
end of a pipe and the other end of the pipe is open. The greater the pres-
sure in a water system, the greater the quantity of water that will flow. 
Similarly, in an electrical system, electrons will flow as long as electric 
pressure is applied to the system. Voltage, potential difference, and elec-
tromotive force are all terms used to describe electric pressure.
Recall that the law of electric charges states that unlike charges 
attract. Consequently, there is a pull, or force, of attraction between two 
dissimilarly charged objects. We call this pull of attraction a field of force.
Another way of looking at this is to picture excess electrons (the nega-
tive charge) as straining to reach the point where there are not enough 
electrons (the positive charge). If the two charges are connected by a 
conductor, the excess electrons will flow to the point where there are not 
enough electrons. But if the two charges are separated by an insulator, 
which prevents the flow of electrons, the excess electrons cannot move. 
Hence, an excess of electrons will pile up at one end of the insulator, with 
a corresponding lack, or deficiency, of electrons at the other end.
As long as the electrons cannot flow, the field of force between the 
two dissimilarly charged ends of the insulator increases. The resulting 
strain between the two ends is called the electric pressure. This pres-
sure can become quite great. After a certain limit is reached, the insu-
lator can no longer hold back the excess electrons, as discussed in the 
previous section. Hence, the electrons will rush across the insulator to 
the other end.
Electric pressure that causes electrons to flow is called voltage. Voltage 
is the difference in electric potential (or electric charge) between two 
points. The volt (V) is the amount of pressure required to force 1 ampere 
(A, the unit of measurement for current flow) through a resistance of 
1 ohm (Ω, the unit of measurement for resistance; Ω is the Greek letter 
omega). In the industry, voltage is almost always measured in the range 
of the common volt. In other areas, the voltage may be measured on a 
smaller scale of a millivolt (mV), or one-thousandth of a volt. For larger 
measurements of the volt, the kilovolt (kV), equal to 1000 volts, is used.
1 millivolt  0.001 volt
1 kilovolt  1000 volts
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

28 
CHAPTER 2   Basic Electricity
To maintain electric pressure, we must have some way to move elec-
trons in the same manner that water pressure moves water. In an electric 
circuit, this can be maintained by a battery, as shown in Figure 2.6, or 
by a generator or alternator, as shown in Figure 2.7. The battery forces 
electrons to flow to the positive electrode and causes electric pressure. 
A generator causes electric pressure by transferring electrons from one 
place to another.
Electromotive force can be produced in several ways. The easi-
est method to understand is the simple dry cell battery, discussed in 
Section 2.3. The most popular method of producing an electromotive 
force is by using an alternating current generator. The alternating current 
generator is supplied with power from another source. Then a wire loop 
is rotated through the magnetic field created by the voltage being applied, 
and an electromotive force is produced through the wire loop. We will 
discuss these ideas in more detail in succeeding sections.
2.6 
CURRENT FLOW
Electrons flowing in an electric circuit are called current. Current flow can 
be obtained in an electric circuit by a bolt of lightning, by static electricity, 
or by electron flow from a generator. Figure 2.8 shows an electric system 
with electric pressure; the quantity of electrons flowing is also given.
Electron flow
Light bulb
Potential
difference
–
+
Dry cell
battery
2.6
FIGURE
A dry cell battery supplying 
electric potential (voltage) 
to an electric circuit. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
2.7
FIGURE
A generator supplying electric 
potential (voltage) to an 
electric circuit. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Generator
Light bulb
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 2.7   Resistance 
29
There are two types of electric current: 
direct current and alternating current. Direct 
current flows in one direction. It is the type of 
current produced by dry cell batteries. Direct 
current is rarely used in the industry as a main 
power source but is used in some modern con-
trol circuits.
Alternating current reverses its direction at 
regular intervals. It is the type of current supplied 
to most homes by electric utility companies. It 
is the most commonly used source of electric 
potential in the heating, cooling, and refrigeration 
industry. Alternating current will be discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 7.
The current in an electric circuit is measured 
in amperes (A). An ampere is the amount of current required to flow 
through a resistance of 1 ohm with a pressure of 1 volt. An ampere is 
measured with an ammeter. In the industry, the ampere is used almost 
exclusively. If a smaller unit of ampere measurement is required, the 
milliampere (mA), which is one-thousandth of an ampere, can be used. 
For larger measurements of amperes, the kiloampere (kA) can be used. 
One kiloampere equals 1000 amperes.
1 milliampere  0.001 ampere
1 kiloampere  1000 amperes
The current that an electric device draws can be used as a guide to 
the correct operation of the equipment by installation and service tech-
nicians. The electric motor is the largest current-drawing device in most 
heating, cooling, and refrigeration systems. The larger the electric device 
(load), the larger the current flow. Any electric device that uses electricity 
requires a certain current when operating properly.
2.7 
RESISTANCE
Resistance is opposition to the flow of electrons in an electric circuit 
and is measured in ohms. The electrical device or load in an electrical 
circuit that will produce some useful work is known as or represents 
the resistance of that circuit. Figure 2.9 shows two electric systems with 
 different resistances. One ohm is the amount of resistance that will 
allow 1 ampere to flow with a pressure of 1 volt. The industry uses sim-
ple ohms for resistance in most cases because the scale is broad enough 
2.8
FIGURE
An electric system; electric 
potential forces electrons 
through a wire (a conduc-
tor) to a load (electric 
heater). (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
240  Volts
 electric
  pressure
 Electric
heater
             (resistance)     
 15  Amperes
electron  flow
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30 
CHAPTER 2   Basic Electricity
for most  applications. In some special cases, the microhm (μΩ), which 
is one-millionth of an ohm, is used for extremely small resistance read-
ings. Larger resistance readings are read in megohms (MΩ); 1 megohm is 
equal to 1 million ohms.
1 microhm  0.000001 ohm
  1 megohm  1,000,000 ohms
All electric devices will have a certain resistance. That resistance 
depends on the size and purpose of the device. As service technicians, 
you will have to become familiar with this value in components. If the 
resistance deviates far from the specified value or the estimated value, 
the device can be considered faulty.
2.8 
ELECTRIC POWER AND ENERGY
When electrons move from the negative to the positive end of a con-
ductor, work is done. Electric power is the rate at which the electrons 
do work. That is, electric power is the rate at which electricity is being 
used. The power of an electric circuit is measured in watts (W). A watt 
2.9
FIGURE
 Two electric systems with different resistances. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Electric
heater with
a resistance
of 5 Ω     
24 A
120 VAC
(pressure)
(current flow )
Electric
heater with
a resistance
of 10 Ω     
12 A
120 VAC
(pressure)
(current flow)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 2.8   Electric Power and Energy 
31
of  electricity is 1 ampere flowing with a pressure of 1 volt. The electric 
power of a circuit is the voltage times the amperage.
electric power  voltage  amperage
In an alternating current circuit, the voltage and current are not in 
phase. To obtain the correct power consumed by the circuit, the product 
of the voltage times the amperage must also be multiplied by a power 
factor. The power factor is the true power (measured with a wattmeter) 
divided by the calculated power and is expressed as a percentage. In a 
direct current circuit, the product of the voltage times the amperage gives 
the power of the circuit; the power factor is not needed.
The industry uses the units of watts for devices that consume a small 
amount of power. Examples of such devices are small electric motors and 
small resistance heaters. Other units used are the horsepower (hp) and 
the British thermal unit (Btu). One horsepower is equal to 746 watts. One 
watt is equal to 3.41 Btu per hour.
1 horsepower  746 watts
1 watt  3.41 Btu/hour
These conversion figures are often used in the industry to calculate 
the Btu rating of an electric heater if the watt rating is known. The horse-
power conversion is used to calculate the horsepower of a motor only if 
the watts are known.
The rate at which electric power is being used at a specific time is 
called electric energy. Electric energy is measured in watthours (Wh). For 
example, if a 5000-watt electric heater is running for 2 hours, it consumes 
10,000 watt-hours of electric energy.
The wattage rating or consumption of any electric device only denotes 
the amount of power the device is using. However, time must be consid-
ered when calculating electric energy, that is, the power being consumed 
over a definite period. Watthours give the number of watts used for a 
specific period of time.
The units of kilowatts (kW) are usually used to determine the amount 
of electricity consumed. Thus, an electric utility calculates the power bill 
of its customers using kilowatthours (kWh), because the watthour read-
ings would be extremely large. The kilowatthour reading is relatively 
small. One thousand watts used for 1 hour equals 1 kilowatthour. All 
electric meters used to measure the consumption of electricity record 
consumption in kilowatthours.
Heating and air-conditioning technicians are often required to make 
a calculation for the output of an electric heater in Btu’s rather than 
in watts. The industry rates electric heating equipment in watts or 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32 
CHAPTER 2   Basic Electricity
INDUSTRIAL HEATING PRODUCTS
EDWIN L. WIEGAND DIVISION
EMERSON ELECTRIC COMPANY
P I T T S B U R G H , PA  U . S . A .
LISTED
LISTED
DUCT HEATER
61R3
UL
®
CATALOG NO
CUSTOMER  IDENT NO
KW
V
AMPS
AMPS
               MAX  VOLTS
               MAX  AMPS
VOLTAGE
INDUCTIVE CURRENT
NONINDUCTIVE CURRENT
SUPPLY V
OPERATING  V
MIN RATING
  REQUIREMENTS
 FOR REMOTE
  THERMOSTAT
PHASE, AC 60 HZ
DATE CODE
NO OF STAGES
NO CIRCUITS
CONTROL CIRCUIT
MOTOR CIRCUIT
CAUTION
 DISCONNECT ALL POWER BEFORE REMOVING
       TERMINAL BOX COVER OR WORKING ON HEATER
TERMINAL BOX MUST NOT BE ENCLOSED IN
ANY MANNER      
SEE INSTALLATION INSTRUCTIONS FOR
HEATER SPACING, WIRING INSTRUCTIONS, ETC.
SUITABLE FOR USE WITH HEAT PUMPS OR
CENTRAL AIR CONDITIONERS
MINIMUN AIR VELOCITIES:
BELOW 80º F       INLET AIR
FT/MIN
FT/MIN
81 THRU 100º F    INLET AIR
DHIIXX-GP-8HX12WXO6.50D-
208V11P-02.50KW-4MP-SSWAM-AST120TB         
N/A
N/A
N/A
156MA
156MA
120
        N/A 
480/60HZ
120/60HZ
2.50
12.0
332K
268
348
208
1
1
1
2.10
FIGURE
Data plate of an electric heater. 
(Courtesy of Chromalox®, Wiegard Industrial 
Division of Emerson Electric Co.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 2.9   Ohm’s Law 
33
kilowatts, which does not give consumers figures that they can under-
stand. Most consumers are familiar with the term Btu and know basically 
what it means in terms of heat output. Therefore, the customer often 
will request the Btu output rather than the wattage of a heating appli-
ance. The Btu output can be easily calculated by multiplying the number 
of watts by the conversion factor of 3.41 Btu/hour. Figure 2.10 shows an 
electric data plate for an electric heater. The wattage on the data plate is 
2.50 kilowatts. Therefore, the Btu output is
  2500  3.41 Btu / hour  8525 Btu / hour
Another term that is used because of the high cost of energy is the 
seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER) of an air-conditioning unit or heat 
pump, measured in Btu’s per watt. The SEER is the Btu output of the equip-
ment divided by the power input with a seasonal adjustment. For example, 
if an air-conditioning unit has a SEER of 10, it will produce 10 Btu of cool-
ing per watt of power consumed by the equipment. All air-conditioning 
manufacturers use SEER ratings for their equipment. The standards for 
SEER are set by the Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute.
2.9 
OHM’S LAW
The relationship among the current, electromotive force, and resistance 
in an electric circuit is known as Ohm’s law. In the nineteenth century, 
George Ohm developed the mathematical comparisons of the major fac-
tors in an electric circuit. Stated in simple terms, Ohm’s law says it will 
take 1 volt of electrical pressure to push 1 ampere of electrical current 
flow through 1 ohm of electrical resistance; in other words, the greater 
the voltage the greater the current, and the greater the resistance the 
lesser the current. Ohm’s law is represented mathematically as “current 
is equal to the electromotive force divided by the resistance.” The follow-
ing equation expresses Ohm’s law:
I  E
      R
In the equation, I represents the current in amperes, E represents the 
electromotive force in volts, and R represents the resistance in ohms. 
Ohm’s law can also be expressed by the following two formulas:
 
E  IR  R  E
                       I
In any of the three formulas, when two elements of an electric circuit 
are known, the unknown factor can be calculated. Ohm’s law must be 
modified for alternating circuit calculations to account for the effects of 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34 
CHAPTER 2   Basic Electricity
coils and capacitors in alternating current circuits. Alternating current 
will be discussed in Chapter 7. However, the general ideas or principles of 
Ohm’s law apply to alternating current circuits.
The following examples show the relationships of the voltage, cur-
rent, and resistance in an electric current.
Example 1 What is the current in the circuit shown in Figure 2.11?
Step 1: I   E
 
  R
Step 2: I   120
 
        10
Step 3: I  12 A
Example 2 What is the resistance of a 100-watt light bulb if the voltage 
is 120 volts and the current is 0.83 ampere?
Step 1: R   E
 
     I
Step 2: R    120
 
          0.83
Step 3: R  145 Ω
Example 3 What is the voltage supplied to the circuit in Figure 2.12?
E = 120 V
R = 10 Ω
  I = ?
2.11
FIGURE
Simple electric cir-
cuit for Example 1. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
E = ?
R = 48 Ω
  I = 5 A
2.12
FIGURE
Simple electric cir-
cuit for Example 3. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 2.10   Calculating Electric Power 
35
Step 1: E  IR
Step 2: E  5  48
Step 3: E  240 V
Ohm’s law allows the calculation of the missing factor if the other 
two factors are known or can be measured. Figure 2.13 shows a simple 
method for remembering Ohm’s law. If one of the factors in the circle is 
covered, the letters remaining in the circle give the correct formula for 
calculating the covered factor.
E
I
R
E
If calculating for E, cover E
and use the formula
E = I  R
I
R
E
If calculating for I, cover I
and use the formula
I
R
I = E
R
E
If calculating for R, cover R
and use the formula
I
R
R = E
I
2.13
FIGURE
Using Ohm’s law (not 
applicable on AC inductive 
circuits). (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
2.10 CALCULATING ELECTRIC POWER
Electric power can be calculated by using the formula P  IE. Two other 
formulas can be used to calculate the electric power of an electric circuit 
by substituting in the following equations:
P  E2  P  I2R
 R
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36 
CHAPTER 2   Basic Electricity
The letter designations in these formulas are the same as in Ohm’s 
law, with P representing power in watts.
The following three examples show the electric power calculations of 
three electric circuits.
Example 4 What is the power consumption of an electric circuit using 
15 amperes and 120 volts?
Step 1: P  IE
Step 2: P  15  120
Step 3: P  1800 W
Example 5 What is the current of an electric heater rated at 5000 watts 
on 240 volts?
Step 1: I  P
 
E
Step 2: I  5000
 
240
Step 3: I  20.8 A
Example 6 What is the power of an electric circuit with 5 amperes 
current and 10 ohms resistance?
Step 1: P  I2R
Step 2: P  52  10
Step 3: P  25  10
Step 4: P  250 W
SUMMARY
Everything—solids, liquids, and gases—is composed of matter. 
Matter can be broken down into molecules (the smallest particles of 
physical objects) and atoms (the smallest particles of an element 
that can exist alone or in combination). An atom is composed of a 
nucleus (the central part) and electrons (negatively charged) that orbit 
around the nucleus, much like the planets orbit the sun. The nucleus 
is composed of protons (positively charged) and neutrons (no charge). 
The number of protons is usually equal to the number of electrons, 
making the atom electrically neutral. When an atom loses electrons, 
it becomes positively charged. When it gains electrons, it becomes 
negatively charged. The law of charges states that like charges repel 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and unlike charges attract. Materials can be made to acquire positive 
or negative charges.
Electrons can be made to flow by the use of friction, chemicals, and 
magnetism. A conductor is a material capable of transmitting electrons 
or electricity. Most metals are conductors. An insulator is a material that 
resists or prevents electron flow.
There are four important factors in any electric circuit: electromotive 
force, current, resistance, and power. The electromotive force of an elec-
tric circuit is the actual pressure in the circuit, much like water pressure 
in a water system. The electromotive force in an electric circuit is mea-
sured in volts. The voltage (pressure) must be sufficient to overcome the 
resistance of the circuit. Alternating current is used almost exclusively in 
the industry to supply electric power to equipment.
The number of electrons flowing in an electric circuit is called the cur-
rent flow. The current flow of an electric circuit is measured in amperes. 
An ampere is the amount of current that will flow through a resistance 
of 1 ohm with a pressure of 1 volt.
The resistance of an electric circuit is measured in ohms. All electric 
loads have some resistance. Electric power is the rate at which electric 
energy is being used in an electric circuit. Electric power is measured in 
watts and kilowatts. Electric utility companies use kilowatthours in most 
cases to charge their customers for the electric energy that they have 
consumed. The kilowatthour is a measure of electric energy and takes 
into consideration the amount of time and the power consumption. One 
thousand watts used for a period of 1 hour equals 1 kilowatthour. Voltage, 
amperage, resistance, and wattage often use the prefixes kilo- or milli- to 
represent larger or smaller quantities of these factors and to avoid the use 
of extremely large or small numbers.
Ohm’s law gives the relationship among the current, electromotive 
force, and resistance in an electric circuit. Ohm’s law states the relation-
ship mathematically. When any two factors in an electric circuit are 
known or can be measured, the formulas for Ohm’s law can be used 
to find the third factor. Electric power can be calculated by using the 
 formula P  IE.
 
 
Summary 
37
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2  R E V I E W
38 
CHAPTER 2   Basic Electricity
RQ1 
All physical objects are composed of __________
a. substances
b. matter
c. neutrons
d. ketons
RQ2 
What is an atom?
RQ3 
Which of the following is a part of the atom?
a. electron
b. proton
c. neutron
d. all of the above
RQ4 
What is static electricity?
RQ5 
Name three ways electricity can be produced.
RQ6 
What part do protons and electrons play in the 
production of electricity?
RQ7 
Which of the following is the simplest atom that 
exists?
a. carbon
b. hydrogen
c. oxygen
d. sulphur
RQ8 
What are the four most important factors in an 
electric circuit?
RQ9 
What is electromotive force?
RQ10 
Electromotive force is commonly measured in 
__________.
a. amperes
b. ohms
c. volts
d. watts
RQ11 
What is current?
RQ12 
How is current measured?
a. amperes
b. ohms
c. volts
d. watts
RQ13 
What is resistance?
RQ14 
How is resistance commonly measured?
a. amperes
b. ohms
c. volts
d. watts
RQ15 
What is electrical power?
RQ16 
How is electrical power commonly measured?
a. amperes
b. ohms
c. volts
d. watts
RQ17 
Where do electrons exist in an atom, and what is 
their charge?
RQ18 
True or False: All atoms tend to lose electrons.
RQ19 
State the law of electric charges.
RQ20 
What is a proton? Where does it normally exist in 
an atom, and what is its charge?
RQ21 
Describe briefly the method a dry cell battery uses 
to produce voltage.
RQ22 
What is a conductor?
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  2  R E V I E W
 
 
Review Questions 
39
RQ23 
Which of the following is the best conductor?
a. wood
b. thermoplastic
c. copper
d. cast iron
RQ24 
What is an insulator?
RQ25 
Which of the following is the best insulator?
a. wood
b. thermoplastic
c. copper
d. cast iron
RQ26 
Why do metals make the best conductors?
RQ27 
How do electric utility companies charge customers 
for electricity?
RQ28 
What is the meaning of SEER when used in con-
junction with an air-conditioning unit?
RQ29 
State Ohm’s law.
RQ30 
True or False: Ohm’s law applies to all types of 
electrical circuits.
RQ31 
What is the ampere draw of a 5000-watt electric 
heater used on 120 volts?
a. 42 ampere
b. 45 ampere
c. 50 ampere
d. 52 ampere
RQ32 
What is the resistance of the heating element of an 
electric iron if the ampere draw is 8 amperes when 
115 volts are applied?
a. 10 ohms
b. 12 ohms
c. 14 ohms
d. 16 ohms
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 2 in the Lab Manual.
RQ33 
What is the voltage of a small electric heater if the 
heater is drawing 12 amperes and has a resistance 
of 10 ohms?
a. 120 volts
b. 240 volts
c. 60 volts
d. none of the above
RQ34 
What is the Btu/hour output of an electric heater 
rated at 15 kilowatts?
a. 51.15 Btu/hour
b. 51,150 Btu/hour
c. 5115 Btu/hour
d. none of the above
RQ35 
What is the kilowatt output of an electric heater 
that has an ampere draw of 50 A and a voltage 
source of (a) 208 volts? (b) 240 volts?
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗ Explain the concepts of a basic electric circuit.
◗ Explain the characteristics of a series circuit.
◗ Explain the characteristics of a parallel circuit.
◗  Describe how series circuits are used as control circuits in the 
air-conditioning industry.
◗  Describe how parallel circuits are used as power circuits in the 
air-conditioning industry.
◗  Explain the relationship and characteristics of the current, resistance, and 
electromotive force in a series circuit.
◗  Explain the relationship and characteristics of the current, resistance, and 
electromotive force in a parallel circuit.
◗ Calculate the current, resistance, and electromotive force in a series circuit.
◗ Calculate the current, resistance, and electromotive force in a parallel circuit.
◗ Explain the characteristics of the series-parallel circuit.
◗  Describe how series-parallel circuits are utilized in the air-conditioning 
industry.
Electric Circuits
C H A P T E R
40
3
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INTRODUCTION
The electrical circuitry in a modern heating, cooling, and refrigeration 
system is important to the technicians who install or work on the electri-
cal systems. Any electrical system used in the industry is composed of 
various types of circuits. Each type is designed to do a specific task within 
the system. We will look at some commonly used types of circuits in 
this chapter.
The two most important kinds of circuits are parallel circuits and 
series circuits. A parallel circuit is an electric circuit that has more than 
one path through which electricity may flow. A parallel circuit is designed 
to supply more than one load in the system.
A series circuit is an electric circuit that has only one path through 
which electricity may flow. It is usually used for devices that are con-
nected in the circuit for safety or control.
A series-parallel circuit is an electrical circuit that has a combina-
tion of series and parallel circuits. Most electrical systems in equipment 
or control systems are made up of a combination of parallel and series 
circuits. Electrical loads that require electrical power for operation are 
usually connected in parallel, which allows them to receive full supply 
voltage for operation. Switches used in electrical circuits to control these 
loads are connected in series, breaking the circuit if the switch opens.
You must understand the circuitry in air-conditioning, heating, and 
refrigeration control and power systems to do an effective job of installing 
and servicing the equipment.
We begin our study with a discussion of the basics of electric circuits.
3.1 
BASIC CONCEPTS OF ELECTRIC CIRCUITS
An electric circuit is the complete path of an electric current, along with 
any necessary elements, such as a power source and a load. When the 
circuit is complete so that the current can flow, it is termed closed or 
made (Figure 3.1). When the path of current flow is interrupted, the circuit 
KEY TERMS
Closed
Control circuit
Electric circuit
Open
Parallel circuit
Power circuit
Series circuit
Series-parallel circuit
Voltage drop
 
 
Section 3.1   Basic Concepts of Electric Circuits 
41
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

42 
CHAPTER 3   Electric Circuits
is termed open or broken (Figure 3.2). The opening and closing of electrical 
switches connected in series with electrical loads control the operation of 
loads in the circuit.
All electric circuits must have a complete path for electrons to flow 
through, a source of electrons, and some electric device (load) that 
requires electric energy for its operation. Figure 3.3 shows a complete 
circuit with the basic components labeled. Electric circuits supply power 
and control loads through the use of switches.
An alternating current power supply is the most common source of 
the electric energy used in the electric circuits of a heating, cooling, or 
refrigeration system. A direct current power supply, such as the dry cell 
battery, is often the source of electron flow in 
electric meters. Other than for meters, though, 
direct current is rarely used as a source of elec-
tric energy. Two special applications of direct 
current used today are electronic air cleaners 
and solid-state modules used for some types 
of special control, such as a defrost control, 
furnace controls, ignition modules, and overcur-
rent protection.
The purpose of most electric circuits is to 
supply energy to a machine that does work. 
The most common device supplied with energy 
is an electric motor. Motors are used to rotate 
fans, compressors, pumps, and other mechan-
ical devices that require a rotating motion. 
Automatic switches also require a power source 
3.3
FIGURE
Basic electric circuit with the
circuit components labeled. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Plug
120  Volts
 (source 
of electrons)
 Electric
heater
(load)
Path for electrons
to flow through
120  Volts
Switch is closed
(Motor 
 running)     
Fan
motor
3.1
FIGURE
A closed circuit.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
3.2
FIGURE
An open circuit.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
120  Volts
Switch is opened
(Motor not
 running)
Fan
motor
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 3.2   Series Circuits 
43
to open and close them so that they can start other electric devices. 
Electric circuits also supply energy to transformers, lights, and timers.
There are several possible path arrangements that electrons may fol-
low. The path arrangement is determined by the use or purpose of the 
circuit. The three types of circuits are series, parallel, and series parallel. 
The series circuit allows only one path of electron flow. The parallel cir-
cuit has more than one path. The series-parallel circuit is a combination 
of the series and parallel circuits. In the following sections, we will look 
at each of these arrangements.
3.2 
SERIES CIRCUITS
Switches and controls are commonly wired in series with each other to 
control one or more loads. The simplest and easiest electric circuit to 
understand is the series circuit. The series circuit allows only one path 
of current flow through the circuit. In other words, the path of a series 
circuit must pass through each device in the entire circuit. All devices 
are connected end to end within a series circuit. Figure 3.4 shows a series 
circuit with four resistance heaters.
Applications
Series circuits are incorporated into most control circuits used in heat-
ing, cooling, and refrigeration equipment. A control circuit is an electric 
circuit that controls some major load in the system. If all control compo-
nents are connected in the circuit in series, the opening of any switch or 
3.4
FIGURE
Series circuit with four 
resistance heaters.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
E =120  Volts
Heaters
R1
R2
R4
R3
Heaters
Electron flow     
Electron flow     
L1
N
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

44 
CHAPTER 3   Electric Circuits
component will open the circuit and stop the electric load, as shown in 
the circuit in Figure 3.5. (The symbols L1 and L2 in Figure 3.5 and in other 
figures represent the source of the voltage, the power supply. We will 
discuss circuit notation in more detail in Chapter 5.)
Series circuits are used in the electric circuitry of heating, cooling, and 
refrigeration equipment to operate the equipment and maintain a desired 
temperature. Any electric switch or control that is placed in series with 
a load will operate that particular load. Figure 3.6 shows one circuit of a 
control system. The controls are connected in series with the device that 
is being controlled, in this case an electric motor.
The series circuit also contains any safety devices that are needed to 
maintain safe operation of the equipment components. Figure 3.7 shows 
a series circuit that is basically made up of safety devices designed to 
3.5
FIGURE
Series circuit with three switches controlling an electric motor.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
208 Volts
 Electric 
motor
High-pressure
switch
Low-pressure
switch
Thermostat
L1
L2
208 Volts
High-temperature
limit
Fan
switch
Fan
motor
L1
L2
3.6
FIGURE
Control (series) circuit of a fan 
motor in a gas furnace. Both 
temperature controls must be 
closed for the fan to operate.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 3.2   Series Circuits 
45
3.7
FIGURE
Control (series) circuit showing safety devices used in commercial 
refrigeration system. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
208 Volts
 Com-
pressor
High-pressure
switch
Low-pressure
switch
Compressor
internal
thermostat
L1
L2
stop the compressor if an unsafe operating condition occurs. If any of the 
safety controls open, the circuit will open and stop the compressor. Safety 
devices should be connected in series to ensure that unsafe conditions 
will cut off the load being protected.
Characteristics of a Series Circuit and Calculations 
for Current, Resistance, and Voltage
The current draw in a series circuit is the same throughout the entire cir-
cuit because there is only one path for the current to follow. The current 
in a series circuit is shown by the following equation:
It  I1  I2  I3  I4  . . .
(The centered dots .  .  . indicate that the equation continues in the 
same manner until all the elements of that particular circuit have been 
accounted for.)
The total resistance Rt in a series circuit is the sum of all the resis-
tances in the circuit. The resistance of a series circuit is shown by the 
following equation:
Rt  R1  R2  R3  R4  . . .
The voltage in a series circuit is completely used by all the loads in 
the circuits. The loads of the series circuit must share the voltage that 
is being delivered to the circuit. Thus, the voltage being delivered to the 
circuit will be split by the loads in the circuit.
The voltage of a series circuit changes through each load. This change 
is called the voltage drop. The voltage drop is the amount of voltage (elec-
trical pressure) used or lost through any load or conductor in the process 
of moving the current (electron flow) through that part of the circuit. The 
voltage drop of any part of a series circuit is proportional to the resistance 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46 
CHAPTER 3   Electric Circuits
in that part of the circuit. The sum of the volt-
age drops of a series circuit is equal to the 
voltage being applied to the circuit. This is 
shown by the following equation:
Et  E1  E2  E3  E4  . . .
Ohm’s law can be used for the calcula-
tions on any part of a series circuit or on the 
total circuit. Figure 3.8 shows a series circuit 
with four resistance heaters of different ohm 
ratings. The calculations for the total resis-
tance, the amperage, and the voltage drop 
across each heater will be calculated using 
the circuit shown in Figure 3.8.
The total resistance can be calculated by adding the ohm rating of 
each heater.
Step 1: Use the formula Rt  R1  R2  R3  R4.
Step 2: Substitute the values given in the figure into the formula:
Rt  4 ohms  10 ohms  12 ohms  14 ohms
Step 3: Solve the formula: Rt  40 ohms.
We use Ohm’s law to calculate the amperage draw (current) of the 
circuit.
Step 1: Use the formula
I   E
       R
Step 2: Substitute the given values into the formula:
I   120
       40
Step 3: Solve the formula: I  3 amperes.
Now we use Ohm’s law to calculate the voltage drop across each 
heater.
Step 1: Use the formula E  IR for each resistance.
Step 2: Substitute the given values into the formula: Ed1  3  4. (The 
symbol Ed1 means the voltage drop across resistance 1.)
Step 3: Solve the formula: Ed1  12 volts.
120 Volts
R1 = 4 Ω 
R2 = 10 Ω 
R4 = 14 Ω 
R3 = 12 Ω 
L1
N
3.8
FIGURE
Series circuit containing four 
resistance heaters with 
different resistance values.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 3.3   Parallel Circuits 
47
Step 4: Solve for each resistance using the same procedures that were 
used in Steps 2 and 3:
Ed2  3  10  30 volts
Ed3  3  12  36 volts
Ed4  3  14  42 volts
Note that the total voltage Et supplied to the circuit is equal to the sum 
of the voltage drops.
3.3 
PARALLEL CIRCUITS
The parallel circuit has more than one path for the electron flow. That 
is, in a parallel circuit the electrons can follow two or more paths at the 
same time. Electric devices (loads) are arranged in the circuit so that each 
is connected to both supply voltage conductors.
Parallel circuits are common in the industry because most loads used 
operate from line voltage. Line voltage is the voltage supplied to the 
equipment from the main power source of a structure and typically has a 
value of 115 volts or 240 volts. The parallel circuit allows the same voltage 
to be applied to all the electric loads connected in parallel, as indicated in 
Figure 3.9. Note that each load in the circuit is supplied by the line voltage 
of 115 volts.
Applications
Parallel circuits are used in the industry to supply the correct line volt-
age to several different circuits in a control system and are called power 
 circuits. Figure 3.10 shows a control system with several circuits in 
120 Volts
Heater  
Light
bulb
Fan
motor
Com-
pressor
L1
n
3.9
FIGURE
Parallel circuit with four components; each component is supplied with 
120 volts. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48 
CHAPTER 3   Electric Circuits
C
COMP
COMP:   Compressor
CFM:      Condenser fan motor
CH:        Crankcase heater
CT:       Cooling thermostat
LPS:       Low-pressure switch
C:            Contactor
          
CFM
C
C
CT
CH
LPS
L1
L2
3.10
FIGURE
Control system with several circuits (parallel); each circuit is supplied 
with line voltage. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 parallel being fed line voltage. Many different paths for electron flow are 
in this parallel hookup. Each circuit that is connected from L1 to L2 on 
the wiring diagram is in parallel with all the others and is being supplied 
with the line voltage.
Parallel circuits are used in all power wiring that supplies the loads of 
heating, cooling, or refrigeration systems. The electric loads of a system 
must be connected to the power supply separately or in a parallel circuit 
to supply the load with the full line voltage.
Characteristics of a Parallel Circuit and Calculations 
for Current, Resistance, and Voltage
There will be few occasions when field technicians are required to make 
calculations for a parallel circuit. This is usually done by the designer of 
the equipment. However, field technicians should be familiar with the 
basic concepts and rules of parallel circuits.
The current draw in a parallel circuit is determined for each part of 
the circuit, depending on the resistance of that portion of the circuit. The 
total current draw of the entire parallel circuit is the sum of the currents 
in the individual sections of the parallel circuit. The current in each indi-
vidual circuit can be calculated by using Ohm’s law when the resistance 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 3.3   Parallel Circuits 
49
and voltage are known. The total ampere draw of a parallel circuit is given 
by the following equation:
It  I1  I2  I3  I4  . . .
The resistance of a parallel circuit gets smaller as more resistances 
are added to the circuit. The total resistance of a parallel circuit cannot 
be obtained by taking the sum of all the resistances. It is calculated by the 
following formula if two resistances are used:
Rt  
 R1  R2
        R1  R2
If three or more resistances are located in the circuit, the reciprocal 
of the total resistance is the sum of the reciprocals of all the resistances 
(the reciprocal of a number is 1 divided by that number). The following 
formula is used to calculate the resistance of a parallel circuit with more 
than two resistances:
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
4
R
R
R
R
2
R
t




 ⋅⋅⋅
The voltage drop in a parallel circuit is the line voltage being supplied 
to the load. In other words, in a parallel circuit each load uses the total 
voltage being supplied to the load. For example, if 115 volts are supplied 
to a load, it will use the total 115 volts. The voltage being applied to each 
of the four components in Figure 3.9 is the same and is given by the fol-
lowing equation:
Et  E1  E2  E3  E4
Ohm’s law can be used to calculate voltage, amperage, or resistance 
if the other two values are known. You can use Ohm’s law to determine 
almost any condition in a parallel circuit, but pay careful attention to the 
individual sections of each complete circuit.
Example 1 What is the total current draw of the parallel circuit shown 
in Figure 3.11?
Step 1: First calculate the current draw for each individual circuit by 
using Ohm’s law in the form
I    E
       R
Step 2: For I1 substitute the given values for E and R1 in the formula 
and solve:
1
240
10

24 amperes
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50 
CHAPTER 3   Electric Circuits
Step 3: For I2 substitute the given values of that circuit in the formula 
and solve:
I2  240
                                  24   10 amperes
Step 4: Use the formula It  I1  I2.
Step 5: Substitute in the formula for It and solve:
                       It  I1  I2
 24 amperes  10 amperes  34 amperes
Example 2 Find the total resistance of the parallel circuit in Figure 3.11.
Step 1: Use the formula
Rt 
  R1  R2
         R1  R2
Step 2: Substitute the known values in the formula:
Rt   10  24
                               10  24    7.06 ohms
Example 3 What is the resistance of a parallel circuit with resistances of 
3 ohms, 6 ohms, and 12 ohms?
Step 1: Use the formula
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
R
R
R
R
2
t



Step 2: Substitute the known values in the formula:
1
1
3
1
6
1
12
Rt



240 Volts
R1 = 10 Ω 
R2 = 24 Ω 
L1
L2
3.11
FIGURE
Parallel circuit for 
Example 1. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 3.4   Series-Parallel Circuits 
51
Step 3: Mathematical computation of this formula is sometimes 
 difficult. If you have problems, consult your instructor.
1
4
12
2
12
1
12
7
12
Rt






7Rt  12
     Rt  1.71 ohms
3.4 
SERIES-PARALLEL CIRCUITS
A series-parallel circuit is a combination circuit made up of series and 
parallel circuits and is used only sparingly in the industry. It is more 
often seen on the full wiring layout of an air-conditioning, heating, or 
refrigeration unit. This type of electric circuit is a combination of the 
series and parallel circuits, as shown in Figure 3.12. The series-parallel 
circuit is sometimes easier to understand when it contains only a few 
components. It becomes harder to understand when there are a large 
number of components.
LPS:       Low-pressure
               switch
HPS:       High-pressure
 
switch
THER:     Thermostat
C:            Contactor
COMP:   Compressor
CFM1:    Condenser fan
                motor 1
CFM2:    Condenser fan
                motor 2                 
CFM2 THER
CFM2 
C 
C 
L1
L2
LPS
HPS
THER
Legend
CFM1 
COMP 
C 
3.12
FIGURE
Series-parallel circuit with four loads and controlling switches (switches in 
series with loads in parallel). (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52 
CHAPTER 3   Electric Circuits
The series-parallel circuit is often used to combine control circuits 
with circuits that supply power to loads, as shown in Figure 3.13. The 
circuit arrangement of most series-parallel circuits is designed so that 
all loads receive the correct voltage to operate switches and contacts in 
series with these loads, thus controlling the operation of the system.
Any calculation of the values in a series-parallel circuit must be per-
formed carefully, because each portion of the circuit must be identified 
as series or parallel. Once the type of circuit has been determined, the 
calculations are made accordingly.
3.13
FIGURE
Wiring diagram of a packaged air-conditioning unit including series-
parallel circuit arrangement where switches are in series to loads and 
loads are in parallel. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
C1
C2
L2
L1
HP
LP
R
Y
G
COMP
C:           Contactor
COMP:   Compressor
CFM:       Condenser fan motor     
IFM:         Indoor fan motor
IFR:         Indoor fan relay
HP:          High-pressure switch
LP:           Low-pressure switch
          
CFM
C
IFR
IFR
IFM
Fan
Auto
On
System
Legend
Thermostat (R,G, and Y are
markings on thermostat terminals)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Summary 
53
Applications
Series-parallel circuits are used in most types of heating, cooling, and 
refrigeration equipment in the industry. This type of circuit allows the 
required voltage to be supplied to electrical loads in the system. In the 
parallel circuits, the switches used to control the loads are connected in 
series. Refer again to Figure 3.13, which shows this type of circuit.
In a series-parallel circuit, both the series and parallel circuits are 
used to supply electrical power to the loads in the electrical systems. In 
Figure 3.13 the compressor, condenser fan motor, and indoor fan motor 
are connected in parallel to the supply voltage L1 and L2. The indoor fan 
relay coil and the contactor coil are in parallel with the transformer sup-
plying voltage to the loads. The use of parallel circuits enables the correct 
voltage to be supplied to the loads in the electrical circuitry of the equip-
ment. Series circuits are used in the electrical circuitry of air-conditioning 
equipment for control and safety switches that stop and start loads to 
maintain the correct temperature and safe operating conditions. Any 
switch connected in series with the loads will stop or start that load, 
depending on the switch position.
In Figure 3.13 the high- and low-pressure switches and thermostat 
are connected in series and control the contactor coil. If any one of these 
switches opens, the power supply to the contactor coil will be interrupted, 
stopping the compressor.
SUMMARY
The three types of electric circuits used in the industry are series, parallel, 
and series parallel. The series circuit has only one path for electron flow. 
The most common type of electric circuit used in the industry is the par-
allel, which has more than one path for electron flow. This type of electric 
circuit allows line voltage to reach all electric loads. The series-parallel 
circuit is a combination of the series and parallel circuits.
The series circuit is used for most of the control circuits used in the 
industry, because if any switch in the circuit opens, the load in the circuit 
will stop or start, depending on the position of the switches. For example, 
if any switch that is connected in series with a load is open, the load will 
be de-energized; if all the switches in the circuit are closed, the load 
will operate. If a switch in the circuit used for temperature control is 
open, the load will be off. If the switch is closed or calling, the load will 
operate. Series circuits are used to control loads in the electrical system.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

54 
CHAPTER 3   Electric Circuits
Parallel circuits are used in the industry and in equipment to ensure 
that proper voltage is supplied to the load. Parallel circuits are designed 
with more than one path for electron flow. In the electrical circuitry for 
equipment, the parallel circuit is used to supply the correct voltage to the 
electrical loads in the system. Parallel circuits are used in the wiring of 
houses to ensure that all receptacles are supplied with 115 volts.
The series-parallel circuit is a combination of series and parallel cir-
cuits. In the proper combination of these circuits, control systems supply 
voltage and control these circuits. Most electric control systems used to 
operate equipment have used the series-parallel circuit.
The series and parallel circuits have different relationships of voltage, 
amperage, and resistance. In a series circuit, the voltage is split among 
the electrical loads, which is the reason this circuit is not used to supply 
power to loads in equipment. The current in the series is equal in all parts 
of the circuit. The sum of all resistances in series is the total circuit resis-
tance. In a parallel circuit, the voltage in all circuit parts is equal; this is 
the reason switches are used. The sum of each current flow in the circuit 
is the total current. The reciprocal of the total resistance is the sum of the 
reciprocals of all resistances.
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
RQ1 
What is a series circuit?
RQ2 
What is a control circuit?
RQ3 
Safety devices in an electrical circuit are connected 
in __________ with the load.
RQ4 
How are series circuits used in air-conditioning 
equipment?
RQ5 
Why are series circuits used for most control 
circuits?
RQ6 
The current draw in a series circuit is __________.
a. the sum of each load in the circuit
b. the same throughout the entire circuit
c. divided by the number of loads in the circuit
d. none of the above
RQ7 
The voltage drop of a series circuit is __________.
a. the amount of voltage lost through any load
b.  proportional to the resistance in that part of 
the circuit
c. equal to the voltage being applied to the circuit
d. all of the above
RQ8 
How would switches used as safety devices be con-
nected with respect to the loads they are protecting?
RQ9 
Draw a series circuit with a thermostat, a low-
pressure switch, and a high-pressure switch used 
as safety controls to protect a motor.
RQ10 
Two identical 115-volt light bulbs connected in 
series with 240 volts would __________.
a. burn dimly
b. burn out immediately
c. burn correctly
d. none of the above
C H A P T E R  3  R E V I E W
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  3  R E V I E W
RQ11 
Draw a circuit with four electric heaters (
) 
in series.
RQ12 
What is a parallel circuit?
RQ13 
Parallel circuits are used in the air-conditioning 
industry to __________.
a. supply the correct line voltage to several circuits
b. act as a safety circuit
c. divide the voltage between two major loads
d. all of the above
RQ14 
Why are parallel circuits used in the 
 air-conditioning industry?
RQ15 
True or False: The current draw of a parallel circuit 
is the sum of the current of each branch circuit.
RQ16 
If three circuits are connected in parallel with a 
power supply of 30 volts, what would be the volt-
age supplied to each circuit?
a. 10 volts
b. 90 volts
c. 30 volts
d. none of the above
RQ17 
If two 115-volt loads were con -nected in parallel 
with 240 volts, they would __________.
a. burn dimly
b. immediately burn out
c. burn correctly
d. none of the above
RQ18 
What is a series-parallel circuit?
RQ19 
Why are series-parallel control circuits important in 
the circuitry used in air-conditioning equipment?
RQ20 
Draw a series-parallel circuit with one switch () 
controlling two electric heaters, each being 
supplied with line voltage.
RQ21 
What is the resistance of a parallel circuit with 
resistances of 2 ohms, 4 ohms, 6 ohms, and 
10 ohms?
RQ22 
What is the resistance of a parallel circuit with 
resistances of 10 ohms and 20 ohms?
RQ23 
What is the total ampere draw of a parallel circuit 
with ampere readings of 2 amperes, 7 amperes, 
and 12 amperes?
RQ24 
What is the voltage of a series circuit with four 
voltage drops of 30 volts?
RQ25 
What is the resistance of a series circuit with 
resistances of 4 ohms, 8 ohms, 12 ohms, and 
22 ohms?
 
 
Review Questions 
55
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 3 in the Lab Manual.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗  Describe the use of the volt-ohm meter and clamp-on ammeter in the 
heating, cooling, and refrigeration industry.
◗  Explain the operation of the basic electric analog meter.
◗  Explain how analog electric meters transfer a known value in an electrical 
circuit to the meter movement.
◗  Describe the operation of an analog voltmeter.
◗  Describe the operation of an analog and digital clamp-on ammeter.
◗  Describe the operation of an analog ohmmeter.
◗  Explain the operation of a digital volt-ohm meter.
◗  Give the advantages and disadvantages of the analog and digital meters.
◗  Describe the conditions of resistance that can exist in an electrical circuit in 
reference to continuity.
◗  Describe the source of energy for the operation of the analog voltmeter, 
ammeter, and ohmmeter.
Electric Meters
C H A P T E R
56
4
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INTRODUCTION
Electricity is used in the control and operation of all refrigeration, heating, 
and air-conditioning systems. Approximately 80% of all service calls made 
by service technicians are diagnosed as electrical problems. Electrical 
meters, in most cases, are required for the proper diagnosis of these elec-
trical problems. The large number of electrical problems encountered in 
the industry requires that industry technicians be able to correctly read 
and use electric meters. In the industry, there are many types of electric 
meters. Some meters are for specific purposes, while others are for the 
general day-to-day tasks that industry technicians perform.
The installation mechanic must be able to read electric meters to 
properly complete the initial start-up and testing of equipment. The 
installation mechanic must be able to read and use electric meters to 
check the electrical characteristics of a newly installed refrigeration, 
heating, and air-conditioning system. No installation is complete without 
electrical checks of the system.
The service technician diagnoses and repairs problems found in 
refrigeration, heating, and air-conditioning systems. The service techni-
cian must be able to read and use all types of electric meters to quickly 
and efficiently locate electrical problems. Without electric meters and the 
knowledge to correctly use them, the service technician would face an 
almost impossible task in troubleshooting electrical problems.
An electric meter is a device used to measure the electrical char-
acteristics of an electrical circuit. Electric meters are available in many 
 different types and designs and must be selected for their use in the 
industry. Most meters are used by installation and service technicians. 
Meters must be durable and maintain adequate accuracy.
The electrical characteristics in a circuit that are most important to 
industry technicians are volts, amperes, and ohms. Although there are 
other important characteristics, these three are the most important. 
Most popular electrical meters are built around these three electrical 
 characteristics. Most electrical meters used in the industry are capable 
KEY TERMS
Ammeter
Analog meter
Clamp-on ammeter
Continuity
Digital meter
Magnetic field
Measurable resistance
Ohmmeter
Open
Short
Voltmeter
Volt-ohm-milliammeter
 
 
Electric Meters 
57
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58 
CHAPTER 4   Electric Meters
of reading more than one electrical characteristic. The most common 
electrical meters used are the volt-ohm-milliammeter and the clamp-on 
ammeter with the ability to read volts and ohms.
The installation and service technician should be careful in selecting 
an electrical meter. Electrical meters should be selected for their every-
day use in the industry. Technicians should select meters with the best 
ranges for the electrical characteristics that will be measured the most.
We will look at the basic principles used to measure electrical char-
acteristics along with the various types and designs of electrical meters.
4.1 
ELECTRIC METERS
An electric meter is a device used to measure some electrical charac-
teristic of a circuit. The most common types of electric meters are the 
 voltmeter, the ammeter, and the ohmmeter.
!CAUTION
Use the proper electrical test equipment for the job 
being performed.
Basic Principles
Most electric measuring instruments make use of the magnetic effect of 
electric current. When electrons flow through a conductor in an electric 
circuit, a magnetic field is created around that conductor, as shown in 
Figure 4.1. This magnetic field is used to move the needle of a meter a 
4.1
F I G U R E
A magnetic field is produced around a  conductor 
when current is flowing through the conductor. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Magnetic field
Current-carrying conductor
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 4.1   Electric Meters 
59
certain distance, which represents the amount of the characteristic (volts, 
ohms, or amperes) being measured. The stronger the magnetic field, the 
larger the movement of the needle. The weaker the magnetic field, the 
smaller the movement of the needle.
If a compass is suspended next to a conductor that is not carrying 
an electron flow, the compass reacts only with the magnetic field of the 
earth and there is no other movement, as shown in Figure 4.2. However, 
when electrons flow through that same conductor, the compass needle 
swings in line with the conductor’s magnetic field, as shown in Figure 4.3. 
The mechanical movement of the needle is caused by the magnetic field 
produced by the electron flow through the conductor. The larger the cur-
rent flow, the stronger the magnetic field produced and the greater the 
needle movement on the scale. This simple principle is the basis of the 
meter movement in most electric meters.
N
S
Compass 
needle
Conductor with no
current flowing
                Compass 
needle
Conductor with 
current flowing
N
S
Magnetic field
produced by
current-carrying
conductor
F I G U R E
F I G U R E
When there is no current flow, 
the compass reacts only to the 
magnetic field of the earth. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
When a current flows through a 
conductor, the compass needle 
swings in line with the 
conductor’s magnetic field. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
4.2
4.3
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60 
CHAPTER 4   Electric Meters
Differences Among Meters
The differences among the various electric meters are not in the meter 
movements, except for digital meters, but in the internal circuits of the 
meters and in how the magnetic fields are created. For electrons to flow 
in an electric circuit, an electric load must be present. This electron flow 
is somewhat different for the clamp-on ammeter, voltmeter, and ohm-
meter. The clamp-on meter picks up the magnetic field through a set 
of laminated jaws on the meter. The voltmeter uses a resistor as a load 
to produce a magnetic field when voltage is applied to the circuit in the 
meter. The ohmmeter has its own power supply and uses the device 
being checked as the load to produce a magnetic field. All three meters 
use the same meter movement, unless the movement is digital. Their 
methods of loading and their power supplies are varied to attain the 
needle movement for reading the magnetic field.
Meters may be made in a combination and mounted in one case, or they 
may be completely separate. Figure 4.4(a) shows an analog clamp-on amme-
ter, and Figure 4.4(b) shows an analog volt-ohm meter. Figure 4.4(c) shows 
a digital clamp-on ammeter and Figure 4.4(d) shows a digital volt-ohm 
meter. The volt-ohm meter, as its name suggests, is used to measure either 
voltage or resistance, depending on the scale selected. The meter shown in 
Figure 4.4(d) is particularly versatile because it is capable of reading tempera-
ture (Fahrenheit and Centigrade) and the microfarad rating of a capacitor.
The meter movement created by the magnetic field around a conduc-
tor is reflected by the movement of the needle on a scale of an electric 
meter. This scale is usually broken down into several basic scales that 
have different ranges for voltage, amperage, and resistance. Some elec-
tric meters have a selector switch: The meter movement is shown on a 
certain point of the scale, but the scale to be used must be determined by 
the person using the meter.
Digital meters are becoming more popular in the industry due to 
the reduction in cost over the past several years and the ease in read-
ing. Another reason for the increasing popularity of the digital meter is 
the increased use of electronic control, which often requires an electri-
cal meter capable of accurately reading small voltages because of the 
lower signal voltages. An analog meter volt-ohm meter is shown in 
Figure 4.5, and an analog meter scale and needle are shown in Figure 4.6. 
The mechanic must estimate the values between the lines on the meter 
scale. Digital meters can be read more accurately because there is no 
estimation, as shown from the digital reading in Figure 4.7. The ease of 
reading a digital meter is certainly an advantage, and many technicians 
are using digital meters in the industry today.
Most digital meters use a 3 ½- or 4½-digit display. Figure 4.8 shows a 
3½-digit display, and Figure 4.9 shows a 4½-digit display. The ½ digit is 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 4.1   Electric Meters 
61
4.4
F I G U R E
(a) Analog clamp-on ammeter with volt-ohm function (b) Analog volt-ohm meter (c) Digital clamp-on 
ammeter with volt-ohm function (d) Digital volt-ohm meter. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62 
CHAPTER 4   Electric Meters
4.5
FIGURE
Analog volt-ohm 
meter. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
4.7
FIGURE
Digital reading 
on digital meter. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
2
3
4
5
10
20
50
1K   200
1
0
150
30
6
20
8
4
25
10
5
15
6
3
6
8
10
11
+
4
2
0
2
4
10
20
_
10
4
2
5
2
1
0
0
0
0
AC
OHMS
OPEN
CLOSED
OHMS
AC AMPS
AC AMPS
AC
DC
dBm
dBm
DC
0
0
200
40
8
250
50
10
300
60
12
30
12
6
100
20
4
50
10
2
OHMS PER VOLT
AC
VOLT
RANGE
ADD
DB
6
12
26
40
46
3
12
60
300
600
DC
4.6
F I G U R E
Analog scale with needle. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
4.8
FIGURE
3 ½ digit digital 
display. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
4.9
FIGURE
4 ½ digit digital 
display. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 4.1   Electric Meters 
63
blank (0) or one that is the left digit of the meter reading. The 3 or 4 digits 
represent the next digits of the meter reading. For example, a 3½-digit 
reading will display a 4-digit reading with the left digit blank (0) or 1, 
such as 1999. This resolution determines the basic accuracy of the meter. 
Typical accuracy for a digital volt-ohm-milliammeter is plus or minus 1% 
of actual reading compared with the typical accuracy of an analog meter 
of plus or minus 2% of full scale.
While analog meters depend on a magnetic field to move the needle, 
the digital meter makes use of Ohm’s law to measure and display the 
electrical characteristics of the circuit.
Digital meters use one of two methods to protect the meter circuitry. 
Some digital meters are protected by internal circuits that detect an over-
load condition and then return the meter to normal operation. This func-
tion generally protects the ohm function from voltage overloads. Other 
digital meters are protected by fuses that have to be changed for the 
meter to again function. Several digital meters are shown in Figure 4.10.
4.10
F I G U R E
Digital meters. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
!CAUTION
Make sure electrical test equipment is in 
good condition.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

64 
CHAPTER 4   Electric Meters
4.2 
AMMETERS
The ammeter uses the basic meter movement discussed in Section 4.1. 
The strength of the magnetic field determines the distance that the 
needle of the meter moves. Figure 4.11(a) shows the magnetic field and 
the meter movement when there is a high current flow through the con-
ductor. Figure 4.11(b) shows the magnetic field and the meter movement 
when there is a low current flow in the conductor. The larger the current 
flow, the stronger the magnetic field grows and the greater the needle 
movement on the scale.
The ammeter measures current flow in an electric circuit. There are 
basically two types of ammeters used in the industry today: the clamp-on 
ammeter and the in-line ammeter. The clamp-on ammeter is the most 
popular because it is the easiest to use. You simply clamp the jaws of the 
meter around one conductor feeding power to the load that is producing 
the current draw. The analog clamp-on ammeter is shown in Figure 4.12. 
Figure 4.13 shows several digital clamp-on ammeters.
30
15
Amperes
0
Magnetic
field
(a) High current flow
(b) Low current flow
Conductor
N
S
Magnetic
field
Conductor
30
15
Amperes
0
N
S
4.11
F I G U R E
Scale of ammeter showing current flow. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 4.2   Ammeters 
65
F I G U R E
Analog clamp-on ammeters with volt-ohm functions. (Source: (a) Delmar/Cengage Learning
(b) A.W. Sperry Instrument Co., Hauppauge, NY.)
4.12
F I G U R E
Digital clamp-on ammeters with volt-ohm 
functions. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
4.13
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

66 
CHAPTER 4   Electric Meters
The clamp-on ammeter is easy to use. Just follow a few simple rules. 
First, select the scale that is appropriate for reading the current draw 
of the electrical device being checked. If the approximate current is 
unknown, use the highest scale until the correct scale can be determined. 
Most clamp-on ammeters have more than one scale and as many as five. 
The jaws of the clamp-on ammeter are clamped around one conductor 
that is supplying a load or circuit. The magnetic field created by the cur-
rent flowing through the wire is picked up by the jaws of the ammeter and 
funneled into the internal connection of the meter. Figure 4.14 shows a 
drawing of a clamp-on ammeter being used to check the ampere draw of 
a compressor. Figure 4.15 shows a clamp-on ammeter being used to read 
the current of an operating compressor.
Never clamp the jaws of the meter around two wires to obtain an 
ampere reading. If the current flows in the wires are opposite, as they 
often are, the meter will read zero because the current flows cancel each 
other out. If the current flows are not opposite, the meter will read the 
012A
Compressor
To Contract
and starting
components
4.14
F I G U R E
Using a clamp-on ammeter 
to check the amp draw of 
a compressor. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 4.2   Ammeters 
67
current draw in both conductors. In either case, you will obtain an incor-
rect reading, which could cause you to incorrectly diagnose the problem.
When the ampere draw is small, you may have difficulty obtaining 
a true reading because of the small needle movement. The problem of 
small needle movement can be remedied by coiling the wire around the 
jaws of the meter. This allows the meter to pick up a larger current flow 
than is actually there. The meter will be more accurate because the cur-
rent reading will fall in the midrange of the scale and can be easily read.
To obtain the correct ampere reading when this method is used, 
divide the ampere draw read by the number of loops going through the 
jaws of the meter. Figure 4.16 shows an ammeter with the conductor 
looped through the jaws three times. The correct reading can be obtained 
by dividing the meter reading, which is 4, by the number of loops through 
the jaws, which is 3. Thus, the ampere draw of the load is 1.33 amperes. 
Remember: The meter reading should always be divided by the number 
of loops carried through the jaws of the meter.
4.15
F I G U R E
Technician using clamp-on ammeter to read the current 
draw of a compressor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

68 
CHAPTER 4   Electric Meters
The clamp-on ammeter is one of the most valuable tools that indus-
try technicians can carry. When you are installing a system, knowing the 
ampere draw of the equipment tells you if the unit is operating prop-
erly. You can also detect many electric circuit problems with a clamp-on 
ammeter, and it is the easiest, quickest way to tell if a load or circuit is 
energized. The ammeter can be purchased with other meters built into it. 
For example, a single clamp-on ammeter can be purchased that will read 
amperage, voltage, and resistance.
4.3 
VOLTMETERS
The voltmeter is used to measure the amount of electromotive force 
available to a circuit or load. This is an important factor for heating, cool-
ing, and refrigeration technicians because a wide range of voltages are 
used in this country.
0
1
2
3
4
5
4.16
FIGURE
Taking a low-ampere 
reading with an 
ammeter by 
looping the wire 
through the jaws. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
4.17
F I G U R E
Simple voltmeter. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 4.3   Voltmeters 
69
Voltmeters range from simple to complex instruments containing 
many scales. The simplest voltmeter available is a small, inexpensive 
one capable of distinguishing only among 120, 240, 480, and 600 volts 
(Figure 4.17). Several manufacturers build simple voltmeters that can 
read only voltages, but these are becoming increasingly difficult to 
obtain. More common is the volt-ohm meter, which reads both volt-
age and resistance. These are available in many forms, and service 
technicians should follow the instructions for the particular model 
being used. The common volt-ohm meter has three voltage scales 
and several voltage ranges. Some meters also have a high-voltage 
jack. Figure 4.18 shows a common type of analog volt-ohm meter. 
Figure 4.19 shows a digital volt-ohm meter.
The voltmeter was designed much like the ammeter, but a resistor is 
added to the circuit to prevent a direct short and allow electrons to flow in 
the meter. The voltmeter uses two leads that are connected to jacks that 
4.18
FIGURE
Analog volt-ohm 
meter. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
4.19
FIGURE
Digital volt-ohm 
meter. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

70 
CHAPTER 4   Electric Meters
lead to the internal wiring. To obtain a reading, the two leads must touch 
or be connected to the conductors supplying the load or to the circuit 
that transfers the electromotive force to the meter. Figure 4.20 shows a 
 drawing using a volt-ohm meter to check the voltage at a compressor. 
Figure 4.21 shows a technician reading the voltage being applied to a 
compressor. The electrons flow through the leads into the meter through 
a resistor with a known ohm rating. The greater the voltage carried into 
the meter, the greater the magnetic field and the greater the needle 
movement or digital reading.
When you do not know the voltage available to the equipment being 
worked on, you should start with the highest scale on the meter and then 
change the meter setting until the needle falls in the midrange of the volt-
age scale. Never abuse a voltmeter by attempting to read a voltage that 
exceeds the range of the meter.
The voltmeter is necessary for field technicians who have anything 
to do with the electrical section of equipment or with the installation or 
servicing of equipment. No heating, cooling, or refrigeration equipment 
should operate at an unsafe voltage, that is, voltage that is either too 
low or too high. All equipment is designed to operate at a voltage of 10% 
above or below the rating of the equipment. But in some cases the  voltage 
may  actually be more than the allowable figure. So field  technicians 
Compressor
220 volts
250v
To Contactor
and starting
components
F I G U R E
Drawing showing a voltmeter being used to check the 
voltage supplied to the compressor. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
4.20
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 4.4   Ohmmeters 
71
should always check the supply voltage. Installation mechanics have not 
 completed their installation unless they have checked the  voltage  available 
to the equipment. Technicians are often required to check the voltages to 
equipment as part of their troubleshooting job. In  addition, the voltmeter 
can be used by technicians as a tool for diagnosing  problems in the system. 
Thus, the voltmeter is a must for proper installation and service.
4.4 
OHMMETERS
The ohmmeter is used to determine the operating condition of a compo-
nent or a circuit. The ohmmeter can be used to find an open circuit, an 
open component, or a direct short in a circuit or component. It can also be 
used to measure the actual resistance of a circuit or component.
The word continuity is used many times when referring to the use 
of ohmmeters. Continuity means that a particular circuit or compo-
nent has a complete path for current to follow. An open component or 
circuit means that there is infinite resistance in the circuit. The term 
 measurable resistance means the actual resistance that is measured with 
Technician 
 checking the 
 voltage of a 
 compressor at 
the contactor. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
F I G U R E4.21
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

72 
CHAPTER 4   Electric Meters
(a) No resistance (short)
(no measurable resistance)
(b) Measurable resistance
(c) Infinite resistance (open)
(no resistance reading)
0
15
∞
F I G U R E
Three conditions of a circuit as read on an ohmmeter.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
4.22
the  ohmmeter. Figure 4.22 shows the three conditions as they might 
appear on the scale of an ohmmeter.
The ohmmeter is a valuable tool for diagnosing and correcting 
 problems in electric circuits. In this industry, many electric devices and 
circuits must be checked. The ohmmeter provides an easy method for 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 4.4   Ohmmeters 
73
checking circuits for opens (i.e., open circuits) and shorts (i.e., short cir-
cuits) and for measuring resistance.
An open circuit causes no noticeable needle movement in an ohmme-
ter because there is not a complete circuit. For example, an open (circuit) 
could occur in a blown fuse, in a motor winding (the internal portion of 
the motor), and in any condition where the electric circuit does not have 
a complete path for electrons to follow.
A direct short in an electric device or circuit causes problems because 
it means that two legs of the electric power wiring are touching, which 
causes an overload. In many cases a direct short means the wiring of the 
component is connected in some fashion. A closed switch is considered 
to be a short, but without this type of short, no heating, cooling, or refrig-
eration system would operate properly.
In many cases, you will have to measure the resistance of a com-
ponent to ensure that the component is in good operating condition. 
Most manufacturers make available to service technicians the exact 
ohmic value of motor windings and other components in the system. 
Figure 4.23 shows a drawing using a volt-ohm meter to check the 
 resistance of a compressor. Figure 4.24 shows a technician reading the 
resistance of an electric motor.
F I G U R E
Using an ohmmeter to check the resistance of a 
compressor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
4.23
Compressor
12 ohms
To Contactor
and starting
components
RX1
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

74 
CHAPTER 4   Electric Meters
F I G U R E
Technician reading the resistance of an electric motor.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
4.24
The meter movement of an ohmmeter is designed and built for a 
very low current that is available from its own power source, usually 
a battery. Figure 4.25 shows the internal wiring of an ohmmeter. The 
ohmmeter works much like the ammeter and the voltmeter except 
for the small current that is supplied from the internal power source. 
The ohmmeter also uses a magnetic field to move the needle, but 
the magnetic field is  created by a self-contained power source in the 
meter. The two leads of the  ohmmeter are connected to the internal 
circuit of the meter, which contains a resistance and the power source. 
The amount of current the small battery can push through the device 
being tested indicates the resistance of that device and determines the 
needle movement.
Due to the low current that an ohmmeter is built to carry, it should 
never be connected to a circuit or device that is being operated. The 
function of the ohmmeter is merely to read the resistance of a device or 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 4.4   Ohmmeters 
75
To object
to be checked
Internal
battery
4.25
F I G U R E
The internal wiring of 
an ohmmeter. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
circuit. Fortunately, most ohmmeters are equipped with some type of 
overload protection to protect the internal circuits of the meter if they are 
subject to line voltage.
Many types and designs of ohmmeters are available. In many cases, 
the ohmmeter and voltmeter are combined in a dual-purpose meter. 
Some manufacturers build and market combinations of voltmeters, 
ohmmeters, and ammeters that are inexpensive. On this three-purpose 
meter, the ohmmeter is a low-range ohmmeter and cannot be used for 
many of the jobs that a technician must do. The more expensive volt-
ohm meters are more accurate and cover all ohm ranges. These meters 
will usually have at least three ohm scales (usually R  1, R  100, and 
R  10,000). Some have more ranges. Those additional ranges are useful 
for some troubleshooting operations. Refer again to Figure 4.18, which 
shows three different volt-ohm meters used today.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

76 
CHAPTER 4   Electric Meters
SUMMARY
Electricity plays an important part in the HVAC industry. Most equipment 
has some type of electric control system, even if it is powered by some 
other means. Thus, it is important for industry technicians to be familiar 
with the basic types of electric meters. About 80% of the problems with 
equipment or systems are electrical, which shows that electric meters are 
important.
The ammeter is used to measure the current flow in an electric cir-
cuit. Two types of ammeters are used in the industry today. The clamp-on 
ammeter is the most frequently used. With this type of ammeter, it is only 
necessary to clamp the jaws of the meter around the conductor feeding 
the circuit or load and to read the amperage. The in-line ammeter must 
be placed in series with the load or circuit to read the amperage. Because 
of the time required to do this, the in-line ammeter is seldom used.
The voltmeter is used to measure the voltage of an electric circuit. The 
voltmeter will have to be connected in parallel to the circuit to determine 
the voltage supplying the circuit. Voltage measurements can determine 
the source voltage, voltage drop, and a voltage imbalance. The first step 
in troubleshooting an air-conditioning system is to determine if voltage 
is available to the equipment or system.
The ohmmeter is used to measure the resistance of a circuit or device 
in ohms. The ohmmeter must be used with the circuit power off to pre-
vent damage to the meter. Most ohmmeters have a power source built 
into the meter. The ohmmeter is used to determine the condition of 
electrical devices used in air conditioning such as motors, heaters, con-
tactor coils, solenoid valves, and other components. A continuity check is 
another use of the ohmmeter that determines if a complete path is avail-
able for current to flow.
The decrease in the cost of digital meters has made them more popu-
lar in the industry. Digital meters can be used without any interpolation 
of the reading, making them an advantage over analog meters, where 
interpolation must be made with reference to the needle on the scale. 
Mechanics should choose the meter that best suits their needs. With the 
proper care, meters will give mechanics many years of good service.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Review Questions 
77
RQ1 
What are the three most common electric meters 
used in the industry?
RQ2 
Service technicians should be able to use electric 
meters because __________.
a. 80% of field problems are electrical
b. technicians are required to troubleshoot electri-
cal control systems
c. technicians must be able to determine the elec-
trical characteristics of an electrical circuit
d. all of the above
RQ3 
What do most analog meters use to facilitate the 
needle movement?
a. Ohm’s law
b. a magnetic field that flowing electrons produce
c. inductive resistance
d. all of the above
RQ4 
How does an ammeter work?
RQ5 
What are the two types of ammeters? Which type 
is more commonly used in the industry?
RQ6 
What is the result on the meter reading of clamp-
ing the jaws of a clamp-on ammeter around two 
wires?
RQ7 
How can a very small ampere draw be measured 
with a clamp-on ammeter?
RQ8 
If a conductor was wrapped around the jaws of a 
clamp-on ammeter four times, the proper reading 
would be __________ if the clamp-on ammeter 
was reading 16 amps.
a. 16 amps
b. 8 amps
c. 4 amps
d. 2 amps
RQ9 
Explain the operation of an analog voltmeter.
RQ10 
Air-conditioning or refrigeration equipment can 
operate properly at __________% above or 
below its rated voltage.
RQ11 
If a technician has no idea of the voltage available 
to a unit, what procedure should be followed on 
reading the voltage?
RQ12 
What precaution should be taken when using an 
ohmmeter?
RQ13 
What does the term continuity mean?
RQ14 
What is a short circuit?
RQ15 
What is an open circuit?
RQ16 
What factors should be considered when purchas-
ing an electric meter?
RQ17 
Match the following terms.
___ short circuit 
a. zero ohms
___ open circuit 
b. 22 ohms
___ measurable 
c. infinite ohms
       resistance
RQ18 
How does the internal circuitry differ among the 
ohmmeter, voltmeter, and ammeter?
RQ19 
A voltmeter is connected to a circuit in (series or 
parallel).
RQ20 
An in-line ammeter must be connected to a circuit 
in __________.
a. series
b. parallel
C H A P T E R  4  R E V I E W
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RQ21 
What is the difference between an analog meter 
movement and a digital meter movement?
RQ22 
Give three advantages of a digital electric meter.
RQ23 
What basic concept is used in a digital meter to 
calculate the circuit characteristics being mea-
sured?
a. Watt’s law
b. Volt’s law
c. Amp’s law
d. Ohm’s law
RQ24 
What is the basic accuracy of most analog and 
digital meters?
RQ25 
How many digits will the 3½- and 4½-digit dis-
plays have?
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 4 in the Lab Manual.
RQ26 
How are digital meters protected?
RQ27 
The ohmmeter differs from other types of meters in 
that it has its own __________ __________.
RQ28 
Compare the digital and analog types of electric 
meters, giving advantages and disadvantages.
C H A P T E R  4  R E V I E W
78 
CHAPTER 4   Electric Meters
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗  Explain what electrical loads are and their general purpose in heating, 
 cooling, and refrigeration systems.
◗  Give examples of common loads used in heating, cooling, and refrigeration 
systems.
◗  Identify the symbols of common loads used in heating, cooling, and 
 refrigeration systems.
◗  Explain the purpose of relays and contactors in heating, cooling, and 
 refrigeration systems.
◗  Identify the symbols of relays and contactors in heating, cooling, and 
 refrigeration systems.
◗  Explain the purpose of switches and the types used in heating, cooling, and 
refrigeration systems.
◗  Identify the symbols of switches in heating, cooling, and refrigeration 
 systems.
◗  Identify the symbols and purpose of other miscellaneous controls in heating, 
cooling, and refrigeration systems.
◗  Identify the different types of wiring diagrams used in the industry and the 
purpose of each.
Components, Symbols, and 
Circuitry of Air-Conditioning 
Wiring Diagrams
C H A P T E R
79
5
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80 
CHAPTER 5   Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning Wiring Diagrams
INTRODUCTION
Because of the complexity of today’s air-conditioning, heating, and 
refrigeration systems, industry technicians should be able to read and 
interpret all kinds of wiring diagrams. Electric wiring diagrams contain 
a wealth of information about the electrical installation and operation of 
the equipment. The installation mechanic depends on the wiring diagram 
for the correct installation of the wiring to the unit. The technician uses 
the electrical diagrams as a guide in troubleshooting the electric system 
of a unit. It would be impossible for wiring diagrams to be composed of 
photographs of various components of the equipment. They would be 
too large and in many cases too complex due to the number of wires 
that are carried to certain devices. Thus, symbols are used in wiring dia-
grams to represent such system components as compressors, indoor fan 
motors, thermostats, pressure switches, and heaters. Industry techni-
cians must be able to identify most symbols and know where to look up 
the remainder. Most manufacturers use similar symbols for each type of 
electric component, although there are some minor differences in sym-
bols between some major manufacturers. Thus, a knowledge of the basic 
symbols is essential if you are to be successful in the industry.
We begin our study with a discussion of the various types of electric 
loads found in the industry and the basic symbol used for each device.
KEY TERMS
Contactor
De-energized
Disconnect switch
Energized
Factual diagram
Fuse
Heater
Installation diagram
Load
Magnetic overload
Magnetic starter
Motor
Normally
Normally closed
Normally open
Pictorial diagram
Pilot duty device
Pole
Pressure switch
Push-button switch
Relay
Schematic diagram
Signal light
Solenoid
Switch
Thermal overload
Thermostat
Throw
Transformer
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 5.1   Loads 
81
5.1 
LOADS
Loads are electric devices that consume electricity to do useful work. 
Loads are devices such as motors (Figure 5.1), solenoids (Figure 5.2), 
resistance heaters (Figure 5.3), and other current-consuming devices. The 
sizes of loads vary from devices with a small current draw, such as a light 
bulb, a small fan motor, and solenoids, to large motors that could use 
upward of 100 amperes.
5.1
F I G U R E
Electric motor. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
5.3
F I G U R E
A resistance heater. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
5.2
F I G U R E
A solenoid used to 
operate a contactor. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

82 
CHAPTER 5   Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning Wiring Diagrams
5.4
FIGURE
Compressor. 
(Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
5.5
FIGURE
A condenser fan motor on a residential 
air-conditioning condensing unit.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Loads are the most important part of a heating, cooling, or refrigera-
tion system because they do all the work in the system. Loads operate 
compressors, which compress and transfer refrigerant in a system. They 
operate fans, which move air. They operate the solenoid part of a relay, 
which starts and stops loads. Also, loads operate with other devices that 
perform useful work. Industry technicians should be able to recognize 
the common symbols for loads and know where to look up the symbols 
for little-used loads, because each electric wiring diagram is composed of 
symbols and their interconnecting wires.
In the following paragraphs, we will take a close look at several differ-
ent kinds of loads used in the industry.
Motors
A motor is an electric device that consumes electric energy to rotate 
a device in an electric system. Motors are used in the industry to 
rotate devices such as compressors (Figure 5.4), condenser fan motors 
(Figure 5.5), pumps (Figure 5.6), and other devices that require rotating 
movement. Motors are the largest and most important loads in heating, 
cooling, and refrigeration systems.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 5.1   Loads 
83
The symbols shown in Figure 5.7 are the most common symbols used 
to represent motors.
A letter designation tells you what purpose the motor serves in the 
system. Figure 5.8 shows several symbolic representations of different 
uses of motors. Careful attention should be given to symbols represent-
ing motors because in some cases, a motor has an internal overload, as 
shown in Figure 5.8(e).
5.6
FIGURE
A centrifugal pump. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
(a) Most commonly used symbol
(b) Alternate symbol
5.7
F I G U R E
Symbols for an electric 
motor. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
5.8
FIGURE
Symbols representing some common letter designations.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
(b) Evaporator fan motor
(c) Compressor motor
(a) Condenser fan motor
(d) Compressor motor
(e) Compressor motor with
       internal overload
CFM
EFM
COMP
COMP
COMP
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

84 
CHAPTER 5   Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning Wiring Diagrams
5.9
FIGURE
Solenoid coil 
used to operate 
relay. (Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Solenoids
The solenoid is a device that creates a magnetic field when energized 
and causes some action to an electric component such as a relay or 
valve. A common solenoid used to operate a relay is shown in Figure 5.9. 
The solenoid is considered a load because it consumes electricity to do 
useful work.
Solenoids are devices that control some element in a system. Solenoid 
valves are valves that open and close, stopping or starting a flow. Solenoid 
coils used in relays and contactors will be discussed later in this chapter. 
Some common solenoid valves are hot-gas solenoids, reversing-valve 
solenoids, and liquid-line solenoids. Figure 5.10(a) shows a solenoid valve 
and a solenoid coil, and Figure 5.10(b) shows its symbol.
Heaters
Heaters are loads that are found in many systems and wiring diagrams. 
A heater takes electric energy and converts it to heat. In some cases, 
electric resistance heaters are used to heat homes. Heaters might also 
5.10
FIGURE
(a) Solenoid valve with coil
(b) Symbol for Solenoid
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
  
(a)
(b)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 5.2   Contactors and Relays 
85
be used to heat a small object or area. The symbol for all heaters is the 
same. Only a letter designation tells you specifically why the heater is 
used. Figure 5.11 shows the symbols used for heaters, along with some 
common letter designations.
Signal Lights
A signal light is a light that is illuminated to denote a certain condition in 
a system. The letter inside the signal light symbol denotes the color of the 
signal light, as shown in Figure 5.12. Signal lights come in a variety of col-
ors and are not limited to the colors shown in Figure 5.12. A signal light is 
used to show that a piece of equipment is operating or that it is operating 
in an unsafe condition. Signal lights are usually energized when a piece 
of equipment or component is started.
5.2 
CONTACTORS AND RELAYS
Contactors and relays are devices that open and close a set or sets of 
electric contacts by the action of a solenoid coil. The contactor or relay is 
composed of a solenoid and the contacts. A relay is shown in Figure 5.13. 
A contactor is shown in Figure 5.14. When the solenoid is energized, the 
contacts will open or close, depending on their original position (that is, 
if they were open, they will close, and vice versa).
CH
(b) Crankcase heater
(a) Heater
(c) Supplementary heater
SUPP H
5.11
FIGURE
Symbols for commonly used electric heaters.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
5.12
FIGURE
Symbols for signal lights showing the color of the light.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
(a)  Red
(b)  Green
(c)  Blue
R
G
B
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

86 
CHAPTER 5   Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning Wiring Diagrams
In an air-conditioning control system, we must have some method of 
controlling loads. In most cases, a relay or contactor is used. Relays and con-
tactors are widely used in control systems. Thus, it is essential that industry 
technicians be able to identify the symbols for relays and contactors.
The main difference between a relay and contactor is the size of the 
device. A contactor is simply a large relay. Usually, the devices are dis-
tinguished by their rated current flow. A contactor can carry 20 amperes 
or more. A relay is designed to carry less than 20 amperes. Contactors 
are commonly used where the ampere draw of a device is more than 
20 amperes. A relay would rarely be used to carry over 20 amperes.
Contactors and relays play an important part in the control system 
of any air conditioner, refrigerator, or heater. For example, contactors 
and relays are used to stop and start different loads in a refrigeration 
system. Compressors, in most air-conditioning systems, are controlled 
by a contactor or magnetic starter. Relays can be used for pilot duty, that 
is, for controlling another relay or contactor. The most important fact to 
remember is that most control systems have many relays and at least one 
contactor. These relays or contactors always control some load.
Relays and contactors are composed of three parts: the contact and 
the coil, or solenoid, and the mechanical linkage. The contact makes the 
electrical connections. Figure 5.15 shows the symbol for a pole, or  contact, 
5.13
F I G U R E
Relay. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
5.14
F I G U R E
Contactor. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 5.2   Contactors and Relays 
87
of a relay or contactor. The term “pole” refers to one set of contacts. 
However, in some cases, the relay or contact might have two or three 
poles, which means two or three sets of contacts. The coil or solenoid, the 
second part of the relay, is energized (voltage is supplied) and, through 
a magnetic field, closes the contact or contacts. Either symbol shown in 
Figure 5.17 can be used to represent a relay or contactor coil. The symbol 
for the relay or contactor is the same if each has the same number of 
poles and if their purpose is basically the same, with the exception of the 
ampere rating of the device.
All symbols are usually shown in the  de-energized position. This 
means that there is no electric potential to the coil of the device. 
Figure 5.15 shows a “normally open” contact in the de-energized position.
The term normally refers to the position of a set of contacts when the 
device is de-energized. Figure 5.15 shows a normally open set of contacts 
and Figure 5.16 shows a normally closed set of contacts. Normally open 
contacts close and normally closed contacts open when the relay or con-
tactor is energized. In Figure 5.18, a relay is shown with normally open 
and closed contacts.
The terms “normally open,” “normally closed,” “energized,” and 
 “de-energized” are important in understanding relays and contactors on 
wiring diagrams. Figure 5.19(a) shows a relay with two normally open 
contacts and one normally closed contact in the de-energized position 
(with no voltage to the coil). Figure 5.19(b) shows the same contacts in 
the energized position (with voltage to the coil). In the de-energized 
position, the current will not flow through contacts 1 and 2, but current 
will flow through contact 3. In the energized position, the current flow is 
through 1 and 2 but not through 3.
5.15
FIGURE
Symbol for a normally open pole 
of a relay or contactor.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
5.16
FIGURE
Symbol for a normally closed pole 
of a relay or contactor.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
5.17
FIGURE
Symbols for relay or contactor coil; 
either symbol may be used for each 
device. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

88 
CHAPTER 5   Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning Wiring Diagrams
5.3 
MAGNETIC STARTERS
A magnetic starter is the same type of device as a contactor in terms of 
the ampere rating of the device. But the magnetic starter has a means 
of overload protection in it, whereas the contactor has none. Figure 5.20 
shows a picture of the magnetic starter and its symbol. The principle of 
operation of the magnetic starter will be covered in Chapter 10.
Normally 
Closed
Contacts
Normally 
Open
Contacts
5.18
F I G U R E
Normally closed and 
open set of contacts.
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
(a)  De-energized
(b)  Energized
1
2
3
1
2
3
5.19
FIGURE
Symbols showing de-energized 
and energized relays. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
5.20
F I G U R E
(a) Magnetic starter; (b) Symbol. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 5.4   Switches 
89
5.4 
SWITCHES
An electric switch is a device that opens and closes to control some load 
in an electric circuit. Electric switches can be opened and closed by tem-
perature, pressure, humidity, flow, or by some manual means. You must 
become familiar with the symbols used for switches because in most 
cases they control the loads in the system. The symbol will also indicate 
what is initiating the action of the switch.
A manually operated switch is a switch that is opened and closed 
by manual force. Figure 5.21 shows a simple manually operated switch. 
The poles of a manual switch are the number of contacts that are 
included in the switch. The throw indicates how the switch may be 
operated. For example, a single-pole–single-throw switch has one set 
of contacts and two positions: an open and a closed position, as shown 
in Figure 5.21. A double-pole–double-throw switch has two sets of con-
tacts and three positions, as shown in Figure 5.22. Symbols for these 
two switches and for two other basic types of manual switches are 
shown in Figure 5.23.
There are other types of manual switches used in the industry. The 
disconnect switch is used to open and close the main power source 
to a piece of equipment or load. Figure 5.24 shows a three-pole dis-
connect switch and its symbol. The push-button switch, as shown 
5.21
F I G U R E
Single-pole–single-throw manual switch. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

90 
CHAPTER 5   Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning Wiring Diagrams
5.22
F I G U R E
Double-pole–double-throw manual switch. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
in Figure 5.25, is a switch used to open and 
close a set of contacts by pressing a button. 
The symbols for the normally closed and the 
normally open push-button switches are also 
shown in Figure 5.25.
The most important type of switch in a 
control system is the mechanically operated 
switch. Thermostats are mechanically oper-
ated switches used in most control systems. 
Thermostats are said to be mechanically 
operated because the temperature-sensing 
 element moves a set of contacts by a mechan-
ical linkage. Thermostats are designed for 
heating, cooling, or both. The cooling ther-
mostat is designed to close on a temperature 
rise and open on a temperature fall. The 
 heating thermostat is designed to open on a 
(a) Single-pole–
     single-throw
     switch
(b) Single-pole–
     double-throw
     switch
(c) Double-pole–
     single-throw
     switch
(d) Double-pole–
     double-throw
     switch
5.23
F I G U R E
Symbols for manual 
switches. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 5.4   Switches 
91
(a)
5.25
F I G U R E
(a) Push-button switch; (b) Symbol. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Symbol for
normally closed
push-button
switch
Symbol for
normally open
push-button
switch
(b)
(a) Switch
(b) Symbol
5.24
F I G U R E
Three-pole fusible disconnect. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

92 
CHAPTER 5   Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning Wiring Diagrams
 temperature rise and close on a temperature fall. The symbols for these 
two types of thermostats, shown in Figure 5.26, indicate their function. 
Figure 5.27 shows a modern thermostat.
Pressure switches are used for different functions in modern control 
circuits. The purpose of the pressure switch determines whether it opens 
or closes on a rise or fall in pressure. The pressure range of the switch is 
not part of the symbolic representation. Figure 5.28 shows the symbols 
for pressure switches. Letter designations in the symbols often denote the 
pressure ranges and purposes of the switches. Figure 5.29 shows some 
common pressure switches used in the industry.
(a) Heating thermostat; opens
on temperature rise
(b) Cooling thermostat; closes
on temperature rise
5.26
F I G U R E
Symbols for heating and cooling thermostats. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
5.27
F I G U R E
Thermostat. 
(Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
(a) Opens on rise in pressure
(b) Closes on rise in pressure
5.28
F I G U R E
Symbols for pressure switches. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 5.5   Safety Devices 
93
5.5 
SAFETY DEVICES
Safety devices are important in today’s modern systems. Components 
are becoming more expensive each year. Thus, it is vital that these 
components be protected from adverse conditions such as low voltage, 
high ampere draw, and overheating. It is for this reason that you should 
become familiar with symbols for safety devices. Overloads and safety 
devices are sometimes a combination of a load and a switch. They differ 
from the relay in their purpose and overall design.
All motors are designed to operate on a certain current draw. If for 
some reason this rating is exceeded, the motor must be cut off immedi-
ately to prevent damage and possible destruction of the component. A 
burned-out motor is often caused by a malfunction in the safety devices.
The fuse is the simplest type of overload device. The fuse is effective 
against a large overload, but it is less effective against small overloads. 
The fuse is nothing more than a piece of metal designed to carry a certain 
load. Any higher load will cause the fuse to break the circuit. Figure 5.30 
shows two symbols for a fuse. Figure 5.31 shows some common fuses in 
use today.
The second type of overload device is designed to protect the motor 
against small and large overloads. This type is divided into two catego-
ries: thermal and magnetic. The thermal overload is 
operated by heat, and the magnetic overload is oper-
ated by magnetism, which is directly proportional to 
the current draw.
The thermal overload can be a pilot duty device, 
which breaks the control circuit and locks the 
motor out. The pilot duty types of overloads are 
most common on motors larger than 3 horsepower. 
5.29
F I G U R E
Pressure switches. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
5.30
F I G U R E
Symbols for fuses. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

94 
CHAPTER 5   Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning Wiring Diagrams
The  thermal overload can also be a line 
voltage device, which breaks the power 
line to the component being protected.
The bimetal element is the simplest 
of the thermal overloads. When it gets 
warm, it warps to open the circuit, as 
shown symbolically in Figure 5.32. Some 
bimetal elements are furnished with heat-
ers, as shown symbolically in Figure 5.33. 
The heater allows the bimetal disc to react 
to an overload more quickly because the 
current flow is proportional to heat.
The thermal overload relay, whose 
symbol is shown in Figure 5.34, is a simple 
device with a thermal element and a 
switch that opens on a rise in  temperature.
The magnetic overload symbol is the 
same as the symbol for a relay with one 
normally closed contact. The current 
5.31
F I G U R E
Some common fuses. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Closed
Open
5.32
F I G U R E
Symbols for bimetal overload (closed and open). 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
5.34
F I G U R E
Symbol for thermal 
overload relay. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
3
Line 1
2
1
5.33
F I G U R E
Symbol for three-wire 
bimetal overload. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 5.6   Transformers 
95
flow is relayed to the overload coil. Since current flow is proportional to 
the strength of the magnetic field, the relay can be designed to energize 
only on a high current draw. Figure 5.35 shows a magnetic overload and 
its symbol. The letter designation of this device will distinguish between 
the magnetic overload and the common relay.
5.6 
TRANSFORMERS
The transformer decreases or increases the incoming voltage to a desired 
voltage. In most air-conditioning control circuits, it is not practical to 
pull large wires for a long distance. Therefore, a 24-volt control circuit, 
(b)
5.35
F I G U R E
(a) Symbol; (b) Magnetic overload. (Courtesy 
of Bill Johnson)
(b)
5.36
F I G U R E
(a) Symbol; (b) Transformer. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
(a)
(a)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

96 
CHAPTER 5   Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning Wiring Diagrams
which is safer, less expensive, and a better method of control, is used. 
Figure 5.36 shows a transformer and its symbol. The voltage is also given 
with the symbol in some cases.
5.7 
SCHEMATIC DIAGRAMS
Most modern heating, cooling, and refrigeration systems are becoming 
more complex with more controls and safety devices. Advances in con-
trols and control systems require you to be able to read schematic dia-
grams. If you are able to read schematic diagrams, you will know what 
the unit should be doing.
The schematic diagram is the most useful and easiest to follow of 
any electric diagram. The schematic diagram tells how, when, and why 
a system works as it does. In most cases, 
service technicians use schematic dia-
grams to troubleshoot control systems. 
The schematic wiring diagram includes 
the symbols and the line representations 
so the user can easily identify loads and 
switches along with the circuits.
All electric circuits contain a source 
of electrons, a device that uses electron 
flow, and a path for the electrons to fol-
low. In most cases, the source of electrons 
is an alternating current voltage supply. 
The device using the electron flow is a 
motor, heater, relay coil, or any other 
load device. The path for the electrons to 
follow is a wire or any type of  conductor.
In the schematic diagram, the source 
of electrons, the power supply, is repre-
sented by two lines drawn downward and 
listed as L1 and L2, as shown in Figure 5.37. 
There is a potential difference of 240 volts 
between L1 and L2. If a path is created 
between L1 and L2, current will flow.
All electrical loads in the unit are 
placed between L1 and L2, along with the 
switches controlling the load. Figure 5.38 
shows a complete circuit in schematic 
form with a compressor and the switch 
(thermostat) that controls it. When the 
Power legs
Run capacitor
L1
L2
5.37
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram 
showing power supply. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Run
capacitor
L1
L2
Compressor
Control
switch
(thermostat)
5.38
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a 
complete circuit. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 5.9   Installation Diagrams 
97
switch is closed, the compressor will run. In Figure 5.38, the source of 
electrons is from L1 and L2, the path is the connecting wire, and the 
device using the electron flow is the compressor. The compressor oper-
ates when the thermostat is closed.
Figure 5.39 shows a full schematic diagram similar to the dia-
grams you will be using on the job. All schematic diagrams are broken 
down into a circuit-by-circuit arrangement. Most schematic diagrams 
contain a legend that cross-references the components and their let-
ter designation to the name of the component. Look at the legend in 
Figure 5.39.
5.8 
PICTORIAL DIAGRAMS
The pictorial diagram, also referred to as a label or line diagram, is  intended 
to show the actual internal wiring of the unit. The pictorial diagram 
shows all the components of the control panel as a blueprint, including 
all the interconnecting wiring. It does not show the unit to scale, however. 
Components that are not shown in the control panel itself are shown out-
side the panel and labeled. The pictorial diagram is used to locate specific 
components or wires when troubleshooting from a schematic diagram. 
A typical pictorial diagram used in the industry is shown in Figure 5.40.
It is difficult to determine from a pictorial diagram how a system 
operates, and only an experienced mechanic can follow a complex picto-
rial diagram. Thus, most air-conditioning technicians use the schematic 
diagram to find the cause of the problem. Then they use the pictorial dia-
gram to locate the position of the component at fault. In cases where the 
wiring is simple, however, a pictorial diagram may be the only diagram 
furnished with the equipment.
The factual diagram consists of a pictorial diagram along with a 
schematic diagram. Many air-conditioner manufacturers supply factual 
diagrams so service technicians can locate the relay or component in the 
control panel.
5.9 
INSTALLATION DIAGRAMS
The installation diagram is used to help the installation electrician to 
wire the unit properly. The diagram gives specific information about ter-
minals, wire sizes, color coding, and breaker or fuse sizes. The diagram 
does not provide details about equipment operation because the electri-
cian has no need for this information. Figure 5.41 shows an installation 
diagram. The installation wiring diagram shows little internal wiring and 
is therefore almost useless to industry technicians.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

98 
CHAPTER 5   Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning Wiring Diagrams
Legend
    Symbols:
   Wiring:
IF:  
IFR:
M:
OL:
HP:
LP: 
Indoor fan motor
Indoor fan relay
Contactor
Overload
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Disconnect switch
Transformer
Switch
Coil
Contact-normally open
Contact-normally closed
Fuse
Capacitor
Motor winding
Identifiable terminal
Other wire junctions
including schematic
Field-power
Factory-power
Field-control
Factory-control
1-60-230
L1
L2
T2
M
51
53
54
S
S
R
52
5
4
230
24 V
2
56
IF
55
55
5
Red
Black
LP
HP
Run cap.
Compressor 
motor
Outdoor fan
motor
Run cap.
Main
Main
OL
OL
Black
Red
Yellow
On
Fan F
V
V
F
7
IFR
M
1
3
8
11
1,4
10
11,12
12
10
C
C
Auto
Indoor thermostat
Cool
To external load
 (30 VA. max.)
Yellow
Yellow
Blue
T1
R
C
2
4
1
M
Aux.
Aux.
  
 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
15
16
17
9
10
11
12
13
14
IFR
5.39
F I G U R E
Complete schematic diagram for small packaged unit. (Courtesy of Westinghouse 
Electric Corp.) 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 5.9   Installation Diagrams 
99
5.40
F I G U R E
A typical pictorial diagram used in the industry. (Courtesy of Carrier 
Corporation, Syracuse, NY)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100 
CHAPTER 5   Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning Wiring Diagrams
COMP
C S R
L1
L2
To Power Supply
208/240/1/60
NEC Class 2 Circuit
40 VA 24 V
RC
CFM
5.41
F I G U R E
A typical installation dia-
gram. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
(a) Motor
(b) Solenoid
(c) Heater
Review of symbols 
for loads. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
F I G U R E 5.42
(b) Contactor
or three-
pole relay
(a) Relay
(c) Magnetic
starter
5.43
F I G U R E
Review of symbols used 
for contactors and 
relays. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Summary 
101
SUMMARY
Loads are devices that use electricity to do useful work. Figure 5.42 gives 
a review of the symbols used for solenoids, motors, and heaters, the typi-
cal loads found in the industry. Most symbols have some type of letter 
designation to identify more clearly the component referred to.
Loads are controlled by relays and contactors, which share the same 
symbol and perform similar tasks. The major difference between relays 
and contactors is the amount of current each can carry. If a compressor is 
being operated by a device, you can assume the device is a contactor. If a 
small fan motor is being operated by a device, you can assume the device 
is a relay. A relay is used for small loads, and a contactor is used for large 
loads. Figure 5.43 reviews the symbols for some of these devices.
Relays and contactors are controlled by switches. Some of the  switches 
used in the industry are manual, push-button, thermostat, and pressure. 
Thermostats are made for two purposes: to operate either a heating or 
a cooling system. The symbols for thermostats denote whether they are 
used for heating or cooling. Pressure switches are much the same as 
thermostats; their symbols also denote which way they open or close and 
under what condition. Pressure switches can be used for low or high pres-
sure and are usually denoted by letter designations.
In any system using motors, protective devices are important to 
prevent damage to the motors or to larger components of the system. 
The most important type of safety device is for motor protection. A fuse, 
magnetic overload, thermal overload line break, thermal overload pilot 
duty, or a thermal overload relay could be used. Many overloads are built 
directly into the larger components.
Transformers are devices that increase or decrease the incoming 
voltage to some desired voltage. Transformers are used in the industry 
mainly in control circuits.
Schematic diagrams tell air-conditioning, heating, or refrigeration 
technicians when and why a system works as it does. Schematic dia-
grams show the symbols for devices and the interconnecting wiring of 
a unit in a circuit-by-circuit arrangement. Schematic diagrams are used 
most frequently by service technicians to troubleshoot equipment and 
systems.
Pictorial diagrams show an exact layout of the control panel with 
the external components shown outside the panel and labeled. The 
pictorial diagram can be used as a troubleshooting diagram on a simple 
system, such as a window air conditioner. In most cases, pictorial diagrams 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

102 
CHAPTER 5   Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning Wiring Diagrams
C H A P T E R  5  R E V I E W
are used to find the placement of a component in the panel. Factual 
 diagrams are a combination of the schematic and pictorial, with each 
shown  separately.
Installation diagrams are used to help the installation electrician cor-
rectly connect the wiring to the unit. Appendix B shows most of the elec-
trical symbols used by major refrigeration, heating, and air-conditioning 
manufacturers.
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
RQ1 
What are the three types of electrical diagrams 
used in the heating, cooling, and refrigeration 
industry?
RQ2 
A load is an electrical device that __________.
a. produces electricity
b. directs the flow of electricity
c. assists in the starting of motors
d. uses electricity to do useful work
RQ3 
What is the major load of an air-conditioning 
system?
RQ4 
Identify the following symbols for loads:
CFM
CH
R
a.
b.
d.
e.
c.
RQ5 
What is the major difference between a contactor 
and a relay?
RQ6 
What do the terms “normally open” and “normally 
closed” refer to with regard to a switch or set of 
contacts? Draw a normally open and normally 
closed contact.
RQ7 
What is the difference between a magnetic starter 
and a contactor?
RQ8 
Identify the following symbols for relays and 
contactors:
a.
b.
d.
e.
c.
a.
b.
c.
RQ9 
Draw a heating and a cooling thermostat and 
explain the difference between them.
RQ10 
A three-pole contactor would allow how many 
paths for current flow?
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RQ11 
A disconnect switch is used to __________.
a. open and close the main power source to a 
piece of equipment
b. stop and start a compressor
c. control the operation of an electric heater
d. open when an unsafe condition occurs
RQ12 
What determines whether a pressure switch opens 
or closes on a rise of pressure?
RQ13 
Identify the following symbols for switches:
a.
b.
d.
e.
c.
RQ14 
What is the difference between a thermal overload 
and a magnetic overload? Draw the symbol for 
each.
RQ15 
What is the purpose of a transformer? Draw the 
symbols for a transformer.
RQ16 
Which of the following is not a requirement for an 
electric circuit?
a. a source
b. a path
c. a load
d. a signal light
RQ17 
What is the purpose of a legend on a schematic 
diagram?
RQ18 
A factual diagram is __________.
a. a pictorial diagram with wire colors denoted
b.  a combination of pictorial and installation 
wiring diagrams
c.  a combination of schematic and pictorial wiring 
diagrams
d. none of the above
RQ19 
Identify the following symbols for safety devices.
e.
d.
a.
b.
c.
RQ20 
Which of the following are not components of a 
contactor or relay?
a. a solenoid
b. contacts
c. thermal element
d. mechanical linkage
RQ21 
True or False: The schematic diagram tells service 
technicians how to wire a system.
RQ22 
What is the difference between a pilot duty and a 
line break overload?
RQ23 
What type of switch would be used to open or 
close a set of contacts at a certain pressure?
RQ24 What is the purpose of a fuse in an electrical system?
RQ25 
True or False: A solenoid valve is a device that 
opens or closes to control the flow of some ele-
ment in the system.
RQ26 
What is a signal light used for in a control system?
RQ27 
Change the following normally open elements from 
the de-energized position to the energized position.
RQ28 Draw the symbols for the following electrical devices.
a. heating thermostat
b. pressure switch (closes on rise)
c. heater
d. motor
e. solenoid coil
f. normally open push-button switch
C H A P T E R  5  R E V I E W
 
 
Review Questions 
103
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RQ29 
Add letter designations to the symbols to indicate 
the following:
a.
compressor
high-pressure switch
evaporator fan motor
crankcase heater
hot-gas solenoid
red signal light
c.
e.
b.
d.
f.
R
RQ30 
Draw a symbol for a magnetic starter.
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 5 in the Lab Manual.
C H A P T E R  5  R E V I E W
104 
CHAPTER 5   Components, Symbols, and Circuitry of Air-Conditioning Wiring Diagrams
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗ Read and interpret the schematic of a dehumidifier.
◗ Read and interpret the schematic of a window air conditioner.
◗ Read and interpret the schematic of a walk-in cooler.
◗ Read and interpret the schematic of a commercial freezer.
◗ Read and interpret the schematic of a gas furnace with a standing pilot.
◗ Read and interpret the schematic of a small packaged residential air conditioner.
◗ Read and interpret the schematics of light commercial air-conditioning 
 systems with control relays.
◗ Read and interpret the schematics of light commercial air-conditioning 
 systems with lockout relays.
◗ Read and interpret the schematics of two-stage heating and two-stage 
 cooling systems.
◗ Read and interpret the schematics of heat pumps with defrost boards and 
with defrost timers.
◗ Read and interpret the schematic of a commercial refrigeration system with 
pump down.
◗ Read and interpret most diagrams found in the refrigeration, heating, and 
air-conditioning industry.
Reading Schematic Diagrams
C H A P T E R
105
R
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

KEY TERMS
Balance point 
Low-voltage control system
Combustion chamber 
Defrost cycle
Control relay 
Dehumidifier
Heat pump 
Gas furnace
Light commercial 
Multistage thermostat
   air-conditioning system 
Pump-down control system
Limit switch 
Reversing valve
Line-voltage control system 
Set point
Lockout relay 
Short cycle
 
INTRODUCTION
Many types of wiring diagrams are used in the refrigeration, heating, 
and air-conditioning industry. Most of these diagrams can be used for 
multiple purposes, such as installing equipment, locating electrical com-
ponents in a control panel, and troubleshooting. One limitation, however, 
is that most diagrams are drawn to emphasize the part of the industry 
for which they are being used. For example, an installation or connec-
tion diagram shows the installation technician how to make the correct 
electrical connections when installing the equipment, but it does not 
show enough detail to enable technicians to troubleshoot the electrical 
system. The pictorial diagram can be used for troubleshooting and instal-
lation, but it is extremely cluttered and hard to follow for tasks other than 
locating electrical components in a control panel. However, if you had to 
completely rewire a control panel, a pictorial diagram would certainly be 
useful. The schematic diagram is the best diagram overall for the service 
technician to use when troubleshooting control circuits.
One of the most important tools available to the refrigeration, heat-
ing, and air-conditioning technician in the field is the schematic wiring 
diagram, sometimes called the ladder diagram. Technicians must under-
stand the operation of the equipment they are assigned to install or 
troubleshoot. A proficient technician should be able to read and interpret 
schematic diagrams in order to
• Understand how a piece of equipment operates.
• Know what the unit should be doing when it is in a specific mode of 
operation.
106 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Reading Schematic Diagrams 
107
• Be able to make installation connections.
• Be able to troubleshoot and repair refrigeration, heating, and 
 air-conditioning systems.
Refrigeration, heating, and air-conditioning equipment ranges from 
the simple to the complex. A schematic diagram shows the technician the 
electrical components that are used in the system. Diagrams can usually 
be found attached to one of the service panels of the equipment, as shown 
in Figure 6.1, or attached to electrical panel covers. These diagrams can 
be schematic, pictorial, a combination of the two, or both. The schematic 
diagram not only identifies the electrical components that are in the unit 
but also illustrates how the unit works and electrical connections that 
need to be made. Technicians should refer to schematic diagrams when 
they want to know which electrical connections are needed to install the 
equipment. A schematic diagram makes troubleshooting easier because 
it breaks the control system down into a circuit-by-circuit arrangement. 
It is the easiest type of diagram to follow. The schematic diagram tells 
how, when, and why a system works as it does. A schematic diagram is 
shown in Figure 6.2.
Diagram on service panel of air conditioner. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
6.1
F I G U R E
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

108 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
6.1 
SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM DESIGN
The schematic diagram resembles a ladder in that it is made up of two 
vertical lines representing the incoming electrical source (Figure 6.3). 
The electrical source is electrical energy being supplied to the equip-
ment. Most electrical circuits shown in a schematic diagram are arranged 
between these lines, as shown in Figure 6.4. The schematic wiring dia-
gram uses symbols to represent electrical components in the system. The 
symbols used by most equipment manufacturers are similar, but they 
C1
C2
L2
L1
HP
LP
R
Y
G
COMP
C:           Contactor
COMP:   Compressor
CFM:      Condenser fan motor     
IFM:        Indoor fan motor
IFR:         Indoor fan relay
HP:          High-pressure switch
LP:           Low-pressure switch
RC:         Run capacitor
          
CFM
C
IFR
IFR
IFM
Fan
Auto
On
System
Legend
RC
Thermostat (R, G, and Y are
markings on thermostat terminals)
Schematic diagram.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
6.2
F I G U R E
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 6.1   Schematic Diagram Design 
109
are not alike in many cases. The symbol used for switches is a straight 
line with the controlling element connected to the switch as shown in 
Figure 6.5(a). Manual switches show no controlling element, as shown in 
Figure 6.5(a). Loads are represented by a variety of symbols like circles 
or zigzagged lines (Figure 6.5[b]). Motors, relay coils, and signal lights are 
generally shown as circles, while solenoids and heaters are shown using 
zigzagged lines. Motors can be shown with their windings inside the 
circle. For most safety elements, a curved line represents their symbols, 
as shown in Figure 6.5(c). Figure 6.5(d) shows some contactors and relays 
commonly used on equipment today. Figure 6.5(e) shows a symbol for 
transformers. A transformer is used in most low-voltage control systems 
to reduce the voltage from line voltage to control voltage, usually 24 volts. 
A low-voltage control system is a control system that is operated by less 
voltage than that applied to the equipment. Most residential control sys-
tems are 24-volt control systems.
A schematic diagram is made up of series and parallel circuits. Each 
circuit that is connected between the vertical lines or power supply is 
in parallel, as shown highlighted in navy blue in Figure  6.6. A paral-
lel circuit has more than one path of current flow; the loads shown in 
Figure  6.6 are connected parallel to each other. Switches that control 
240/1/60
L1
L2
6.3
F I G U R E
Power supply of schematic 
diagram. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
240/1/60
L1
L2
FM
T
T:
FM:
Thermostat
Fan motor
6.4
F I G U R E
Circuit of schematic diagram. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

110 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
Heater
Crankcase heater
Defrost heater
Hot-gas solenoid
Relay coil    
Red signal light   
Compressor (single phase)
Compressor (three phase)
Fuse
Circuit breaker
In-line thermal overload
Magnetic overload
Pilot duty thermal overload
Relay or contactor with 
two NO contacts
Relay with one NO and one
NC contact
Single-pole–single-throw switch
Single-pole–double-throw switch
Double-pole–single-throw switch
Double-pole–double-throw switch
Thermostat opens on rise
(heating)
Thermostat closes on rise
(cooling)
Pressure switch opens on rise
Pressure switch closes on rise
Normally closed push button
Normally open push button
Humidistat
Time-delay relay
Relay contacts
Compressor
Evaporator fan motor
Condenser fan motor
Reversing valve solenoid
Three-pole contactor
H
Comp
EFM
Comp
Comp
AGS 
CFM
RVS
Transformer
CH
Htr 
R
A
B
C
D
E
6.5
F I G U R E
(A) Symbols for switches, (B) symbols for loads, (C) symbols for safety controls, (D) symbols  
for contactors and relays, (E) symbols for transformer. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

loads are connected in series with each load, as shown highlighted in 
navy blue in Figure 6.7. A series circuit is an electrical circuit with only 
one path of current flow. Series circuits are used when safety devices 
and operating controls are used to control a load. The entire schematic 
diagram shown in Figure 6.8 is a series-parallel circuit.
The circuit-by-circuit arrangement of a schematic diagram has impor-
tant benefits. Technicians can be overwhelmed by the complexity of the 
equipment or control circuits they are trying to troubleshoot. It is much 
simpler to focus on a small section of a diagram than on the entire dia-
gram. For example, examine the diagram in Figure 6.9(a) and then look at 
one circuit of the same diagram highlighted in navy blue in Figure 6.9(b). 
Isolating the circuit that is shown in Figure 6.9(b) does not change how 
the unit or control system operates, but it does allow the technician to 
concentrate on the part of the system that he or she suspects is causing 
the problem. This is much simpler than trying to troubleshoot by focusing 
240/1/60
L1
L2
COMP
BM
C
C
BR
C
COMP:
BM:
C:
BR:
Compressor
Blower motor
Contactor
Blower relay
BR
6.6
F I G U R E
Parallel circuits in a schematic. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 6.1   Schematic Diagram Design 
111
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

112 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
on the entire schematic diagram. A technician can never lose sight of the 
fact that the control circuit operates as a unit, but he or she can certainly 
make troubleshooting easier by focusing on the circuit that is not operat-
ing correctly.
Technicians must be able to read and interpret schematic diagrams so 
they can perform the tasks that will be assigned to them in the industry.
6.2 
READING BASIC SCHEMATIC DIAGRAMS
In this section, six basic schematic diagrams will be explained in detail:
• Figure 6.11 Dehumidifier
• Figure 6.12 Simple window air conditioner
• Figure 6.13 Walk-in cooler
• Figure 6.14 Commercial freezer
240/1/60
L1
L2
COMP
BM
C
C
BR
C
COMP:
BM:
C:
BR:
Compressor
Blower motor
Contactor
Blower relay
BR
6.7
F I G U R E
Switches connected in series with loads. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

• Figure 6.15 Gas furnace with standing pilot
• Figure 6.16 Packaged air-conditioning unit
Dehumidifier
A dehumidifier takes the humidity out of air in a specific area. 
Dehumidifiers are most commonly used to decrease moisture problems 
in basements, computer rooms, and other rooms where moisture is 
excessive. They come in many forms and sizes, but their function is the 
same no matter the size. The dehumidifier discussed is the type that is 
used in a residence; it is very simple in design and construction and is 
shown in Figure 6.10. The dehumidifier uses a line-voltage control system. 
A line voltage control system uses line voltage to operate the system.
The electrical components of a dehumidifier are the (1) humidistat, 
(2) compressor, and (3) fan motor. The schematic diagram for a simple 
residential dehumidifier is shown in Figure 6.11. A humidistat is a 
device that opens and closes a switch in reference to a set humidity. The 
240/1/60
L1
L2
COMP
BM
C
C
BR
C
COMP:
BM:
C:
BR:
Compressor
Blower motor
Contactor
Blower relay
BR
6.8
F I G U R E
Series and parallel circuits of schematic diagram. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 6.2   Reading Basic Schematic Diagrams 
113
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

114 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
COMP
C
C
RC
IFR
HPS
LPS
CIT
On
G
Y
R
CR
CR
CH
CFM
IFM
C
IFR
240/1/60
COMP:
C:
IFR:
IFM:
CR:
HPS:
LPS:
CR:
CH:
TRANS:
CIT:
CT:
Compressor
Contactor
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
Control relay
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Control relay
Crankcase heater
Transformer
Compressor internal
thermostat
Cool thermostat
L1
L2
Legend
CR
Auto
Thermostat
(a)
6.9
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

COMP
C
C
RC
IFR
HPS
LPS
CIT
On
Auto
G
Y
R
CR
CR
CH
CFM
C
IFR
CR
240/1/60
COMP:
C:
IFR:
IRM:
CR:
HPS:
LPS:
CR:
CH:
TRANS:
CIT:
CT:
Compressor
Contractor
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
Control relay
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Control relay
Crankcase heater
Transformer
Compressor internal
 thermostat
Cool thermostat
IFM
IFM
Legend
Thermostat
L1
L2
(b)
6.9
F I G U R E
One circuit higlighted in schematic diagram. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 6.2   Reading Basic Schematic Diagrams 
115
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

116 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
6.10
F I G U R E
Dehumidifier. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
H
120 volts
H:
C:
FM:
Humidistat
Compressor
Fan motor
C
FM
L1
N
6.11
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a 
dehumidifier. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 compressor moves refrigerant throughout the refrigeration system, and 
the fan motor forces air across the evaporator to remove moisture and 
across the condenser to remove heat from the refrigerant. If the humid-
ity increases to the set point of the humidistat, the humidistat will close 
and start the compressor and fan motor as shown highlighted in navy 
blue in Figure 6.12. The set point of a control is the point at which the 
contacts open or close, depending on the function of the control. When 
the humidity falls below the set point, the humidistat will open, stopping 
the compressor and fan motor (see Figure 6.11).
Simple Window Air Conditioner
Window air-conditioning units (see Figure 6.13) are common throughout 
the United States. They are used to cool small areas and, in some cases, 
whole houses, depending on the capacity of the window air conditioner. 
Window air conditioners range from simple to complex, depending on the 
many options that are available to consumers today. Many window units 
are equipped with multiple-speed fan motors, options that allow the fan 
motor to cycle on and off with the compressor, and heating capabilities.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

120 volts
H
H:
C:
FM:
Humidistat
Compressor
Fan motor
C
FM
L1
N
6.12
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of an operating dehumidifier  
with the active circuits highlighted in navy blue. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
6.13
F I G U R E
Window air conditioner. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 
Section 6.2   Reading Basic Schematic Diagrams 
117
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

118 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
The window air conditioner that will be discussed is a simple design 
that has a single-speed fan motor operated by the control switch and a 
compressor that is operated by the control switch and thermostat, as 
shown schematically in Figure 6.14. The control switch has three posi-
tions: off, fan only, and cool and operates the fan and compressor. When 
the control switch is in the off position, it connects the common terminal 4 
to terminal 1, which makes no electrical connection to system compo-
nents (see Figure 6.14). The fan-only position operates the fan only for air 
circulation and connects the common terminal 4 of the control switch to 
terminal 2 of the switch that will start the fan motor; this circuit is high-
lighted in navy blue in Figure 6.15. When the control switch is in the cool 
C
CS
1
2
3
#4
T
CS:       
FM:        
C:          
T:          
Switch
Fan motor
Compressor
Thermostat
240 volts
L1
L2
FM
6.14
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of simple window air conditioner. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
C
CS
1 2
3
#4
T
CS:       
FM:        
C:          
T:          
Switch
Fan motor
Compressor
Thermostat
240 volts
L1
L2
FM
6.15
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of simple window air 
conditioner  with fan motor circuits highlighted 
in navy blue. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

position, an electrical connection is made between terminal 4 of the con-
trol switch and terminals 2 and 3; these circuits are highlighted in navy 
blue in Figure 6.16. The connection that is made between terminals 4 and 
2 will operate the fan. The connection that is made between terminals 4 
and 3 will operate the compressor if the temperature of the conditioned 
space is above the set point of the thermostat. When the temperature of 
the conditioned space reaches the set point, the thermostat opens, inter-
rupting the power supply to the compressor, while the fan motor contin-
ues to run as shown in Figure 6.17. When the occupant shuts the window 
unit off, all components are stopped (see Figure 6.14).
Walk-In Cooler
A walk-in cooler is a refrigerated area that is conditioned by a mechani-
cal refrigeration system. These refrigeration units vary in size from small, 
like those used in a small grocery store, to extremely large, like those in 
manufacturing facilities. The indoor section of the walk-in cooler refrig-
eration unit includes an evaporator and a fan motor to move air across 
the evaporator, which is connected to a condensing unit. The condensing 
unit includes a compressor and a condenser fan motor that are usually 
located outside and connected to the evaporator section electrically and 
mechanically (by refrigerant lines).
FM
CS
1
2
3
#4
T
CS:       
FM:        
C:          
T:          
Switch
Fan motor
Compressor
Thermostat
240 volts
Thermostat 
closed
L1
L2
C
6.16
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of simple window unit air 
conditioner  in the cooling mode of operation. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 6.2   Reading Basic Schematic Diagrams 
119
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

120 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
The electrical components of a walk-in cooler include an evaporator 
fan motor, a compressor, a condenser fan motor, and electrical controls. 
The schematic diagram for a walk-in cooler is shown in Figure 6.18. The 
defrost timer consists of a timer motor that rotates and a set of contacts 
that open for a certain period of time at selected intervals. Defrosting is 
accomplished by shutting the compressor and condenser fan motor off 
and operating the evaporator fan motor. In walk-in cooler applications, 
this is usually enough to keep the evaporator coil defrosted. The walk-
in cooler also has a high-pressure switch, which is a safety control that 
will interrupt supply voltage to the compressor if the discharge pressure 
reaches an unsafe condition. (Discharge pressure reaches an unsafe con-
dition when the condenser is unable to adequately reject the heat that 
has been absorbed by the evaporator.) The low-pressure switch is used as 
the operating control for the walk-in cooler. Low-pressure switches are 
often used as operating controls because the pressure corresponds to the 
temperature in a refrigeration system. All of these electrical components 
can be seen in Figure 6.18.
Figure 6.19 shows the schematic diagram of a walk-in cooler control 
system with the system operating. The active circuits are highlighted 
in navy blue. The defrost timer motor operates continuously whenever 
power is supplied to the control system; this allows the defrost timer 
to initiate a defrost cycle at preset time intervals. The circuit controlling 
the  compressor and condenser fan motor has three electrical switches in 
series with these components: the high-pressure switch, the low-pressure 
FM
CS
1
2
3
#4
T
CS:       
FM:        
C:          
T:          
Switch
Fan motor
Compressor
Thermostat
240 volts
Thermostat 
open
L1
L2
C
6.17
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of simple window unit air con-
ditioner in the cooling mode of operation when the 
set point is reached. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

240 volts
CFM
HPS LPS
DT
EFM:
C:
LPS:
HPS:
CFM:
DT:
Evaporator fan motor
Compressor
Low-pressure switch
High-pressure switch
Condenser fan motor
Defrost timer
C
EFM
DT
L1
L2
6.18
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of walk-in-cooler. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
240 volts
CFM
HPS LPS
DT
EFM:
C:
LPS:
HPS:
CFM:
DT:
Evaporator fan motor
Compressor
Low-pressure switch
High-pressure switch
Condenser fan motor
Defrost timer
C
EFM
DT
L1
L2
6.19
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of operating walk-in-cooler with active 
circuit highlighted in navy blue. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 6.2   Reading Basic Schematic Diagrams 
121
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

122 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
switch, and the defrost timer contacts. In normal operation, the low-
pressure switch opens and closes to maintain the desired temperature in 
the cooler. The defrost timer contacts open and close at designated periods 
of time to defrost the evaporator coil, and the high-pressure switch will 
only open if a high-pressure condition occurs in the refrigeration system. 
The opening of the high-pressure switch would stop the compressor and 
condenser fan motor to prevent damage to the compressor.
Commercial Freezer
A commercial freezer is a refrigeration system that is designed to main-
tain a temperature lower than 32°F in a refrigerated case. When a tem-
perature lower than 32°F must be maintained in a refrigerated space, the 
evaporator must be defrosted often enough to remove the frost from the 
evaporator coil. Frost removal from the evaporator coil is accomplished 
by using a source of heat. The most popular heat source is electric heat-
ers, but in some cases hot gas from the compressor is transferred to the 
evaporator. A schematic diagram of a commercial freezer is shown in 
Figure 6.20.
240 V/1Ø/60
DT
4
2
1
T
Df T
DH
Defrost timer
Defrost timer motor
Thermostat
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Evaporator fan motor
Defrost thermostat
Defrost heater
DT:
DTM:
T:
C:
CFM:
EFM:
DfT:
DH:
DTM
C
CFM
EFM
L1
L2
6.20
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of commercial freezer. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The loads in the commercial freezer are compressor, condenser fan 
motor, evaporator fan motor, defrost heater, and defrost timer motor. The 
controls needed for the freezer to work automatically are the thermostat, 
defrost thermostat, and defrost timer. The defrost timer is used to start 
and stop the defrost cycle along with a defrost thermostat that terminates 
the defrost cycle if the temperature rises too high. The defrost timer used 
in this application is a single-pole–double-throw switch controlled by a 
timer motor. The defrost timer used in commercial freezers is shown 
in Figure 6.21. This type of defrost timer can be set to go into defrost for 
a specific number of defrost cycles in a 24-hour period, and the defrost 
6.21
F I G U R E
Commercial freezer 
defrost timer. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 
Section 6.2   Reading Basic Schematic Diagrams 
123
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

124 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
cycle time can be set from 30 to 120 minutes. The defrost timer motor 
operates whenever electrical energy is supplied to the control system. 
The thermostat is the operating control of the freezer and is used to 
maintain freezer temperature.
Figure 6.22 highlights the circuits that are active when the freezer 
is in the freezer mode of operation. The defrost timer contacts are closed 
between terminal 4 and terminal 1. The thermostat is the operating con-
trol in this mode of operation; it opens and closes to maintain the desired 
temperature in the freezer. The compressor, condenser fan motor, and 
evaporator fan motor are connected electrically in parallel and will oper-
ate together when the thermostat is closed.
The defrost mode of operation is highlighted in navy blue in Figure 6.23. 
The defrost timer contacts have changed from the normal operating 
position of terminal 4 to terminal 1 to terminal 4 to terminal 2. When the 
defrost timer contacts are in this position, the compressor, condenser 
fan motor, and evaporator fan motor are deenergized. The defrost heater 
is energized through the defrost timer contacts 4 and 2 and the defrost 
240 V/1Ø/60
DT
4
1
2
T
DfT
DH
Defrost timer
Defrost timer motor
Thermostat
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Evaporator fan motor
Defrost thermostat
Defrost heater
DT:
DTM:
T:
C:
CFM:
EFM:
DfT:
DH:
DTM
C
CFM
EFM
L1
L2
6.22
F I G U R E
Commercial freezer schematic diagram in freezing mode 
of operation with active circuit highlighted in navy blue.  
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

thermostat. The defrost thermostat is a safety control that is normally 
closed but will open if the evaporator coil reaches a temperature that 
would be detrimental to the frozen product. The defrost heater remains 
energized until the defrost timer contacts change from 4 and 2 to 4 and 1, 
returning the system to normal operation. If the defrost thermostat 
opens, the defrost heater will be shut off. Some defrost timers automati-
cally return the system to the frozen food mode of operation, but the type 
shown in this diagram will only shut the heater off.
Gas Furnace with Standing Pilot
The gas furnace shown in Figure 6.24 utilizes natural or LP gas as 
the source to heat a structure. A standing pilot burns continuously 
until extinguished at the end of the heating season. The furnace has 
a low-voltage control system, which means it is 24 volts in most cases. 
In low-voltage control systems, the electrical system is divided into 
two sections  by using a transformer. The transformer decreases line 
voltage—in this case 120 volts—to 24 volts (see Figure 6.25). The schematic 
240 V/1Ø/60
DT
4
2
1
T
DfT
DH
Defrost timer
Defrost timer motor
Thermostat
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Evaporator fan motor
Defrost thermostat
Defrost heater
DT:
DTM:
T:
C:
CFM:
EFM:
DfT:
DH:
C
CFM
EFM
L1
L2
DTM
6.23
F I G U R E
Commercial freezer schematic diagram in defrost mode 
of operation with active circuits highlighted in navy blue.  
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 6.2   Reading Basic Schematic Diagrams 
125
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

126 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
diagram of a gas furnace with a standing pilot is shown in Figure 6.25. 
The fan motor is the only line voltage load in the electrical circuit and is 
controlled by the fan switch. The gas valve is a 24-volt load; it is used to 
stop and start the flow of gas to the furnace burners and is controlled by 
the heating thermostat. The pilot and gas burners are not shown in the 
schematic diagram because they are not electrical components.
When the temperature in the structure falls below the set point, the 
heating thermostat will close and provide 24 volts to the gas valve if 
the limit switch is closed (see circuit highlighted in red in Figure 6.26). 
The burners of the furnace will ignite, supplying heat to the combustion 
chamber, the section of the furnace that encloses the gas flame. The set 
6.24
F I G U R E
Gas furnace.  
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FM
120 volts
24 volts
FS
GV
HT
LS
T
R
W
FS:
FM:
T: 
HT: 
                
LS:
GV:
Fan switch
Fan motor
Transformer 
Heating
  thermostat
Limit switch
Gas valve
L1
N
6.25
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of gas furnace with standing pilot.  
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
FM
120 volts
24 volts
FS
GV
HT
LS
T
R
W
FS:
FM: 
T:  
HT:  
LS:
GV:
Fan switch
Fan motor
Transformer 
Heating 
  thermostat
Limit switch
Gas valve
L1
N
6.26
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of gas furnace in the heating mode of 
operation with the active circuits highlighted. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
Section 6.2   Reading Basic Schematic Diagrams 
127
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

128 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
point of a limit switch is the point at which the switch opens. If the tem-
perature of the heat exchanger reaches an unsafe level, the limit switch 
will open, interrupting the voltage supply to the gas valve. As the com-
bustion chamber is heated, the temperature of the fan switch begins to 
rise, and at the set point the fan switch will close, supplying heated air 
to the structure as shown highlighted in orange in Figure 6.26. When the 
set point of the heating thermostat is reached, the 24-volt power supply 
to the gas valve is interrupted, extinguishing the flame. The fan motor 
will continue to operate until the combustion chamber cools and the fan 
switch opens.
Packaged Air-Conditioning Unit
A simple air-cooled packaged unit with a low-voltage control system 
is used to provide conditioned air to cool structures (see Figure 6.27). 
A packaged unit is manufactured in one piece with all components 
included, with the exception of the thermostat. Common components in 
an air-cooled packaged unit are the compressor, condenser fan motor, 
evaporator fan motor, and the controls necessary to provide automatic 
operation. The control system will include a transformer, which provides 
the 24 volts for the control system, along with an operating control and 
6.27
F I G U R E
Packaged air-conditioning unit.  
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the necessary safety controls. Most residential air-conditioning systems 
have a 24-volt control system as shown in Figure 6.28.
The schematic diagram shown in Figure 6.28 is divided into two sec-
tions. The portion above the transformer is the line voltage section and 
is highlighted in red in Figure 6.29. The portion below the transformer is 
the 24-volt control circuit and is highlighted in navy blue in Figure 6.29. 
The only connection between the line- and low-voltage sections is the 
transformer.
C:
COMP:
CFM:
IFM:
IFR:
HP:
LP:
RC:
Contactor
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Indoor fan motor
Indoor fan relay
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Run capacitor
L1
C1
IFR
IFR
C
HP
LP
IFM
C2
L2
COMP
CFM
RC
R
On
G
Y
Auto
Fan
System
Thermostat (R, G, and Y are
markings on thermostat terminals)
Legend
6.28
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of packaged air-conditioning unit. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 6.2   Reading Basic Schematic Diagrams 
129
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
Contactors and relays have coils that close the contacts when ener-
gized. These coils and the contacts themselves are not connected electri-
cally. Often the coil will have a different voltage from the current passing 
through the contacts. In such cases the schematic diagram will show the 
coils of relays and contactors in the low-voltage section of the diagram. 
The contacts of the relays or contactors will be in the line voltage section 
of the diagram in series with the loads they are controlling.
C:
COMP:
CFM:
IFM:
IFR:
HP:
LP:
RC:
Contactor
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Indoor fan motor
Indoor fan relay
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Run capacitor
L1
C1
IFR
IFR
C
HP
LP
IFM
C2
L2
COMP
CFM
RC
R
On
G
Y
Auto
Fan
System
Thermostat (R, G, and Y are
markings on thermostat terminals)
Legend
6.29
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram with line voltage circuits highlighted in red and low-
voltage circuits highlighted in navy blue. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

System switch
Fan
switch
Cooling
thermostat
On
On
Fan
Fan
Auto
G
R
Y
6.30
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a 
24-volt thermostat with 
all switches shown. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
The schematic for the low-voltage thermostat used on the unit is 
shown in Figure 6.30. The thermostat is a combination of several switches 
along with the actual temperature-sensing portion of the control, which 
in this case is a cooling thermostat. Most low-voltage thermostats are 
also equipped with a heating function because most comfort cooling sys-
tems also include a heating function. The switch in the upper left of the 
thermostat diagram is a system switch. It cuts the total control system 
off; that is, it stops the entire system from operating. The fan switch has 
both “on” and “automatic” positions. The “on” position permits fan-only 
operation. In the “automatic” position, the fan operates only when the 
cooling thermostat is closed.
The low-voltage control portion (see Figure 6.29) of the control system 
opens and closes the contacts in relays and contactors in the line voltage 
portion of the circuit (see Figure 6.29), which operates the condenser fan 
motor, indoor fan motor, and compressor. The contactor coil in the low-
voltage control system is energized by the closing of the cooling thermo-
stat if the system switch is closed. This circuit is highlighted in navy blue 
in the low-voltage section of Figure 6.31. When the contactor is energized, 
its contacts (C1 and C2) close, starting the compressor and condenser fan 
motor shown highlighted in red in the line voltage section of Figure 6.31. 
 
Section 6.2   Reading Basic Schematic Diagrams 
131
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

132 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
The high-pressure and low-pressure switches in the contactor coil circuit 
will deenergize the contactor coil by opening if the refrigeration system 
reaches an unsafe operating condition, be it high or low pressure.
Figure 6.31 shows the low- and line voltage circuits that operate the 
indoor fan motor. The indoor fan relay coil is energized through the thermo-
stat if the fan switch is in the “auto” position or by the fan switch if it is set 
in the “on” position (see the circuits highlighted in green in the low-voltage 
section of Figure 6.31). The indoor fan motor is started when the indoor fan 
relay contacts are closed; it is highlighted in orange in Figure 6.31 in the line 
voltage section of the diagram.
C:
COMP:
CFM:
IFM:
IFR:
HP:
LP:
RC:
Contactor
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Indoor fan motor
Indoor fan relay
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Run capacitor
L1
C1
IFR
C
HP
LP
IFM
C2
L2 
COMP
CFM
RC
R
On
G
Y
Auto
Fan
System
Thermostat (R, G, and Y are
markings on thermostat terminals)
Legend
IFR
6.31
F I G U R E
Thermostat and contactor coil circuits of packaged unit highlighted 
(Red compressor, condenser fan motor, and line-voltage circuits; 
orange indoor fan motor line-voltage circuits; navy blue contactor 
coil, safety controls, and low-voltage circuits; green indoor fan realy 
coil low-voltage circuit). (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The following steps give the sequence of operation of the air- 
conditioning unit. Refer to Figure 6.28 as you read each step.
 1. The contactor coil is energized by the closing of the cooling thermo-
stat when the system switch is in the “on” position. When the con-
tactor closes, the compressor and condenser fan motor start.
 2. The indoor fan motor operates continually with the fan switch in the 
“on” position because the IFR coil is energized, closing the contacts. If 
the fan switch on the thermostat is in the “automatic” position, the 
fan operates only when the contactor coil is energized.
 3. The high-pressure and low-pressure switches are safety devices that 
deenergize the contactor if either opens. The opening of the high-
pressure and low-pressure switches will not affect the operation of 
the indoor fan motor.
The schematic diagrams for residential and small commercial sys-
tems are usually simple and easy to understand. It is important for 
service technicians to be able to interpret wiring diagrams so they can 
service the equipment. A schematic diagram tells a technician how and 
when a piece of equipment operates as it does.
6.3 
READING ADVANCED SCHEMATIC DIAGRAMS
In Section 6.2, six basic schematic diagrams were covered in detail. 
However, in the industry many control systems go far beyond the basic 
diagrams that were discussed. As the size and complexity of control 
systems and equipment grow, more electrical components are required 
to adequately protect and operate the equipment. The following six 
advanced schematic diagrams will be discussed.
• Figure 6.32: Light commercial air-conditioning control system with a 
control relay
• Figure 6.34: Light commercial air-conditioning control system with a 
lockout relay
• Figure 6.37: Two-stage heating, two-stage cooling control system
• Figure 6.40: Heat pump with defrost timer
• Figure 6.52: Heat pump with defrost board
• Figure 6.57: Commercial refrigeration system using a pump-down 
control system
Each circuit being discussed is highlighted and explained in detail.
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
133
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

134 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
Light Commercial Air-Conditioning Control System 
with a Control Relay
A light commercial air-conditioning system is used on smaller commer-
cial installations, usually from 5 to 25 tons. These systems generally have 
larger loads (electrical devices that have a higher current draw) like com-
pressors, condenser fan motors, and evaporator fan motors that must be 
controlled by the control system. These larger loads require larger contac-
tors because of their current requirements, and therefore the contactor 
coils must be larger to adequately close the contacts. The larger contac-
tors often have difficulty closing if a 24-volt control system is used. Larger 
contactors operate better with line voltage because of their size. When it 
becomes necessary to use larger contactors, a control relay is used to con-
trol the larger contractor. The control relay is a 24-volt relay controlled 
by an operating control, usually a thermostat. The contacts of the control 
relay are placed in series with the contactor coil, which has a higher volt-
age and easily closes the larger contactor. A schematic diagram of a light 
commercial packaged unit is shown in Figure 6.32 with the control relay 
highlighted in navy blue.
The light commercial air-conditioning packaged unit operates much 
like the smaller residential packaged unit. On a call for cooling, the ther-
mostat closes, making electrical connections between R (power supply to 
thermostat), Y (cool function), and G (fan function) and energizing both 
the control relay and the indoor fan relay as shown highlighted in navy 
blue in Figure 6.33. When the control relay is energized, the contacts 
close, sending line voltage to the contactor coil if the safety controls 
(high-pressure switch, low-pressure switch, and compressor internal 
thermostat) in the circuit are closed. The high-pressure switch would 
open if an unsafe high discharge pressure existed in the refrigeration 
system. The low-pressure switch would open if an unsafe low suction 
pressure existed in the refrigeration system. The compressor’s internal 
thermostat would open if the motor windings of the compressors were 
at an unsafe temperature. Once the control relay and the indoor fan 
relay are energized, their contacts close, energizing the contactor and the 
indoor fan relay. When the contactor is energized, the contactor contacts 
close, starting the compressor and condenser fan motor. At the same 
time the indoor fan relay contacts close, starting the indoor fan motor. 
The line voltage circuits are highlighted in red in Figure 6.33.
Air-Conditioning System with Lockout Relay
Many air-conditioning systems have some type of lockout built into the con-
trol system that keeps the system off until the control system can be reset 
by turning the system off and back on. A lockout relay is a relay that can 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Comp
C
C
RC
IFR
HPS
LPS
CIT
On
Auto
G
Y
R
CR
CR
CH
CFM
IFM
C
IFR
CR
COMP:
C:
IFR:
IFM:
CR:
HPS:
LPS:
CR:
CH:
TRANS:
CIT:
CT:
Compressor
Contactor
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
Control relay
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Control relay
Crankcase heater
Transformer
Compressor internal
   thermostat
Cool thermostat
L1
L2
Legend
Thermostat
6.32
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of light commercial packaged air conditioner with 
control relay. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
135
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

136 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
Comp
C
C
RC
IFR
HPS
LPS
CIT
On
Auto
G
Y
R
CR
CR
CH
CFM
IFM
C
IFR
CR
COMP:
C:
IFR:
IFM:
CR:
HPS:
LPS:
CR:
CH:
TRANS:
CIT:
CT:
Compressor
Contactor
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
Control relay
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Control relay
Crankcase heater
Transformer
Compressor internal
  thermostat
Cool thermostat
L1
L2
Legend
Thermostat
6.33
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of light commercial packaged unit with control  
energized  with active circuits highlighted. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

open a control circuit in an air-conditioning system and remain open until 
the occupant or the service technician resets the thermostat or the power 
supply, depending on whether the lockout relay is low- or line voltage. The 
lockout relay used in the past was an impedance relay, which is a relay with 
a high-resistance coil. Lockout relays are used in control systems to make 
the occupant aware that there is a problem and to prevent the equipment 
from short cycling. A compressor or other load short cycles when it con-
tinually stops and starts in rapid succession. The lockout relay looks identi-
cal to a normal relay and can only be distinguished by the number on the 
outside of the relay case. The old style lockout relay will be covered in order 
to familiarize you with the electrical circuitry. The newer lockout relays are 
solid-state devices that are much simpler to install and service; they are 
discussed in the basic electronics chapter (Chapter 13) of this text.
Figure 6.34 shows a schematic diagram of an air conditioner with a 
lockout relay. The lockout relay coil and contacts are shown highlighted 
in Figure 6.34. The lockout circuit of the diagram will be the only circuit 
covered. The remainder of the diagram is similar to those that have been 
discussed previously. The lockout relay in this schematic protects the 
compressor only; the indoor fan motor is not affected and will not be 
locked out by the action of the lockout relay. On a call for cooling, the 
thermostat closes and makes an electrical path between R, G, and Y. If all 
safety components (HPS, LPS, CT, and the normally closed LR contacts) 
are closed in the circuit to the contactor coil, closing the contacts of the 
contactor will start the compressor. At the same time, the indoor fan relay 
coil will be energized, closing the indoor fan relay contacts and starting 
the indoor fan motor. These circuits are highlighted in Figure 6.35.
Assume that the unit is operating and the high-pressure switch 
opens due to a dirty condenser. At that time the contactor is deenergized 
because the 24-volt supply has been broken to the contactor coil. At the 
same time, an electrical circuit has been made from the power source 
going to the circuit through the lockout relay coil. The lockout relay is 
energized because the contactor coil becomes a conductor. The contactor 
coil becomes a conductor because its resistance is less than that of the 
holding relay coil, and current will always take the path of least resis-
tance. This circuit is shown highlighted in Figure 6.36, along with other 
circuits in the schematic that are energized. The circuit can be reset by 
opening and closing the thermostat or the 24-volt system switch.
Air-Conditioning System Controlled 
by a Multistage Thermostat
Many air-conditioning and heating systems incorporate multistage 
thermostats to more efficiently control the temperature of a structure. 
Multistage thermostats are used in light commercial air-conditioning 
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
137
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

138 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
240 V/1Ø/60 cycles
 24 Volts
T
W
R
Y
G
Heating
source
LR
LR
CIT
LPS
HPS
IFR
HR
C
C
C:
COMP:
CIT:
HR:
IFR:
IFM:
LR:
T:     
Contactor
Compressor
Compressor internal thermostat
Heating relay
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
Lockout relay
Thermostat
COMP
IFM
HR
IFR
C
6.34
F I G U R E
Air-conditioning system with lockout relay.  
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

COMP
240 V/1Ø/60 cycles
 24 Volts
T
W
Y
G
IFM
Heating
source
LR
LR
CIT
LPS
HPS
IFR
HR
C
C
C:
COMP:
CIT:
HR:
IFR:
IFM:
LR:
T:     
Contactor
Compressor
Compressor internal thermostat
Heating relay
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
Lockout relay
Thermostat
R
HR
C
IFR
L1
L2
6.35
F I G U R E
Air conditioning system with lockout relay in the operating mode with 
active circuits highlighted in red. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
139
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

140 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
COMP
240 V/1Ø/60 cycles
 24 Volts
HR
T
W
R
Y
G
IFM
C
Heating
source
LR
LR
CIT
LPS
HPS
IFR
IFR
HR
C
C
C:
COMP:
CIT:
HR:
IFR:
IFM:
LR:
T:     
Contactor
Compressor
Compressor internal thermostat
Heating relay
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
Lockout relay
Thermostat
6.36
F I G U R E
Air conditioning system with lockout relay in the locked out position 
with active circuits highlighted in red. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

systems that have more than one section of heating or cooling units and 
on heat pumps that have supplementary electric resistance heat. A mul-
tistage thermostat operates heating or cooling units or portions of heating 
and cooling equipment to maintain the desired temperature in a struc-
ture. A multistage thermostat could be used in a structure that has two 
air-conditioning condensing units or two heating units. In this case, the 
control system would start the first cooling or heating units or stages; the 
other units or stages would not start unless the thermostat determines 
that one unit or stage cannot not adequately maintain the desired tem-
perature. Multistage thermostats have a temperature range between the 
closing of the first and second stages. For example, in a two-stage cooling 
thermostat the first stage closes at the set point and the next stage closes 
only if the building temperature rises to the difference between stages, 
usually two to three degrees.
The operation of a two-stage cooling, two-stage heating control sys-
tem is covered in this section. The schematic diagram for the system is 
shown in Figure 6.37. The fan circuit operates like previously discussed 
fan circuits.
Heating Operation If the control system is set for heating and the tem-
perature in the structure drops below the set point, the first stage of the 
heating thermostat closes, making an electrical connection between 
R, W1, and G. The G terminal operates the fan function, which closes 
on both the heating and cooling cycles. The W1 terminal operates the 
first-stage heating cycle. The connection from G allows 24 volts to pass 
to the IFR coil, closing the contacts and starting the indoor fan motor. 
The connection from W1 allows 24 volts to pass to the HC1 coil, closing 
the contacts of HC1 and allowing voltage to pass through them, ener-
gizing Heater 1. The electrical circuits energized when the first stage of 
the heating thermostat closes are shown in Figure 6.38 highlighted in 
red. The electric heater circuits are equipped with a safety thermostat 
(TL1 and TL2) that would open if the temperature around the electric 
heater(s) reached an unsafe condition.
If the temperature in the structure continues to drop, the second 
stage of the thermostat will close and make an electrical connection 
between R and W2. The first-stage heating system and the fan remain 
energized when the second stage closes. When this connection is made, 
the HC2 coil will be energized, closing the contacts and allowing voltage 
to pass through them to energize Heater 2. This and the circuits that are 
energized when the first-stage heating thermostat closes are highlighted 
in orange in Figure 6.38.
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
141
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

142 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
240/1Ø/60 cycles
L1
L2
 24 Volts
HC1
HC2
CC1
CC2
IFR
W1
W2
Y1
Y2
R
G
IFM
IFR
CC1
CC1
CC2
CC2
HC1
HC1
HC2
TL1
TL2
H1
H2
HC2
CC1:
CC2:
C1:
C2:
CFM1:
CFM2:
HC1:
HC2:
H1:
H2:
IFM:
HPS1:
HPS2:
CIT1:
CIT2:
TL1:
TL2:     
Cooling contactor 1
Cooling contactor 2
Compressor 1
Compressor 2
Condenser fan motor 1
Condenser fan motor 2
Heat contactor 1
Heat contactor 2
Heater 1
Heater 2
Indoor fan motor
High-pressure switch 1
High-pressure switch 2
Compressor internal thermostat 1
Compressor internal thermostat 2
Temperature limit 1
Temperature limit 2
HPS1 CIT1
HPS2 CIT2
CFM1
CFM2
C1
C2
6.37
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of two-stage cooling, two-stage heating control 
system. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

240/1Ø/60 cycles
 24 Volts
HC1
CC1
CC2
IFR
W1
W2
Y1
Y2
G
IFM
IFR
CC1
CC1
CC2
CC2
HC1
HC1
HC2
TL1
TL2
H1
H2
HC2
HPS1 CIT1
HPS2 CIT2
CFM1
CFM2
C1
C2
L1
L2
HC2
R
CC1:
CC2:
C1:
C2:
CFM1:
CFM2:
HC1:
HC2:
H1:
H2:
IFM:
HPS1:
HPS2:
CIT1:
CIT2:
TL1:
TL2:     
Cooling contactor 1
Cooling contactor 2
Compressor 1
Compressor 2
Condenser fan motor 1
Condenser fan motor 2
Heat contactor 1
Heat contactor 2
Heater 1
Heater 2
Indoor fan motor
High-pressure switch 1
High-pressure switch 2
Compressor internal thermostat 1
Compressor internal thermostat 2
Temperature limit 1
Temperature limit 2
6.38
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of two-stage cooling, two-stage heating control system with the 
first stage heating circuits highlighted in red and second stage highlighted in orange. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
143
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

144 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
Cooling Operation On a call for cooling, an electrical connection is made 
between R, Y1, and G in the thermostat. The indoor fan motor is ener-
gized with the closing of the indoor fan relay contacts, starting the fan 
motor. The connection between R and Y1 allows voltage to pass through 
the safety controls (high-pressure switch 1 and compressor thermostat 1) 
to energize the compressor contactor 1 coil. This closes the contacts and 
starts compressor 1 and condenser fan motor 1 as shown in Figure 6.39 
highlighted in blue. If the temperature continues to rise, then the second-
stage cooling thermostat will close, making an electrical connection 
between R and Y2. This will energize compressor contactor 2 and start 
compressor 2 and condenser fan motor 2 as shown in Figure 6.39 high-
lighted in green. The indoor fan motor, compressor 1, and condenser fan 
motor1 continue to operate.
Heat Pump with Defrost Timer
A heat pump is an air-conditioning system that uses a reversing valve 
to reverse the refrigeration cycle in order to provide heating. A reversing 
valve is an electrically controlled valve that allows for the reversing of the 
refrigeration cycle on a heat pump.
The refrigeration cycle of a heat pump is basically the same as that 
of any air-conditioning system except for the reversing valve and other 
refrigeration system components. When a heat pump is operating in 
the air-conditioning mode, the indoor coil is the evaporator and the 
outdoor coil is the condenser. In the heating mode, the refrigerant flows 
in the reverse direction so that the outdoor coil becomes the evaporator 
and the indoor coil becomes the condenser. In summer, the heat pump 
removes the heat from the inside air and expels it to the outside air, 
but in the winter the heat is absorbed from the outside air and released 
inside.
When the heat pump is operating in the heating mode, there must be 
a way to defrost the outside coil. This is done by temporarily reversing 
the cycle and using the cooling mode of operation to defrost the coil. This 
is referred to as the defrost cycle. In the defrost mode, a set of resistance 
heaters is energized to keep the indoor fan from moving cold air and 
causing drafts in the structure. Many methods are used in the industry to 
defrost a heat pump.
The efficiency of a heat pump decreases as the outdoor temperature 
drops, and at a certain point, called the balance point, the heat pump 
can no longer supply enough heat to properly condition the structure. 
Supplementary electric resistance heaters are added to the circuit to 
provide  the additional heat needed to properly condition the space.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.39
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of two-stage cooling, two-stage heating control system with first stage cooling 
circuits highlighted in navy blue and the second stage cooling circuits highlighted in green. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
 
145
240/1Ø/60 cycles
 24 Volts
HC1
HC2
CC1
CC2
IFR
W1
W2
Y1
R
G
IFM
IFR
CC1
CC1
CC2
CC2
HC1
HC2
HC3
TL1
L1
L2
TL2
H1
H2
HC4
HP1
CIT1
HP2
CIT2
CFM1
CFM2
C1
C2
Y2
CC1:
CC2:
C1:
C2:
CFM1:
CFM2:
HC1:
HC2:
H1:
H2:
IFM:
HPS1:
HPS2:
CT1:
CT2:
TL1:
TL2:     
Cooling contactor 1
Cooling contactor 2
Compressor 1
Compressor 2
Condenser fan motor 1
Condenser fan motor 2
Heat contactor 1
Heat contactor 2
Heater 1
Heater 2
Indoor fan motor
High-pressure switch 1
High-pressure switch 2
Compressor thermostat 1
Compressor thermostat 2
Temperature limit 1
Temperature limit 2
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

146 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
A two-stage heating, one-stage cooling or two-stage heating, and 
two-stage cooling thermostat is used to operate most heat pumps, depend-
ing on the control circuitry designed by the manufacturer. The heat pump 
diagram  in this text uses a two-stage heating, two-stage cooling thermostat.
The heat pump discussed here is a split-system heat pump, which 
means that the unit is divided into an outdoor section and an indoor 
section. The thermostat is mounted in the indoor space.
The heat pump schematic is covered in four stages: (1) cooling cycle, 
(2) heating cycle, (3) defrost cycle, and (4) resistance heating cycle. The 
schematic is discussed according to the system’s sequence of operation.
A heat pump schematic is shown in Figure 6.40 with all the electrical 
components identified by reference numbers and letters. The legend for 
the heat pump schematic is shown in Figure 6.41; it includes the names 
of the parts, abbreviations, and the reference letters or number in paren-
theses. These reference numbers and letters are locator points for electri-
cal components in the diagram. The same legend will be used for all four 
explanations.
The Cooling Cycle
The cooling cycle schematic of the heat pump is shown in Figure 6.42. 
Only the electrical components that are functional in the cooling mode of 
operation are shown on the diagram.
Disconnect 1 (1) and disconnect 2 (20) are in the “on” position with the 
thermostat system switch (A) in the “off” position. Disconnect 1 (1) sup-
plies power to the outdoor unit, thus supplying power to the trickle circuit 
through the start winding of the compressor motor (5), with the run capac-
itor (4) acting as a crankcase heater for the compressor. Disconnect 2 (20) 
supplies power to the indoor unit, thus supplying power to the trans-
former (16), which provides 24 volts to the control circuitry. The outdoor 
sensor (13) is energized through the outdoor temperature anticipator (G) 
in the thermostat whenever the disconnect for the indoor unit is turned 
on. These circuits are highlighted in Figure 6.43.
If the thermostat system switch (A) is moved to the “auto” position, 
the cooling anticipator is energized and provides heat to the thermostat 
bimetal during the “off” cycle. Due to the voltage drop across the cooling 
anticipator, the motor starter (12) will not energize. The first-stage cooling 
thermostat (B) closes and completes the 24-volt circuit from terminal R 
to terminal O of the thermostat, thus energizing the switchover (revers-
ing) valve solenoid (11). These circuits are highlighted in navy blue in 
Figure 6.44 along with those from the previous explanation.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.40
F I G U R E
Typical complete operation schematic of heat pump. 
(Courtesy of The Trane Company)
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
147
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

148 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
Legend
AH:
Supplementary heat contactor
(19)
BH:
Supplementary heat contactor
(18)
CA:
Cooling anticipator
(D & E)
(4 & 6)
(C)
(4)
(I & J)
CR:
Run capacitor
(4 & 6)
CPR:
Compressor
D:
Defrost relay
(9)
DFT:
Defrost timer
(7)
DT:
Defrost termination thermostat
(8)
F:
Indoor fan relay
(15)
FM:
Manual fan switch
(F)
HA:
Heating anticipator
HTR:
Heater
IOL:
Internal overload protection
LT:
Light
LVTB:
Low-voltage terminal board
MS:
Compressor motor contactor
(5, 3, & 12)
MTR:
Motor
ODA:
Outdoor temperature anticipator
(G)
ODS:
Outdoor temperature sensor
(13)
ODT:
Outdoor thermostat
RHS:
Resistance heat switch
(C)
SC:
Switchover valve solenoid
(11)
SM:
System switch
(A)
TNS:
Transformer
(16)
TSC:
Cooling thermostat
(B & D)
TSH:
Heating thermostat
(E & H)
6.41
F I G U R E
Legend of diagrams in Figures 6.40–6.51. 
(Courtesy of The Trane Company)
The second-stage cooling thermostat (D) closes and completes the 
24-volt circuit from R to Y, thus energizing the motor starter (12), and 
from R to G, thus energizing the fan relay (15) after the temperature rises 
0.7°F–1.5°F above the temperature of the first-stage cooling thermostat. 
Simultaneously, the contacts (3 and 5) of the motor starter close, energiz-
ing the compressor and the outdoor fan motor; the indoor fan motor is 
energized through the indoor fan relay contacts (19). Once the second-
stage cooling thermostat closes, the cooling anticipator is bypassed. These 
circuits are highlighted in green along with the previous two explanations 
in Figure 6.45. The heat pump is now operating in the cooling mode.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.42
F I G U R E
Typical cooling cycle schematic of heat pump. 
(Courtesy of The Trane Company)
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
149
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

150 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
6.43
F I G U R E
Active circuits of heat pump shown highlighted with disconnect  
1 and 2 closed. (Courtesy of The Trane Company)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.44
F I G U R E
Cooling cycle schematic of heat pump with active circuits 
highlighted in navy blue when first-stage cooling thermostat 
closed. (Courtesy of The Trane Company)
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
151
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

152 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
6.45
F I G U R E
Cooling cycle schematic of heat pump with first stage cooling 
circuit highlighted in navy blue and second-stage cooling circuit 
highlighted in green. (Courtesy of The Trane Company)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Heating Cycle
The heating cycle schematic of the heat pump is shown in Figure 6.46. 
Only the electrical components that are functional in the heating mode 
of operation are shown in the diagram.
Disconnect 1 (1) and disconnect 2 (20) are in the “on” position with 
the thermostat system switch (A) in the “off” position. Disconnect 1 (1) 
supplies power to the outdoor unit, thus supplying power to the 
trickle circuit through the start winding of the compressor motor (5), with 
the run capacitor (4) acting as a crankcase heater for the compressor. 
Disconnect 2 (20) supplies power to the transformer (16) and provides 
24 volts to the control circuitry. The outdoor thermostat sensor (13) is 
energized through the outdoor anticipator (G) in the thermostat whenever 
the disconnect for the indoor unit is turned on. See figure 6.43.
If the thermostat system switch (A) is moved to the “auto” position, 
the first-stage heating thermostat (E), when closed, completes the 24-volt 
circuit from terminal R to terminal Y. This energizes the motor starter (12). 
It also completes the 24-volt circuit from terminal R to terminal G, thus 
energizing the indoor fan relay (15). The heating anticipator is energized 
when the first-stage heating thermostat closes. Simultaneously, the 
contacts (3 and 5) of the motor starter close, energizing the compressor 
and the outdoor fan motor; the indoor fan motor is energized through 
the indoor fan relay contacts (19). The second set of contacts (15) of the 
indoor fan relay provides an interlock for the heater control circuit. These 
circuits are highlighted in red in Figure 6.47.
The second-stage heating thermostat closes after a temperature 
drop of 0.7°–1.5°F. When the second-stage heating thermostat closes, 
the 24-volt circuit from terminal R to terminals W and U energizes the 
supplementary heat contact coil (19) and the blue light on the thermostat. 
If the outdoor thermostat (14) is closed, the W circuit can also energize 
the supplementary contactor (18). These circuits are shown highlighted in 
orange, along with the two previously discussed, in Figure 6.48.
The Defrost Cycle
When operating in the heating mode at temperatures below 40°F out-
doors, the heat pump’s outdoor coil will accumulate frost or ice. The 
defrost cycle schematic of the heat pump is shown in Figure 6.49 with the 
defrost circuits highlighted in red. Only the electrical components that 
are functional in the defrost mode of operation are shown. Defrosting is 
accomplished by putting the heat pump in the cooling mode so that the 
outdoor coil becomes the condenser without outdoor fan operation long 
enough to defrost the coil.
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
153
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

154 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
6.46
F I G U R E
Heating cycle schematic of heat pump. 
(Courtesy of The Trane Company)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.47
F I G U R E
Heating cycle of heat pump schematic with active circuits 
highlighted  in red when first-stage heating thermostat is closed. 
(Courtesy of The Trane Company)
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
155
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

156 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
6.48
F I G U R E
Heating cycle of heat pump schematic with first-stage heating circuits 
highlighted in red and second-stage heating circuits highlighted in 
orange. (Courtesy of The Trane Company)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
157
6.49
F I G U R E
Defrost cycle schematic of heat pump with defrost circuits highlighted 
in red. (Courtesy of The Trane Company)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

158 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
The heat pump is operating in the heating mode. Initiation of the 
defrost cycle requires that two conditions be met: (1) The lower circuit 
of the outdoor coil must be below 26°F, as detected by the defrost ter-
mination thermostat (8); and (2) the defrost timer (7 and 8) must have 
completed the required of 45- or 90-minute compressor run time. If these 
two conditions are met, the timer cam switch (7) will close and complete 
a circuit through the closed defrost termination switch (8) and the defrost 
timer switch (8) to the defrost relay coil (9). When the defrost relay is ener-
gized, defrost relay contacts 1 (11) and 3 (11) complete the circuitry to the 
supplementary heater contactor (18) and the switchover valve solenoid 
coil (11). Contact 2 of the defrost relay opens the circuit to the outdoor fan 
motor (10) and provides a holding circuit for the defrost relay coil.
Termination of the defrost cycle normally occurs when the defrost 
termination thermostat (8) opens after the liquid temperature leaving 
the outdoor coil reaches approximately 52°F. If the defrost termination 
thermostat does not terminate the defrost cycle within 10 minutes, the 
override switch in the defrost timer will open and deenergize the defrost 
relay and thus terminate the defrost cycle.
The Resistance Heating Cycle
Most heat pumps are equipped with an emergency heat mode that allows 
the customer to isolate the pump part of the heat mode and heat the 
residence by supplementary electric resistance heat. The emergency heat 
mode provides heat when the normal heating mode suffers a mechanical 
failure. The emergency heat cycle of the heat pump is shown highlighted 
in red in Figure 6.50. (Only the electrical components that are functional 
are shown.)
The emergency heat switches 1 and 2 (C) are mechanically linked 
to each other within the thermostat. When emergency heat switch 1 is 
moved from the “normal” position to the “emergency” position, terminal 
Y is removed from the circuit. This isolates the motor starter and closes 
terminal X2, which energizes the supplementary heat contactor coils 
(18 and 19) if the outdoor thermostat (14) is closed. If the outdoor ther-
mostat is open, the supplementary heat relays will be energized by the 
second-stage heating thermostat when needed.
The entire heat pump schematic is shown in Figure 6.51; it can be 
understood when the technician looks at each mode of operation and 
then breaks it down into a circuit-by-circuit arrangement.
Heat Pump with Solid-State Defrost Board
The heat pump discussed in this section has the operating characteris-
tics of the previous heat pump except for the method of defrost initiation 
and termination. The defrost boards on many modern-day heat pumps 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R
6.50
F I G U R E
Resistance heat cycle schematic of heat pump with active circuits 
highlighted in orange. (Courtesy of The Trane Company)
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
159
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

160 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
6.51
F I G U R E
Complete schematic diagram of heat pump. (Courtesy of The Trane 
Company)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

are nothing more than a solid-state timer that closes for a specified 
period of time on a particular time cycle, plus other electrical devices 
such as relays that facilitate an effective defrost cycle. In some cases, 
the technician can set the defrost cycle time and the time that the heat 
pump remains in defrost by making certain electrical connections on 
the solid-state defrost board. This option is useful because of the sever-
ity of the winters in some areas where heat pumps are currently being 
installed. Many heat pumps are being manufactured today that are 
equipped with a demand defrost system, which defrosts the outdoor coil 
on the heating cycle only when there is a definite need for the coil to be 
defrosted. These types of electronic defrost controls are more complex 
and expensive than the normal solid-state defrost board that will be dis-
cussed in this section.
The schematic diagram for a heat pump with a solid-state defrost 
board is shown in Figure 6.52. The main operating control discussed in 
this section is the thermostat. The letter designations used on heat pump 
thermostats vary from one manufacturer to another. One of the common 
letter designations is used in this section. The R terminal on the thermo-
stat receives 24 volts from the transformer. The thermostat, depending on 
the setting, will distribute 24 volts to the desired terminals to cause the 
system to accomplish the purpose for which the thermostat has been set. 
The outdoor unit includes the compressor, condenser fan motor, revers-
ing valve, and defrost board with the defrost thermostat.
The indoor and outdoor units are supplied with 240 volts/single 
phase/60 cycles. The active circuits that are supplied with electrical energy 
and the blower motor circuitry are highlighted in green in Figure 6.53. 
The transformer primary is supplied with 240 volts from the indoor unit 
power supply. The control voltage from the transformer secondary is 
24 volts, which is supplied to the defrost board and the R terminal on the 
thermostat. When the thermostat fan switch is set in the “on” position, an 
electrical connection is made between the R and G terminals of the thermo-
stat, supplying 24 volts to the blower relay and starting the blower motor.
When the fan switch is set in the “automatic” position, the fan will 
operate when the unit is in either cooling or heating mode. The thermo-
stat is the controlling element for the blower motor in the “automatic” 
or continuous position. In the “automatic” position, the fan runs when 
the thermostat is calling for heating or cooling. When the thermostat fan 
switch is set in the continuous position, the indoor fan will run continu-
ously. The thermostat calling for heat makes the electrical connection 
between R and Y, which sends electrical energy to the contactor of the 
outdoor unit and starts the compressor and outdoor fan motor. These 
circuits are highlighted in red in Figure 6.54.
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
161
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

162 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
BM
(Outdoor unit)
DT
T
T
D
C
R
B
C
C
DB1
COMP
OFM
C
RVS
Y
O
E
G
R
W1
SHR1
SHR2
DB3
ODT
BR
BR
SHR1
SHT1
SH1
SHR2
SHT2
SH2
(Indoor unit)
DB2
C:
COMP:
OFM:
DB:
DT:
RVS:
SHR1:
SHR2:
BR:
SHT1:
SHT2:
SH1:
SH2:
ODT:
BM:
     
Contactor
Compressor
Outdoor fan motor
Defrost board
Defrost thermostat
Reversing valve solenoid
Strip heat relay #1
Strip heat relay #2
Blower relay
Strip heat thermostat 1
Strip heat thermostat 2
Strip heater 1
Strip heater 2
Outdoor thermostat
Blower motor
Legend
Thermostat
L1
L2
L1
L2
6.52
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of heat pump with solid-state defrost control. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

BM
(Outdoor unit)
DT
T
T
D
C
R
B
C
C
DB1
COMP
OFM
C
RVS
Y
O
E
G
R
W1
SHR1
SHR2
DB3
ODT
BR
BR
SHR1
SHT1
SH1
SHR2
SHT2
SH2
(Indoor unit)
DB2
Thermostat
L1
L2
L1
L2
Legend
C:
COMP:
OFM:
DB;
DT:
RVS:
SHR1:
SHR2:
BR;
SHT1:
SHT2:
SH1:
SH2:
ODT:
BM:
Contractor
Compressor
Outdoor fan motor
Defrost board
Defrost thermostat
Reversing valve solenoid
Strip heat relay #1
Strip heat relay #2
Blower relay
Strip heat thermostat 1
Strip heat thermostat 2
Strip heater 1
Strip heater 2
Outdoor thermostat
Blower motor
6.53
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram with the active circuits that are supplied with electrical 
energy and the blower motor circuits highlighted in green. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
163
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

164 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
BM
(Outdoor unit)
DT
T
T
D
C
R
B
C
C
DB1
COMP
OFM
C
RVS
Y
O
E
R
W1
SHR1
SHR2
DB3
ODT
BR
BR
SHR1
SHT1
SH1
SHR2
SHT2
SH2
(Indoor unit)
DB7
Thermostat
L1
L2
L1
L2
Legend
C:
COMP:
OFM:
DB;
DT:
RVS:
SHR1:
SHR2:
BR;
SHT1:
SHT2:
SH1:
SH2:
ODT:
BM:
Contractor
Compressor
Outdoor fan motor
Defrost board
Defrost thermostat
Reversing valve solenoid
Strip heat relay #1
Strip heat relay #2
Blower relay
Strip heat thermostat 1
Strip heat thermostat 2
Strip heater 1
Strip heater 2
Outdoor thermostat
Blower motor
G
6.54
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram with the heating circuits highlighted (first-stage heating 
circuits in red and second-stage heating circuits in orange) of heat pump 
with solid-state defrost control. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The supplementary heat cycle of the heat pump is used when the 
compressor cannot supply enough heat to adequately heat the structure. 
When this occurs, the indoor temperature will continue to fall, even 
though the compressor is operating. The second-stage heating thermo-
stat will then close, supplying electrical energy from the R terminal to W1. 
This supplies 24 volts to the supplementary heat relay 1 (SHR1) and sup-
plementary heat relay 2 (SHR2) if the outdoor thermostat (ODT) is closed. 
The supplementary heat circuits are highlighted in orange in Figure 6.54. 
Many thermostats are equipped with emergency heat switches that will 
prevent the compressor from operating and will allow the supplementary 
heaters to operate when the thermostat is set for emergency heat.
The reversing valve was previously described as the electrical device 
that reverses the refrigerant flow in a heat pump. Heat pumps can oper-
ate with the reversing valve energized on either heating or cooling, but 
the reversing valve is energized only on the cooling cycle of the heat 
pump that is being discussed. One advantage of not energizing the revers-
ing valve on the heating cycle is that if the valve fails, the system will still 
operate in the heating mode during cold weather.
The operation of the heat pump in the cooling cycle is similar to its 
operation in the heating cycle, except that the reversing valve is ener-
gized. If the thermostat is set in the cooling mode and the temperature 
is above the set point of the thermostat, the reversing valve is energized 
from the R terminal on the thermostat to the O terminal. The thermostat 
also makes an electrical connection between R and Y, energizing the con-
tactor and starting the compressor and outdoor fan motor. The schematic 
for the cooling cycle is shown in Figure 6.55 with the cooling circuits high-
lighted in navy blue.
In the heating cycle, the outdoor coil becomes the evaporator and the 
indoor coil becomes the condenser. When the heat pump is operating in 
the heating cycle in a cold ambient condition, the outdoor coil, being the 
evaporator, will frost. If the outdoor coil is not cleaned of the frost, the 
system will dramatically lose efficiency and heating capacity. To defrost 
the outdoor coil in the heating cycle of operation, the heat pump must be 
temporarily put in the cooling mode in order to supply the outdoor coil 
with hot discharge gas, which defrosts the coil. However, the heat pump 
will be cooling, so the supplementary heat must be started to temper the 
air going into the structure.
Figure 6.56 shows the heat pump diagram with the electrical circuits 
that are active in the defrost cycle highlighted in red. The defrost circuits 
contain the defrost relay, which contains DB1, DB2, and DB3 contacts. 
These contacts will remain closed until the timer in the defrost board 
cycles out or the defrost thermostat opens, at which time the defrost 
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
165
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

166 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
BM
(Outdoor unit)
DT
T
T
D
C
R
B
C
C
DB1
COMP
OFM
C
RVS
Y
E
G
R
W1
SHR1
SHR2
DB3
ODT
BR
BR
SHR1
SHT1
SH1
SHR2
SHT2
SH2
(Indoor unit)
DB2
O
Thermostat
L1
L2
L1
L2
Legend
C:
COMP:
OFM:
DB;
DT:
RVS:
SHR1:
SHR2:
BR;
SHT1:
SHT2:
SH1:
SH2:
ODT:
BM:
Contractor
Compressor
Outdoor fan motor
Defrost board
Defrost thermostat
Reversing valve solenoid
Strip heat relay #1
Strip heat relay #2
Blower relay
Strip heat thermostat 1
Strip heat thermostat 2
Strip heater 1
Strip heater 2
Outdoor thermostat
Blower motor
6.55
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram with the cooling circuits highlighted in navy blue for a 
heat pump with solid-state defrost control. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

cycle will be terminated. The DB1 contacts are normally closed and they 
now open, stopping the outdoor fan motor during the defrost cycle to 
prevent the flow of cold air across the outdoor coil. The DB2 contacts are 
normally open and they now close, energizing the reversing valve. The 
supplementary heater or heaters, depending on the outdoor temperature, 
are energized through the normally open DB3 contacts.
Commercial Refrigeration System 
with Pump-Down Cycle
A pump-down control system stops the liquid flow of refrigerant with a 
solenoid valve in the liquid line and allows the compressor to transfer 
most of the refrigerant from the low side to the high side of the refrigera-
tion system. This type of cycle is used on many commercial refrigeration 
systems and some commercial air-conditioning systems. The advantage 
of using a pump-down cycle is that when the system cycles off, the refrig-
erant cannot migrate back to the crankcase of the compressor to cause 
a flooded start situation. The schematic diagram of a commercial freezer 
with electric defrost is shown in Figure 6.57.
Figure 6.58 shows a commercial freezer in the normal operating cycle 
with the active circuits highlighted. If the system is off and the thermo-
stat closes with the defrost timer contacts in the 1 to 4 position, the liquid 
line solenoid (LLS) valve is energized. The opening of the liquid line sole-
noid valve allows liquid refrigerant to pass through the liquid line to the 
metering device. When the pressure in the system due to the opening of 
the liquid line solenoid valve increases enough to close the low-pressure 
switch, the contactor coil is energized, closing the contacts of the contac-
tor and starting the compressor and the condenser fan motor if the safety 
controls (HPS and CMT) in the circuit are closed. The condenser fan motor 
is controlled by the condenser fan motor thermostat; it operates when 
the ambient temperature of the condenser reaches the set point of the 
condenser fan motor thermostat. The evaporator fan motor is started at 
the same time. The defrost timer motor is energized whenever power is 
supplied to the unit.
The defrost cycle of the system is initiated when the defrost timer 
contacts change to the 4 and 2 position. The defrost cycle is shown in 
Figure 6.59 with the active circuits highlighted. This action breaks the 
electrical connection to the liquid line solenoid valve, stopping the flow 
of refrigerant to the metering device. The compressor will continue to 
operate until most of the refrigerant is captured in the high side of the 
system. When the defrost timer contacts are in the 4 and 2 position and 
the defrost thermostat is closed, the defrost heater will be energized to 
defrost the evaporator coil. The defrost cycle can be terminated when the 
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
167
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

168 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
BM
(Outdoor unit)
DT
T
T
D
C
R
B
C
C
DB1
COMP
OFM
C
RVS
Y
O
E
G
R
W1
SHR1
SHR2
DB3
ODT
BR
BR
SHR1
SHT1
SH1
SHR2
SHT2
SH2
(Indoor unit)
DB2
Thermostat
L1
L2
L1
L2
6.56
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of the defrost circuits highlighted in red for a heat 
pump with solid-state defrost control. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C:
CC:
CFMT:
CFM:
DTM:
DTC:
T:
LLS:
DH:
HPS:
LPS:
CMT:
EFM: 
Compressor
Compressor contactor
Condenser fan motor 
thermostat
Condenser fan motor
Defrost timer motor
Defrost timer contacts
Thermostat
Liquid line solenoid
Defrost heater
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Compressor motor 
 thermostat
Evaporator fan motor
Legend
C
CFM
CFMT
CC
CC
HPS
LPS
CMT
CC
DT
DTC
T
DH
EFM
DTM
4
2
1
240/1/60
LLS
L1
L2
6.57
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of commercial freezer with pump-down control. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
defrost timer contacts (4 and 2) open. If the defrost thermostat opens, 
indicating a temperature increase in the evaporator, the defrost heater 
will be de-energized. However, this action will not put the system back 
into the freezing mode of operation. The defrost timer will continue to 
run until contacts 4 and 2 open and contacts 4 and 1 close, returning the 
system to normal operation.
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
169
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

170 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
C:
CC:
CFMT:
CFM:
DTM:
DTC:
T:
LLS:
DH:
HPS:
LPS:
CMT:
EFM:
     
Compressor
Compressor contactor
Condenser fan motor 
thermostat
Condenser fan motor
Defrost timer motor
Defrost timer contacts
Thermostat
Liquid line solenoid
Defrost heater
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Compressor motor 
thermostat
Evaporator fan motor
Legend
CFMT
CC
CC
HPS
LPS
CMT
DT
DTC
T
DH
DTM
4
2
1
240/1/60
LLS
CC
EFM
C
CFM
L1
L2
6.58
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of commercial freezer with pump-down control in freezing mode of 
operation with active circuits highlighted in navy blue. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C:
CC:
CFMT:
CFM:
DTM:
DTC:
T:
LLS:
DH:
HPS:
LPS:
CMT:
EFM:
Compressor
Compressor contactor
Condenser fan motor 
 thermostat
Condenser fan motor
Defrost timer motor
Defrost timer contacts
Thermostat
Liquid line solenoid
Defrost heater
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Compressor motor 
 thermostat
Evaporator fan motor
Legend
CFMT
HPS
LPS
CMT
DT
DTC
T
DH
DTM
4
2
1
240/1/60
LLS
CC
EFM
C
CFM
L1
L2
6.59
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of commercial freezer with pump-down in defrost  mode 
of operation highlighted in red. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 6.3   Reading Advanced Schematic Diagrams 
171
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

172 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
SUMMARY
In this chapter, the schematics of several different applications were cov-
ered in detail from the simple electrical circuits that are used in window 
air conditioners and dehumidifiers to more advanced schematics such as 
those of heat pumps and light commercial air-conditioning systems. On 
most occasion, schematic diagrams are not simple, but they are easy to 
understand if the technician looks at them circuit by circuit. The techni-
cian only needs to determine the part of the circuit that is not operating 
properly and then direct attention to that circuit. It is essential that the 
technician develop the skills required to read schematic diagrams in 
order to adequately troubleshoot heating, air-conditioning, and refrigera-
tion systems.
Schematic diagrams are laid out in a circuit-by-circuit arrangement. 
Each of these individual circuits is connected in parallel across two lines 
that represent the power supply. Most of these parallel circuits include 
a major load with the switches that control these loads connected in 
series. Technicians can easily troubleshoot a control system by using a 
schematic diagram if they focus on the load and circuit that is at fault.
Small appliances that operate on 120 or 240 volts with line voltage 
control systems tend to be simple and easy to understand. Examples of 
these systems are dehumidifiers, window air conditioners, walk-in cool-
ers, and commercial reach-in freezers. Not all 120- and 240-volt appli-
ances are simple. Simplicity depends upon the number of loads and 
switches, and some of these appliances have many loads and switches.
Equipment that uses a low-voltage control system and requires a 
transformer and low-voltage components to control the loads in the sys-
tem tends to be complex. The major difference is that line voltage, usually 
240/1/60 or 208/240/3/60, supplies power to the equipment. The loads are 
supplied with the line voltage, and, in some cases, part of the control sys-
tem also uses line voltage. The line voltage is supplied to a transformer 
that reduces the voltage for the primary control system. Low-voltage con-
trol systems are used because of their accuracy and safety.
No matter what type of control system is used in a heating, air-
conditioning,  or refrigeration system, it is essential that the technician be 
able to read schematic diagrams in order to efficiently troubleshoot the 
system.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
C H A P T E R  6  R E V I E W
 
Review Questions 
173
RQ1 
Why should an air-conditioning technician learn to 
read schematic diagrams?
RQ2 
Briefly explain the layout of a schematic diagram.
RQ3 
Most schematic diagrams are made up of 
__________.
a. series circuits
b. parallel circuits
c. series-parallel circuits
d. none of the above
RQ4 
Schematic diagrams break the wiring of control 
systems down into a(n) __________ arrangement.
a. circuit-by-circuit
b. series circuit
c. individual circuit
d. none of the above
RQ5 
Draw the symbols for the following components.
a. heating thermostat
b. cooling thermostat
c. pressure switch (opens on rise)
d. thermal line break overload
e. fuse
f. magnetic overload
g. crankcase heater
h. three-pole contactor
i. relay with one NO and one NC contact
j. red signal light
k. three-phase compressor motor
RQ6 
What is the name of an appliance that is used to 
remove moisture?
a. humidifier
b. dehumidifier
c. air conditioner
d. both a and c
RQ7 
What is the position of the control switch if the 
window unit in Figure 6.14 is to operate the fan 
and compressor if the thermostat is closed?
a. 4 and 1
b. 4, 1, and 2
c. 4, 2, and 3
d. 4 and 3
RQ8 
True or False: The defrost timer motor operates 
continuously in Figure 6.18.
RQ9 
True or False: The evaporator fan motor is con-
trolled by the defrost timer in Figure 6.18.
RQ10 
What electrical component initiates the defrost 
cycle of the commercial freezer shown in 
Figure 6.20?
a. thermostat
b. defrost timer
c. defrost thermostat
d. defrost heater
RQ11 
The thermostat of the commercial freezer in 
Figure 6.20 is connected in series with which of the 
following electrical devices?
a. compressor
b. condenser fan motor
c. evaporator fan motor
d. all of the above
RQ12 
What is the purpose of the fan switch in 
Figure 6.25?
RQ13 
If the temperature in the furnace schematic shown 
in Figure 6.25 were to increase to an unsafe con-
dition, what electrical device would interrupt the 
power supply to the gas valve?
a. fan switch
b. heating thermostat
c. limit switch
d. all of the above
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

174 
CHAPTER 6   Reading Schematic Diagrams
RQ14 
What is the purpose of the transformer in 
Figure 6.25?
RQ15 
True or False: The system in Figure 6.28 is using a 
line voltage control system.
Use Figure 6.28 to answer questions 16–20:
RQ16 
The HP and LP switches are connected in 
__________ with the contactor coil.
a. series
b. parallel
RQ17 
The contactor is controlled by __________.
a. the disconnect switch
b. the high-pressure switch
c. the cooling thermostat
d. none of the above
RQ18 
With the fan switch in the “on” position, the 
indoor fan will __________.
a. run only when the thermostat is closed
b. run when the temperature exceeds 95°F
c. run continously
d. none of the above
RQ19 
The compressor and condenser fan motor start 
__________.
a. at separate times
b. at the same time
RQ20 
The compressor and condenser fan motor are con-
nected in __________.
a. series
b. parallel
RQ21 
Under what conditions would a control relay be 
used in a control system?
RQ22 
What is the purpose of a lockout relay?
RQ23 
Explain why the lockout relay coil energizes instead 
of the contactor coil. See figure 6.34.
RQ24 
True or False: The first- and second-stage cooling 
will be energized at the same time when a 
two-stage cooling thermostat closes on a call 
for  cooling. See figure 6.37.
RQ25 
True or False: A two-stage cooling thermostat 
would be used on a system with one condensing 
unit.
Use Figure 6.40 to answer questions 26–29:
RQ26 
What is the purpose of the defrost cycle of a heat 
pump?
RQ27 
What two factors initiate the defrost mode in the 
diagram?
RQ28 
What type of thermostat is used with the heat 
pump in the diagram?
RQ29 
Explain the operation of the switchover valve and 
its purpose.
RQ30 
The reversing-valve solenoid is energized on the 
__________ cycle.
a. heating
b. cooling
RQ31 
The defrost cycle of the heat pump schematic in 
Figure 6.54 is initiated by __________.
a. time
b. temperature
c. pressure
d. both b and c
RQ32 
What is a pump-down system and why is it used in 
commercial refrigeration system?
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For activities dealing with material covered in this chapter, 
refer to Chapter 6 in the Lab Manual.
C H A P T E R  6  R E V I E W
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗ Explain the basic difference between direct and alternating current.
◗ Briefly explain how alternating current is produced.
◗ Explain the difference between single-phase and three-phase power 
distribution systems.
◗ Explain inductance, reactance, and impedance.
◗ Explain a basic power distribution system.
◗ Explain the common voltage systems.
◗ Identify the common voltage systems.
KEY TERMS
Alternator 
Peak voltage
Capacitive reactance 
Phase
Delta system 
Power factor
Effective voltage 
Reactance
Frequency 
Sine wave
Impedance 
Single phase
Inductance 
Three phase
Inductive reactance 
Wye system
Alternating Current, Power 
Distribution, and Voltage Systems
C H A P T E R
175
R
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INTRODUCTION
Two types of current are used in the heating, cooling, and refrigeration 
industry today: direct current (DC) and alternating current (AC). Current 
is the flow of electrons. Direct current is an electron flow in only one 
direction. Alternating current is an alternating (back and forth) flow of 
electrons; that is, the electrons reverse their direction of flow at regular 
intervals. Direct current will not be discussed in this chapter because it is 
used in the industry only for special applications.
Most current produced by electric utilities is alternating current. In 
the rare instances that direct current is needed, it can be produced by a 
direct current generator or a rectifier. It is usually produced by the con-
sumer. Direct current has limited use in the industry; it is used mostly for 
refrigeration transportation equipment, electronic air cleaners, and elec-
tronic control components. Direct current control systems have become 
increasingly popular with the advancements made in direct current con-
trols that are available to the industry today.
Alternating current is used in most heating, cooling, and refrigeration 
equipment. Alternating current equipment is cheaper and more trouble 
free than direct current equipment. In addition, alternating current is 
easier to produce than direct current.
Because of the popularity and wide use of alternating current, it is 
important for industry technicians to be familiar with its theory. In addi-
tion, technicians should be familiar with the way power is distributed by 
electric utilities and the many types of voltage-current systems available.
We begin our study with a discussion of some basic ideas of alternat-
ing current.
7.1 
BASIC CONCEPTS OF ALTERNATING CURRENT
Alternating current, or AC, is an electron flow that alternates, flowing in 
one direction and then in the opposite direction at regular intervals. It is 
produced by cutting a magnetic field with a conductor.
The sine wave is often used as a graphical representation of alternat-
ing current. Figure 7.1 shows a sine wave, the graph of alternating current. 
The letter X represents a conductor in a particular position as it is rotated 
in the magnetic field. At point A, X is at a potential of 0. However, the 
potential (voltage) increases when the conductor is rotated through the 
magnetic field until it reaches point B, where the potential peaks. When 
the conductor (X) is rotated from B to C, the potential decreases until at 
point C, the potential is again 0. The direction of flow from point A to point 
C is termed positive. The direction is reversed on the lower half of the 
176 
CHAPTER 7   Alternating Current, Power Distribution, and Voltage Systems
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 7.1   Basic Concepts of Alternating Current 
177
sine wave (point C back to point A) and is termed negative. From point C, 
the potential increases until it reaches point D and peaks. The potential 
decreases from point D until the conductor reaches point A, where the 
potential is again 0. The curve shows the conductor from point A through 
a complete clockwise revolution back to point A.
While the conductor is rotating from point A to point C, one posi-
tive alternation occurs. That is, the curve starts from 0, reaches the peak 
at point B, and returns to 0 at point C. The next alternation is negative 
as X goes from point C back to point A in the same manner as the first 
 alternation.
Cycles and Frequency
When the conductor rotates through one complete revolution, it has 
generated two alternations, or flow reversals. Two alternations (changes 
in direction) equal one cycle (refer again to Figure 7.1). One cycle occurs 
when the rotor, or conductor, cuts the magnetic field of a north pole and 
a south pole.
The frequency of alternating current is the number of complete cycles 
that occur in a second. The frequency in known as hertz (Hz), but many 
times it is referred to as cycles. In most locations in the United States, 
the common frequency is 60 hertz. In some isolated cases in the United 
States and in some foreign countries, 25 hertz is the frequency used. The 
7.1
F I G U R E
Sine wave of alternating current. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
NORTH
POSITIVE
One
alternation
One-half cycle
One
alternation
One-half cycle
SOUTH
NEGATIVE
One cycle
C
A
A
A X
C
D
D
0˚
90˚
180˚
270˚
360˚
B
B
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

178 
CHAPTER 7   Alternating Current, Power Distribution, and Voltage Systems
disadvantage of using 25 hertz is that the reversals can be detected by 
the human eye in light fixtures. The frequency of 60 hertz is considered 
standard frequency, but 50 hertz is also used in some cases.
Effective Voltage
Because alternating current starts at 0, reaches a peak, and then returns 
to 0, there is always a variation in voltage and an effective value has to be 
determined. Alternating current reaches a peak at 90 electrical degrees. 
This is known as peak voltage. The effective voltage of an alternating cur-
rent circuit is 0.707 times its highest or peak voltage. This value is deter-
mined with respect to direct current so the effective voltage is equal to 
one direct current volt. Figure 7.2 shows a comparison of effective voltage 
versus peak voltage in an alternating current circuit. Alternating current 
amperage is 0.707 times the peak amperage. All electric meters are cali-
brated to read effective voltage and amperage.
Voltage-Current Systems
Alternating current is available to the consumer at several different volt-
ages and with different current characteristics. The four basic voltage-
current characteristics available are 240 volt–single phase–60 hertz, 
240 volt–three phase–60 hertz, 208 volt–three phase–60 hertz, and 
480 volt–three phase–60 hertz. These designations are often abbreviated; for 
example, 240 volt–single phase–60 hertz is abbreviated as 240 V–1ø–60 Hz. 
The V is the abbreviation for volts; ø (Greek letter phi) is the symbol 
for phase; and Hz is the abbreviation for hertz (which means the same 
as cycles).
0˚
90˚
180˚
Peak 
voltage
100 V
Effective
voltage 70.7 V
7.2
F I G U R E
Effective voltage versus peak 
voltage. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning) 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 7.1   Basic Concepts of Alternating Current 
179
Phase
The phase of an AC circuit is the number of currents alternating at differ-
ent time intervals in the circuit. Single-phase current would have only a 
single current, while three-phase current would have three.
Alternator
Alternating current is produced by an alternator. The alternator is made 
up of a winding or set of windings called the stator and a rotating magnet 
called the rotor. The number of windings used depends on the desired 
phase characteristic of the current. When the rotor is rotated through the 
field of the winding, an alternating electrical current is produced.
Single-phase current is produced by an alternator with one winding 
in the stator as shown in Figure 7.3. Three-phase current is produced by 
an alternator with three windings in the stator that are wound 120° apart 
as shown in Figure 7.4. The sine wave of three-phase current is shown in 
Figure 7.5.
Inductance and Reactance
It is a common assumption that when the voltage is strongest, the 
amperage is also strongest. However, this is not always the case. The 
amperage of a circuit determines the strength of the magnetic field in 
the circuit. If the current increases, so will the magnetism. If the cur-
rent decreases, so will the magnetism. The fluctuation of the magnetic 
strengths in an AC circuit, and in conductors cutting through more 
7.4
F I G U R E
Winding arrange-
ment of three-phase 
alternator. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning) 
N
S
7.3
F I G U R E
Winding arrange-
ment of single-phase 
alternator. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
N
S
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

180 
CHAPTER 7   Alternating Current, Power Distribution, and Voltage Systems
than one magnetic field, induces (causes) a voltage that counteracts the 
 original voltage. This effect is called inductance.
The inductance in an AC circuit—that is, the effect of the magnetic 
fields—produces an out-of-phase condition between the voltage and 
amperage. The induction of the original voltage produces a second volt-
age due to the magnetic fields collapsing. This effect causes the voltage 
to lead the amperage, as shown in Figure 7.6.
Resistance in a direct current circuit is the only factor that affects 
the current flow. AC circuits are affected by resistance, but they are also 
affected by reactance. Reactance is the resistance that alternating cur-
rent encounters when it changes flow. There are two types of reactance 
in AC circuits: inductive reactance and capacitive reactance. Inductive 
reactance is the opposition to the change in flow of alternating current, 
which produces an out-of-phase condition between voltage and amper-
age, as shown in Figure 7.6. Capacitive reactance is caused in AC circuits 
by using capacitors. When a capacitor is put in an AC circuit, it resists the 
change in voltage, causing the amperage to lead the voltage, as shown 
in Figure 7.7. The sum of the resistance and reactance in an AC circuit is 
called the impedance.
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
TIME
V
O
L
T
A
G
E 
7.5
F I G U R E
Sine wave of three-phase current. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 7.1   Basic Concepts of Alternating Current 
181
Power
As we have said, the voltage and current in an AC inductive circuit are out 
of phase with each other. When voltage and current are out of phase, they 
are not working together. Thus, the power (wattage) of the circuit must 
be calculated by using a voltmeter and an ammeter. This calculation 
gives the apparent wattage. A watt meter would measure the true power 
( wattage). The ratio between the true power and the apparent power is 
7.6
F I G U R E
Sine wave of voltage and current when they are out of phase. Voltage leads 
the current in an AC circuit due to the effect of inductance. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
0˚
90˚
180˚
270˚
360˚
Current
Voltage
7.7
F I G U R E
Sine wave of voltage and current when they are out of phase. Current leads the 
voltage in an AC circuit due to capacitive reactance. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
0˚
90˚
180˚
270˚
360˚
Voltage
Current
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

182 
CHAPTER 7   Alternating Current, Power Distribution, and Voltage Systems
called the power factor and is usually expressed as a percentage. The fol-
lowing equation expresses this:
        PF =     true power (measured)
                                             apparent power (calculated)
7.2 
POWER DISTRIBUTION
Direct current was used in the beginning to supply consumers with their 
electrical needs, but it had many disadvantages. Transmission for a long 
distance without using generating stations to boost the direct current was 
impossible. The inability to raise and lower DC voltages and the need to 
use large transmission equipment were other problems. Alternating cur-
rent can be transmitted with much less worry than direct current and has 
become the ideal power to supply to consumers because of its flexibility. 
Most equipment used in the industry incorporates alternating current as 
its main source of power.
Electric power is generated by rotating turbines through the use of 
gas, oil, coal, hydropower, or atomic energy. The rotating turbines have 
the effect of a rotating conductor in a magnetic field. The electricity is 
generated inside the plant and transferred outside the plant, where it is 
boosted to a large, easily transmitted voltage. This is frequently as high 
Generating
plant
Residential
consumer and
some commercial
and industrial
consumers
Substation
Commercial
and industrial
consumer
Transformer
4800 V
120/240 V
120,000 V - 220,000 V
7.8
F I G U R E
Layout of power distribution. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 7.3   240-Volt–Single-Phase–60-Hertz Systems 
183
as 220,000 volts. The alternating current is then transmitted to a substa-
tion, where its voltage is reduced to around 4800 volts with the use of 
a stepdown transformer. From the substation, the power is distributed 
to transformers that step down the voltage to a usable voltage. Or the 
power is supplied directly to consumers who use their own transformers 
to reduce the voltage. Figure 7.8 shows a diagram of electric power trans-
mission from the generating plant to the customer.
In the following sections, we discuss the four common voltage sys-
tems available to consumers.
7.3 
240-VOLT–SINGLE-PHASE–60-HERTZ SYSTEMS
Single-phase alternating current exists in most residences. Most small 
heating, cooling, and refrigeration equipment can be purchased for use 
on single phase. Any domestic appliance that operates on 120 volts is 
single-phase equipment. It is important to understand the makeup of 
the 240-V–1ø–60-Hz system because of its popularity in small commercial 
buildings and residences. Air-conditioning technicians must be able to 
determine the type of voltage system available to ensure proper installa-
tion and operation of the equipment.
In some older structures, it is still possible to find a single-phase, 
two-wire system. This voltage system was used when few electric 
appliances were available and there was no need for 240-volt systems. 
The system uses two wires, supplying only 120 volts, one as a hot wire 
and one as a neutral. Hot wires are conductors that actually supply 
voltage to an appliance. The neutral is a wire connected to the ground 
and is identified by the color white. The ground wire is a safety circuit 
not intended to carry normal circuit current but is provided to carry 
fault current to ground in the case of a short between the hot circuit 
conductor and the case or frame of a device. This conductor is either 
bare or colored green. In the voltage system shown in Figure 7.9, 
120 volts is displaced through L1 but must be connected to a neutral to 
make a complete circuit.
The most common voltage system found today is the 240-V–1ø–60-Hz 
system. This voltage system consists of three wires, two hot wires, and 
one ground. A schematic for the 240-volt system is shown in Figure 7.10. 
The figure shows the breakdown of the 240-volt–single-phase–60-hertz 
system that is used to supply power to a piece of equipment, such as 
a walk-in cooler, an electric furnace, or an air-conditioning unit. In this 
system, connecting either hot leg, L1 or L2, and the neutral directly to a 
load will supply 120 volts. Connecting L1 and L2 directly to a load will 
supply 240 volts.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

184 
CHAPTER 7   Alternating Current, Power Distribution, and Voltage Systems
The electric utility uses a transformer to produce the 240-V–1ø–60-Hz 
system. The transformer hookup of this system is shown in Figure 7.11. 
Pay close attention to the secondary side of the transformer. A transformer 
takes voltage at one value and by induction changes it to another value. 
Figure 7.11 shows a transformer with a 4800-volt primary winding and a 
240-volt secondary winding. The primary winding, or input, is connected to 
the initial voltage, which is 4800 volts in Figure 7.11. The secondary wind-
ing produces the output, or new voltage, which is 240 volts in Figure 7.11.
From electric
utility
4800 V Primary
120 V
120 V
240 V
L1
L2
N
7.11
F I G U R E
Transformer hookup of a 240-volt–
single-phase–60-hertz system. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
N
120 V
7.9
FIGURE
Schematic for 120-volt–
single-phase–60-hertz 
system using two wires. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
120 V
240 V
120 V
L1
L2
N
7.10
FIGURE
Schematic for 
240-volt–single-
phase–60-hertz system 
using three wires. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 7.5   240-Volt–Three-Phase–60-Hertz Delta System 
185
Most equipment can be operated at plus or minus 10% of the rated 
voltage. For example, a piece of equipment rated at 240 volts could operate 
on a minimum voltage of 216 volts and a maximum voltage of 264 volts. 
The electric utility maintains a plus or minus 10% of the correct supply 
voltage. Air-conditioning equipment has a tendency to operate more sat-
isfactorily on the maximum voltage than on the minimum voltage.
7.4 
THREE-PHASE VOLTAGE SYSTEMS
Three-phase alternating current is common in most commercial and 
industrial structures. Three-phase electrical services supply three hot 
legs of power with one ground to the distribution equipment and then on 
to the equipment. Three-phase power supplies are more versatile than 
single-phase supplies because of the different voltage systems that are 
available. Thus, it is essential to understand the uses and advantages of 
three-phase voltage systems.
Three-phase electric power supplies have many advantages over 
the single-phase power supply when used in commercial and industrial 
applications. In most cases, residences do not use enough electric energy 
to warrant a three-phase power supply. The electric power consumer can 
buy three-phase electric power cheaper than single phase. Three-phase 
electric motors require no special starting apparatus, eliminating one 
trouble spot in the building and servicing of motors. Three-phase power 
offers better starting and running characteristics for motors than does 
single phase. Many large electric motors used in the industry are avail-
able for three phase only, preventing many structures from using single-
phase power supplies. Thus, most commercial and industrial structures 
are supplied with three-phase power.
The only disadvantage of three-phase systems is the higher cost of 
electric panels and distribution equipment.
There are basically two types of three-phase voltage systems used in 
commercial and industrial wiring systems: the delta transformer hookup, 
which will supply 240 V–3ø–60 Hz, and the wye transformer hookup, 
which will supply 208 V–3ø–60 Hz or 480 V–3ø–60 Hz.
7.5 
240-VOLT–THREE-PHASE–60-HERTZ DELTA SYSTEM
The 240-V–3ø–60-Hz, or delta, system is used in structures that require a 
large supply to motors and other three-phase equipment. The delta sys-
tem is usually supplied to a structure with four wires, which include three 
hot legs and a neutral, but in some rare cases it is supplied with three 
hot wires only. Figure 7.12 shows the wiring layout of a 240-V–3ø–60-Hz 
system. This system is unique in that it contains a high leg, which in 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

186 
CHAPTER 7   Alternating Current, Power Distribution, and Voltage Systems
Figure 7.12 is L1. Connecting L1 to neutral, or ground, provides a range of 
180 volts to 208 volts. Connecting L1 to L2, L2 to L3, or L1 to L3 provides 
240 volts. Connecting L2 to N or L3 to N provides 120 volts. If one hot leg 
of a three-phase delta system is lost, only single-phase voltage is supplied 
and a single-phase condition exists. This condition can easily damage 
any three-phase equipment.
The transformer secondary hookup of a three-phase delta system is 
shown in Figure 7.13. The delta system takes its name from the Greek 
letter delta (Δ), which resembles the shape of the hookup, as can be seen 
in Figure 7.13. The high leg of the voltage occurs because the transformer 
winding between L1 and N is longer than the windings between L2 and N 
and between L3 and N.
The 240-V–3ø–60-Hz or delta voltage system is used primarily on sys-
tems that have many three-phase circuits of 240 volts and few 120-volt 
circuits. The system consists of two available 120-volt legs when L2 and 
120 V
240 V
240 V
120 V
208 V
L2
L1
L3
7.13
F I G U R E
Schematic for the transformer 
hookup of a 240-volt–three-phase–
60-hertz system showing the delta 
transformer secondary hookup. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
240 V
240 V
240 V
120 V
120 V
208 V max.
L1
L2
L3
N
7.12
FIGURE
Schematic for 240-volt–
three-phase–60-hertz 
system using four 
wires. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 7.6   208-Volt–Three-Phase–60-Hertz Wye System 
187
L3 are connected to a circuit with the neutral. If the high leg, or L1, is 
connected in a circuit with the neutral, it delivers between 180 volts and 
208 volts. This will damage any 120-volt load or appliance.
Detection of the 240-V–3ø–60-Hz system can be accomplished simply 
and easily by testing across any two hot legs with a voltmeter. If 240 volts 
are read, the system is a delta system. The high leg should be identified 
by an orange marking. Another method of detection is to check the volt-
age between each hot leg and neutral with a voltmeter. If the voltage 
between any hot leg and neutral reads between 180 volts and 208 volts, 
the system is a delta system.
7.6 
208-VOLT–THREE-PHASE–60-HERTZ WYE SYSTEM
The 208-V–3ø–60-Hz wye voltage system is common in structures that 
require a large number of 120-volt circuits, such as schools, hospitals, 
and office buildings. The wye system offers the versatility of using three-
phase alternating current and the possibility of supplying many 120-volt 
circuits for lights, appliances, and other 120-volt equipment. The volt-
age ratings of some equipment are such that the equipment must be 
used with the right voltage system for proper operation and selection. 
Therefore, the detection of this system is important because of the lower-
voltage requirements.
This system is supplied by four wires, one neutral and three hot legs, 
as shown in schematic form in Figure 7.14. The 208-volt system is differ-
ent from the 240-volt system in that it contains no high leg. In Figure 7.14, 
L1, L2, and L3 are the hot legs and N represents the ground. The voltage 
available between any two hot legs (L1, L2, or L3) is 208 volts. Connections 
between any hot leg (L1, L2, or L3) and the ground (N) provide 120 volts. As 
can be seen from the schematic, there are three available 120-volt power 
legs. This allows more 120-volt circuits than the 240-volt delta system.
The transformer secondary hookup of a 208-volt–three-phase wye 
system is shown in Figure 7.15. The wye system takes its name from 
the letter Y, which resembles the shape of the hookup, as can be seen in 
Figure 7.15. All three legs of the transformer windings are equal in wind-
ing length, as shown in Figure 7.15, but in the delta system they are not. 
The wye transformer connection is also used on several higher-voltage 
systems.
Detection of the 208-V–3ø–60-Hz wye system is easy with the use 
of a voltmeter. If 208 volts are read across any two of the hot legs, or if 
120 volts are read between all three hot legs and the neutral, the system 
is a 208-volt wye system. The 208-volt wye system is a balanced system 
and contains no high leg that must be identified. But care should be taken 
to identify the ground when connections are being made.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

188 
CHAPTER 7   Alternating Current, Power Distribution, and Voltage Systems
7.7 
HIGHER-VOLTAGE SYSTEMS
Higher-voltage systems are becoming increasingly popular because of 
their many advantages. They are used mostly in industrial structures, but 
in some cases they are used in commercial structures. It is necessary to 
understand and to be able to detect a higher-voltage system to ensure the 
safety of technicians and to prevent damage to equipment.
The technician should take extra care when working around circuits 
with high voltage. Several high-voltage systems are available. There is 
a 240/480-volt–single-phase system, a 240/416-volt–three-phase system, 
120 V
208 V
208 V
120 V
120 V
208 V
L2
N
L1
L3
7.15
F I G U R E
Schematic for the 
transformer hookup 
of a 208 volt–three-
phase–60-hertz 
system showing the 
wye transformer 
secondary hookup. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
208 V
208 V
120 V
208 V
120 V
120 V
L1
L2
L3
N
7.14
FIGURE
Schematic for 208-volt–
three-phase–60-hertz 
system using four 
wires. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 7.7   Higher-Voltage Systems 
189
and a 277/480-volt–single-phase system. These systems can be identified 
with a voltmeter. For example, in the 277/480-volt system, the 277-volt 
reading is obtained between any hot leg and ground. The different sys-
tems are available with wye and delta hookups. The wye 277/480-volt sys-
tem will be discussed in this section because of its popularity, but other 
high-voltage systems are available.
Advantages
Using higher-voltage systems has many advantages. There is little dif-
ference in the switches, relays, and other electric panels used in 208-volt 
and 480-volt systems. Motors may be wound differently for higher volt-
ages, but they cost a little more. The service equipment and wiring may 
be smaller for a 480-volt system than for a 208-volt system. This might 
save the consumer a great deal of money.
Disadvantages
Disadvantages of using the higher-voltage systems stem mainly from 
problems that would be brought about by trying to implement a com-
mon high-voltage system in this country. If the consumer needs single-
phase circuits with both 120 volts and 240 volts, additional transformers 
must be purchased. Single-phase equipment is more common than three 
phase. Equipment manufacturers would like to work toward some com-
mon voltages so they could produce fewer types of equipment. Now they 
must manufacture many motors with different voltage ratings to meet 
consumers’ needs.
The 277/480-Volt System
Figure 7.16 shows a schematic layout of the 277/480-volt wye system. 
This system is primarily used in industry, but occasionally there are 
commercial applications. The system has no means of supplying 
120 volts or 240 volts at single phase without the use of a separate step-
down transformer.
Between any hot leg (L1, L2, or L3) and neutral (N), 277-volt circuits 
are obtained. The 277-volt circuit is commonly used in commercial and 
industrial lighting systems to operate fluorescent lights. Between any two 
hot legs (L1 and L2, L2 and L3, or L1 and L3), 480 volts can be obtained. If 
three phase is desirable, it can be obtained by connections to all three hot 
legs. Figure 7.17 shows the completely balanced transformer layout of a 
277/480-V–3ø–60-Hz wye system.
Detection of the 480-V–3ø–60-Hz system is easy with the use of a volt-
meter. If 480 volts are read across any two of the hot legs, or if 277 volts 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

190 
CHAPTER 7   Alternating Current, Power Distribution, and Voltage Systems
are read between the hot legs and the ground, the system is a 277/480-volt 
wye system. The 480-volt wye system is a balanced system and contains 
no high leg that must be identified. But care should be taken to identify 
the ground when connections are being made.
277 V
277 V
277 V
480 V
480 V
480 V
L1
L2
L3
N
7.17
F I G U R E
Schematic for the 
transformer hookup 
of a 277/480-volt–
three-phase–
60-hertz wye 
system. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
480 V
480 V
480 V
277 V
277 V
277 V
L1
L2
L3
N
7.16
FIGURE
Schematic diagram for 
a 277/480-volt–three-
phase–60-hertz system. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Summary 
191
SUMMARY
Alternating current is used in most heating, cooling, and refrigeration 
equipment because its properties give it greater flexibility than direct cur-
rent. It is easier to transmit over a long distance, and no expensive trans-
mission equipment is required. It can be supplied at almost any voltage 
that a consumer wants.
Alternating current changes direction twice per cycle. The number of 
cycles per second is the frequency. Standard frequency is 60 hertz. The 
voltage leads the current in an AC circuit due to inductive reactance. 
The current leads the voltage due to capacitive reactance. The sum of the 
resistance and reactance in an AC circuit is called the impedance.
Voltage and current are out of phase in an AC circuit. Consequently, 
the power of the circuit must be calculated by using the effective wattage. 
The ratio between the true power and the effective power in an AC circuit 
is called the power factor.
An electric utility company can supply single-phase or three-phase 
current to structures at voltages from 208 volts to 480 volts. The generat-
ing plant supplies a high voltage that is stepped down so the consumer 
can use it. The common voltage characteristics are 240 V–1ø–60 Hz, 
240 V–3ø–60 Hz, 208 V–3ø–60 Hz, and 480 V–3ø–60 Hz.
The 240-V–3ø–60-Hz, or delta, system is common throughout commer-
cial and industrial structures. It adds efficiency to systems that have a large 
number of three-phase and 240-volt circuits. The system supplies three hot 
legs and one neutral, which deliver 240 volts between any two of the three hot 
legs. This system has a high leg. Caution should be taken not to connect any 
120-volt circuit to the high leg. Between ground and the other two hot legs, 
120 volts can be obtained. Detection of the delta system is essential to prevent 
damage to 120-volt equipment and to ensure proper equipment selection.
The 208-volt wye system is a well-balanced three-phase system that 
is commonly used on structures that need many 120-volt circuits as well 
as three-phase or 208-volt circuits. The system does not operate motors 
as efficiently as the 240-volt delta system, but it is more adaptable to the 
balancing of each leg of a service. Much equipment is made for either 
208-volt or 240-volt systems, and some can be used on either system.
High-voltage systems are becoming increasingly common. In a high-
voltage system, smaller wire can be used, making the installation of 
equipment less expensive. While there are several high-voltage systems 
in use, the 277/480-volt wye system is most common. A large number of 
heating, cooling, and refrigeration systems are rated at higher voltages. 
Air-conditioning technicians should be able to identify the higher-voltage 
systems for safety and proper installation.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  7  R E V I E W
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
192 
CHAPTER 7   Alternating Current, Power Distribution, and Voltage Systems
RQ1 
Alternating current is __________.
a. an alternating flow of electrons
b. electrons reversing their flow at regular intervals
c. the most commonly used current
d. all of the above
RQ2 
What is the advantage of alternating current over 
direct current?
RQ3 
Direct current is used in which of the following 
applications in the industry?
a. electronic control components
b. magnetic starters
c. three-phase motors
d. none of the above
RQ4 
What is the common frequency of alternating cur-
rent in the United States?
a. 25 Hz
b. 50 Hz
c. 60 Hz
d. none of the above
RQ5 
What is reactance?
RQ6 
What is impedance?
RQ7 
What is the sum of the resistance and reactance in 
an alternating current?
a. induction
b. alternation
c. impedance
d. none of the above
RQ8 
Give a brief description of the transmission of 
alternating current from the generating plant to the 
consumer.
RQ9 
Name the four voltage-current characteristics com-
monly used today.
RQ10 
The phase of alternating current is __________.
RQ11 
True or False: Inductance in an AC circuit is an 
effect that is due to the magnetic fields caused by 
the current flow.
RQ12 
What is the common electrical service to a 
residence?
a. 240 volts–single-phase–60 hertz
b. 208 volts–three-phase–60 hertz
c. 240 volts–three-phase–60 hertz
d. 480 volts–three-phase–60 hertz
RQ13 
What is the voltage range in which alternating 
current equipment can be operated?
RQ14 
The effective voltage of alternating current is 
__________ times its highest or peak voltage.
RQ15 
How can a 240-volt–single-phase–60-hertz electri-
cal system be detected?
RQ16 
What is the difference between single-phase and 
three-phase alternating current?
RQ17 
What is the voltage of a system with a wye trans-
former hookup?
RQ18 
What is the voltage of a system with a delta trans-
former hookup?
RQ19 
What are the advantages and disadvantages of a 
delta electric system?
RQ20 
How can the wye and delta systems be detected?
RQ21 
What is the advantage of the 480-volt wye system 
over the 208-volt wye system?
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  7  R E V I E W
RQ22 
True or False: Single-phase alternating current is 
common in most commercial and industrial 
structures.
RQ23 
Sketch the delta and wye transformer hookup 
arrangements.
RQ24 
What are the advantages of the 208-volt–three-
phase–60-hertz system? In which types of struc-
tures is this system primarily used?
RQ25 
What is the 277-volt–single-phase–60-hertz system 
used for?
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 7 in the Lab Manual.
 
Review Questions 
193
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗ Understand the standard wire size as defined by the American Wire 
Gauge (AWG).
◗ Give the advantages and disadvantages of copper and aluminum conductors.
◗ Explain the factors that are considered when sizing an electrical circuit conductor.
◗ Correctly size and install electrical conductors for circuits used in the indus-
try by the National Electrical Code® and manufacturers’ instructions.
◗ Calculate the voltage drop in an electrical circuit.
◗ Explain the types of enclosures for disconnect switches that are available.
◗ Explain the types, sizes, and enclosures of disconnect switches that are used 
in the industry.
◗ Explain the types of electrical panels that are used to distribute electrical 
power to circuits in the structure.
◗ Install breakers in an electrical breaker panel.
KEY TERMS
Installation of Heating, Cooling, 
and Refrigeration Systems
C H A P T E R
194
American Wire Gauge
Breaker
Breaker panel
Disconnect switch
Distribution center
Fusible disconnect switch
Fusible load center
National Electrical Code®
Nonfusible disconnect switch
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INTRODUCTION
The proper installation of heating, cooling, and refrigeration equipment 
is as important as any other phase of the industry. Installation covers 
a broad range of subjects, but one of the most important is the electric 
circuit servicing the equipment and its size. Thus, industry technicians 
should be familiar with the structure’s circuitry and circuit components.
Once the electric utility delivers the power to the structure, the cus-
tomer must bring it inside. Several kinds of electric panels are used in 
residences, and many types are used in commercial and industrial struc-
tures to accomplish this. Hence, it is important for service and installa-
tion technicians to understand how electric power is distributed within 
the structure.
In this chapter we discuss several components of the electric circuit 
servicing the heating, cooling, and refrigeration equipment. We also dis-
cuss several types of electric panels that technicians may encounter on 
the job.
8.1 
SIZING WIRE
Manufacturers usually list in the installation instructions the correct wire 
and fuse size. But in many cases the person responsible for the installa-
tion must calculate the wire and fuse size. The National Electrical Code® 
governs the types and sizes of wire that can be used for a particular appli-
cation and a certain amperage. The correct wire and fuse size is impor-
tant to the life and efficiency of any equipment. Hence, the installation 
mechanic should know how to determine the size to use.
Copper is the most popular conductor in the industry. However, 
aluminum is used in some cases because of its low cost. Copper wire is 
a good conductor of electricity and has many other characteristics that 
contribute to its popularity. Copper wire bends easily, has good mechani-
cal strength, resists corrosion, and can be easily joined. Aluminum con-
ductors, on the other hand, do not have all the good characteristics of 
copper. Aluminum conducts electricity well enough, but problems arise 
because aluminum corrodes easily. Thus, aluminum wire connections 
have a tendency to become loose because of coefficient of expansion.
Wire Size
Standard wire size is defined in the United States by the American Wire 
Gauge (AWG). The American Wire Gauge lists the largest wire, 0000 (4/0), 
down to number 50, which is the smallest wire. In the industry, wire sizes 
from number 20 to number 4/0 are the most common. The most popular 
sizes are from number 16 to number 4.
 
 
Section 8.1   Sizing Wire 
195
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

196 
CHAPTER 8   Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems
In some cases, wire larger than 4/0 is needed. The circular mil system is 
used for this purpose. Circular mil sizing runs from 250 MCM (MCM is the 
abbreviation for 1000 circular mils), which is about 1/2 inch in diameter, to 
750 MCM, which is about 1 inch in diameter. Circular mil sizing does exist 
in larger sizes. Figure 8.1 is a table that gives the data on round copper wire.
Factors to Consider in Wiring
The type of insulation surrounding the conductor usually determines its 
application and the amperage it can be used for. Insulation of different 
grades is used for different purposes. For example, insulation can be heat 
resistant, moisture resistant, heat and moisture resistant, or oil resistant. 
Figure 8.2 shows a partial table from the NEC® listing conductor application 
and insulations. National Electrical Code® and NEC® are registered trademarks 
of the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., Quincy, MA 02269.
Several factors should be considered when sizing circuit conductors. 
These factors are voltage drop, insulation type, enclosure, and safety. The 
voltage drop of a circuit, which takes into account the distance the con-
ductors must be fed, must be calculated by the installation technician. 
The insulation type, the enclosure, and safety can be determined by using 
the tables of the National Electrical Code®. There are also wire-sizing tables 
in the National Electrical Code® that give the allowable amperage for both 
aluminum and copper conductors. The National Electrical Code® is consid-
ered a guide to safe wiring procedures. The code does not ensure that all 
systems following its procedures will be good systems, however. That is 
the responsibility of the designer.
Voltage Drop
Voltage drop in a conductor is of prime importance when sizing wire. Any 
voltage that drops between the supply and the equipment is lost to the 
equipment. If the voltage drop is large enough, it will seriously affect the 
operation of the equipment. But even a small voltage drop is detrimental 
to the equipment. The voltage drop can be easily measured when the 
equipment is operating by reading the voltage at the supply and subtract-
ing from that the voltage read at the equipment. If we read 240 volts at 
the supply and 210 volts at the equipment when it is operating, then there 
is a voltage drop of 30 volts in the circuit. The maximum recommended 
voltage drop for a branch circuit is 3%. The allowable voltage drop of most 
manufacturers is 10% below the nameplate rating.
Wire-Sizing Charts
Figure 8.3 shows the table from the National Electrical Code® for the allow-
able ampacities (amperages) of a conductor for copper and aluminum 
wire. The wire-sizing charts from the NEC® are usually accurate for sizing 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.1
F I G U R E
Data on round copper wire. (Courtesy of BICC Industrial Cable 
Company) 
 American Wire Gauge (A.W.G.) Working Table (U.S. Bureau of Standards)
Gauge No.
A.W.G.
Diameter
in Mils
Cross Section
Ohms per 1000 Ft.
at 25 Deg. C.
(77 Deg. F.)
Lb. per
1000 Ft.
Circular
Mils
Square
Inches
0000
460
212000
.166
.0500
641
000
410
168000
.132
.0630
508
00
365
133000
.105
.0795
403
0
325
106000
.0829
.100
319
1
289
83700
.0657
.126
253
2
258
66400
.0521
.159
201
3
229
52600
.0413
.201
159
4
204
41700
.0328
.253
126
5
182
33100
.0260
.320
100
6
162
26300
.0206
.403
79.5
7
144
20800
.0164
.508
63.0
8
128
16500
.0130
.641
50.0
9
114
13100
.0103
.808
39.6
10
102
10400
.00815
1.02
31.4
11
91
8230
.00647
1.28
24.9
12
81
6530
.00513
1.62
19.8
13
72
5180
.00407
2.04
15.7
14
64
4110
.00323
2.58
12.4
15
57
3260
.00256
3.25
9.86
16
51
2580
.00203
4.09
7.82
17
45
2050
.00161
5.16
6.20
18
40
1620
.00128
6.51
4.92
19
36
1290
.00101
8.21
3.90
20
32
1020
.000802
10.4
3.09
21
28.5
810
.000636
13.1
2.45
22
25.3
642
.000505
16.5
1.94
23
22.6
509
.000400
20.8
1.54
24
20.1
404
.000317
26.2
1.22
25
17.9
320
.000252
33.0
0.970
26
15.9
254
.000200
41.6
0.769
27
14.2
202
.000158
52.5
0.610
28
12.6
160
.000126
66.2
0.484
29
11.3
127
.0000995
83.5
0.384
30
10.0
101.0
.0000789
105
0.304
31
8.9
79.7
.0000626
133
0.241
32
8.0
63.2
.0000496
167
0.191
33
7.1
50.1
.0000394
211
0.152
34
6.3
39.8
.0000312
266
0.120
35
5.6
31.5
.0000248
336
0.0954
36
5.0
25.0
.0000196
423
0.0757
37
4.5
19.8
.0000156
533
0.0600
38
4.0
15.7
.0000123
673
0.0476
39
3.5
12.5
.0000098
848
0.0377
40
3.1
9.9
.0000078
1070
0.0299
 
 
Section 8.1   Sizing Wire 
197
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

198 
CHAPTER 8   Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems
8.2
F I G U R E
Table of conductor application and insulation. (Reprinted with permission from NFPA 
70-2008, the National Electrical Code copyright 2008, National Fire Protection 
Association, Quincy, MA 02269. This reprinted material is not the referenced subject 
which is represented only by the standard in its entirety.) (Continued) 
Trade Name
Type Letter
Maximum Operating 
Temperature
Application Provisions
Insulation
Thickness of Insulation
Outer Covering1
AWG or kcmil
mm
mils
Fluorinated 
ethylene 
propylene
FEP or 
FEPB
90°C
194°F
Dry and damp locations
Fluorinated ethylene 
propylene
14–10
8–2
0.51
0.76
20
30
None
200°C
392°F
Dry locations — special 
applications2
Fluorinated ethylene 
propylene
14–8
0.36
14
Glass braid
6–2
0.36
14
Glass or other suitable 
braid material
Mineral insulation 
(metal sheathed)
MI
90°C
194°F
250°C
482°F
Dry and wet locations
For special applications2
Magnesium oxide
18–163
16–10
9–4
3–500
0.58
0.91
1.27
1.40
23
36
50
55
Copper or alloy steel
Moisture-, heat-, 
and oil-resistant 
thermoplastic
MTW
60°C
140°F
90°C
194°F
Machine tool wiring in 
wet locations
Machine tool wiring in 
dry locations.
FPN: See NFPA 79.
Flame-retardant 
moisture-, heat-, and 
oil-resistant thermo-
plastic
22–12
10
8
6
4–2
1–4/0
213–500
501–1000
(A)
(A)
(A) None
(B)  Nylon jacket or 
equivalent
0.76
0.76
1.14
1.52
1.52
2.03
2.41
2.79
30
30
45
60
60
80
95
110
Paper
85°C
185°F
For underground ser-
vice conductors, or by 
special permission
Paper
Lead sheath
Perfluoro-alkoxy
PFA
90°C
194°F
200°C
392°F
Dry and damp locations
Dry locations — special 
applications2
Perfluoro-alkoxy
14–10
8–2
1–4/0
0.51
0.76
1.14
20
30
45
None
Perfluoro-alkoxy
PFAH
250°C
482°F
Dry locations only. 
Only for leads within 
apparatus or within 
raceways connected 
to apparatus (nickel 
or nickel-coated cop-
per only)
Perfluoro-alkoxy
14–10
8–2
1–4/0
0.51
0.76
1.14
20
30
45
None
Thermoset
RHH
90°C
194°F
Dry and damp locations
14–10
8–2
1–4/0
213–500
501–1000
1001–2000
1.14
1.52
2.03
2.41
2.79
3.18
45
60
80
95
110
125
Moisture-resistant, 
flame-retardant, non-
metallic covering1
Moisture-resistant 
thermoset
RHW4
75°C
167°F
Dry and wet locations
Flame-retardant, 
moisture-resistant 
thermoset
14–10
8–2
1–4/0
213–500
501–1000
1001–2000
1.14
1.52
2.03
2.41
2.79
3.18
45
60
80
95
110
125
Moisture-resistant, 
flame-retardant, non-
metallic covering4
RHW-2
90°C
194°F
Silicone
SA
90°C
194°F
200°C
392°F
Dry and damp locations
For special application2
Silicone rubber
14–10
8–2
1-4/0
213–500
501–1000
1001–2000
1.14
1.52
2.03
2.41
2.79
3.18
45
60
80
95
110
125
Glass or other suitable 
braid material
Table 310.13(A) Conductor Applications and Insulations Rated 600 Volts
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Trade Name
Type Letter
Maximum Operating 
Temperature
Application Provisions
Insulation
Thickness of Insulation
Outer Covering1
AWG or kcmil
mm
mils
Thermoset
SIS
90°C
194°F
Switchboard wiring only
Flame-retardant 
 thermoset
14–10
8–2
1-4/0
0.76
1.14
2.41
30
45
55
None
Thermoplastic and 
fibrous outer 
braid
TBS
90°C
194°F
Switchboard wiring only
Thermoplastic
14–10
8
6–2
1-4/0
0.76
1.14
1.52
2.03
30
45
60
80
Flame-retardant, non-
metallic covering
Extended polytetra-
fluoro-ethylene
TFE
250°C
482°F
Dry locations only. 
Only for leads within 
apparatus or within 
raceways connected to 
apparatus, or as open 
wiring (nickel or nickel-
coated copper only)
Extruded polytetra-
fluoro-ethylene
14–10
8–2
1-4/0
0.51
0.76
1.14
20
30
45
None
Heat-resistant ther-
moplastic
THHN
90°C
194°F
Dry and damp locations
Flame-retardant, 
heat-resistant 
thermoplastic
14–12
10
8–6
4–2
1-4/0
250–500
501–1000
0.38
0.51
0.76
1.02
1.27
1.52
1.78
15
20
30
40
50
60
70
Nylon jacket or 
equivalent
Moisture- and heat-
resistant thermo-
plastic
THHW
75°C
167°F
90°C
194°F
Wet location
Dry location
Flame-retardant, 
 moisture- and heat-
resistant thermoplastic
14–10
8
6–2
1-4/0
213–500
501–1000
1001–2000
0.76
1.14
1.52
2.03
2.41
2.79
3.18
30
45
60
80
95
110
125
None
Moisture- and heat-
resistant thermo-
plastic
THW
75°C
167°F
90°C
194°F
Dry and wet locations
Special applications 
within electric discharge 
lighting equipment.
Limited to 1000 open-
circuit volts or less. (size 
14–8 only as permitted 
in 410.33)
Flame-retardant, 
 moisture- and heat-
resistant thermoplastic
14–10
8
6–2
1-4/0
213–500
501–1000
1001–2000
0.76
1.14
1.52
2.03
2.41
2.79
3.18
30
45
60
80
95
110
125
None
THW-2
90°C
194°F
Dry and wet locations
Moisture- and heat-
resistant thermo-
plastic
THWN
75°C
167°F
Dry and wet locations
Flame-retardant, 
 moisture- and heat-
resistant thermoplastic
14–12
10
8–6
4–2
1–4/0
250–500
501–1000
0.38
0.51
0.76
1.02
1.27
1.52
1.78
15
20
30
40
50
60
70
Nylon jacket or 
equivalent
THWN-2
90°C
194°F
Moisture-resistant 
thermoplastic
TW
60°C
140°F
Dry and wet locations
Flame-retardant, 
moisture-resistant 
thermoplastic
14–10
8
6–2
1–4/0
213–500
501–1000
1001–2000
0.76
1.14
1.52
2.03
2.41
2.79
3.18
30
45
60
80
90
110
125
None
Underground feeder 
and branch-circuit 
cable — single con-
ductor (for Type UF 
cable employing 
more than one 
conductor, see 
Article 340.)
UF
60°C
140°F
75°C
167°F6
See Article 340.
Moisture-resistant
Moisture- and heat 
resistant
14–10
8–2
1-4/0
1.52
2.03
2.41
   605
   805
   955
Integral with insulation
 
 
Section 8.1   Sizing Wire 
199
Table 310.13(A) Conductor Applications and Insulations Rated 600 Volts
8.2
F I G U R E
(Continued) 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

200 
CHAPTER 8   Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems
Trade Name
Type Letter
Maximum Operating 
Temperature
Application Provisions
Insulation
Thickness of Insulation
Outer Covering1
AWG or kcmil
mm
mils
Underground service-
entrance cable 
— single conduc-
tor (for Type USE 
cable employing 
more than one 
conductor, see 
Article 338.)
USE
75°C
167°F
See Article 338.
Heat- and moisture-
resistant
14–10
8–2
1-4/0
213–500
501–1000
1001–2000
1.14
1.52
2.03
2.41
2.79
3.18
45
60
80
   957
110
125
Moisture-resistant 
nonmetallic covering 
(See 338.2.)
USE-2
90°C
194°F
Dry and wet locations
Thermoset
XHH
90°C
194°F
Dry and damp locations
Flame-retardant ther-
moset
14–10
8–2
1-4/0
213–500
501–1000
1001–2000
0.76
1.14
1.40
1.65
2.03
2.41
30
45
55
65
80
95
None
Moisture-resistant 
thermoset
XHHW4
90°C
194°F
75°C
167°F
Dry and damp locations
Wet locations
Flame-retardant, 
moisture-resistant 
thermoset
14–10
8–2
1-4/0
213–500
501–1000
1001–2000
0.76
1.14
1.40
1.65
2.03
2.41
30
45
55
65
80
95
None
Moisture-resistant 
thermoset
XHHW-2
90°C
194°F
Dry and wet locations
Flame-retardant, 
moisture-resistant 
thermoset
14–10
8–2
1-4/0
213–500
501–1000
1001–2000
0.76
1.14
1.40
1.65
2.03
2.41
30
45
55
65
80
95
None
Modified ethylene 
tetrafluoro-
ethylene
Z
90°C
194°F
150°C
302°F
Dry and damp locations
Dry locations—special 
applications2
Modified ethylene 
tetrafluoro-ethylene
14–12
10
8–4
3–1
1/0-4/0
0.38
0.51
0.64
0.89
1.14
15
20
25
35
45
None
Modified ethylene 
tetrafluoro-
ethylene
ZW
75°C
167°F
90°C
194°F
150°C
302°F
Wet locations
Dry and damp locations
Dry locations — special 
applications2
Modified ethylene 
tetrafluoro-ethylene
14–10
8–2
0.76
1.14
30
45
None
ZW-2
90°C
194°F
Dry and wet locations
1 Some insulations do not require an outer covering.
2 Where design conditions require maximum conductor operating temperatures above 90°C (194°F).
3 For signaling circuits permitting 300-volt insulation.
4 Some rubber insulations do not require an outer covering.
5 Includes integral jacket.
6 For ampacity limitation, see 340.80.
7 Insulation thickness shall be permitted to be 2.03 mm (80 mils) for listed Type USE conductors that have been subjected to special investigations. The nonmetallic cover-
ing over individual rubber-covered conductors of aluminum-sheathed cable and of lead-sheathed or multiconductor cable shall not be required to be flame retardant. For 
Type MC cable, see 330.104. For nonmetallic-sheathed cable, see Article 334, Part III. For Type UF cable, see Article 340, Part III.
8.2
F I G U R E
(Continued) 
electric conductors unless the circuit is extremely long. For example, if a 
5-ton condensing unit draws 24 amperes, the service technician should 
add 25% of the full-load amperage to the total, which would be 6 amperes. 
This gives a total of 30 amperes for the wire-sizing data. From the table 
in Figure 8.3, we see that the circuit would require a copper conductor of 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Table 310.16 Allowable Ampacities of Insulated Conductors Rated 0 Through 2000 Volts, 60°C Through 90°C (140°F Through 194 °VF), Not More Than 
Three Current-Carrying Conductors in Raceway, Cable, or Earth (Directly Buried), Based on Ambient Temperature of 30°C (86°F)
Size AWG 
or kcmil
60°C
(140°F)
75°C
(167°F)
90°C
(194°F)
60°C
(140°F)
75°C
(167°F)
90°C
(194°F)
Size AWG 
or kcmil
Types TW, 
UF
Types RHW, 
THHW, THW, 
THWN, XHHW, 
USE, ZW
Types TBS, SA, SIS, FEP, 
FEPB, Ml, RHH, RHW-2, 
THHN, THHW, THW-2, 
THWN-2, USE-2, XHH, 
XHHW, XHHW-2, ZW-2
Types TW, 
UF
Types RHW, 
THHW, THW, 
THWN, XHHW, 
USE
Types TBS, SA, SIS, 
THHN, THHW, THW-
2, THWN-2, RHH, 
RHW-2, USE-2, XHH, 
XHHW, XHHW-2, 
ZW-2
COPPER
ALUMINUM OR COPPER-CLAD ALUMINUM
18
16
14*
12*
10*
8
—
—
20
25
30
40
—
—
20
25
35
50
14
18
25
30
40
55
—
—
—
20
25
30
—
—
—
20
30
40
—
—
—
25
35
45
—
—
—
12*
10*
8
6
4
3
2
1
55
70
85
95
110
65
85
100
115
130
75
95
110
130
150
40
55
65
75
85
50
65
75
90
100
60
75
85
100
115
6
4
3
2
1
1/0
2/0
3/0
4/0
125
145
165
195
150
175
200
230
170
195
225
260
100
115
130
150
120
135
155
180
135
150
175
205
1/0
2/0
3/0
4/0
250
300
350
400
500
215
240
260
280
320
255
285
310
335
380
290
320
350
380
430
170
190
210
225
260
205
230
250
270
310
230
255
280
305
350
250
300
350
400
500
600
700
750
800
900
355
385
400
410
435
420
460
475
490
520
475
520
535
555
585
285
310
320
330
355
340
375
385
395
425
385
420
435
450
480
600
700
750
800
900
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
455
495
520
545
560
545
590
625
650
665
615
665
705
735
750
375
405
435
455
470
445
485
520
545
560
500
545
585
615
630
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
CORRECTION FACTORS
Ambient 
Temp. (°C)
For ambient temperatures other than 30°C (86°F), multiply the allowable ampacities shown above by the appropriate
factor shown below
Ambient 
Temp. (°F)
21–25
1.08
1.05
1.04
1.08
1.05
1.04
70–77
26–30
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
78–86
31–35
0.91
0.94
0.96
0.91
0.94
0.96
87–95
36–40
0.82
0.88
0.91
0.82
0.88
0.91
96–104
41–45
0.71
0.82
0.87
0.71
0.82
0.87
105–113
46–50
0.58
0.75
0.82
0.58
0.75
0.82
114–122
51–55
0.41
0.67
0.76
0.41
0.67
0.76
123–131
56–60
—
0.58
0.71
—
0.58
0.71
132–140
61–70
—
0.33
0.58
—
0.33
0.58
141–158
71–80
—
—
0.41
—
—
0.41
159–176
* See 240.4(D).
8.3
F I G U R E
Table for wire sizing. (Reprinted with permission from NFPA 70-2008, the National 
Electrical Code copyright 2008, National Fire Protection Association, Quincy, MA 02269.  
This reprinted material is not the referenced subject which is represented only by the 
standard in its entirety.)
 
 
 
201
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

202 
CHAPTER 8   Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems
No. 10 TW copper wire. Also from the table, we see the circuit would 
require a No. 8 TW aluminum conductor.
Figure 8.4 shows the manufacturer’s electrical data for a piece of equip-
ment. The wire sizes are given in the fourth column. Figure 8.5 shows the 
table of electrical characteristics of a specific model of equipment, but in this 
table the exact wire sizes are not given. However, the wire size amperages 
are given (the column headed MCA). The installation technician would use 
the wire size amperage column and the NEC® wire charts to size the wire.
Many items in the NEC® cover the sizing of electric conductors. Most 
technicians use the NEC® for reference. The preceding examples were 
given as a guide to show you how to use the NEC® charts.
!CAUTION
Use only electrical conductors that are the proper size 
for the load of the circuit according to the NEC® to 
avoid overheating and possible fire.
Calculating Voltage Drop
Figure 8.3 does not consider voltage drop, which must be calculated for 
long circuits. To calculate the voltage drop in a conductor, you must know 
the number of feet of wire that is used. The following formula is used to 
calculate voltage drop:
E  IR
For example, if No. 12 TW wire is to run 500 feet, what is the volt-
age drop over this distance when the supply voltage is 240 volts? First, 
we find the resistance of No. 12 wire from Figure 8.1. It is 1.6 ohms per 
Recommended Wire Size for Air-Cooled Packaged Equipment
Unit Model 
Number
Voltage 
Characteristics
Minimum 
Circuit 
Ampacity
Minimum 
Wire 
Size (AWG)
Maximum 
Wire 
Length (ft)
Maximum 
Overcurrent 
Protection
ACP18
ACP24
ACP30
ACP36
ACP48
ACP48
ACP60
ACP60
208/230-1-60
208/230-1-60
208/230-1-60
208/230-1-60
208/230-1-60
208/230-3-60
208/230-1-60
208/230-3-60
14
20
22
28
40
25
50
35
14
12
10
10
6
10
6
8
70
80
100
90
100
85
100
95
20
30
30
45
60
40
60
50
8.4
F I G U R E
Table of recommended wire size for an air conditioner. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Electrical data
38AK007-12, 38AKS008-12
UNIT 38
NOMINAL 
VOLTAGE (V-Ph-Hz)
VOLTAGE RANGE*
COMPR
OFM
POWER SUPPLY
Min
Max
RLA
LRA
FLA
MCA
MOCP
AK007
208/230-3-60
460-3-60
575-3-60
187
414
518
254
508
632
19.0
9.5
7.6
142
72
58
1.9
1.0
1.9
25.6
12.9
11.4
35
15
15
AK008
208/230-3-60
460-3-60
575-3-60
187
414
518
254
508
632
25.0
12.4
10.4
185
89
90
3.1
1.4
1.4
34.4
16.9
14.4
45
20
15
AK012
208/230-3-60
460-3-60
575-3-60
187
414
518
254
508
632
34.5
17.0
14.3
239
119
90
3.1
1.4
1.4
46.2
22.7
19.3
60
30
20
AKS008
208/230-3-60
380-3-60†
460-3-60
575-3-60
187
342
414
518
254
437
508
632
31.5
19.0
15.7
12.6
160
75
80
64
3.1
2.2
1.4
1.4
42.5
26.0
21.0
17.2
50
35
25
20
AKS009
208/230-3-60
380-3-60†
460-3-60
575-3-60
187
342
414
518
254
437
508
632
39.7
24.0
19.9
15.9
198
93
99
79
3.1
2.2
1.4
1.4
52.7
32.2
26.3
21.3
70
40
35
25
AKS012
208/230-3-60
380-3-60†
460-3-60
575-3-60
187
342
414
518
254
437
508
632
39.7
24.0
19.9
15.9
198
93
99
79
3.1
2.2
1.4
1.4
52.7
32.2
26.3
21.3
70
40
35
25
LEGEND
CSA – Canadian Standards Association
FLA – Full Load Amps
HACR – Heating, Air Conditioning and 
Refrigeration
LRA – Locked Rotor Amps
MCA – Minimum Circuit Amps
MOCP – Maximum Overcurrent Protection
OFM – Outdoor (Condenser) Fan Motor
RLA – Rated Load Amps
*Units are suitable for use on electrical systems 
where voltage supplied to the unit terminals is 
not below or above the listed limits.
†380-v units are export models not listed with 
UL or CSA.
NOTES:
1. In compliance with NEC (National Electrical 
Code) requirements for multimotor and com-
bination load equipment (refer to NEC Articles 
430 and 440), the overcurrent protective device 
for the unit shall be fuse or HACR breaker.
2. The MCA and MOCP values are calculated in 
accordance with the NEC, Article 440.
3. Motor RLA and LRA values are established 
in accordance with Under-writers’ Laboratories 
(UL), Standard 1995.
4. The 575-v units are CSA-listed only.
8.5
F I G U R E
Table of electrical characteristics of a large condensing unit. (Courtesy of Carrier 
Corporation)
 
 
Section 8.1   Sizing Wire 
203
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

204 
CHAPTER 8   Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems
1000 feet. From Figure 8.3, we find the ampacity of No. 12 TW wire. It is 
20 amperes. Substituting in the formula E  IR, we find E 20 .8 (1.6 ohms 
per 1000 feet  .8 ohm per 500 feet). The voltage drop over 500 feet is 
16 volts. Subtracted from the supply voltage of 240 volts, this gives 
224 volts supplied to the equipment.
In most cases, the wiring that is run to heating, cooling, or refrigera-
tion equipment will not exceed 75 feet to 100 feet. Then the wire size can 
be read directly from the table in Figure 8.3 because the voltage drop can 
be ignored on short-distance circuits. (There is a correction factor in the 
NEC® tables if the temperature exceeds 30°C.)
8.2 
DISCONNECT SWITCHES
All heating, cooling, and refrigeration equipment should have some 
means for disconnecting the power supply at the equipment. The neu-
tral conductor, if present, must not be disconnected by this device. Some 
equipment has a built-in method for disconnecting the power, such as a 
circuit breaker or fuse blocks. However, in most cases, a disconnecting 
device must be supplied and installed by an electrician or the installa-
tion technician. Disconnect switches are relatively simple and easy to 
install once the correct selection is made. Disconnect switches are used to 
provide a positive way to disconnect the power source to the equipment 
being serviced by the technician. The technician should lock the discon-
nect in the open position when working on equipment to prevent shock 
in case someone tries to close it.
A disconnect switch is a two- or three-pole switch mounted in an enclo-
sure. The disconnect switch is basically a convenient, easy, and safe means 
of disconnecting power from the equipment for servicing and testing the 
equipment or for safety purposes. The switch can be purchased with or 
without a space for fuses. Using fuses provides overcurrent protection for 
the conductors and equipment. In most cases, disconnect switches have a 
grounding lug mounted in the enclosure. The switches can have different 
arrangements. For example, a four-pole–three-fuse switch would be used 
on a three-phase circuit and would have a ground lug. A three-pole–three-
fuse switch would be used for three-phase circuits and would not have a 
ground lug. A three-pole–two-fuse switch would be used on single-phase 
circuits and would have a ground lug. Figure 8.6 shows the schematics of 
two disconnect switches, and Figure 8.7 shows these switches.
Disconnect switches can be purchased for general duty or heavy duty. 
The heavy-duty disconnect switch would be installed for equipment 
requiring frequent switching. The general-duty switch would be used for 
equipment requiring infrequent switching.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 8.2   Disconnect Switches 
205
Disconnect switches. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
8.7
F I G U R E
(a) Three-wire–two-fuse disconnect
(b) Four-wire–three-fuse disconnect
Schematic diagram of two fusible disconnect switches. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
8.6
F I G U R E
(a) Three-wire–two-fuse disconnect
(b) Four-wire–three-fuse disconnect
Enclosures
The type of enclosure that the disconnect switch mounts in is determined 
by the conditions existing in the area of installation. A general type of enclo-
sure could only be used where there were no problems of moisture, dust, 
or explosive fumes. A rain-tight disconnect enclosure could be used in areas 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

206 
CHAPTER 8   Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems
of moisture but not where dust or explosive fumes exist. An  explosion-proof 
enclosure could be used in any location, but it is much more expensive than 
other enclosures and hence is not used without reason.
Fusible and Nonfusible Switches
The purpose of a disconnect switch can be twofold. First, it can be used 
as a means of disconnecting the supply power going to the equipment. 
Second, it can be used as a safety device when fused correctly. If the 
only purpose of a disconnect switch is to break the power supply, then a 
nonfusible disconnect switch should be used. But if a means of protection 
for the wire or equipment is needed, a fusible disconnect switch should 
be used with the proper fuse sizes. Most equipment manufacturers will 
give the fuse sizes needed in the installation instructions. If fuse sizes are 
not given, the National Electrical Code® should be consulted.
The selection of a fusible disconnect switch is determined by duty, 
enclosure type, and size. Fuses are designed so that one size covers sev-
eral different ampacities. The same size fuse can be purchased to cover 
from 1 to 30 amperes, from 30 to 60 amperes, from 70 to 100 amperes, and 
from 100 to 200 amperes. There are larger sizes available, but they are not 
used frequently. Disconnect switches are rated 30 amperes, 60 amperes, 
100 amperes, 200 amperes, 400 amperes, and 600 amperes. A 30-ampere 
disconnect switch would 
be used for any load from 
1 ampere to 30 amperes. 
A 200-ampere disconnect 
switch can be used with 
fuses from 100 amperes 
to 200 amperes. Other 
determining factors of 
the switches can easily 
be selected from a manu-
facturer’s catalog.
Figure 8.8 shows a dis-
connect switch installed 
on a piece of equipment. 
In the installation of a 
disconnect switch, it is 
imperative that the wir-
ing connections be made 
tightly. The line voltage 
wires should always be 
connected at the top of 
Disconnect switch installed on equipment. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
8.8
F I G U R E
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the enclosure. The load or wires supplying the unit should be connected to 
the load side or bottom of the fuses. At no time should wires be installed 
in an enclosure without the proper connection.
!CAUTION
The technician should make certain that all circuits are 
protected with properly sized fuses or breakers accord-
ing to the National Electrical Code.®
8.3 
FUSIBLE LOAD CENTERS
Fusible load centers, or breaker panels, are electric panels that supply the 
circuits in a structure with power and protect those circuits with fuses. 
Figure 8.9 shows a typical fusible load center and its schematic. Fusible 
load centers were popular until about 1968, when breaker panels gained 
 
 
Section 8.3   Fusible Load Centers 
207
Fusible load center. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
8.9
F I G U R E
(a) Schematic
(b) Load center
Available
= circuit =
space
4
= Plug =
fuses
Available
= circuit =
space
1
Fuse
pullout
1
Fuse
pullout
S/N
S/N
**BFM 32B–200A
12 Plug fuses and
12 Plug fuses and
2 Pull outs
Drawing guide
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

208 
CHAPTER 8   Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems
prominence in the market. Air-conditioning technicians often find them-
selves working on fusible load centers when the owner of an older home 
decides to have air conditioning installed. Many fusible load centers are 
still in existence, so technicians must understand them and know how to 
make the correct connections.
The newest fusible load centers are built with the capacity of taking 
additional fuse blocks in the main lugs, which supply power to the entire 
panel, at any time if a space is available. This capacity allows the electri-
cian to install the additional circuits required for any particular structure. 
It is relatively easy to add a circuit to the late-model panels by merely 
inserting the fuse blocks and screwing them in.
8.4 
BREAKER PANELS
Breaker panels are usually installed in residences and industrial buildings 
today. Breakers are devices that detect any overload above their rating in 
a circuit and open the circuit automatically. The breaker must then be 
reset manually.
Breakers can be obtained for almost any application, no matter 
how large or small. Breakers are made with one, two, or three poles. 
The poles denote how many hot legs are being fed from the breaker to 
the appliance. A one-pole breaker supplies one hot leg and makes up a 
120-volt–single-phase circuit. A two-pole breaker supplies two hot legs 
and makes a 240-volt–single-phase circuit. A three-pole breaker supplies 
three hot legs and makes up a three-phase circuit at the supplied voltage. 
Breakers are available with amperage ratings between 1 ampere and sev-
eral hundred amperes, depending on the application. Figure 8.10 shows 
one-pole, two-pole, and three-pole breakers.
One-pole, two-pole, and three-pole breakers. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
8.10
F I G U R E
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Construction
Breaker panels are built in sev-
eral different forms, but they 
all serve the same purpose. 
Different manufacturers build 
breaker panels that are similar 
in design, but the breakers from 
different manufacturers do not 
usually fit each others’ panels. 
However, several manufacturers’ 
equipment does interchange.
Breaker panels are built 
with or without main break-
ers. A main breaker installed 
in the breaker panel provides a 
main switch in the panel and 
adds a means of overload pro-
tection for the entire panel. A 
breaker panel can be obtained 
with main lugs and no main 
breaker, but the breaker should 
have some means of protection. 
Breaker panels are rated by how 
many amperes the main lugs can carry and by the rating of the main break-
er. Figure 8.11 shows the main lugs of a breaker panel with a main breaker.
Breaker panels are built for use with single-phase or three-phase 
systems and for 250 volts or 600 volts. The breaker panel in the average 
residence is rated at 150 amperes or 200 amperes and is a general-duty 
type. The breakers snap into a residential panel (as they do in some com-
mercial and industrial panels). Figure 8.12 shows a residential breaker 
panel and its schematic.
The commercial and industrial breaker panel can meet almost any 
specifications that the customer requires. The commercial and industrial 
panels are built for more rugged duty than are the usual residential pan-
els. Most commercial and industrial panels use breakers that attach to 
main lugs with screws. Figure 8.13 shows a typical breaker panel, along 
with its schematic, used in commercial and industrial applications.
Installation
The installation of a breaker into a breaker panel causes little or no trou-
ble. Breakers connect in some panels by attachment to the main lugs with 
clips. Other breakers are attached to the main lugs by screws. Technicians 
 
 
Section 8.4   Breaker Panels 
209
Breaker panel showing main lugs and main 
breaker. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
8.11
F I G U R E
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

210 
CHAPTER 8   Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems
should be familiar with breakers and breaker panels to order the correct 
breaker for a particular use.
In most cases, breaker panels have some open spaces. If a situation 
arises where there is no spare opening, a breaker with two circuits can 
replace a standard one-circuit breaker and is shown in Figure 8.14. Most 
manufacturers produce this type of breaker.
Figure 8.15 shows a breaker being installed in a breaker panel. Care 
should be taken to ensure the breaker is correctly aligned with the proper 
clip in the panel. When installing a breaker that is attached to the lug 
with a screw, make certain that the connection is tight. Before installing 
a breaker in a panel, you should cut off the power supply to the panel.
!CAUTION
Wear shoes that have insulating soles and heels that 
are in good condition.
8.12
Residential breaker panel. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
F I G U R E
(a) Schematic
(b) Panel
Industrial breaker panel. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
8.13
F I G U R E
(a) Schematic
(b) Panel
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 8.5   Distribution Centers 
211
A two-circuit breaker 
used to replace a 
normal-sized breaker. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
8.14
F I G U R E
Breaker being installed in 
a breaker panel. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
8.15
F I G U R E
On rare occasions circuit breakers are faulty. Either they cannot 
be reset or they open the circuit on a lower amperage than the rating. 
If either condition exists, the breaker must be replaced. A breaker can be 
checked for resetting if a voltage reading is taken between the ground and 
the breaker. If voltage is available to the load side of the breaker under 
load, the breaker is good. In rare cases, a breaker could be stuck in the 
closed position, and if so, it should be replaced. The breaker that trips at 
a lower-than-rated amperage should be checked with an actual ampere 
reading of the circuit.
8.5 
DISTRIBUTION CENTERS
Distribution centers are designed to distribute the electrical supply to 
several places in a large structure. Their use is largely confined to com-
mercial and industrial applications. Figure 8.16 shows schematically the 
layout of a distribution system in a structure. In Figure 8.16, Panel A is 
the main distribution point between the electric service and other panels 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

212 
CHAPTER 8   Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems
Schematic of the electrical distribution system of a large structure. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
8.16
F I G U R E
Electrical service
Panel BA
Panel A
distribution center
Panel B
distribution center
To fan coil unit
To air
compressor
To condensing
unit 1
To condensing
unit 2
To other loads
in structure
Panel AA
lighting
100 A
200 A
200 A
30 A 30 A
30 A 30 A
60 A
60 A
60 A
60 A
and the heating and air-conditioning 
equipment.
Figure 8.17 shows a modern distri-
bution panel. In a very large structure, 
it would not be unusual to find several 
distribution centers. A distribution cen-
ter often saves a great deal of money 
because many circuits are shortened 
and only the main circuit is lengthy. 
Distribution centers can be of the fus-
ible or circuit-breaker design. The fus-
ible design is the more popular mainly 
because of its moderate cost. Larger 
breakers are extremely expensive and 
hence are not used often.
Modern distribution panel. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
8.17
F I G U R E
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.6 
 INSTALLING ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS FOR REFRIGERATION, HEATING, 
AND AIR-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
The installation of refrigeration, heating, and air-conditioning equipment 
requires a power source being supplied to the equipment for proper oper-
ation. In almost all cases this power source will be alternating current that 
is supplied through conductors from the power distribution equipment in 
the structure. Common power distribution equipment in structures today 
includes fusible load centers, breaker panels, or large distribution centers. 
Fusible load centers and medium-duty breaker panels are used in most 
residences to distribute the electrical power to individual circuits within 
the structure. Distribution panels and heavy-duty breaker panels are used 
in most commercial and industrial applications for power distribution.
In addition to the power source there must be a path for the electri-
cal energy to flow. It is the responsibility of the installation mechanic 
to determine the correct type and size of conductor that is to be used to 
supply the electrical energy to the equipment. The mechanic must also 
determine what type of conduit or covering, if any, is to be used to protect 
the conductors. Many different types of conduit are available to protect 
electrical conductors from the elements, including electrical metallic 
tubing, rigid conduit, plastic flexible conduit, polyvinylchloride (PVC) 
 conduit, and many others.
The electrical circuit supplying power to the equipment must have a 
means to protect the wire and a method to disconnect the power when 
service is required. Overcurrent protection could come in the form of a 
circuit breaker or fuse. In order to protect the conductors supplying the 
electrical energy and the equipment, the installation technician will have 
to correctly size and install the chosen method of protection. The selec-
tion of the protective devices should meet the National Electrical Code® as 
well as local and state codes. In most applications, some form of a dis-
connect switch is used to interrupt the power supply to the equipment in 
the event that equipment needs service or needs to be shut down.
!CAUTION
Make sure that extension cords being used are in 
good condition.
!CAUTION
Use properly grounded tools connected to properly 
grounded circuits.
 
 
Section 8.6   Installing Electrical Circuits 
213
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

214 
CHAPTER 8   Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems
There are many different types of disconnect switches that are used 
in this industry. One of the most popular types is the fusible disconnect 
switches shown in Figure 8.18. Other types of disconnects are used in the 
industry and vary widely in style and design. All disconnects serve the 
same purpose and basically are wired in the same manner. The incom-
ing energy source is connected to the L1 and L2 or line terminals in the 
disconnect, while the supply to the equipment is connected to the T1 and 
T2 or load terminals in the disconnect.
!CAUTION
Make sure all electrical connections are tight.
When installing a piece of air-conditioning equipment, the technician 
must determine the location of electrical energy that will be supplied to 
the selected equipment. In most residences, this supply will be from a 
fusible load center or a circuit breaker load center as shown in Figure 8.12. 
In commercial and industrial applications, a circuit breaker panel or 
Fusible disconnect switches used in the industry. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
8.18
F I G U R E
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

distribution panel will supply the electrical energy to the  selected equip-
ment. Once the source location has been determined, the technician 
must determine how to get the electrical energy from the source to the 
equipment. Weather-resistant cable or conduit should be used from 
the disconnect to the outdoor unit. All codes that are applicable, the 
National Electrical Code®, and all state and local codes should be followed 
in the installation and sizing of the conductors supplying the load. The 
mechanic will have to make the proper connections at the power source 
whether it is service entrance equipment or a disconnect switch. From 
the source, conductors will have to be connected between the source and 
equipment with connections made at the load (equipment). Figure 8.19 
shows a drawing of the electrical circuit between the power source—in 
this case, a circuit breaker load center—and selected equipment. Figure 8.20 
shows a drawing of the electrical circuit between the power source—in 
this case, a disconnect switch—and selected equipment. Figure 8.21 
shows an electrical connection between the disconnect and outdoor unit. 
Figure 8.22 shows the basic circuit requirements for the electrical con-
nections of a residential air-conditioning or heat pump condensing unit.
!CAUTION
Technicians should not stand in damp or wet areas 
when working with electric circuits with the power on.
 
 
Section 8.6   Installing Electrical Circuits  
215
Electrical circuit between a circuit breaker load center and selected 
equipment. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
8.19
F I G U R E
Load center
Furnace
Power supply
to disconnect
Disconnect
switch
Air conditioner
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

216 
CHAPTER 8   Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems
Disconnect
Air conditioner
Power from 
electrical panel
in structure
Structure
Electrical circuit between a disconnect and selected 
equipment. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
F I G U R E8.20
Photograph of an electrical connection 
between the disconnect and outdoor unit. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
F I G U R E8.21
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 BRANCH-CIRCUIT  
 OVERCURRENT  
 PROTECTION:  
• MUST  BE  ABLE  
   TO  CARRY  
   STARTING  CURRENT.
• SIZE  ACCORDING  
   TO  DATA  ON  THE  
   EQUIPMENT  LABEL.  
• MUST  BE  FUSES  
   UNLESS  LABEL  
   ON  EQUIPMENT  
   SHOWS  THAT  
   HACR  BREAKERS  
   ARE  PERMITTED.
 DISCONNECTING  MEANS:
• SELECT  SIZE   BASED  ON  NAMEPLATE  
   RATED-LOAD  CURRENT  OR  BRANCH-
   CIRCUIT  SELECTION  CURRENT—
   WHICHEVER  IS  GREATER—AND  LOCKED    
   ROTOR  CURRENT.
• AMPERE  RATING  OF  SWITCH  MUST  BE  
   AT  LEAST  115%  OF  NAMEPLATE  RATED-
   LOAD  CURRENT  OR  BRANCH-CIRCUIT  
   SELECTION  CURRENT—WHICHEVER  
   IS  GREATER.
• MUST  ALSO  BE  HORSEPOWER  RATED.  
   CHECK  TABLES  430-148,  149,  150,  AND  
   151  TO  COMPARE  THE  RATED-LOAD  
   CURRENT,  BRANCH-CIRCUIT  SELECTION  
   CURRENT,  AND  HORSEPOWER  RATING.  
• MUST  BE  WITHIN  SIGHT  OF  EQUIPMENT.  
 BRANCH-CIRCUIT  CONDUCTORS:
• THE  CONDUCTOR  AMPACITY  RATING  
   REQUIRED  FOR  THE  AIR-CONDITIONING  
   UNIT  IS  FOUND  ON  THE  LABEL.  THIS  
   HAS  BEEN  DETERMINED  BY  THE  
   MANUFACTURER  TAKING  INTO  
   CONSIDERATION  THE  MOTOR  
   COMPRESSOR  CURRENT,  FAN  MOTOR  
   CURRENT,  AND  HEATER  CURRENT.  THIS  
   IS  GENERALLY  125%  OF  THE  LARGEST  
   MOTOR  PLUS  THE  FULL-LOAD  RATING  
   OF  THE  REST  OF  THE  EQUIPMENT’S  
   LOADS,  SUCH  AS  FANS  AND  HEATERS.
 OVERLOAD  PROTECTION:
• THIS  IS  USUALLY  AN  INTEGRAL  
   PART  OF  THE  EQUIPMENT,  SUPPLIED  
   BY  THE  MANUFACTURER.
 LABEL:
• MANUFACTURER’S  NAME  
• VOLTAGE
• FREQUENCY
• PHASES
• MINIMUM  CIRCUIT  AMPACITY
• MAXIMUM  RATING  OF  BRANCH-
   CIRCUITS,  SHORT-CIRCUIT,  AND  
   GROUND-FAULT  PROTECTIVE  DEVICE
• WILL STATE  “MAXIMUM  SIZE  FUSE”  
   OR  “MAXIMUM  SIZE  FUSE  OR  
   HACR  BREAKER”
HERMETICALLY
SEALED  MOTOR
FAN
MOTOR
TYPICAL
AIR-CONDITIONING
UNIT
The basic requirements for the electrical connection of a residential air conditioner or heat 
pump. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
8.22
F I G U R E
 
 
Section 8.6   Installing Electrical Circuits  
217
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

218 
CHAPTER 8   Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems
Depending upon geographic location, in some cases the heating and 
air-conditioning technicians can only make connections to the equip-
ment, and other electrical connections must be made by licensed electri-
cians. This is determined by local and state codes.
The installation mechanic should follow all applicable codes as 
well as the installation instructions furnished by the manufacturer. 
Installation diagrams are usually furnished by the manufacturer and are 
located inside the equipment.
!CAUTION
When working with ladders, make sure that they are 
not allowed to come in contact with power lines.
SUMMARY
For proper installation and maintenance of heating, cooling, and refrig-
eration equipment, industry technicians should be familiar with the elec-
tric circuits and circuit components of a structure. The life and safety of 
the equipment depend on the use of the correct size of wiring. Voltage 
drop, insulation type, enclosure, and safety are the determining factors 
in wire sizing. Manufacturers usually provide instructions on the size of 
wire to use with their equipment, but in some cases the technician must 
calculate the size. The National Electrical Code® is a guide that should be 
used in sizing wire properly.
Various types of electric panels are used in the industry. The discon-
nect switch, sometimes called the safety switch, is commonly used on 
equipment, along with another electric panel. In most structures, the 
electric panels are not located close enough to the equipment to be con-
sidered safe for disconnecting the equipment. Therefore, in most cases 
disconnect switches should be installed on or close to the equipment.
The fusible load center or breaker panel is used in most residences. 
The breaker panel is also popular in commercial and industrial pan-
els. Breakers are designed to trip or break the circuit when an overload 
occurs. Some breakers clip to the main lugs; others screw to them.
The distribution center is used in commercial and industrial plants 
as a means of distributing power to other electric panels in the structure. 
Service technicians should be familiar with power distribution because of 
the many voltage ranges of modern equipment. The mechanic or installer 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Review Questions 
219
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
C H A P T E R  8  R E V I E W
RQ1 
Which of the following characteristics apply to cop-
per being used as a conductor?
a. good mechanical strength
b. ability to resist corrosion
c. easily joined together
d. all of the above
RQ2 
Which of the following is a disadvantage of using 
aluminum wire?
a. conduction of electricity
b. corrodes easily
c. thicker insulation necessary
d. all of the above
RQ3 
What are the four factors that should be consid-
ered in sizing circuit conductors?
RQ4 
How would you determine the voltage drop in a 
circuit?
RQ5 
What is a disconnect switch?
RQ6 
The most popular conductor used in the industry is 
__________.
RQ7 
On what application would you use the following 
types of electrical enclosures?
a. general duty
b. waterproof
c. explosion proof
RQ8 
What is the difference between a fusible disconnect 
switch and a nonfusible disconnect switch?
RQ9 
What determines the type of insulation surrounding 
the conductor?
a. application
b. size
c. number of conductors
d. none of the above
RQ10 
How many hot legs would a three-pole breaker 
supply to an appliance?
RQ11 
When determining the size and installation of an 
electrical circuit, which of the following guides 
should be followed?
a. National Electrical Code®
b. local codes
c. state codes
d. all of the above
RQ12 
What is the purpose of a disconnect switch?
RQ13 
What is the difference between a fusible load cen-
ter and a breaker load center? Which is primarily 
used in the industry today?
RQ14 
What is a circuit breaker?
RQ15 
How can a faulty circuit breaker be detected?
RQ16 
How are circuit breakers attached to the main lugs 
of an electrical panel?
RQ17 
What is a distribution center and what is its 
primary purpose?
must be able to pick up power out of any type of electric panel. In many 
areas, industry technicians are responsible for the total installation of 
equipment, including power wiring. In other areas, power wiring must be 
done by an electrician.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  8  R E V I E W
220 
CHAPTER 8   Installation of Heating, Cooling, and Refrigeration Systems
RQ18 
A distribution center is used in which of the follow-
ing applications?
a. residential
b. commercial
c. industrial
d. both b and c
RQ19 
Which of the following are true about the 
American Wire Gauge?
a. smallest wire is No. 12
b. largest wire is No. 4/0
c. wires larger than 4/0 are sized in circular mils
d. both b and c
RQ20 
True or False: Fusible load centers are usually 
installed in residences today.
RQ21 
What connects the breaker to the source of power 
in a breaker panel?
a. breaker clips
b.  breaker connects directly to incoming power 
source
c. main lug
d. breaker screws
RQ22 
What would you do in a situation where there is 
no spare opening in a breaker panel for the instal-
lation of equipment?
RQ23 
True or False: In all areas of the United States, air-
conditioning technicians can install the conductor 
from the distribution panel to the equipment.
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
RQ24 
What size wire would be required for a circuit 
requiring 100 amperes?
RQ25 
What would be the voltage drop in an electrical 
circuit if the current draw was 65 amps and 
the  circuit was 750 feet long with No. 6 TW 
 conductor?
RQ26 
What size wire would be required for the power 
supply of the following packaged unit?
 
Compressor—45 amps
 
Indoor fan motor—6 amps
 
Condenser fan motor—6 amps
RQ27 
What is the purpose of a main breaker?
RQ28 
What size wire would be required for an AK012 
with a power supply of 208/240–3  –60 Hz with 
the specifications given in Figure 8.5?
RQ29 
What size wire would be used for a fan motor 
if the figure for full load amps of the motor is 
14 amperes?
RQ30 
What is the resistance of a No. 4 wire if the circuit 
is 500 feet long?
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 8 in the Lab Manual.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗ Explain magnetism and the part it plays in the operation of electric motors.
◗ Explain torque and the purpose of different types of single-phase motors.
◗ Explain the operation of a basic electric motor.
◗ Understand how to operate, install, reverse the rotation (if possible), and 
diagnose problems in a shaded-pole motor.
◗ Understand the purpose of capacitors in the operation of a single-phase 
motor and be able to explain the difference between a starting and running 
capacitor.
◗ Correctly diagnose the condition of any capacitor and, using capacitor rules, 
be able to substitute a capacitor if a direct replacement is not available.
◗ Explain how to operate, install, troubleshoot, and repair (if possible) 
 split-phase and capacitor-start motors.
◗ Explain how to operate, install, troubleshoot, and repair (if possible) 
 permanent split-capacitor motors.
◗ Explain how to operate, install, troubleshoot, and repair (if possible) 
 capacitor-start–capacitor-run motors.
◗ Understand how to operate, install, reverse, and troubleshoot three-phase motors.
◗ Explain how to operate, install, troubleshoot, and repair (if possible) 
 electronically commutated motors.
◗ Identify the common, start, and run terminals of a single-phase compressor motor.
Basic Electric Motors
C H A P T E R
221
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

KEY TERMS
Capacitor 
Microfarad
Capacitor-start motor 
Permanent magnet
Capacitor-start– 
Permanent split-capacitor motor
    capacitor-run motor 
Rotor
Delta winding 
Running capacitor
Electromagnet 
Shaded-pole motor
Electronically commutated  
Split-phase motor
    motor (ECM) 
Squirrel cage rotor
Flux 
Star winding
Hermetic compressor 
Starting capacitor
Induced magnetism 
Stator
Magnetic field 
Three-phase motor
Magnetism 
Torque
 
INTRODUCTION
The electric motor changes electric energy into mechanical energy. 
Motors are used to drive compressors, fans, pumps, dampers, and any 
other device that needs energy to power its movement.
There are many different types of electric motors with different run-
ning and starting characteristics. Most single-phase motors are designed 
and used according to their running and starting torque. Torque is the 
strength that a motor produces by turning, either while starting or run-
ning. This chapter covers most types of motors available today and how 
they are used in the heating, cooling, and refrigeration industry. All elec-
tric motors should be properly grounded.
We begin our study with a discussion of magnetism, an effect that is 
needed to operate motors, relays, contactors, and other electric devices.
9.1 
MAGNETISM
Magnetism is the physical phenomenon that includes the attraction of 
an object for iron and is exhibited by a permanent magnet or an electric 
current. Magnetism is produced in many different ways, but regardless 
of how it is produced, the effect is basically the same. The magnetic field 
of the earth, for example, is the same as the magnetism in a horseshoe 
222 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 9.1   Magnetism 
223
magnet, the magnetism produced by a transformer, and the magnetism 
produced by an electromagnet. A good example of magnetism is the abil-
ity of a horseshoe magnet to pick up articles made of iron. The most com-
mon example of magnetism is the reaction of a compass to the earth’s 
magnetic field.
All magnets have two poles, a north pole and a south pole. If the north 
pole of a bar magnet is brought close to the north pole of another bar 
magnet, the magnets will repel each other, as shown in Figure 9.1. If the 
south pole of one bar magnet is brought close to the north pole of another 
bar magnet, the magnets will attract each other and come together, as 
shown in Figure 9.2. Therefore, like poles of magnets repel each other and 
unlike poles attract.
Magnetic Field
The magnetic lines of force of a magnet that flow between the north 
and south poles are called flux. These lines of force are highlighted in 
Figure 9.3. The area that the magnetic force operates in is called a mag-
netic field. Magnetic fields can flow through materials, depending on 
the strength of the magnetic field. A magnetic field is best conducted 
through soft iron. That is why certain parts of motors and other electric 
devices are made of soft iron.
N
S
N
S
9.1
F I G U R E
Repulsion of like poles of 
two bar magnets. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
S
S
N
N
9.2
F I G U R E
Attraction of unlike poles 
of two bar magnets. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

224 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
Induced Magnetism
Induced magnetism is created when a piece of iron is placed in a mag-
netic field. The important fact to remember about a magnetic field is that 
the closer an object is to the magnet, the stronger the magnetic field is 
on that object. Therefore, if we insert an iron bar within 2 or 3 inches 
of a magnetic field, we induce a stronger field than if we placed the bar 
6 inches from the field.
Two types of magnets are in use today: the permanent magnet and 
the electromagnet. The permanent magnet is a piece of magnetic mate-
rial that has been magnetized and can hold its magnetic strength for a 
reasonable length of time. The permanent magnet must be made of a 
magnetic material, such as iron, nickel, cobalt, or chromium. Some non-
magnetic materials, such as glass, rock, wood, paper, and air, cannot be 
made magnetic but can be penetrated by a magnetic field.
The electromagnet is a magnet produced through electricity. When 
an electron flow is in a conductor, a magnetic field is created around the 
conductor, as highlighted in Figure 9.4. The larger the electron flow, the 
stronger the magnetic field. Therefore, if we take an iron core and wind a 
current-carrying conductor around it, the iron core will become a magnet, 
as shown in Figure 9.5. In Figure 9.5 the magnetic field is highlighted. The 
Flux
S
N
9.3
F I G U R E
Magnetic field of a 
bar magnet. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Magnetic field
Conductor 
9.4
F I G U R E
Magnetic field created around a 
current-carrying wire. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

electron flow and the number of turns of the conductor around the core 
determine the strength of an electromagnet. Figure 9.6 shows an electro-
magnet that is used as a solenoid in a contactor.
Magnetism is important in the heating, cooling, and refrigeration 
industry because of its many uses in the operation of electric devices. 
Motors require magnetism to create a rotating motion. Relays and contac-
tors use magnetism to open and close a set of contacts. All of the devices 
discussed in this chapter use magnetism in some way.
Wire (conductor)
Iron core
Magnetic field
9.5
F I G U R E
Magnetic field of an iron core 
when a current-carrying conduc-
tor is wound around the core. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
9.6
F I G U R E
An electromagnet used as a solenoid in a contactor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 9.1   Magnetism 
225
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

226 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
9.2 
BASIC ELECTRIC MOTORS
Electric motors are common devices in the heating, cooling, and refrigera-
tion industry. Motors are used to create a rotating motion and drive com-
ponents that need to be turned. Motors power compressors, pumps, fans, 
timers, and any other device that must be driven with a rotating motion.
In an electric motor, electric energy is changed to mechanical energy 
by magnetism, which causes the motor to turn. The method by which 
magnetism causes motors to rotate uses the principle that like poles of 
magnets repel and unlike poles attract. Suppose a simple magnet is placed 
on a pivot and used as a rotor (the rotating part of an electric motor) and 
a horseshoe magnet is used as a stator (the stationary part of a motor), as 
shown in Figure 9.7(a). Movement will be obtained by the repulsion and 
attraction of the poles of a magnet. The rotor would turn until the unlike 
poles are attracted to each other, as shown in Figure 9.7(b).
To make an electric motor move continuously, we must have a rotat-
ing magnetic field, which is produced by the reversal of the poles, or the 
polarity, in the rotor or stator. An alternating current of 60 hertz changes 
direction 120 times per second. Therefore, the current would change the 
polarity of the stator poles on each reversal of current. If the rotor has a 
permanent polarity, as shown in Figure 9.8, then the changes of polar-
ity in the stator would cause the rotor to move. Therefore, if alternating 
Stator
Rotor
(a) Initial position of the rotor
(b) Movement of the rotor due to the
 
repulsion and attraction of the
 
magnet's poles
N
S
N
S
Stator
Rotor
N
S
N
S
9.7
F I G U R E
A simple electric motor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

current changes direction, causing a polarity change, 120 times a second, 
then the motor will turn in a continuous motion because the poles of the 
stator will be continuously repelling and attracting the permanent poles 
of the rotor. Figure 9.8 shows the motor in one complete cycle of current 
or one-sixtieth of a second. The movement of the motor is caused by the 
magnetic field of the stator as it rotates through its alternations of cur-
rent. Figure 9.9 shows the windings of an electric motor. The windings of 
the motor are a part of the stator.
9.9
F I G U R E
Winding of an electric motor. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Rotor
Stator
N
N
S
S
Beginning of cycle
L2
L1
Rotor
Stator
S
S
N
N
One-half of cycle
Two-pole motor, 3600 rpm
L2
L1
Rotor
Stator
N
N
S
S
Full cycle
L2
L1
Complete cycle of operation of an electric motor. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
F I G U R E9.8
 
Section 9.2   Basic Electric Motors 
227
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

228 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
In motors, the rotor is not a permanent magnet, as we stated in the 
previous explanation. The squirrel cage rotor shown in Figure 9.10 is 
the most commonly used rotor today. The squirrel cage rotor derives its 
name from its cagelike appearance. In the squirrel cage rotor, copper or 
aluminum bars are evenly spaced in the steel portion of the rotor and 
connected by an aluminum or copper end ring as shown in the drawing in 
Figure 9.11. The squirrel cage rotor produces an inductive magnetic field 
within itself when the stator is energized.
The most common motors operate much like a transformer, with the 
stator being the primary magnetic field and the rotor being a movable sec-
ondary magnetic field. The rotor will have magnetism induced into it from 
the stator, and its magnetic poles will be permanent. The magnetic poles 
of the stator are moving at the rate of the alternations of the current.
9.3 
TYPES OF ELECTRIC MOTORS
The industry uses all kinds of AC motors to rotate the many different 
devices that require rotation in a complete system. Different motors are 
needed for different tasks because not all motors have the same running 
Welds holding copper
bars to end ring
Welds at 
all joints
Copper 
bars 
Shaft 
Iron core 
Copper 
end ring 
9.10
9.11
F I G U R E
F I G U R E
Squirrel cage rotor.
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Drawing of a squirrel cage 
rotor. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and starting characteristics. This fact, along with the increased cost of 
stronger motors, allows the industry to use the right motor for the right 
job. For example, many compressors require a motor with a high starting 
torque and a good running efficiency. Small propeller fans use motors 
with a low starting torque and average running efficiency.
Motor Strength
The starting methods, or strengths, are generally used to classify motors 
into types. Motors are selected mainly because of the starting torque 
(power) required for the motor to perform its function. Six general types 
of motors are used in environmental systems: shaded pole, split phase, 
permanent split capacitor, capacitor start–capacitor run and capacitor 
start, three phase, and electronically commutated. There are others, such 
as the repulsion-start–induction-run and series motors. However, these 
are outdated or not commonly used in the industry. The starting torques 
of the six general types of induction motors, expressed as a percentage of 
their running torque, are as follows: shaded pole, 100%; split phase, 200%; 
permanent split capacitor, 200%; capacitor start–capacitor run and capac-
itor start, 300%; three phase, 600%; and electronically commutated, 200%.
Motor Speed
The following formula can be used to determine the speed of an electric 
motor with a load:
Speed  Flow reversals (frequency) / second (hertz)  120
Number of poles
One cycle of alternating current has two flow reversals. If 60 hertz alter-
nating current is being used, there are 120 flow reversals per second. For 
example, if a four-pole motor is used in an application, its calculated 
rpm is
Four-pole motor speed 
60  120   1800
4
The actual rpm of a four-pole motor is 1750 rpm. Motor speeds that are 
common to the industry are
Two-pole motors 
3450 rpm
Four-pole motors 
1750 rpm
Six-pole motors 
1050 rpm
Eight-pole motors 
900 rpm
 
Section 9.3   Types of Electric Motors 
229
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

230 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
Open and Enclosed Motors
Motors are commonly either open or enclosed. The open motor, shown 
in Figure 9.12, has a housing and is used to rotate a device such as a fan 
or a pump that is itself not enclosed in any type of housing. The enclosed 
motor is housed within some type of shell. The most common enclosure 
of a motor is a completely sealed hermetic compressor, as shown in 
Figure 9.13. Any starting apparatus used on an enclosed motor must be 
mounted outside the enclosure. The starting apparatus of an open motor 
is usually mounted within the motor itself.
9.12
F I G U R E
Open motor. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
9.13
F I G U R E
Enclosed motor in a  hermetic 
compressor. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Green Technology
Energy Efficient Motors
The manufacturers of electric motors used in the HVAC industry are con-
tinually designing and producing motors that use less energy, thus sav-
ing energy and reducing the operating cost to the consumer. The Energy 
Policy Act of 1992, which went into effect October 1997, requires that 
most general purpose three-phase motors rated from 1 to 200 horse-
power meet minimum efficiency standards. This standard covers only the 
larger motors used in the industry. Manufacturers of small single-phase 
motors are continually improving the design for these motors to operate 
at higher efficiency. Higher efficiency motors save energy by reducing 
the amount of electricity needed. Many motor manufacturers are using 
manufacturing processes that protect the environment by reducing harm-
ful emissions.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In the following sections, we will discuss the six basic motor types 
in detail.
Motor Dimensions
The National Electrical Manufacturers’ Association (NEMA) has estab-
lished standard motor dimensions. Figure 9.14 shows the dimensions 
of typical motor frames used in the industry. The standards are useful 
when a technician is forced to locate a replacement motor for a particular 
application.
9.4 
SHADED-POLE MOTORS
Most single-phase induction motors require a starting winding to cre-
ate a starting torque that enables the motor to start. In most cases, the 
starting winding is located 90 electrical degrees from the main winding. 
A shaded-pole motor uses a shaded pole made of a closed turn of a heavy 
copper wire banded around a section of each stator pole. A shaded-pole 
motor is shown in Figure 9.15. Shaded-pole motors are used when very 
small starting and running torques are required, such as in a furnace 
fan, a small condensing unit fan, and an open-type propeller fan. These 
motors are easily stalled, but in most cases, because of the small locked 
rotor amperes (i.e., the current draw of the motor when power is applied 
but the motor does not turn), they can stall and still not burn out the 
windings.
9.14
F I G U R E
Dimension of typical motor frames. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 9.4   Shaded-Pole Motors 
231
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

232 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
Operation
Figure 9.16 shows the stator of a shaded-pole motor. At one side of each 
pole, a small groove has been cut into the stator and banded by a solid 
copper wire or band, as shown in Figure 9.17.
When the shaded-pole motor is starting, a current is induced into the 
shaded pole from the main windings. The shaded poles produce a mag-
netic field that is out of phase with the magnetic field of the main wind-
ing, and a rotating magnetic field is produced that is sufficient to give the 
desired starting torque. When the motor approaches full speed, the effect 
of the shaded pole is negligible. The rotation of the shaded-pole motor is 
from the unshaded edge of the pole toward the shaded edge of the pole.
Figure 9.18 shows the schematic diagram of a single-speed, shaded-
pole motor. A single-speed, shaded-pole motor has only one wind-
ing, with the exception of the shaded pole, and is relatively simple. 
Figure 9.19 shows the schematic diagram of a three-speed, shaded-pole 
motor. The main winding is the speed winding for high-speed operation. 
For  medium-speed operation, the main winding is put in series with the 
medium-speed winding, which increases the number of poles and pro-
duces fewer revolutions per minute. For low-speed operation, the main 
winding is put in series with the medium- and low-speed windings, which 
increases the number of poles in the stator and further reduces speed.
9.15
F I G U R E
Shaded pole motor. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Reversing
Shaded-pole motors are difficult to reverse because to do so, you must 
disassemble them. The rotation of the shaded-pole motor is determined 
by the location of the shaded poles. Figure 9.20 shows a layout of a single-
speed, shaded-pole motor. When the shaded poles are on the left side of 
the main poles, as in Figure 9.20, the rotation will be toward the shaded 
poles, or clockwise. On the other hand, when the shaded poles are on 
the right side of the main poles, as shown in Figure 9.21, the rotation will 
again be toward the shaded poles, but in this case, the rotation will be 
9.16
F I G U R E
Stator of  shaded 
pole motor. 
(Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Rotation
Shaded pole
9.17
F I G U R E
Shaded pole. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 
Section 9.4   Shaded-Pole Motors 
233
L1
L2
9.18
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of 
single-speed shaded 
pole motor. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Common
High
speed
Medium
speed
Low
speed
9.19
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of 
three-speed shaded pole 
motor. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

234 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
Windings
Rotor
Rotation
Shaded poles
Main poles
L1
L2
9.20
F I G U R E
Layout of shade-pole motor, 
with clockwise rotation in the 
direction of the shaded pole. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Rotation
Rotation
Rotor
Shaded poles
Main poles
9.21
F I G U R E
Layout of shaded-pole motor, with counterclockwise 
rotation in the direction of the shaded poles. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

counterclockwise. Therefore, for reversing the shaded-pole motor, the 
stator must be reversed to change the positions of the shaded poles, and 
this usually means disassembling the motor.
Troubleshooting
Shaded-pole motors are easy to identify because of the copper band 
around the shaded pole, previously shown in Figure 9.17. A single-
speed, shaded-pole motor is easily diagnosed for trouble because 
of its simple winding patterns, previously shown schematically in 
Figure 9.18. Multispeed shaded-pole motors are more difficult to trou-
bleshoot because of the additional speed windings, which were previ-
ously shown in Figure 9.19. The shaded-pole motor can be checked with 
an ohmmeter to determine the condition of the windings. Because a 
shaded-pole motor has stalled does not mean the windings are faulty. If 
this  condition should occur, the motor probably needs lubrication. The 
shaded-pole motor is simple and easy to troubleshoot. It is used in many 
applications in the industry.
9.5 
CAPACITORS
The capacitor consists of two aluminum plates with an insulator between 
them. The insulator prevents electrons from flowing from one plate to 
the other, but it permits the storage of electrons. Figure 9.22 shows the 
schematic symbol for a capacitor. Capacitors are used to boost the start-
ing torque or running efficiency of single-phase motors.
Two Types Used in the Industry
Two types of capacitors are used primarily in the industry: the 
electrolytic or starting capacitor and oil-filled or running capacitor 
(Figure 9.23). Starting capacitors are usually in a plastic case consisting 
of two  aluminum electrodes (plates) with a chemically treated paper, 
impregnated with a nonconductive electrolyte, between them. They can 
be purchased in ranges from 50 to 600 microfarads (μF) and from 120 to 
300 volts. A microfarad is the unit of measurement 
for the strength of a capacitor; all capacitors are 
rated according to their strength in microfarads. The 
electrolytic capacitor is used to assist a single-phase 
motor in starting.
The oil-filled capacitor consists of two aluminum 
electrodes with paper between them and an oil-filled 
capacitor case. It is available in microfarad ranges 
of about 2 to 80 and voltage ranges of 240 to 550. 
9.22
F I G U R E
Symbol for a 
capacitor. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
Section 9.5   Capacitors 
235
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

236 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
The oil-filled capacitor can be used for small or  moderate torque starting, 
but it is more commonly used to increase a motor’s running efficiency.
The major difference between the two types of capacitors is in their 
application. A starting capacitor is built in a relatively small case with a 
dielectric—a nonconductor of electric current. It is used for only a short 
period of time on each cycle of the motor. Therefore, a starting capacitor 
has no need to dissipate heat, although its capacity is larger than that of 
its counterpart, the running capacitor.
The running capacitor is designed to stay in the motor circuit for the 
entire cycle of operation. Therefore, it must have some means of dissipat-
ing the heat. The oil in the capacitor case is used for this purpose. The oil-
filled capacitor is physically larger than the starting capacitor but smaller 
in capacity than the starting capacitor and usually contained in a metal 
case. Both capacitors are in wide use in the industry.
Troubleshooting
Short capacitor life and malfunctions can be caused by several different 
factors. High voltage can cause a capacitor to overheat. This can damage 
the plates and short the electrodes. Starting capacitors can be damaged 
by faulty starting apparatus that would keep the capacitor in the line 
circuit long enough to damage the capacitor. Excessive temperature can 
shorten the life of capacitors or cause permanent damage due to poor 
9.23
F I G U R E
Common capacitor used in the industry. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
(a) Starting capacitors
(b) Running capacitors
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ventilation, starting cycles that are too long, or starting cycles that occur 
too frequently. The cause of the malfunction should be corrected as soon 
as possible. The capacitors themselves are frequently the cause of the 
problem.
!CAUTION
Before handling or checking a motor capacitor, short 
from one terminal to another with a 20,000-ohm, 
4-watt resistor.
!CAUTION
When making electrical connections to a running capac-
itor, make sure that power supplying the capacitor is 
connected to the marked terminal.
All capacitors used on single-phase motors are designed specifically 
to assist the motor in proper operation. However, in some cases it is 
impossible to replace a capacitor with an exact replacement. If this situa-
tion should occur, use the following guidelines for replacing the capacitor:
 1. The voltage of any capacitor used for replacement must be equal to 
or greater than that of the capacitor being replaced.
 2. The strength of the starting capacitor replacement must be at least 
equal to but not more than 20% greater than that of the capacitor 
being replaced.
 3. The strength of the running capacitor replacement may vary by plus 
or minus 10% of the strength of the capacitor being replaced.
 4. If capacitors are installed in parallel, the sum of the capacitors is the 
total capacitance.
 5. The total capacitance of capacitors in series may be found in the fol-
lowing formula:
C 
C1  C2
C1  C2
These rules are intended only as a guide. Remember, it is always pref-
erable to use an exact replacement.
Many methods for testing capacitors are in common use in the indus-
try today. A capacitor can be checked by using an ohmmeter. The ohm-
meter should be placed on a high-ohm scale and both leads should be 
 
Section 9.5   Capacitors 
237
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

238 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
connected to the terminals of a discharged capacitor. If the needle of an 
analog meter shows a deflection to the right end of the scale and back 
to infinity, the capacitor is probably good. A digital ohmmeter will go to 
a small resistance reading and back to a larger resistance reading if the 
capacitor is good. If an ohmmeter reads 0 ohms, the capacitor is shorted. 
If the needle of the meter does not move, the capacitor is open.
In case of doubt, another method can be used to check the capaci-
tor. By briefly applying voltage to a capacitor, reading the amperage, and 
then substituting the values into the following formula, we can obtain the 
exact capacitance:
microfarads  2650  amperes
volts
When performing this test, put a fuse in the circuit to prevent over-
loading due to a shorted capacitor, as shown in Figure 9.24. Starting 
capacitors should be put in the circuit for approximately five seconds 
only. Many commercial capacitance testers are available on the market, 
one of which is shown in Figure 9.25. Many new digital volt-ohm meters 
test capacitors. Figure 9.26 shows a digital volt-ohm meter that can check 
the capacitance of a capacitor. A visual inspection of both the starting and 
oil filled capacitor can give the technician an indication that a capacitor 
is bad. In case an oil filled capacitor is protruding or swollen as shown in 
Figure 9.27 the capacitor is bad. If the seal on a starting capacitor is open 
as shown in Figure 9.28; it is usually bad.
Switch
Fuse (5A)
Capacitor
120 or
240 volts
9.24
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of electric circuit to check the 
 capacitance of a capacitor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.26
F I G U R E
9.25
F I G U R E
Capacitor tester. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
9.27
F I G U R E
Bad run capacitor 
(Extruding outside 
normal shade). (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Digital volt-ohm meter 
capable of reading the 
capacitance of a  capacitor. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Open Seal
9.28
F I G U R E
Bad starting capacitor 
(Open seal). (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
Section 9.5   Capacitors 
239
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

240 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
Green Technology
PCBs
Many older refrigeration, heating, and air conditioning systems may use 
running capacitors with single-phase electric motors that contain PCBs. 
PCBs is a common name for polychlorinated biphenyls. PCBs is a oily liq-
uid usually with a clear color but could be a range of colors from yellow 
to black depending on the chlorine content. PCBs have good insulating 
properties and can withstand high temperatures without decomposing. 
PCBs when released into the environment do not break down and can be 
absorbed into the tissues of animals and fish, which cause a risk to the 
food chain. PCBs can enter the body in three ways: absorption through 
the skin, inhalation of PCB vapors, and ingestion. Very high exposure to 
PCBs whether ingested or absorbed through the skin can cause damage 
to the nervous system or liver damage. There is a possibility that PCBs 
may cause cancer. Capacitors containing PCBs are usually rectangular or 
cylindrical encased in aluminum container produced in 1979. Capacitors 
produced after 1979 and labeled “NO PCBs” contain no PCBs. If a capac-
itor is not labeled “NO PCBs”, it is assumed to contain PCBs. Capacitors 
containing PCBs are slightly heavier than those that do not contain PCBs. 
Capacitors containing PCBs should be properly disposed of by a certified 
disposal company.
9.6 
SPLIT-PHASE MOTORS
Two general classifications of split-phase motors are used in the indus-
try. The resistance-start–induction-run motor and the capacitor-start– 
induction-run motor are types of split-phase motors in common use 
today. Each of these motors has different operating characteristics while 
being similar in construction. Split-phase motors use some method of 
splitting the phase of incoming power to produce a second phase of 
power, giving the motor enough displacement to start. The split-phase 
motor uses two windings to displace the phase and create the needed 
displacement between the run and start windings to produce rotation.
Resistance-Start–Induction-Run Motor
The resistance-start–induction-run motor shown in Figure 9.29 has both 
a starting winding to assist the motor in starting and a running winding 
to continue rotation after the motor has reached a certain speed. Most 
single-phase motors have some method of beginning the rotation; in a 
split-phase motor, rotation is started by splitting the phase to make a 
two-phase current. The single-phase current is split between the running 
and the starting winding, which puts one of the windings out of phase by 
45 to 90 degrees. The starting windings are used to assist the split-phase 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

motor in starting. They are also used until the motor has reached a speed 
that is about 75% of its full-capacity speed. The starting windings then 
drop out of the circuit by the use of a centrifugal switch. After that occurs, 
the motor operates at full speed on the main or running winding alone.
A cutaway view of a split-phase motor is shown in Figure 9.30
9.29
F I G U R E
Split-phase motor. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Stator
Bearings
Motor windings
Bearings
Squirrel cage rotor
9.30
F I G U R E
Cutaway view of an electric motor. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
Section 9.6   Split-Phase Motors 
241
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

242 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
The split-phase motor can be operated on 120 volts–single phase–
60 hertz or 208/240 volts–single phase–60 hertz. Some split-phase motors 
can operate on either voltage by making simple changes in their wiring 
if so desired. Thus, they are dual-voltage motors. Split-phase motors can 
be reversed by reversing the leads of the starting winding at the terminals 
in the motor.
Split-phase motors are used when a high starting torque is not 
required. They are used in such equipment as belt-driven evaporator fan 
motors, hot-water pumps, small hermetic compressors, grinders, wash-
ing machines, dryers, and exhaust fans.
Operation
The phases in a split-phase motor are split by the makeup of the start-
ing windings. The starting winding is designed with smaller wire and 
more turns than is the running winding, which has a greater inductance. 
Therefore, the running winding is displaced from the starting winding 
because of its greater inductance. This displacement causes a resistance 
to current flow to build up in the running winding. The phase displace-
ment means the current reaches the two windings at separate times, 
allowing one winding to lead, in this case the starting winding. However, 
some manufacturers allow current to reach the running winding first 
by designing an increased resistance into the starting winding and an 
increased induction into the running winding. Whatever method is used, 
the motor basically operates on the same principle: splitting the phase.
The operation of a split-phase motor, referring to Figure 9.31, is 
as follows:
1. 
Power is applied to the running and starting windings in parallel. The 
motor itself splits the phase by the counter electromotive force (emf) 
in the running winding, which acts as a resistance to hold back the 
current flow to the running winding. On the alternation of power, the 
starting winding creates a higher magnetic field than the running 
winding.
2. 
In half of a cycle the alternations are changed. The running winding 
has the stronger magnetic field, moving the rotor a certain distance 
depending on the number of poles in the motor. For the motor in 
Figure 9.31, the distance is one-fourth of a rotation.
3. 
As the alternations continue at the rate of 60 cycles per second, 
the motor continues to rotate with the magnetic field of the stator. 
Therefore, the rotor, with its magnetic field permanent, attempts to 
keep up with the rotating magnetic field of the stator.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4. 
The motor is equipped with a centrifugal switch that drops the start-
ing winding out of the circuit when the motor has reached 75% of its 
full speed.
Troubleshooting
Split-phase motors are one of the most reliable types of motors used in 
the heating, cooling, and refrigeration industry. They are used on most 
types of single-phase equipment. The split-phase motor is easy to trou-
bleshoot if the service technician has a good understanding of its opera-
tion. The three probable areas of trouble are the bearings, the windings, 
and the centrifugal switch.
The bearings of any motor often give trouble because of wear and 
improper maintenance. Identification of a motor with bad bearings is 
simple. The motor will have trouble turning and in some cases may be 
locked down completely.
The windings of a split-phase motor can be shorted, open, or grounded. 
This is easily diagnosed with an ohmmeter.
Legend
A:  Running
     windings
B:  Starting
     windings
C:  Rotor
Running
windings
Starting
windings
L1
L2
L1
L2
C
B
B
B
B
A
A
A
A
9.31
F I G U R E
Layout of a split phase motor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 9.6   Split-Phase Motors 
243
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

244 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
The centrifugal switch, shown in Figure 9.32, is the hardest section to 
diagnose for troubles because it stays in the circuit only a short time. The 
centrifugal switch has a tendency to stick in an open or closed position 
because of wear and often must be replaced. The centrifugal switch can 
usually be heard when it drops in after the motor is cut off. Hence, it can 
be checked effectively in this manner. If the centrifugal switch does not 
drop out of the circuit, the motor will pull an excessively high ampere 
draw and cut off on overload. One sure method of checking the centrifu-
gal switch is by disassembling the motor and making a visual inspection.
Capacitor-Start–Induction-Run Motor
The capacitor-start motor, shown in Figure 9.33, produces a high start-
ing torque, which is needed for many applications in the industry. The 
open capacitor-start motor operates like a split-phase motor except that a 
capacitor is inserted in series with the centrifugal switch and the starting 
winding. The centrifugal switch breaks the flow of current to the starting 
capacitor and starting winding. The centrifugal switch opens when the 
motor has reached a speed that is 75% of its full speed. Figure 9.34 shows 
a schematic diagram of the motor.
Capacitor-start motors are used on pumps, small hermetic compres-
sors, washing machines, and some types of heavy-duty fans.
9.32
F I G U R E
Centrifugal switch used in a split-
phase or capacitor-start motor 
(Photo by Bill Johnson)
9.33
F I G U R E
Capacitor-start motor. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Open Type
As we have said, the open capacitor-start motor 
is similar in design to the split-phase motor 
with the exception of the capacitor. Therefore, 
troubleshooting the open capacitor-start motor 
is similar to checking the split-phase motor 
except for checking the capacitor. There are 
four possible areas of trouble in the open 
 capacitor-start motor: windings, bearings, cen-
trifugal switch, and capacitor.
The windings can be easily checked with 
the use of an ohmmeter by checking for shorts, 
opens, and grounds.
The bearings of a motor usually fail because 
of lack of maintenance or wear. Motor bearings 
will usually become tight or lock down com-
pletely. This condition can be determined by 
trying to turn the motor. If the motor has a tight 
place in its rotation or will not turn at all, the 
bearings are faulty in the motor.
Due to the constant opening and closing of 
the centrifugal switch, it is often the culprit in 
motor problems. The centrifugal switch may 
stick in an open or closed position or its contacts may be defective. A 
centrifugal switch, in some cases, can be checked with an ohmmeter to 
determine its position, open or closed. In other cases, the motor will have 
to be disassembled to check the switch.
The capacitor is easy to check with an ohmmeter. The capacitor is 
often mounted in one end bell of the motor rather than on top of the 
stator.
Enclosed Type
When capacitor-start motors are used in small hermetic compressors, 
a centrifugal switch cannot be used because of the oil used to lubricate 
the compressor. Instead, an external relay is used to break the power 
going to the starting winding and the starting capacitor. In this case, the 
 capacitor-start motor is an enclosed motor with a starting relay. By insert-
ing a capacitor in the starting winding, a phase displacement is created 
between the running and starting windings, causing the motor to rotate.
The enclosed capacitor-start motor has an external relay to drop the 
starting winding and starting capacitor out of the circuit. This capacitor 
should be checked to determine its condition.
L1
L2
R
C
S
Centrifugal
switch
Starting
capacitor
9.34
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of 
an open type capacitor 
start motor with a 
centrifugal switch. 
Relays may be used 
instead of centrifugal 
switch. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
Section 9.6   Split-Phase Motors 
245
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

246 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
The condition of the windings of an enclosed motor can easily be 
checked with an ohmmeter. The windings have a set of terminals on the 
outside of the casing that lead to the windings. Use an ohmmeter to check 
across these terminals to determine if the windings are shorted, open, or 
grounded.
The enclosed motor can also be locked down due to worn bearings or 
to internal failure of some component of the motor. This condition can 
be detected with an ammeter or by the humming sound of the motor on 
an attempted start.
9.7 
PERMANENT SPLIT-CAPACITOR MOTORS
Permanent split-capacitor motors, also known as PSC motors, are simple 
in design and have a moderate starting torque and a good running effi-
ciency, which makes them a popular motor in the industry. Figure 9.35 
shows a PSC motor used as a fan motor. Figure 9.36 shows a hermetic 
compressor that uses a PSC motor to power the compressor.
9.35
F I G U R E
Permanent split-capacitor 
motor. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
9.36
F I G U R E
Hermetic compressor 
utilizing a PSC motor. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The starting winding and the running capacitor of the PSC motor are 
connected in series, as shown in Figure 9.37(b). The schematic diagram of 
the hookup is shown in Figure 9.37(a). The running and starting windings 
are in parallel, but the capacitor causes a phase displacement.
Permanent split-capacitor motors are used on compressors, where 
the refrigerant equalizes on the “off” cycle, on direct-drive fan motors, 
and in other applications in the industry. It has a relatively low cost in 
comparison with other motors because it does not have a switch to drop 
the starting winding out of the circuit. The PSC motor can be used only 
when a moderate starting torque is required to begin rotation.
Operation
The permanent split-capacitor motor has two windings: a running (main) 
winding and a starting (phase) winding. Both windings are wound with 
almost the same size and length of wire. A running capacitor is put in 
L1
L2
L1
L2
Running capacitor
Hermetic compressor
R
R
RC
S
S
C
C
(a) Hookup
(b) Schematic
C:
R:
S:
RC:
Common terminal
Running winding terminal
Starting winding terminal
Running capacitor
Legend
9.37
F I G U R E
Diagrams of permanent split-capacitor motor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 9.7   Permanent Split-Capacitor Motors 
247
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

248 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
series with the starting winding. The capacitor 
causes the electron flow through the starting 
winding to shift it out of phase with the running 
winding. Therefore, a rotating magnetic field is set 
up, causing the rotor to turn.
Multispeed PSC motors may have tapped run-
ning windings. The starting winding is in series 
with the running capacitor and in parallel with 
the running winding. Figure 9.38 shows a sche-
matic diagram of a three-speed PSC motor. For 
high-speed operation, the starting and main wind-
ings are energized. Medium-speed operation is 
accomplished by energizing the starting winding 
with the main and medium-speed windings con-
nected in series. For low-speed operation, the main, 
medium, and low windings are connected in series 
with each other, and all are connected in parallel 
to the starting winding.
Troubleshooting
The PSC motor usually gives trouble-free operation for long periods. The 
three most common failures in a PSC motor are in the bearings, windings, 
or capacitor.
The bearings of a PSC motor often become faulty because of wear or 
lack of proper maintenance. Bearings in any motor can be diagnosed with 
little trouble by rotating the motor by hand and noticing rough places in 
the movement or the shaft being locked in one position.
The windings of a motor become faulty because of overheating, over-
loading, or a faulty winding. A bad motor winding can easily be checked 
with an ohmmeter. The windings could be shorted, open, or grounded. 
The service technician should use care in diagnosing problems with the 
windings of PSC motors because they are often built with several speeds.
A bad capacitor can keep a PSC motor from starting or can pull a high 
ampere draw when running. Capacitors can be checked by one of the 
methods covered in Section 9.5. In most cases, faulty PSC motors will be 
replaced with new motors rather than repaired. The PSC motor is easy to 
troubleshoot with the right tools and knowledge.
Probably the most difficult aspect of PSC motors is their design. PSC 
motors are often built with several speeds. Service technicians must 
pay careful attention when replacing a faulty PSC motor because if the 
motor is connected incorrectly, permanent damage can occur. Most PSC 
motors are furnished with a wiring diagram to ensure correct installation. 
Start
Common
High
Medium
Low
9.38
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a 
three-speed PSC motor. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Motor manufacturers, however, make only a limited number of motors to 
replace the many different motors in the field. Thus, a service technician 
may have to adapt the replacement motor to a specific application.
9.8 
CAPACITOR-START–CAPACITOR-RUN MOTORS
The capacitor-start–capacitor-run motor, or CSR motor, produces a high 
starting torque and increases the running efficiency. It is actually a 
 capacitor-start motor with a running capacitor added permanently to 
the starting winding. The starting winding is energized all the time the 
motor is running. The capacitor-start–capacitor-run motor takes the 
good running characteristics of a permanent split-capacitor motor (see 
Section 9.7) and adds the capacitor-start feature. This produces one of the 
best all-around motors used in the industry.
Capacitor-start–capacitor-run motors are used almost exclusively on 
hermetic or semi-hermetic compressors. Rarely will this type of motor 
be used as an open-type motor because of the cost of the components 
necessary to produce it. Most open-type motors do not use a starting 
relay but use the centrifugal switch instead. Open-type motors are usu-
ally built as permanent split-capacitor motors or capacitor-start motors. 
Occasionally, a CSR motor will be used in an open-type motor when an 
extremely high starting torque is required.
Operation
The CSR motor begins operation on a phase displacement between the 
starting and running windings, which allows rotation to begin. The run-
ning capacitor lends a small amount of assistance to the starting of the 
motor, but its main function is to increase the running efficiency of the 
motor. Figure 9.39a shows a schematic diagram of this motor with its 
starting components and Figure 9.39b shows a pictorial diagram with the 
wiring connections of a capacitor-start-capacitor-run motor.
Troubleshooting
The capacitor-start–capacitor-run motor is sometimes difficult to trou-
bleshoot because of the number of components that must be added to 
a regular motor to produce it. The windings, bearings, potential relays, 
starting capacitor, and running capacitor must all be checked.
The windings of a CSR motor can be easily checked with an ohm-
meter to determine if the windings are shorted, open, or grounded. In 
most cases, the windings will be enclosed in a hermetic casing and the 
terminals will be on the outside of the casing. However, the type of motor 
makes little difference in checking the winding as long as the technician 
uses the correct terminals.
 
Section 9.8   Capacitor-Start–Capacitor-Run Motors 
249
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

250 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
The bearings of a CSR motor can be worn so badly that the motor 
will not turn or will turn only with a great deal of difficulty. The bear-
ings of hermetically sealed motors are enclosed and therefore harder to 
check, but the condition of the bearings can be determined by a whining 
sound, or by the motor pulling a larger-than-normal ampere draw. Care 
R
RC
C
SR
SC
SR
S
Legend
C:
R:
S:
RC:
SC:
SR:
Common terminal
Running winding terminal
Starting winding terminal
Running capacitor
Starting capacitor
Starting relay (potential)
L1
L2
9.39
F I G U R E
(a) Schematic diagram of a capacitor-start–capacitor-run motor. 
(b) Connection diagram for CSR motor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Compressor
terminals
Potential relay
SC
SR
SR
RC
C
S
R
L2
L1
1
2
5
(a) Schematic
(b) Hookup
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

should be taken not to condemn the bearings of a motor because of a high 
ampere draw unless you are sure this is the problem.
The starting relay can be checked by diagnosing the condition of 
the contacts and the coil. The contacts can be checked with an ohm-
meter or by visual inspection. On an ohmmeter the contacts should 
show zero resistance. The visual inspection is easy once the relay is 
disassembled. Then the condition of the contacts can be determined: 
sticking, pitting, or misalignment. The coil is checked like the wind-
ings of a motor.
The starting and running capacitors are easily checked with an ohm-
meter to determine their condition.
Troubleshooting a CSR motor is done by checking all components of 
the motor. These motors must be correctly checked to prevent other com-
ponents from being destroyed. For example, a capacitor will be destroyed 
if the contacts or coil of a starting relay are bad.
9.9 
THREE-PHASE MOTORS
Three-phase motors are rugged, reliable, and more dependable than 
other types of motors. The most common type and the type often used 
in heating, cooling, and refrigeration is the squirrel cage induction type, 
shown in Figure 9.40. This motor will be the only three-phase motor dis-
cussed in this chapter.
Three-phase motors are considerably stronger than single-phase 
motors because of the three phases that are fed to the motor. Three-
phase current actually supplies three hot legs to the device, rather 
than the two hot legs supplied by single-phase 
power. Therefore, instead of having a two-phase 
displacement, a three-phase displacement is 
available without using starting components. 
Three-phase motors are common to the indus-
try; thus the technician should understand their 
operation.
Operation
Three-phase motors operate on the same prin-
ciples as the single-phase with the exception 
of the three-phase displacement. A rotating 
magnetic field is produced in the stator. This 
interacts and causes a magnetic field in the 
rotor. However, the three-phase motors require 
9.40
F I G U R E
Three-phase induction 
motor. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 
Section 9.9   Three-Phase Motors 
251
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

252 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
no starting apparatus, because none 
of the phases are together. In the sine 
wave of the three-phase motor, none of 
the phases peaks at the same time. Each 
phase is approximately 120 electrical 
degrees out of phase with the others. For 
this reason, there is no need to use any 
device to cause a phase displacement, as 
is needed in the starting of single-phase 
motors.
Three-phase motors can be purchased 
in any voltage range desired. For example, 
a dual-voltage, three-phase motor can be 
operated on two different voltages with 
minor modifications in the wiring.
Three-phase motors have two basic 
types of windings. They are the star 
winding or wye (Y) winding, as shown 
in Figure 9.41, and the delta winding, as 
shown in Figure 9.42. There is no opera-
tional difference between the two types, 
but it does allow designers more latitude 
in three-phase motor design.
Troubleshooting
A three-phase motor can be checked by 
reading the resistance of the winding 
with an ohmmeter. If a resistance read-
ing of 0 ohm occurs, the motor is shorted. 
A reading of infinite resistance indicates 
an open winding. A reading of some 
measurable resistance is usually from 
1 ohm to 50 ohms, depending on the 
size of the motor. The larger the motor, 
the smaller the resistance. The smaller 
the motor, the larger the resistance 
of the winding. Care should be taken 
because of the chance of a spot burnout 
in the winding. Experience should give 
service technicians the ability to diag-
nose any type of electric motor.
Low-voltage
hookup
L1 to T1 and T 7
L2 to T2 and T8
L3 to T3 and T9
Tie T4, T5, and T6
together
High-voltage
hookup
L1 to T1
L2 to T2
L3 to T3
Tie T4 to T 7, 
T5 to T8, and 
T6 toT9
T1
T4
T7
T8
T9
T5
T6
T2
T3
9.41
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of the star 
winding of a three-phase motor. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Low-voltage
hookup
L1 to T1, T6 and T7
L2 to T2, T4 and T8
L3 to T3, T5 and T9
High-voltage
hookup
L1 to T1
L2 to T2
L3 to T3
Tie T4 to T7,
T5 to T8,
 and T6 to T9
T1
T4
T 7
T8
T9
T5
T6
T2
T3
9.42
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of the delta 
winding of a three-phase motor. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.10 ELECTRONICALLY COMMUTATED MOTORS
The refrigeration, heating, and air-conditioning industry has a made 
a concentrated effort to increase the efficiency of equipment that is 
being placed into operation. This can be accomplished by decreasing the 
electrical power consumed by the equipment by decreasing the load on 
equipment. The largest electrical loads in refrigeration or air-conditioning 
systems are the motors that supply mechanical energy to operate com-
pressors, fans, pumps, and other devices requiring rotation. Electrical 
resistance heaters also require large amounts of electrical power but are 
seldom used because of high energy costs. Most other electrical loads in 
refrigeration and air-conditioning systems require only minimal electri-
cal power. The major emphasis for increased efficiency and reduction in 
system power consumption has, therefore, been the electric motor.
Equipment typically operates at full-load capacity equipped with 
some type of capacity control, which is seldom the case in residential 
installations. Most equipment could easily satisfy the heating or cool-
ing load of the structure while supplying only a fraction of its rated 
capacity. For example, if the capacity of an air-conditioning system was 
48,000 Btu/hr and the building’s heat gain was only 24,000 Btu/hr, con-
ventional equipment would supply 48,000 Btu/hr for the heat load of only 
24,000 Btu/hr. This would result in frequent system starting and stopping, 
not to mention the increased chances of high-humidity-related issues. 
Stopping and starting an electrical motor requires a great deal more elec-
trical power than normal running conditions. Recall that the locked rotor 
amperage, which is the amperage draw of the motor on initial startup, 
is about five to seven times greater than the motor’s normal running 
amperage. It would, therefore, be advantageous if the equipment oper-
ated for a longer period of time at a reduced capacity. This would result 
in using less electrical energy than the frequent stopping and starting 
alternative of forcing the equipment to operate at full capacity for shorter 
periods of time. In addition, less frequent starting and stopping reduces 
the wear and tear on the system’s mechanical components. One method 
of accomplishing this goal is to incorporate variable-speed motors into 
the system. Variable-speed motors have the ability to vary their speed 
to match the load of the structure. As a result, equipment efficiency is 
increased and electrical power consumption is reduced as the equipment 
capacity will closely match the structure’s heating or cooling load.
There are several methods used to control the speed of electric 
motors. The speed of an alternating current electric motor is determined 
by the number of motor poles and the frequency of the power supply. 
Alternating current is difficult to regulate and control, making motor 
speed modulation difficult to accomplish by regulating the frequency of 
 
Section 9.10   Electronically Commutated Motors 
253
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

254 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
the alternating current power supply. The speed of AC motors can easily 
be varied by changing from one pole arrangement to another, a feature 
commonly found on many multispeed alternating current motors. When 
the speed of an AC motor is varied by altering the frequency of the power 
supply, variable frequency drives (VFDs) are used. These tend to be bulky 
and very expensive for many applications, but advances in technology are 
helping to remedy these setbacks.
A very easy way to produce a variable-speed motor is by converting 
alternating current to direct current. Direct current is easier to control and 
regulate, enabling a motor to operate at variable speeds. The most common 
methods used to vary the speed of electric motors, short of using VFDs, 
are using direct current converters and electronically commutated motors 
(ECM). The direct current converters convert the alternating current that 
the power company supplies to direct current, which can then be regulated 
to vary the speed of the motor. The electronically commutated motor actu-
ally reverses one-half of each alternating current cycle to form a single 
directional current, which is then utilized to vary the speed of the motor.
The increase of electronically commutated motor usage has been phe-
nomenal over the past ten years—from 100,000 motors in service in 1995 
to over one million in 2005. ECM-driven appliances are found in residen-
tial, commercial, and industrial markets. Probably the greatest increase 
in the usage of the ECM has been the residential market, where motors 
controlling fans are usually smaller than 1 horsepower. Electronically 
commutated motors are manufactured for 120-, 240-, and 277-volt inputs 
and typically range from 1⁄3 horsepower to 1 horsepower for primary air 
movement in residential air-conditioning systems. Figure 9.43 shows an 
ECM used as the primary air mover in a residential gas furnace. ECMs 
have also become popular in smaller sizes with 120- and 240-volt inputs 
that are used in furnace draft inducers as shown in Figure 9.44. The ECM 
is utilized in many other applications, such as fan terminal boxes in vari-
able air volume (VAV) systems and air movement in refrigeration display 
cases, vending machines, and walk-in coolers. Most major air-conditioning 
manufacturers are using the ECM in their high-efficiency equipment lines.
Construction
The ECM is a brushless DC, three-phase motor with a permanent mag-
net rotor shown broken down in Figure 9.45. The ECM is actually a two-
part motor. One part is the motor and the other part is the control. Both 
parts are shown in Figure 9.45. Motor phases are sequentially energized 
by an electronic control, energized by a power supply. A control module 
is attached to one end of the motor that uses input signals to obtain 
and maintain the correct motor speed. The motor control is shown in 
Figure 9.46.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.43
F I G U R E
ECM used as primary 
air movement in resi-
dential gas furnace. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
9.44
F I G U R E
ECM used as furnace 
draft motor. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
Section 9.10   Electronically Commutated Motors 
255
9.46
F I G U R E
The control module 
of ECM. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
9.45
F I G U R E
ECM broken down in 
sections. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

256 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
The ECM stator is a laminated interlocked stator wound like a three-
phase motor, as shown in Figure 9.47. The rotor of the ECM turns with 
the aid of ball bearings and is equipped with three permanent magnets 
attached to it at 120-degree segments, as shown in Figure 9.48. The mag-
nets are attached to the rotor with heavy-duty glue and are magnetized 
by the manufacturer.
Operation
The operation of an electronically commutated motor is determined 
by the inputs to the motor control. The input signals vary depending 
on the mode of system operature. Line voltage alternating current is 
9.47
F I G U R E
The stator of ECM. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
9.48
F I G U R E
The rotor of ECM. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

supplied to the motor at all times. The alternating current is converted 
to direct current and sent to the inverter. The signal from the motor 
control, also sent to the inverter, ultimately determines the speed of 
the motor. The ECM experiences a soft start when initially energized. 
This means that the motor starts at a low speed and gradually ramps 
up to its final desired speed, which depends on the system conditions. 
Since the motor ramps its speed up and down, the ECM allows for a 
wide range of blower or fan speeds. Figure 9.49 shows a block diagram 
of the ECM and the control. At present it is almost impossible to cover 
all of the different inputs of the ECM because each manufacturer uses 
a unique signal or interface strategy. For more information on the 
manufacturer-specific signals and interfaces, the technician should 
consult the equipment manufacturer. Electronically commutated 
motors have many advantages over the PSC motor, which has been used 
almost exclusively in low-torque applications prior to the introduction 
of the ECM. These advantages include quieter operation, higher motor 
efficiency, better performance, greater comfort for the consumer, and 
better humidity control in the occupied space.
Troubleshooting
Electronically commutated motors are more difficult to troubleshoot 
than most other motors used in the field because of the various inter-
faces, motor control strategies, and modules that are used by the various 
equipment manufacturers. The technician should always refer to manu-
facturer’s information when troubleshooting these motors. Some inher-
ent actions of the ECM, such as the rocking of the stator or the rumbling 
sound on startup and shutdown, may lead the technician to condemn 
the motor. When the motor is rocking, trying to go both directions, it is 
AC Power
AC to DC
Conversion
Inverter
ECM
BLOWER
Motor
control
INPUTS
9.49
F I G U R E
Block diagram of ECM and control. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
Section 9.10   Electronically Commutated Motors 
257
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

258 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
determining the location between the stator and the rotor. The techni-
cian should isolate the sound rather than change ECMs when the noise 
is objectionable. ECMs should always be tested under load because motor 
operation without a load can be erratic. The line voltage supplies to the 
ECM should never be disconnected or connected with the power on as 
this action could cause damage to the control module.
ECMs must have high and low voltage at the appropriate connections 
to operate. This should be the first item that a service technician should 
check if the motor is not operating. The motor’s failure to operate could be 
caused by the absence of either line or low voltage. The technician should 
check each voltage source and verify that the measured voltage is within 
acceptable ranges. If the motor starts but runs erratically, the problem 
could be anything from loose low-voltage connections to moisture in the 
control. Common indications of motor/controller problems include con-
stant ramping of the motor speed, either up or 
down, and constant motor speed during periods 
of varying load. When problems such as these 
occur, a troubleshooting chart from the manu-
facturer could be helpful. The common-sense 
method of troubleshooting an ECM is to first 
check the motor. The motor must be disconnected 
from the control module to check it properly. 
The resistance readings of the motor should be 
similar to those of a three-phase motor. Each 
winding should have the same resistance. If 
each winding reads the same resistance and 
the motor is not grounded, the problem is prob-
ably elsewhere. Once you have determined that 
the motor is good and all connections are good, 
the next item to check is the control module. 
Figure 9.50 shows an electronic module that is 
available to check the ECM.
9.50
F I G U R E
Electronic module used 
to troubleshoot ECM. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Green Technology
ECM Savings
The ECM (Electronically Commutated Motor) uses less electrical energy 
than other types of electric motors that are used for air flow in condi-
tioned air systems. For example, the PSC motor is approximately 60% 
efficient while the ECM is approximately 80% efficient. A heating and 
cooling system using an ECM generally will save the consumer approxi-
mately $125 per year.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.11 HERMETIC COMPRESSOR MOTORS
Hermetic compressors are becoming increasingly popular because of their 
low cost. Hermetic motors are of the induction type. They are designed 
for single- and three-phase current. There are four basic types of single-
phase motors used in hermetic compressors. The split-phase motor is 
used on small equipment (fractional horsepower). The capacitor-start 
motor is also used on small equipment. The permanent split-capacitor 
motor is used on most window units and small residential units. The 
capacitor-start–capacitor-run motor is used on any application that 
requires a good starting and running torque. Many hermetic compressors 
are built with three-phase motors; usually these are used on the larger 
equipment.
!CAUTION
Make sure all compressors are properly grounded.
!CAUTION
Oil and refrigerant can spray out of a hermetic com-
pressor when an electrical terminal of the compressor 
is vented.
!CAUTION
The protective covering of the electrical terminals of a 
hermetic compressor should always be in place in the 
event of terminal venting.
Operation
Hermetic compressor motors are totally enclosed in a shell with refrig-
erant and oil. Hence, they require special considerations. Nothing can 
be used inside the shell that is capable of causing a spark or that has to 
move on the crankshaft, such as a centrifugal switch. Therefore, no start-
ing apparatus can be incorporated inside the compressor shell. Starting 
relays and capacitors must be mounted and wired outside the motor. It 
must be remembered that hermetic motors operate the same as other 
motors with the exception of the enclosure.
 
Section 9.11   Hermetic Compressor Motors 
259
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

260 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
Terminal Identification
All single-phase motors have a common, a start, 
and a run terminal. These terminals are some-
times wired directly into an open-type motor 
and are difficult to find. The common is the 
junction point of the start and run terminals. 
The start and run terminals are connected to 
one end of the windings while the common 
is connected to the other end. The schematic 
diagram of a single-phase compressor motor is 
shown in Figure 9.51 with the terminals identi-
fied. Of course, each of the windings of a three-
phase hermetic motor is the same because no 
starting apparatus is required.
In single-phase motors, it is important for 
the service technician to determine the com-
mon, start, and run terminals. This task can be 
performed simply and easily by using an ohm-
meter to obtain the resistance of each winding 
with respect to common. Figure 9.52 shows the 
resistance values of a single-phase motor after 
Green Technology
Variable-Speed Compressors
Some compressors used in modern conditioned air systems are variable-
speed compressors that cut operating cost because the compressor is 
only compressing and moving the amount of refrigerant that is necessary 
to meet the load in the structure. Variable-speed inverters are being 
used to vary the speed of the compressor depending on the load of the 
structure. Inverters are effectively used in small ductless systems that 
are being widely used in the industry. Ductless systems are relatively 
small condensing units with a small evaporator blower mounted in the 
conditioned space. However, some large condensing units use inverters 
to vary the speed of the compressor to meet the load of the structure 
decreasing the electrical power that is used in low load conditions. Two-
speed compressors are bind manufactured today, which operate the 
compressor on low speed when the load on the structure is low and on 
high speed when the load on the structure is high. Many advancements 
being made in compressor design drastically reduce the electrical energy 
used to operate compressors.
Compressor terminal box
R
C
S
Compressor
Run winding
Start winding
Legend
R:  Run terminal
C:  Common terminal
S:  Start terminal
9.51
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a 
single-phase compres-
sor with the terminals 
identified.(Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the resistance has been measured at each terminal on the compressor. 
To find the run, start, and common terminals, the following procedure 
should be followed:
1.  Find the largest reading between any two 
terminals. The remaining terminal is com-
mon (in Figure 9.52 the reading between A 
and B is largest; C is common).
2.  The larger reading between common and 
the other two terminals identifies start (C to 
A is 2 ohms and C to B is 10 ohms; therefore, 
common to B is larger and B is start).
3.  The remaining terminal is run (A is run).
This procedure is important, especially 
in installing the external electric devices, 
although it is not necessary if a good, readable 
diagram is available. In a three-phase motor, 
the resistances among all three terminals are 
the same.
Troubleshooting
Troubleshooting a hermetic compressor motor 
is often difficult because of its physical makeup 
and because it is totally enclosed in a shell and 
cannot be visually inspected. Small hermetic 
compressors usually have some type of exter-
nal overload, as shown in Figure 9.53, whereas 
large hermetic compressors usually have inter-
nal overloads, as shown in Figure 9.54. The 
winding layouts of single-phase hermetic com-
pressors are similar regardless of motor size. 
The only difference is the size of the windings, 
which will vary the resistance readings of the 
motor windings. Three-phase hermetic com-
pressor motors are generally produced in sizes 
above 3 horsepower. Through experience, the 
service technician will be able to determine the 
approximate resistance of the motor windings 
in a hermetic compressor.
Electrical troubleshooting of hermetic com-
pressor motors is done by taking a resistance 
A
C
B
2 Ω 
12 Ω 
10 Ω 
9.52
F I G U R E
Terminals of a single-
phase compressor with 
ohmic values given.
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
9.53
F I G U R E
Small hermetic com-
pressor with exterior 
overload. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
Section 9.11   Hermetic Compressor Motors 
261
Overload
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

262 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
!CAUTION
If arcing sounds (sizzling, sputtering, or popping) are 
heard inside a compressor, immediately move away; 
this sound indicates a possible compressor terminal 
venting situation.
reading of the windings with a good ohmmeter. Determining the 
 condition of the windings is easy if the problem with the motor is open 
windings, shorted windings, or grounded windings. Figure 9.55 shows a 
schematic representation of these three conditions.
Most single- or three-phase hermetic compressor motors have three 
terminals on the outside of the casing that connect the motor to the 
external power wiring, as shown in Figure 9.56. Some large hermetic 
compressors have more than three terminals, such as dual-voltage, 
part winding motors or two-speed motors, as shown in Figure 9.57. The 
resistance readings of single-phase motor windings are not the same 
because the compressor has a start winding and a run winding connected 
by a  common wire, as shown in Figure 9.58. The physical makeup of a 
Internal
Overload
9.54
F I G U R E
Hermetic compressor with 
internal overload. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

single-phase motor will allow the service technician to match the resis-
tance readings to determine the condition of the windings. The sum of 
the resistance readings of the start to common terminals and the run to 
common terminals should equal the resistance reading obtained between 
the run and start terminals, as discussed in the terminal identifica-
tion  section. If the readings do not match, a spot burnout of the wind-
ing is likely. Three-phase motors will have the same resistance in each 
Good
Open
Shorted
Grounded
C
C
S
R
R
C
S
S
C
R
S
R
9.55
F I G U R E
Schematic representation of good, shorted, open, and grounded compressor 
windings with internal overload. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 9.11   Hermetic Compressor Motors 
263
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

264 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
 winding; if not, the motor is bad because of the spot burnout. The service 
technician must be careful, however, before condemning a hermetic 
motor whose winding resistance readings vary, because the problem may 
actually be bad connections, a faulty meter, or a misreading of the meter. 
A good service technician should use every possible diagnostic tool to 
ensure that no good hermetic compressor is condemned.
(a) Spade-type push-on terminals
(b) Screw terminals
Start
Start
Start
Common
Common
Common
Run
Run
Run
Comm
1 phase
L1
3 phase
Run
1 phase
L3
3 phase
L2
3 phase
Start
1 phase
C
T1
R
T3
T2
S
9.56
F I G U R E
Several terminal arrangements on hermetic compressors. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24-Volt
compressor
sensors
Line voltage
c'case heaters
Compressor
power
Two-speed motor
connections
S1
S
C1
C2
L1
L2
L3
R1
R2
R3
Use copper conductors only
Screw terminals
9.57
F I G U R E
Terminals on large hermetic compressor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
!CAUTION
When removing a compressor, make sure that electrical 
power supplies have been disconnected and the refrig-
erant recovered.
 
Section 9.11   Hermetic Compressor Motors 
265
Diagnosing an open, shorted, or grounded hermetic compressor 
motor is easy because the resistance readings obtained are definite 
and exact. An open winding in the compressor motor means there is 
no continuity or no complete circuit; it gives an infinite resistance read-
ing, as shown in Figure 9.59. A shorted winding in a compressor motor 
means the  winding has burned together; it gives a zero ohm reading, 
as shown in Figure 9.60. A grounded winding in a compressor motor 
means that part of the winding is in contact the compressor body; 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

266 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
which gives a lower than normal resistance 
reading between the shell and the terminals 
of a compressor, as shown in Figure 9.61. Any 
resistance reading less than 500,00 ohms is 
suspect. A better way to test motor insulation 
is to use a high voltage insulation tester such 
as a Megger shown in Figure 9.62. A grounded 
compressor can be dangerous because the 
technician or customer can receive an electri-
cal shock if they touch the compressor casing 
or unit frame. A “direct short” will usually 
blow a fuse, but a compressors with a par-
tially grounded winding will usually operate 
but often times overheat. Good contact on the 
compressor shell must always be maintained 
if the motor is grounded; therefore, any paint 
must be removed from a small section of the 
compressor. The open and shorted windings 
should be read on a low ohm scale (R  1), 
but the grounded winding should be read on 
the R  10,000 scale or higher. A grounded 
compressor can be dangerous because the 
technician or customer can receive an electri-
cal shock if he or she touches the casing of a 
slightly grounded compressor. A resistance 
reading as high as 500,000 ohms indicates a 
grounded compressor that should be changed. 
Grounded compressors, if allowed to operate, 
will often operate at a higher-than-normal temperature; the warmer 
the windings, the lower the resistance of the ground in most cases.
Before condemning the compressor, service technicians should make 
certain that the internal overload of the compressor is not open. This 
condition can easily be determined by touching the compressor; if the 
compressor is hot, it is a good indication that the overload is open. The 
internal overload of a single-phase hermetic compressor is located in the 
common conductor that connects the run and start windings, as shown in 
C
S
R
Resistance readings
C to R:    2 ohms
C to S:    8 ohms
R to S:  10 ohms 
9.58
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of 
windings of a single-
phase compressor with 
internal overload (ohm 
reading for windings 
shown). (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
!CAUTION
To ensure safety and prevent damage to the motor, 
restart only after determining the cause of stoppage.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Compressor
R  1
Ohmmeter
C
R
S
9.59
F I G U R E
Open compressor winding being checked with an ohmmeter. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
0
Compressor
R  1
Ohmmeter
C
S
R
9.60
F I G U R E
Shorted compressor winding being checked with an ohmmeter. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
Section 9.11   Hermetic Compressor Motors 
267
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

268 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
6.
C
R
S
R  10
Ohmmeter
Compressor
9.61
F I G U R E
Grounded compressor windings being checked with an ohmmeter. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
9.62
F I G U R E
Photograph of a megger (Photo by Bill 
Johnson). 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Figure 9.63. Internal overloads used in three-phase hermetic compressor 
motors are connected at the common junction of the windings, as shown 
in Figure 9.64. There are many reasons for an internal overload to open in 
a hermetic compressor: for example, low refrigerant charge, locked-down 
compressor, faulty starting components, and high discharge pressure.
Mechanical failures in hermetic compressors often seem like electri-
cal problems, especially when the compressor is locked down or when 
the internal overload opens because of some mechanical failure. The 
technician must make certain the problem is truly electrical before an 
accurate diagnosis can be made.
!CAUTION
Before resetting a circuit breaker or fuse, check for a 
short circuit to ground.
!CAUTION
When troubleshooting electric motors or hermetic com-
pressor motors that are extremely hot, make sure they 
have ample time to cool before condemning them.
 
Section 9.11   Hermetic Compressor Motors 
269
C
R
S
Internal
overload
9.63
F I G U R E
Schematic of a single-phase 
compressor with internal 
overload. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Internal
overload
1
2
3
9.64
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a 
three-phase compressor with 
internal overload. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

270 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
9.12 SERVICE CALL PROTOCOL
All heating, refrigeration, and air-conditioning systems at one time or 
another will require servicing. There are many types of service proce-
dures that are performed each day for customers by industry technicians. 
Service procedures often performed by technicians in the industry are 
pre-season startups, preventive maintenance calls, or inoperative system 
calls. No matter what the reason for the call, technicians must always 
keep in mind that they are performing a service for the customer and 
that without the customer and service calls, there is no need for their 
company or their job. When customers choose a company to service 
their heating, refrigeration, and air-conditioning equipment, a great deal 
of trust and confidence is placed in the company and its employees. The 
technician must make certain that his or her actions and attitude rein-
force the decision that the customer has made. A satisfied customer will 
do more advertising for the company and technician by word of mouth 
than many other methods of high-cost advertising. When the customer 
calls and asks for a specific technician, the technician knows that he or 
she has impressed the customer and pleased his or her employer.
Most technicians have the technical skills required to diagnose and 
repair most heating, refrigeration, and air-conditioning system problems. 
You can be very efficient in repairing the system, but you can still fail to 
satisfy the customer because of your actions or attitudes. The technician is 
constantly being evaluated by customers, employers, and coworkers. The 
customer wants to be treated in a fair and courteous manner while the sys-
tem problem is being resolved. The employer is concerned about the profit 
margin and wants the technician to work faster and still  maintain a high 
level of accuracy. Coworkers should be friends, but in many cases conflicts 
occur over speed of work, callbacks, and pay scales. The technician has a dif-
ficult task in keeping his or her customers, employer, and coworkers happy.
One of the most important aspects of the technician’s job is the treat-
ment of the customer. The technician must first treat the customer in a 
courteous manner. Often this will be difficult because the customer will be 
angry because of the problems with his or her heating, refrigeration, or air-
conditioning system. For example, the customer may have spent a cold, 
uncomfortable night without heat, or it may be 105°F in the house without 
air conditioning, or food is spoiling because of an inoperative freezer, or 
this is a callback, or the cost of the repair is higher than expected. The 
technician will often have to listen to unhappy customers and try to be 
understanding even before correcting the problem. The technician must 
be patient and listen to the customer’s complaint while trying to obtain as 
much information as possible about the problem. The technician should 
also avoid disrupting the activities of the customer whenever possible.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The technician’s appearance is of utmost importance because often 
the technician is judged by this alone. The customer will be much more 
comfortable with a technician who is clean and neat in appearance. 
Often, because of the location and service procedure, it will be difficult to 
maintain a clean and neat appearance the entire day. It is the responsi-
bility of the technician to try to remain clean and neat regardless of the 
working conditions (under houses, in attics, or in muddy, sloppy condi-
tions). Changing a compressor, cleaning a furnace, or cleaning a dirty con-
denser can make it difficult to remain clean and neat. Many companies 
require employees to wear uniforms for this purpose. It is not practical 
to change clothes every time you work in dirty areas or work with dirty 
components, but you must do everything possible to maintain a neat and 
clean appearance at all times.
The technician must treat the customer’s property with respect. The 
technician will be required to work in close proximity to walls and floor 
coverings and must do so without marring or damaging these surfaces. 
Every effort must be made to prevent any type of damage to the customer’s 
structure or furnishings; make sure hands are clean before working on 
a thermostat mounted on an interior wall, remove mud from shoes or 
remove shoes before entering the structure, dust clothing before enter-
ing the structure, and do not use furniture as a resting place for tools or 
components. It is the technician’s responsibility to prevent damage to the 
customer’s property. Damage to the customer’s structure or furnishings 
will have to be corrected by the company. Most companies have liability 
insurance to cover such costs. The technician should also make certain to 
check the service procedures performed to ensure that no danger exists 
from gas leaks, loose wires, or fire in the equipment that was serviced.
Upon completion of the service procedure, the technician should 
fully explain the problem and the service performed to correct it. If there 
are several options for correcting the problem, all options should be dis-
cussed and the customer allowed to choose the option he or she prefers. 
The technician should be fair about the amount of time spent and parts 
used for which the customer will be billed. For example, it is unfair to bill 
the customer for 10 pounds of refrigerant when only 5 were required; it 
would also be unfair to bill the customer for more time than was required. 
It is also dishonest to replace parts that are still in good condition and 
charge the customer for them. The technician must always make the cor-
rect ethical decisions regarding the customer to ensure continued trust.
The technician should never forget that the company will be judged 
by the technician’s actions, appearance, and attitude. No greater compli-
ment can be paid a service technician than for the customer to call back 
and request a particular technician for a service call.
 
Section 9.12   Service Call Protocol 
271
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

272 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
9.13 SERVICE CALLS
Service Call 1
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas-fired forced-air furnace
Complaint: No heat
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for 
available information. The work order information reveals that the 
furnace is an upflow gas-fired furnace located in a closet within the 
living space of the residence.
 2. The technician informs the customer of his or her presence (if the 
customer is available) and obtains specifics about what the system 
is doing.
 3. Upon entering the residence, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign material are carried into the structure. The technician 
also takes care not to mar interior walls.
 4. The customer informs the technician that the main burner is ignit-
ing and operating for several minutes and cutting off. The blower 
is not operating.
 5. The technician checks the limit and fan controls and determines 
that they are operating correctly. The technician checks the voltage 
available to the fan motor and determines that the voltage supply is 
correct.
 6. The technician turns the power supply off and locks or labels it.
 7. The fan motor is only moderately warm, indicating that the motor 
has been off for some time.
 8. The technician checks the motor windings with an ohmmeter and 
reads infinite resistance, determining that the motor windings are 
open.
 9. The technician changes the fan motor and checks the operation of 
the furnace.
10. The technician informs the customer of the problem and that it has 
been corrected.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11. A subsequent courtesy call by the technician to the customer to 
make certain the equipment is operating properly builds confidence 
and good will between the company and the customer.
Service Call 2
Application: Commercial refrigeration (walk-in cooler)
Type of Equipment: Air-cooled condensing unit with evaporator
Complaint: Warm walk-in cooler
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order information reveals that the tem-
perature of the walk-in cooler is above a safe temperature for the 
stored product.
 2. The technician informs the business manager of his or her presence 
and obtains specifics about what the refrigeration unit system is doing.
 3. Upon entering the business, the technician makes certain that the 
normal business activities are not interrupted and that his or her 
appearance is clean and neat.
 4. The manager informs the technician that the refrigeration unit is not 
maintaining the correct temperature.
 5. The technician makes a visual inspection of the indoor unit and 
finds the evaporator fan motor operating.
 6. The technician proceeds to the outdoor condensing unit and 
observes that the compressor runs only a short period of time and 
cuts off. The condenser fan motor is not running.
 7. With the compressor running, the technician knows that power is 
available to the condensing unit.
 8. The technician turns the power off to the condensing unit and locks 
or labels it.
 9. The technician finds that the motor turns freely but is extremely hot. 
The technician makes the determination that the motor bearings are 
good.
10. The technician determines that the condenser fan motor is a PSC 
motor and checks the running capacitor with an ohmmeter or capac-
itor tester. The technician finds that the capacitor is open.
 
Section 9.13   Service Calls 
273
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

274 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
11. The technician removes the faulty running capacitor and replaces it 
with the correct replacement capacitor.
12. The technician restores power to the condensing unit, observes the 
operation of the fan motor, then checks the amp draw of the motor 
and compares the reading with the nameplate running ampacity of 
the motor to ensure that the motor is operating properly.
13. The technician interrupts power to the unit and oils the condenser 
fan motor.
14. The technician informs the manager of the problem and that it has 
been corrected.
15. A subsequent courtesy call by the technician to the manager to make 
certain the equipment is operating properly builds confidence and 
good will between the service company and the customer.
Service Call 3
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Packaged heat pump
Complaint: No cooling
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order information reveals that the unit 
is a packaged heat pump. The customer will leave the key under a 
flower pot on the right side of the front door.
 2. Upon entering the residence, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician 
also takes care not to mar interior walls.
 3. The technician sets the thermostat to cool and observes the opera-
tion of the equipment. The technician immediately notices that the 
indoor fan motor is not operating.
 4. The technician goes outside to check the unit, specifically the indoor 
fan motor, based on the indication that the motor is not running 
when the thermostat is set to cool. The technician finds that the 
compressor and outdoor fan motor are operating, but the indoor fan 
motor is not operating.
 5. The technician turns the power supply off and locks or labels it.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6. The technician removes the unit cover, allowing access to the indoor 
fan motor.
 7. The technician finds that the indoor fan turns with difficulty and the 
motor is hot to the touch.
 8. The technician has determined by the fan being difficult to turn 
that the bearings are bad and that the indoor fan motor should be 
replaced. (Occasionally, oiling the motor will free the bearings, but 
this is usually only a temporary correction and, in most cases, the 
best solution is to replace the motor.)
 9. The technician replaces the fan motor with the correct motor.
10. The technician turns the power on and checks the operation and 
amp draw of the new fan motor. The indoor fan motor is operat-
ing properly, so the technician turns the power off and replaces the 
access cover.
11. The technician turns the power on to the unit.
12. The technician returns the thermostat setting to normal and leaves 
a note for the customer indicating the service performed.
13. The technician replaces the key in the location designated by the 
customer.
Service Call 4
Application: Commercial conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Commercial and industrial fan coil unit with 
230-volts–three-phase–60-hertz power supply
Complaint: Blower motor does not operate
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order information reveals that the motor 
operating the blower in the fan coil unit is not operating.
 2. The technician informs the maintenance supervisor of his or her 
presence and obtains any specific information about the fan coil 
unit.
 3. The technician visually observes the blower motor and controls and 
finds that the motor is controlled by a magnetic starter, which has 
opened due to a possible overload. The technician resets the overload 
 
Section 9.13   Service Calls 
275
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

276 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
and the blower motor rotates at a very low rate of speed, and then 
the magnetic starter opens again due to an overload.
 4. The technician turns the power off and locks or labels it.
 5. The technician checks the motor and finds that it turns freely but is 
extremely hot to the touch.
 6. The technician has determined that the bearings of the motor are 
good and the overheating is due to other factors.
 7. The technician checks the power at the magnetic starter and finds 
that only single phase is available and that the motor requires 
230 volts–three phase–60 hertz.
 8. The technician checks the voltage at the distribution center and 
checks the fuses with an ohmmeter. One of the three fuses has an 
infinite reading and is bad.
 9. The technician replaces the bad fuse with one of equal specification.
10. The technician restores power to the magnetic starter and observes 
that the fan operates.
11. The technician checks the amp draw of the fan motor and deter-
mines that the motor is operating properly.
12. The maintenance supervisor is informed that the problem was a 
blown fuse that created a single-phasing condition and overloaded 
the motor, and that the problem has been corrected.
Service Call 5
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No cooling
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order reveals that the system is not cooling.
 2. The technician informs the customer of his or her presence and 
obtains specifics about what the conditioned air system is doing.
 3. Upon entering the residence, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician 
also takes care not to mar interior walls.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 4. The thermostat is set to the cool position and the indoor fan motor 
is operating, but the system is not cooling.
 5. The technician proceeds to the air-cooled condensing unit and finds 
that the condenser fan motor is operating, which normally indicates 
that the contactor is closed.
 6. The cover is removed from the condensing unit and the technician 
determines that the compressor is not operating and is very hot to 
the touch.
 7. A voltage check is made at the compressor terminals and the correct 
voltage is available.
 8. The technician makes a resistance check of the compressor motor 
and reads 25 ohms between the start and run terminals of the com-
pressor but reads infinite resistance between common and start and 
common and run. These resistance readings indicate that the inter-
nal overload of the compressor is open (it is not allowing voltage to 
reach the windings).
 9. All starting components and capacitors are checked by the techni-
cian. If all are good, the technician will have to allow the internal 
overload ample time to close. After the internal overload has reset, 
the technician will make a resistance check of the windings. The 
resistance reading of the run to start terminals of the compressor 
should equal the readings of the sum of the common to start and 
common to run terminals.
10. The windings are good, so the technician tries to start the compres-
sor. If the compressor fails to start and pulls a high current draw 
or the internal overload opens again, the compressor is probably 
mechanically seized or locked down.
11. The technician informs the customer that the compressor is bad 
and will have to be replaced. The technician gives the homeowner 
an estimate of the replacement cost and time when the replacement 
can be made.
 
Section 9.13   Service Calls 
277
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

278 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
Service Call 6
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Heat pump
Complaint: No heat
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order indicates that the breaker for the 
outdoor section of the heat pump is overloading, while the indoor 
unit is operating. The customer will leave the key under the mat at 
the back door.
 2. Upon entering the residence, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician 
also takes care not to mar interior walls.
 3. The technician sets the thermostat to heat and observes the opera-
tion of the equipment. The technician notices that the indoor fan 
motor is operating, but the unit is not heating.
 4. The technician goes to the outdoor unit and observes that the unit is 
not operating. The voltage is checked at the line connections of the 
disconnect switch of the outdoor unit and no voltage is available. The 
disconnect is turned off. The technician locates the electrical panel 
and resets the breaker that feeds the outdoor unit.
 5. The disconnect is closed and nothing happens. A voltage check is 
again made, which indicates that the breaker has broken the circuit 
again.
 6. The technician determines that a short circuit exists somewhere in 
the outdoor unit. A resistance check must be made of each load that 
receives voltage from the disconnect. The resistance checks indicate 
that the resistance reading from the common to run terminals of 
the compressor is 0 ohm. This indicates that the compressor motor 
windings are shorted and the compressor must be replaced.
 7. The customer is informed that the compressor is bad and will have 
to be replaced. The technician gives the homeowner an estimate of 
the replacement cost and a time when the replacement can be made.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SUMMARY
The single most important operating principle of an electric motor is the 
rotating magnetic field produced by alternating current. An alternating 
current is applied to the stator of the motor to produce a magnetic field. 
The magnetic field interacts with the rotor to produce a magnetic field in 
the rotor. When these two magnetic fields act together, they produce a 
rotating movement in the motor.
There are basically six types of motors used in the industry: shaded 
pole, split phase, permanent split capacitor, capacitor start–capacitor run 
and capacitor start, three phase, and electronically commutated.
The shaded-pole motor is a low-starting torque motor used on some 
propeller types of fans. These motors are easy to identify because of 
the copper band around the shaded pole. They are easily diagnosed for 
trouble because of their simple winding patterns.
Split-phase motors are relatively low-torque motors. They are simple 
and inexpensive devices. A split-phase motor can be used on a small 
hermetic compressor with the starting winding being dropped out by a 
starting relay. It can be used with any open types of motors that do not 
require a high starting torque.
The permanent split-capacitor motor has a low starting torque and 
a running capacitor in the starting winding. The running capacitor 
remains in the circuit at all times to produce good running efficiency. 
The permanent split-capacitor motor is used on most residential air 
conditioners of 5 horsepower or under and on direct-drive fan motors. 
It is relatively inexpensive because it does not have a switch to drop the 
starting winding.
The capacitor-start and the capacitor-start–capacitor-run motors are 
similar in design. They have a high starting torque. The addition of a 
running capacitor to a capacitor-start motor produces the capacitor-start–
capacitor-run motor, which has good running efficiency.
Three-phase motors are commonly used on large pieces of equip-
ment. They operate much like single-phase motors except that they have 
three basic phase displacements without the use of any starting appara-
tus. They have better starting and running characteristics than single-
phase motors.
The electronically commutated motor (ECM) is a high-efficiency, 
 variable-speed motor that is interfaced with system controls. The ECM 
can be programmed to maintain constant airflow over a wide range 
of external static pressures. The ECM is constructed as a three-phase 
 
Summary 
279
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

280 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
DC motor. The motor is made in two parts: One part is the motor and 
the other section is the controller. The motor can be disconnected and 
checked just like a three-phase motor. The controller/module can easily 
be checked with a motor analyzer purchased from the manufacturer.
Hermetic compressor motors are becoming popular because of their 
low cost. They are used in many cooling units, especially for the smaller 
systems. Hermetic motors must have all their starting apparatus wired 
and mounted externally because it cannot be contained in the compres-
sor shell. A hermetic compressor motor may be any one of the five basic 
motor types discussed in this chapter. The enclosure distinguishes the 
hermetic compressor from the other motor types.
Most single-phase motors require some method of producing a sec-
ond phase of electricity in the motor to make it start. The design of the 
windings in a split-phase motor allows the use of a centrifugal switch to 
drop the starting winding out of the circuit after the motor has attained 
75% of its full speed. Other types of single-phase motors use capaci-
tors to create the second phase. The permanent split-capacitor motor 
incorporates a running capacitor to aid in the starting of the motor. The 
capacitor-start–capacitor-run motor incorporates the running capacitor 
along with a starting capacitor, using a potential relay to drop out the 
starting capacitor. The capacitor-start motor operates as a split-phase 
motor except that a starting capacitor is added to the start winding.
The service technician will often need to diagnose why a hermetic 
compressor will not run. Frequently, the fault lies in the hermetic 
motor. Hermetic compressor motors can easily be diagnosed with a good 
 ohmmeter as open, shorted, or grounded. Spot burnouts are harder to 
diagnose, but you can still identify them easily by using the resistance 
readings of the motor.
Note: See Appendix A for Motor Review Table.
!CAUTION
All electric motors should be properly grounded.
!CAUTION
Before starting an electric motor that has blown a fuse 
or tripped a circuit breaker, make sure that the motor 
does not have a short to ground before resetting or 
replacing the safety device.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
RQ1 
What is magnetism?
RQ2 
Torque is __________.
a. strength that a motor produces by turning
b. rotating motion
c. a motor under load
d. all of the above
RQ3 
A magnetic field is __________.
a. the area around an electric motor
b. the area around an electric wire
c. the area in which a magnetic force operates
d. all of the above
RQ4 
True or False: A permanent magnet is a piece of 
material that has been magnetized and can hold its 
magnetic strength for a reasonable length of time.
RQ5 
How is an electromagnet produced?
RQ6 
Which of the following produces the best electro-
magnet?
a. cobalt
b. soft iron
c. paper
d. wood
RQ7 
Unlike poles of a magnet _________ each other 
and like poles _________ each other.
RQ8 
What part does polarity play in the operation of an 
electric motor?
RQ9 
What part of a motor produces an inductive mag-
netic field within itself to facilitate the rotating 
motion?
a. squirrel cage rotor
b. motor bearings
c. capacitor
d. all of the above
RQ10 
What part does the frequency of alternating current 
play in the operation of an electric motor?
RQ11 
What would be the speed of a two-pole motor 
operating on a 120 volts 60 Hertz power supply?
a. 1100 rpm
b. 1800 rpm
c. 2800 rpm
d. 3600 rpm
RQ12 
What are the five types of single-phase motors 
used in the industry?
RQ13 
Which of the following correctly lists the motor’s 
starting torque from lowest to highest?
a.  capacitor start, split phase, shaded pole, 
three phase
b.  shaded pole, three phase, permanent split 
capacitor, capacitor start
c.  three phase, split phase, shaded pole, capacitor 
start
d.  shaded pole, split phase, capacitor start, three 
phase
RQ14 
Which of the following is a common use of a 
shaded-pole motor?
a. furnace fan motor
b. propeller fans
c. small pumps
d. compressors
RQ15 
How does a shaded-pole motor operate?
RQ16 
How can a shaded-pole motor be reversed?
RQ17 
What determines the rotation of a shaded-pole motor?
a. location of windings
b. location of shaded pole
c. location of rotor
d. none of the above
RQ18 
Draw a diagram of a three-speed, shaded-pole motor.
RQ19 
What enables a split-phase motor to develop 
enough torque to begin rotation?
 
Review Questions 
281
C H A P T E R  9  R E V I E W
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RQ20 
What removes the starting winding from the elec-
trical circuit of an open-type split-phase motor once 
it reaches 75% of its operating speed?
a. disconnect switch
b. phase-out switch
c. centrifugal switch
d. starting switch
RQ21 
What are the three probable areas of trouble in a 
split-phase motor?
RQ22 
What is the unit of measurement for the strength 
of a capacitor?
a. microamp
b. microtorque
c. microfarad
d. microwatt
RQ23 
What is the purpose of a capacitor?
a. boost starting torque
b. increase running efficiency
c. increase motor speed
d. both a and b
RQ24 
What is the difference between a running and a 
starting capacitor?
RQ25 
List the five capacitor replacement rules.
RQ26 
Explain the operation of a permanent split- 
capacitor motor.
RQ27 
How are a PSC motor and a capacitor- start– 
capacitor-run motor similar?
a. Both use a starting capacitor.
b. Both use a running capacitor.
c. Both use starting relays.
d. none of the above
RQ28 
What are the advantages and disadvantages 
of using the following types of motors?
a. shaded-pole motor
b. PSC motor
c. split-phase motor
d. capacitor-start–capacitor-run motor
RQ29 
What are the similarities between an open-type 
split-phase motor and a capacitor-start motor?
a. Both have a capacitor.
b. Both have a relay.
c. Both have a centrifugal switch.
d. none of the above
RQ30 
Which of the following is an advantage in using a 
three-phase motor?
a. higher starting torque
b. stronger
c. more dependable
d. all of the above
RQ31 
Draw a wiring diagram of a capacitor- start– 
capacitor-run motor.
RQ32 
True or False: All starting apparatuses are mounted 
externally to the hermetic compressor shell.
RQ33 
What is the process in troubleshooting any electric 
motor?
RQ34 
Which of the following is the capacitance of an 
88-μF and a 108-μF starting capacitor connected 
in series?
a. 196 μF
b. 96 μF
c. 48 μF
d. 40 μF
RQ35 
Which of the following is the capacitance of two 
20-μF running capacitors connected in parallel?
a. 10 μF
b. 20 μF
c. 30 μF
d. 40 μF
RQ36 
If a capacitor produces 15 A on a 240-volt supply, 
which of the following is its microfarad rating?
a. 166 μF
b. 15 μF
c. 200 μF
d. 3450 μF
C H A P T E R  9  R E V I E W
282 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  9  R E V I E W
RQ37 
Which of the following capacitors could be used to 
replace a 35-μF, 370-V running capacitor?
a. 35 μF, 330 V
b. 35 μF, 390 V
c. 30 μF, 440 V
d. 40 μF, 370 V
RQ38 
Which of the following capacitors could be used to 
replace a 188-μF, 250-V starting capacitor?
a. 188 μF, 120 V
b. 259 μF, 120 V
c. 200 μF, 250 V
d. 300 μF, 250 V
RQ39 
Which of the following capacitors or combination 
of capacitors could be used to replace a 45-μF, 
370-V running capacitor?
a. 40 μF, 440 V
b. 30 μF, 250 V
c. 30 μF, 370 V
d. 15 μF, 440 V
RQ40 
Which of the following capacitors or combination 
of capacitors could be used to replace an 88-μF, 
250-V starting capacitor?
a. 180 μF, 250 V
b. 180 μF, 330 V
c. 150 μF, 120 V
d. 150 μF, 250 V
RQ41 
Find the common, start, and run terminals of the 
following hermetic compressors.
a. 
b. 
c. 
RQ42 
Briefly explain the procedure for troubleshooting 
hermetic compressor motors.
RQ43 
What are the electrical failure categories for her-
metic compressor motors?
RQ44 
What precautions should be taken when checking 
hermetic compressor motors?
RQ45 
What would be the highest allowable resistance 
reading for a grounded compressor motor?
RQ46 
What are the advantages of using an electronically 
commutated motor over a PSC motor?
RQ47 
Explain the construction of an ECM.
RQ48 
An ECM is a __________.
a. three-phase, AC motor
b. three-phase, DC motor
c. single-phase, AC motor
d. single-phase, DC motor
RQ49 
True or False: The resistance readings of the wind-
ings of a properly operating ECM should be equal.
RQ50 
True or False: The line voltage power supply of an 
ECM should never be disconnected or connected 
with the power on.
 
Review Questions 
283
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
16 Ω
2 Ω
7 Ω
C
12 Ω
4 Ω
10 Ω
1 Ω
8 Ω
8 Ω
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 9 in the Lab Manual.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PRACTICE SERVICE CALLS
Determine the problem and recommend a solution for the following ser-
vice calls. (Be specific; do not list components as good or bad.)
Practice Service Call 1
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Packaged heat pump
Complaint: Intermittent heat
Symptoms:
1. All components of equipment are operating properly except the 
indoor fan motor.
2. Indoor fan motor is turning slower than normal.
3. Indoor fan motor is drawing 12 amps (nameplate amps 3.2 A).
4. Indoor fan motor cuts off approximately every 10 minutes for a 
considerable period of time.
5. Ohmmeter reading of run winding is 2 ohms.
6. Ohmmeter reading of start winding is 12 ohms.
7. Ohmmeter reading of capacitor is infinite.
Practice Service Call 2
Application: Commercial refrigeration (walk-in freezer)
Type of Equipment: Air-cooled condensing unit with evaporator (unit 
voltage 240 V–1ø–60 Hz)
Complaint: No refrigeration
Symptoms:
1. Compressor is out due to opening of high-pressure switch. 
(Technician resets high-pressure switch.)
2. Compressor operates after resetting the high-pressure switch, but 
the condenser fan motor does not operate.
3. The condenser fan motor is cold to the touch.
284 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Practice Service Calls 
285
4. Voltage to the condenser fan motor is 240 volts.
5. Ohm reading of the start winding of the condenser fan motor is 
infinite ohms.
Practice Service Call 3
Application: Commercial and industrial conditioned air system
Type of equipment: Commercial and industrial fan coil unit (unit voltage 
240 V–3ø–60 Hz)
Complaint: Fan does not operate
Symptoms:
1. Motor is supplied with 240 V–3ø–60 Hz.
2. Resistance reading of motor is between T1 and T4 and T2 and T5  
infinite ohms, T3 and T6  2 ohms, and T7 and T9  infinite ohms. 
(Motor is dual voltage, wye winding.)
3. Motor is cold to the touch.
Practice Service Call 4
Application: Domestic refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Frost-free refrigerator
Complaint: No refrigeration
Symptoms:
1. Compressor does not run.
2. Compressor starting components are good.
3. Resistance readings of compressor terminals are: C to S  12 ohms, 
C to R  infinite ohms, and S to R  infinite ohms.
Practice Service Call 5
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No cooling
Symptoms:
1. Indoor fan is operating normally.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

286 
CHAPTER 9   Basic Electric Motors
2. Condenser fan motor is operating normally.
3. Compressor is extremely hot to the touch.
4. Resistance readings of the compressor terminals are: C to R  2 ohms, 
C to S  13 ohms, and R to S  15 ohms.
5. Resistance reading between the run terminal and compressor 
housing  200 ohms.
Practice Service Call 6
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Air-cooled packaged unit
Complaint: No cooling
Symptoms:
1. Indoor fan motor is operating normally.
2. Condenser fan motor is operating normally.
3. Compressor is extremely hot to the touch.
4. Resistance readings of the compressor terminals are: R to S  15 ohms 
and C to R & S  infinity.
5. All capacitors and starting components are good.
6. If the compressor is allowed to cool down and then restarted, it has 
a current draw of 85 amps (nameplate full load amps  24 A).
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

287
C H A P T E R10
OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗  Identify and explain the operation of motor starting relays and other starting 
components that are used on single-phase hermetic compressor motors.
◗  Select the correct potential relay for an application with information avail-
able on the potential relay to be replaced.
◗  Troubleshoot and install motor starting relays on hermetic compressor 
motors.
◗  Lubricate and identify the types of bearings used in electric motors.
◗  Identify the type of motor drives used on industry applications.
◗  Calculate the variables in a V-belt drive application to obtain the desired 
equipment rpm.
◗  Recognize and adjust a V-belt application to the proper tension and 
 alignment.
KEY TERMS
Back electromotive force 
Locked rotor amperage
Ball bearings 
Potential relay
Bearing 
Sleeve bearings
Current or magnetic relay 
Solid-state relay
Direct drive 
Starting relay
Full-load amperage 
V-belt
Components for Electric Motors
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 9 we discussed electric motors and some of their starting 
components. In this chapter we discuss the starting components used on 
single-phase hermetic motors. Single-phase hermetic motors and other 
special motors require some type of external starting component because 
they are enclosed in a sealed case. Three types of starting relays are used 
on this type of motor: current, potential, and solid state. These devices 
are used on most single-phase hermetic compressor motors with the 
exception of permanent split-capacitor motors.
Electric motors must have bearings to permit smooth and easy rota-
tion. The ball bearing or the sleeve bearing is used in most motors. Motors 
also must have some means of transferring their rotating motion to the 
device being powered by the motor. A direct-drive hookup transfers the 
rotating motion directly from the motor to the device. The belt-drive 
hookup transfers the rotating motion to the device by a belt connection.
Magnetic starters and push buttons are used to stop and start electric 
motors. A magnetic starter opens and closes sets of contacts to stop and 
start loads. The magnetic starter also incorporates overload protection for 
the motor it controls. Push-button switches are used to control magnetic 
starters in many cases.
10.1 STARTING RELAYS FOR SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS
Single-phase motors, with the exception of the permanent split-capacitor 
motor, must have some means of dropping the starting winding (or the 
starting capacitor in the case of a capacitor-start–capacitor-run motor) 
out of the circuit. In an open-type motor, this is accomplished simply 
and easily by a centrifugal switch mounted in the motor. The switch 
opens the starting circuit once the motor reaches 75% of its full speed. In 
enclosed motors some type of starting relay must be used.
Basically, three types of starting relays are used in the industry. The 
first two types—current, and solid-state relays—are generally used on 
small hermetic motors. The third type, the potential relay, can be adapted 
to any size motor. Starting relays are essential to the operation of a 
hermetic compressor motor with the exception of the permanent split-
capacitor motor.
Each of the three types of starting relays uses a different method 
to drop the starting circuit in or out. A potential relay operates on the 
principle of back electromotive force. The back electromotive force is the 
amount of voltage produced in the starting winding of a motor. The cur-
rent or magnetic type of relay operates on the current or amperage that 
288 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 10.2   Current or Amperage Relays 
289
the motor uses to start. The solid-state relay uses a positive temperature 
coefficient (PTC) material that effectively removes the start winding or 
component from the circuit. Each of these relays must be correctly sized 
and matched to the application, except the solid-state relays that can be 
used over certain horsepower ranges. Each relay is designed to remove 
the starting circuit when the motor reaches approximately 67% to 75% of 
full speed.
10.2 CURRENT OR AMPERAGE RELAYS
On all electric motors, the starting amperage is greater than the running 
amperage because the rotor is stationary on startup. The starting amper-
age of an electric motor is usually stated as the locked rotor amperage 
(LRA). The locked rotor amperage is the maximum amp draw of the motor 
when the motor is in a locked rotor condition. The running amperage 
of an electric motor is usually stated as the full-load amperage (FLA). 
Therefore, the ampere draw of the motor is high at the time of the initial 
startup, but as the motor gains speed, the ampere draw decreases. The 
current or magnetic relay uses the electrical characteristics of the motor 
to remove the starting circuit electrically once the motor has established 
a good running speed, approximately 75% of full speed.
Operation
The current relay is built much like a solenoid, with copper wire wrapped 
around a steel hollow core holding a steel plunger, as shown in Figure 10.1. 
Figure 10.2 shows a cutaway view of a current relay. The contacts of the 
current relay are normally open, as shown schematically in Figure 10.3. 
The contacts of most current relays are protected by covers that cannot 
be removed, so it is almost impossible to visually inspect the contacts.
Figure 10.4 shows the position of the contacts when the motor is in the 
starting phase. As the speed of the motor increases, the amperage decreases. 
When the motor has reached 67% to 75% of its full speed, the amperage 
will be low enough to cause the magnetic field strength of the relay coil to 
decrease enough to drop the relay contacts out of the starting circuit.
Troubleshooting
Most current relays are easy to troubleshoot because they have a coil and 
a set of contacts than can be easily checked with an ohmmeter. The cur-
rent relay has normally open contacts that are easily checked by turning 
the relay upside down and checking the contacts with an ohmmeter. If 
the contacts are good, the relay contacts will read open (infinite ohms) 
when the relay is right side up. They will read closed (zero ohms) when 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

290 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
10.1
F I G U R E
Current relays. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Stationary
contact
Pin connectors
Guide pin
Stationary contact
Bridging
contact
Solenoid
coil
Spring
Armature
10.2
F I G U R E
Cutaway of current-type relay (Adapted with 
permission from Texas Instruments, Inc., 
Attleboro, MA).
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 10.3   Potential Relays 
291
Compressor
terminal box
C
S
R
L1
L2
10.3
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a current relay when it is de-energized. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Compressor
terminal box
C
S
R
L1
L2
10.4
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of 
a current relay when it 
is energized. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
the relay is inverted. It is imperative when checking a current relay with 
an ohmmeter that the ohm readings of the contacts be obtained from the 
correct position of the relay.
The coil of the relay is made of large wire and should have a very low 
resistance, around 0 to 1 ohm. If the coil reads any higher, more than 
likely the coil is bad and the relay should be replaced. The current relay 
and motor starting components should be completely checked to ensure 
that no other components are bad.
10.3 POTENTIAL RELAYS
The potential relay is gaining popularity because it can be adapted easily 
to most any compressor. The back electromotive force produced by the 
starting winding of a motor is the controlling factor of a potential relay.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

292 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
Operation
When a single-phase motor is operating, a voltage is produced across 
the starting windings above and beyond the voltage being applied to the 
motor. The starting windings actually act as a generator to produce the 
back electromotive force of a motor. The back electromotive force of a 
motor corresponds to the motor speed. The potential relay is designed 
to open, dropping the starting circuit, when the motor reaches a certain 
back electromotive force that is predetermined by the manufacturer of 
the motor.
Figure 10.5 shows a potential relays that look much like ordinary 
general-purpose relays. The wiring diagram for a potential relay is 
shown in Figure 10.6. The potential relay has an advantage over other 
relays because its contacts are normally closed when the unit starts, so 
there is no arcing on startup, but when the relay closes on the off cycle 
sparking occurs because the starting capacitor will discharge. Arcing is 
an electric spark that is produced across two sets of contacts. As the 
motor speed increases, so does the back electromotive force. When the 
10.5
FIGURE
Potential relays. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 10.3   Potential Relays 
293
speed approaches 75% to 80% of full speed, the back electromotive force 
is large enough to drop the starting circuit by energizing the potential 
relay coil. The potential relay is rated by, and operates on, three voltage 
ratings: pickup voltage—the minimum voltage required to energize the 
coil and open the NC contacts; dropout voltage—the minimum voltage 
the coil requires once it is energized to keep the contacts from closing; 
and continuous coil voltage—the maximum voltage at which the coil can 
continuously operate.
On many permanent split-capacitor hermetic motors that are experi-
encing difficulty starting, a hard-starting kit can be installed to eliminate 
the problem, making the PSC motor a capacitor-start–capacitor-run motor. 
A hard-starting kit consists of a potential relay and a starting capacitor. 
Figure 10.7 shows the schematic diagram of a hard-start kit, and Figure 10.8 
shows a hard-start kit as it would come from a manufacturer.
Troubleshooting
The potential relay is easy to troubleshoot because only two parts of the 
relay must be checked. The coil of the potential relay can be checked 
with an ohmmeter across 2 and 5 (Figure 10.7), which could check out as 
good, open, or shorted. The contacts of the potential relay across 1 and 2 
should be checked, and they should be closed. Motor current will increase 
if the potential relay does not drop the starting circuit at the proper time. 
This condition is dangerous to the motor and the starting apparatus. 
The potential relay should always be checked completely to prevent this 
 condition. A service technician should always check the operation of a 
unit after the dropout of a starting relay. The correct size relay should 
10.6
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a potential relay. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Compressor
terminals
Potential relay
SC
SR
SR
RC
C
S
R
L2
L1
1
2
5
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

294 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
10.7
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a hard-start kit. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
To starting
winding
To power leg feeding
run of compressor
To common
of compressor
Starting capacitor
Potential relay
1
2
5
10.8
FIGURE
Hard-start kit. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 10.3   Potential Relays 
295
always be used for replacement of a faulty relay. If the starting relay is 
working properly, there will be no ampere draw through the starting 
circuit after the motor has reached full speed. Figure 10.10 shows a com-
mercial potential relay tester.
The use of potential relays on single-phase hermetic motors has 
increased over the past 10 years. Potential relays vary greatly in number 
of terminals, coil group, pickup voltage, and mounting position. An expla-
nation of the number system of the two major manufacturers of potential 
relays should be helpful in the field.
The two major brands of potential relays are General Electric and 
RBM. Explanations of their numbering codes are given in Figures 10.9 and 
10.10, respectively. Pay careful attention to the coil group and the pickup 
voltage when you cross-reference a potential relay.
10.9
F I G U R E
Explanation of G.E. potential relay code. 
(Courtesy of Tecumseh Products Co.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

296 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
10.10
F I G U R E
Explanation of RBM potential relay code.
(Courtesy of Tecumseh Products Co.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 10.4   Solid-State Starting Relays and Devices 
297
10.4 SOLID-STATE STARTING RELAYS AND DEVICES
The advancement of solid-state controls has produced another type of 
current-sensitive relay, a PTC starting switch. Certain ceramic materi-
als (PTC) increase their resistance as they heat up from current passing 
through them. This is the basis of the solid-state relays that are replac-
ing many of the other varieties on fractional horsepower motors. A PTC 
solid-state starting relay is shown in Figure 10.11. The solid-state starting 
relay used on small split-phase and capacitor-start motor compressors 
is simple in its operation. The device is used to drop out the starting 
 windings and starting capacitor of a small hermetic compressor motor. 
Figure 10.12 shows a solid-state relay installed on a fractional-horse-
power hermetic compressor. The flexibility of the solide-state relay has 
greatly expanded its usage because one relay will cover a range of horse-
powers. Manufacturers are producing a PTC relay with a built-in starting 
capacitor, as shown in Figure 10.13, and a built-in starting capacitor and 
overload, as shown in Figure 10.14.
10.11
F I G U R E
Solid-state starting relay. 
(Courtesy of Sealed 
Unit Parts Co., Inc., 
Allenwood, NJ)
10.12
FIGURE
Solid-state 
starting relay 
installed on a 
compressor.  
(Courtesy of 
Tecumseh 
Products Co.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

298 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
10.13
F I G U R E
Solid-state relay with built-in capacitor. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
10.14
F I G U R E
Solid-state relay with built-in capacitor and overload. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 10.4   Solid-State Starting Relays and Devices 
299
Permanent split-capacitor (PSC) motors often need assistance in 
starting. A potential relay and starting capacitor can be used to change a 
normal PSC motor into a capacitor-start–capacitor-run motor with a high 
starting torque. On some occasions a positive temperature coefficient 
start device is used to increase the starting torque of a PSC motor. The 
PTC start device is easier to install and less expensive than the conven-
tional potential relay and starting capacitor. Figure 10.15 shows the PTC 
start device. This device is wired in parallel with the run capacitor. The 
PTC start device performs much like a small starting capacitor; it momen-
tarily increases the current in the motor starting winding. As the material 
heats up, its resistance increases quickly to the point where it becomes 
a nonconductor and the motor returns to PSC operation. This device 
requires a three-minute cool-down period between starts. To check this 
device, the service technician need only determine if it is dropping out of 
the circuit or if it is being energized on startup. It should be replaced if it 
is not working properly.
An electronic motor starting relay has been introduced that can be 
used as a universal replacement for many motor starting relays in the 
industry. This electronic relay operates on a time function principle 
rather than sensing voltage or current. The time function design allows 
this relay to be used as a replacement for many potential and current 
starting relays. This relay is shown in Figure 10.16. The wiring diagram 
is shown in Figure 10.17 with the relay replacing a potential relay and in 
Figure 10.18 replacing a current-type relay.
Operation
The solid-state starting relay is placed in series with the start winding 
of the fractional horsepower hermetic compressor, as shown in 
Figure 10.19. The solid-state starting relay normally has a very low resis-
tance. As the compressor motor starts, the current flows to the start 
winding. The resistance of the solid-state starting relay rapidly rises very 
high. Therefore, the current flow to the start winding is reduced greatly, 
which takes the starting winding out of the circuit. Most solid-state 
starting relays can also be used with a capacitor placed in series with the 
relay and start winding, as shown in Figure 10.20. One advantage of the 
solid-state starting relay is that one model covers a variety of horsepower 
ranges. For example, one relay could be used from 1⁄2 horsepower to 
1⁄5 horsepower, and another from ¼ horsepower to 1⁄3 horsepower. Some 
manufacturers produce this type of relay to cover compressor motors 
above 1⁄3 horsepower. The major advantage of this type of relay is that the 
service technician can stock three basic relays and cover many applica-
tions and sizes.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

300 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
RUN CAPACITOR
LOW RESISTANCE
COLD
PTC DEVICE
START WINDING
RUN WINDING
10.15
F I G U R E
Positive temperature coefficient starting device. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
(a)
HIGH RESISTANCE
HOT
RUN CAPACITOR
(b)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

These starting devices are also available with 
a built-in starting capacitor (refer again to Figure 
10.13). When the relay capacitor is used, the exist-
ing overload must remain on the compressor for 
protection. A three-in-one relay is also available 
(refer again to Figure 10.14) that contains the solid-
state relay, a capacitor, and an overload.
The solid-state PTC-type starting relay is 
usually limited to domestic refrigeration appli-
cations, but it can be used on other applica-
tions if the manufacturer’s installation instruc-
tions are followed. The solid-state relay usually 
requires 3 to 10 minutes to cool down between 
operating cycles, so it is not feasible for short-
cycling applications.
Troubleshooting
The solid-state starting relay is easy to trouble-
shoot because of its simplicity. On many occa-
sions, the relay will show some visible signs that 
would indicate the condition of the relay. In some 
 
 
Section 10.4   Solid-State Starting Relays and Devices 
301
C
S
R
RUN CAP
PR90
START
CAPACITOR
OVERLOAD
LINE
THERMOSTAT
WIRING AS A POTENTIAL  RELAY
REPLACES ALL POTENTIAL MOTOR STARTING
RELAYS FOR COMPRESSORS RATED AT
120 TO 270 VAC SINGLE PHASE
UP TO 5 H.P. ANY PICK-UP VOLTAGE
DIAGRAM NOTE:
A wire from the RUNNING
TERMINAL of the compressor
motor must be connected to #4
on the relay.
10.17
FIGURE
Wiring of universal relay replacing potential relay. (Courtesy of Sealed 
Unit Parts Co., Inc., Allenwood, NJ)
10.16
FIGURE
Universal motor 
starting relay. 
(Courtesy of 
Sealed Unit Parts 
Co., Inc., Allenwood, NJ)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

302 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
cases, the relay will be charred, severely burned, and cracked; in other 
instances, the relay will only be slightly burned. The relay can also be 
checked with an ohmmeter: If the resistance is very low, the relay is 
good; a high resistance across the relay indicates a bad relay. The techni-
cian must make certain the relay is cool when performing the resistance 
10.19
FIGURE
Schematic diagram of compressor 
and solid-state starting relay 
(split-phase motor). (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
120 V
L1
N
Solid-state
starting relay
S
R
C
Compressor
10.20
FIGURE
Schematic diagram of com-
pressor and solid-state starting 
relay (capacitor-start motor). 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
120 V
N
L1
Start
capacitor
Solid-state
starting relay
S
R
C
Compressor
OVERLOAD
MOTOR
R
C
S
S. CAP
LINE
PRO-90 WIRING AS A 
CURRENT STARTING RELAY
10.18
FIGURE
Wiring of universal relay 
replacing a current relay. 
(Courtesy of Sealed 
Unit Parts, Co., Inc., 
Allenwood, NJ)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 10.5   Motor Bearings 
303
check. The  service technician could also check to make certain the relay 
is dropping the starting winding out of the circuit by using a clamp-on 
ammeter if a wire is connecting the relay to the compressor terminal. If 
the relay pushes directly onto the compressor  terminals, this check is 
practically impossible; hence, an amp reading of the compressor motor 
must be taken, and a judgment must be made whether the start winding 
remained in the circuit.
10.5 MOTOR BEARINGS
All rotating electric equipment has some type of bearing to allow for 
smooth and easy rotation. A bearing is that part of a rotating electric 
device that allows free movement. The two types of bearings used in the 
heating, cooling, and refrigeration industry are ball bearings and sleeve 
bearings, shown in Figure 10.21. The ball bearing is the most efficient 
because it produces less friction. The sleeve bearing is cheaper, however, 
and is more commonly used.
Ball Bearings
Ball bearings are designed with an inner and an outer ring, which enclose 
the balls by use of a separator. The inner ring is the bore in which the 
shaft is pressed.
Ball bearings are lubricated in three ways. The permanently lubricated 
bearings are sealed at the factory and only rarely require additional lubri-
cation. The packed lubrication of ball bearings is done by hand. The bear-
ing must be disassembled and hand packed with grease every two to five 
years. Many ball bearings are equipped with a grease fitting and should be 
lubricated every two years. Lubrication is of prime importance to a motor. 
Note that overlubrication is as damaging as underlubrication. Figure 10.22 
shows a ball bearing pressed into an end bell of a motor.
Ball bearings are used on most heavy loads. However, ball bear-
ings cannot be used in a hermetic compressor because of the danger 
of sparks. Some of the many advantages of using ball bearings are 
mountings in any position, antifriction design, versatility, and the 
ability to carry a large load. Ball bearings are often permanently lubri-
cated from the factory or require infrequent lubrication. Thus, they 
require less maintenance than a sleeve bearing. The life of a ball bear-
ing is usually long and trouble free, but misuse can rapidly destroy a 
ball bearing.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

304 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
Sleeve Bearings
Sleeve bearings are brass or bronze cylinders in which a shaft rotates. The 
bearings have more friction than the ball bearing and thus are used for 
lighter duty. Lubrication of sleeve bearings is accomplished by oil wick 
lubrication, yarn-packed lubrication, or oil ring lubrication.
The oil wick lubrication has a wick that extends into an oil reservoir. 
The wick picks up oil from the reservoir and transfers it to the shaft, as 
shown in Figure 10.23. The reservoir should be filled with oil twice a year.
The yarn-packed lubrication is merely yarn packed around the shaft 
to lubricate it, as shown in Figure 10.24. This bearing should be lubricated 
every few months.
The oil ring lubrication is used on large motors. In this device a ring 
rotates through an oil reservoir, picking up oil and transferring it to the 
shaft, as shown in Figure 10.25. The oil level of the reservoir should be 
checked monthly.
Hermetic compressors use sleeve bearings because with sleeve bear-
ings there is no danger of sparks. Care must be taken in mounting motors 
equipped with sleeve bearings because of the lubrication problems when 
the bearings are mounted in a vertical position. Sleeve bearings are com-
monly used in many applications in the industry.
10.21
FIGURE
Sleeve and ball bearings used in 
the industry. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
10.22
FIGURE
Mounted ball bearing. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 10.6   Motor Drives 
305
Bearing
Cover
Ring
Oil reservoir
10.25
FIGURE
Oil ring lubrication 
of a sleeve bearing. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Bearing
Filler
Yarn
10.24
FIGURE
Yarn-packed lubrication 
of a sleeve bearing.
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
10.6 MOTOR DRIVES
A motor drive is the connection between an electric motor and a compo-
nent that requires rotation. Electric motors are used to drive most devices 
that require rotation. There are two basic driving devices: direct drive and 
belt and pulley drive.
10.23
FIGURE
Oil wick lubrication of 
a sleeve bearing. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Bearing
Filler
Oil wick
Oil well
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

306 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
Direct Drive
Direct-drive methods require that a device turn with the same revolu-
tions per minute as the motor. Fan motors and pumps are often direct 
drive; hermetic compressors are always direct drive. Direct-drive hook-
ups require a close fit between the motor and the device. In a hermetic 
compressor, the crankshaft is made in one piece, with the motor on one 
end and the compressor portion on the opposite end. Direct-drive appli-
cations usually require a coupling, except with hermetic compressors and 
fan motors.
The two types of direct-drive couplings used in the industry are the 
flexible-hose coupling, as used on oil burners, and flange couplings, 
as used on some open types of compressors and hot-water pumps. 
Figure 10.26 shows both commonly used types of direct-drive couplings.
Motor
Motor
Pump outlet
Pump outlet
Pump
Pump
Coupling
Coupling
Pump inlet
Pump inlet
(a) Flexible-hose coupling
(b) Flange coupling
10.26
FIGURE
Two widely used direct-drive couplings.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
!CAUTION
When removing a device from the shaft of an electric 
motor, make sure that the motor shaft or the device 
being removed is not damaged.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 10.6   Motor Drives 
307
V-Belt
Although many types of belts are used to drive devices, only the V-belt 
will be discussed here. It is used almost exclusively in the industry. 
By using two pulleys and connecting them with a V-belt, rotation can 
be transferred from the motor to the device, as shown in Figure 10.27. 
V-belts are used in many applications in the industry, such as driving 
open types of compressors, fan motors, and pumps.
!CAUTION
The technician should never wear loose clothing or 
neckties when working around rotating equipment. 
Long hair should also be tied back.
There are basically three sizes of V-belts used at present. Size FHP 
V-belts are 3⁄8 inch wide and used on fractional-horsepower motors. Size 
A-section is ½ inch wide and used for most jobs requiring one- to five-
horsepower motors. Size B-section is 21/32 inch wide and used when the 
motor pulley is larger than 5 inches in diameter. More than one V-belt 
10.27
FIGURE
V-belt connection 
between fan and 
motor. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

308 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
is often used to pull large devices. When belt changes are needed, a 
matched set should be used in a dual-belt application. The equipment’s 
revolutions per minute can be changed by changing the pulley size or 
sizes. The following formula can be used:
diameter of equipment pulley  motor rpm × motor pulley size
rpm of equipment
This formula can be transposed to solve for any of the stated values 
by simple algebra. For example, if the motor rpm were 1750 with a 5-inch 
pulley, what size equipment pulley would be required to produce a speed 
of 1000 rpm?
diameter of equipment pulley  motor rpm × motor pulley size
rpm of equipment
diameter of equipment pulley  1750 × 5
1000
diameter of equipment pulley  8.75 inches
V-belts should always be properly aligned and the tension adjusted. 
Figure 10.28(a) shows an incorrectly aligned V-belt. The proper amount of 
tension for most belts is shown in Figure 10.28(b). The tension of a V-belt 
should be set to manufacturer’s specifications if available. A belt tension 
10.28
FIGURE
V-belt alignment.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Compressor
Compressor
Motor
Motor
Belt
Belt
1"
(a) Incorrect alignment
(b) Proper tension and adjustment
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 10.7   Service Calls 
309
gage is shown in Figure 10.29. Frequently a V-belt will slip, causing erratic 
equipment speed or breakage. In these cases, the belt should be replaced 
and the tension adjusted correctly.
!CAUTION
Always use caution when working around an electric 
motor that is transferring rotating motion with V-belts.
10.29
FIGURE
Belt tension 
gage. (Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
10.7 SERVICE CALLS
Service Call 1
Application: Commercial refrigeration (walk-in cooler)
Type of Equipment: Air-cooled condensing unit with evaporator
Complaint: No refrigeration
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order information reveals that the walk-in
 cooler of the meat market is hot with rapid deterioration of stored 
product. The condensing unit is located outside behind the structure.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

310 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
 2. The technician informs the manager of his or her presence and 
obtains any additional information about the problem.
 3. The manager has noticed that the compressor is starting and run-
ning only a short time before cutting off. The condenser fan motor is 
running normally.
 4. The equipment is 240 V–1ø–60 Hz. With the condenser fan motor 
picking up power from the terminals of the compressor, the techni-
cian assumes that voltage is being applied to the compressor. The 
technician measures the current draw of the compressor while run-
ning. The current draw is seven times that of the normal running 
amps of the compressor.
 5. The compressor overload breaks power to the compressor after only 
a few seconds of operation.
 6. The technician turns the power off and locks or labels it when work-
ing with live circuits.
 7. The technician checks the compressor motor and determines that 
the motor is in good condition.
 8. The starting capacitor is hot to the touch. The technician checks 
to determine if the capacitor is being removed from the circuit by 
checking the amp reading of the capacitor; if the capacitor is read-
ing a current draw, then the capacitor is remaining in the circuit. 
The potential relay is checked to determine the condition of the 
relay contacts and coil. The technician reads the resistance between 
terminals 1 and 2 and 2 and 5. The reading between 1 and 2 reads 
0 ohms. Terminals 1 and 2 are the normally closed contacts of the 
relay and should read 0 ohms. The reading between 2 and 5 reads 
infinite ohms. Terminals 2 and 5 are the relay coil terminals and 
should have a very high but measurable resistance. The potential 
relay coil is open, allowing the starting capacitor to remain in the 
circuit and causing the motor to overload.
 9. The part number of the faulty relay is an RBM 128-122-1335CA. The 
relay must be replaced with a potential relay with the continuous 
coil voltage of 256 and a coil calibration of 300 to 320 volts. The tech-
nician finds the correct relay from the available supply on the service 
truck.
10. The technician replaces the relay and checks to make certain that the 
new relay is removing the capacitor from the circuit by  observing the 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 10.7   Service Calls 
311
current draw of the capacitor. There should be a current draw through 
the capacitor while the motor is starting, but when the motor reaches 
a certain speed, the capacitor current draw should be 0 amps.
11. The technician checks the current draw of the compressor to make 
certain the compressor is operating properly.
12. The technician informs the manager of the problem and that it has 
been corrected.
Service Call 2
Application: Domestic refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Domestic chest-type freezer
Complaint: Freezer defrosting
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order information reveals that the freezer 
is located in the utility room under the carport and will be unlocked. 
The customer has commented that the compressor tries to start but 
does not run. The freezer has been unplugged.
 2. The technician plugs the freezer in and notices that the compressor 
tries to start but does not and the overload takes it out of the circuit. 
When checking a chest-type freezer the technician knows that only 
three or four components will need to be checked when the com-
pressor is attempting to start: the compressor, relay, overload, and 
capacitor, if used. The overload is seldom the problem, so the techni-
cian will check that last.
 3. The technician unplugs the freezer.
 4. The technician reads the resistance of the compressor and deter-
mines that the compressor is electrically good. The relay is a current 
type relay and must be checked next. The relay has a normally open 
set of contacts and a magnetic coil that closes the contacts when the 
compressor tries to start.
 5. The technician checks the resistance of the coil and reads infinity. 
The technician determines that the current-type relay coil is open 
and not energizing the starting winding, thus preventing the com-
pressor from starting. The freezer motor is a split-phase motor and 
does not require a capacitor.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

312 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
 6. The technician obtains the correct relay from the supplier and 
replaces the faulty relay.
 7. The technician starts the freezer and checks the current draw of the 
compressor to make certain the freezer is operating properly.
 8. The technician leaves a note informing the homeowner of the ser-
vice performed.
Service Call 3
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Packaged heat pump
Complaint: No heat
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order reveals that the unit is a packaged 
heat pump. Someone will be home.
 2. Upon entering the residence, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign materials are carried into the structure. The technician 
also takes care not to mar interior walls. The customer informs the 
technician that the auxiliary heat light has been on when the unit is 
operating.
 3. This heat pump has a capacitor-start–capacitor-run compressor 
motor. With the indoor fan motor operating properly, the technician 
knows that voltage is available to the unit.
 4. The technician removes the compressor access panel. The compres-
sor is hot to the touch, indicating that it had been attempting to start 
and failed, resulting in an open internal overload.
 5. The technician must determine why the compressor is not starting. 
The compressor and motor are found to be in good electrical condi-
tion. The starting components of the compressor must be checked to 
determine if they are good.
 6. The technician uses an ohmmeter to check both starting and running 
capacitors and finds them good. The potential relay contacts must be 
checked. An ohm reading of infinity is read across terminals 1 and 2, 
indicating that the normally closed contacts are open and the start 
capacitor is not being introduced to the motor starting circuits.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 10.7   Service Calls 
313
 7. The technician turns the power supply off and locks it or labels it.
 8. The technician replaces the faulty potential relay with the proper 
relay.
 9. Power is restored to the unit and the technician checks the opera-
tion of the compressor, making certain that the capacitor is being 
removed from the circuit.
10. The technician reads the current of the motor and makes certain the 
compressor is operating properly.
11. The technician replaces the compressor access cover.
12. The technician informs the customer of the corrected problems.
Service Call 4
Application: Commercial refrigeration (refrigerator)
Type of Equipment: Air-cooled condensing unit mounted on top with 
evaporator
Complaint: No refrigeration
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for 
available information. The work order information reveals that the 
temperature of the refrigerator is above a safe temperature for the 
product stored.
 2. The technician informs the owner of the sandwich shop of his or her 
presence and obtains specifics about the operation of the refrigerator.
 3. The technician makes every attempt not to disturb the activity of 
kitchen personnel.
 4. The compressor is hot to the touch and not operating, but the con-
denser fan motor is operating, indicating that power is available to 
the compressor.
 5. The technician turns the power supply off and locks or labels it.
 6. The technician determines that the compressor and motor are in 
good condition.
 7. The technician observes that the compressor attempts to start. The 
technician measures the current draw of the compressor; the current 
draw is extremely high.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

314 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
 8. The technician checks the current-type relay. The resistance read-
ing for the coil is slightly above 0 ohms, indicating that the coil is 
good. The resistance of the relay contacts is infinite when the relay 
is inverted, indicating that the relay is bad.
 9. The technician replaces the current-type relay.
10. The technician restores power and checks the operation of the 
 compressor.
11. The technician informs the owner of the sandwich shop of the prob-
lem and that it has been corrected.
Service Call 5
Application: Ventilation system
Type of Equipment: Exhaust fan
Complaint: Exhaust fan not running
Service procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for 
available information. The work order information reveals that the 
exhaust fan is not operating, causing a stuffy condition in the room.
 2. The technician informs the maintenance supervisor of his or her 
presence and obtains additional information about the problem. The 
supervisor informs the technician that the motor is operating, but 
the fan is not.
 3. The technician turns the power supply off and locks or labels it.
 4. The technician visually inspects the exhaust fan and locates a bro-
ken belt.
 5. The technician obtains the correct replacement and installs it, 
adjusting the tension.
 6. The technician makes certain that the exhaust fan is operating 
properly.
 7. The technician informs maintenance supervisor of the problem and 
that it has been corrected.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Summary 
315
SUMMARY
Many types of electric motors require special electrical devices to keep 
the starting winding or starting component in the circuit until the motor 
has reached approximately 75% of full speed. Starting relays are used 
in most cases to drop the start windings and/or starting component 
from the electrical circuit once the motor has reached operating speed. 
It is essential that the starting components and/or starting windings be 
removed from the circuit at the correct time to prevent damage to the 
motor or starting components.
There are four types of relays in common use in the industry today. 
The current-type relay operates on the principle that amperage flowing 
through a wire will produce a magnetic field. At its highest point, this 
magnetic field will close a set of contacts, thus putting the necessary 
starting components in the circuit and removing them at the correct 
time. The potential relay has a normally closed set of contacts that are 
opened and closed by the back electromotive force of the motor. This 
back emf corresponds to the motor speed, thus dropping out the starting 
components at the right time. Electronic relays used as starting relays are 
becoming increasingly popular in the industry. They have several advan-
tages over the regular type of starting relay in that they can be used over 
a variety of sizes while incorporating other motor components if needed. 
The hot-wire relay is seldom used in the industry because better methods 
are available for dropping the starting components out of the circuit.
All rotating heating, cooling, and refrigeration equipment must have 
bearings to operate efficiently and smoothly. Ball bearings and sleeve 
bearings are commonly used today for this purpose. Correct lubrication is 
essential to ensure long life and efficient service from the bearings.
In most cases in the industry, electric motors drive some type of 
equipment. Direct-drive applications are common, as are V-belt appli-
cations. Direct-drive applications require very accurate fit with little 
vibration. The device being driven must turn at the same revolutions per 
minute (rpm) as the motor. V-belt connections have a certain amount of 
tolerance, but they must be correctly adjusted. They can be used to alter 
the revolutions per minute of the equipment by changing the pulleys.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 0  R E V I E W
316 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
RQ1 
What is the purpose of a starting relay?
a. to start an electric motor
b.  to remove the starting winding or component 
from the circuit
c. to protect the motor from starting overloads
d.  to prevent the motor from starting under heavy 
loads
RQ2 
Explain the operating principle of a potential relay.
RQ3 
Explain the operating principle of a current relay.
RQ4 
What is the difference between a current and 
potential relay?
RQ5 
The contacts of the current relay are 
______________________________.
RQ6 
The controlling factor for a potential relay is 
_______________________.
a. back electromotive force
b. line voltage
c. voltage drop
d. none of the above
RQ7 
True or False: The contacts of the potential relay 
are normally open.
RQ8 
What is the approximate speed at which the start-
ing windings or components should be removed 
from the motor electrical circuit?
a. 50%
b. 75%
c. 90%
d. 100%
RQ9 
As a single-phase motor’s speed is increased 
from a stationary position, the current draw 
_______________.
a. increases
b. decreases
RQ10 
As a single-phase motor’s speed is increased 
from a stationary position, the back electromotive 
force______.
a. increases
b. decreases
RQ11 
Which of the following statements reflects the cor-
rect terminal identification of a potential relay?
a. 1 & 2 coil, 2 & 4 contacts
b. 2 & 4 coil, 3 & 6 contacts
c. 1 & 5 coil, 2 & 5 contacts
d. 2 & 5 coil, 1 & 2 contacts
RQ12 
A G.E. potential relay with the number 3ARR3-
D4F6 would have a continuous coil voltage of 
___________.
a. 214
b. 332
c. 420
d. 502
RQ13 
An RBM potential relay with the number 128-122-
2324K would have a continuous coil voltage of 
______________________________.
a. 130
b. 170
c. 256
d. 336
RQ14 
A G.E. potential relay with a number 3ARR3-C3A1 
could be replaced with which of the following RBM 
potential relays?
a. 128-212-1167AB
b. 128-112-1161AB
c. 128-151-1111CD
d. 128-212-1147AB
RQ15 
An RBM potential relay with a number 128-122-
1161BC could be replaced with which of the fol-
lowing G.E. potential relays?
a. 3ARR3-C4B2
b. 3ARR3-C9D2
c. 3ARR3-C6B2
d. 3ARR3-C2B2
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
C H A P T E R  1 0  R E V I E W
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 0  R E V I E W
 
 
Review Questions 
317
RQ16 
What are the two types of bearings used in the 
industry?
RQ17 
Which of the following is not an advantage of the 
ball bearing?
a. more efficient than a sleeve bearing
b. requires less maintenance than a sleeve bearing
c. cheaper than a sleeve bearing
d. longer life than a sleeve bearing
RQ18 
What is the main reason that sleeve bearings are 
used in the industry?
a. cost
b. maintenance
c. life
d. efficiency
RQ19 
What is a direct-drive application?
RQ20 
How is the direct-drive application used in the 
industry?
RQ21 
Why are V-belts popular in the industry?
RQ22 
What is the correct tension on a V-belt?
RQ23 
True or False: If the starting relay is working prop-
erly, there will be no ampere draw through the 
starting circuit after the motor reaches full speed.
RQ24 
What is the purpose of a hard-start kit in conjunc-
tion with a hermetic compressor?
RQ25 What electrical components make up a hard-start kit?
RQ26 
Name the three ways in which ball bearings may 
be lubricated.
RQ27 
True or False: Overlubrication of a motor and its 
bearings is as damaging as underlubrication.
RQ28 
Name three ways in which sleeve bearings may be 
lubricated.
RQ29 
What are the common sizes of V-belts and what 
are their applications?
RQ30 
What is the compressor speed of an open-type 
compressor if the motor rpm is 1750, the motor 
pulley diameter is 4 inches, and the pulley diameter 
of the compressor is 16 inches?
a. 438
b. 468
c. 498
d. 528
RQ31 
What size motor pulley would be required if the 
motor turns 1750 rpm, the fan pulley is 8 inches, 
and the desired rpm of the fan is 650 rpm?
a. 3
b. 4
c. 5
d. 6
RQ32 
What is one situation in which a ball bearing can-
not be used?
RQ33 
Explain the operation of a solid-state PTC starting 
relay.
RQ34 
What advantages does the solid-state starting relay 
have over the conventional current-type relay?
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 10 in the Lab Manual.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

318 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
PRACTICE SERVICE CALLS
Determine the problem and recommend a solution for the following ser-
vice calls. (Be specific; do not list components as good or bad.)
Practice Service Call 1
Application: Commercial refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Frozen food display with air-cooled condensing unit 
(240 V–1ø–60 Hz)
Complaint: No refrigeration
Symptoms:
1. Condenser fan motor is operating normally.
2. Evaporator fan motor is operating properly.
3. Internal overload is cycling compressor on and off.
4. All starting components are in good condition.
5. Compressor motor is in good condition.
Practice Service Call 2
Application: Domestic refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Frost-free domestic refrigerator (compressor has 
split-phase motor)
Complaint: No refrigeration
Symptoms:
1. Compressor is not operating.
2. Correct voltage is available to compressor.
3. Contacts of current-type relay are good.
4. Compressor is cycled on and off by compressor overload.
5. Compressor draws locked rotor current when start is attempted.
Practice Service Call 3
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Air conditioner using air handling unit with air-cooled 
condensing unit (240 V–1ø–60 Hz and CSR motor with internal overload)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Practice Service Calls 
319
Complaint: No cooling
Symptoms:
1. Indoor electrical components are operating normally.
2. Condenser fan motor is operating properly.
3. 240 V–1ø–60 Hz is available to compressor.
4. Compressor starts and runs for a short period of time.
5. Compressor and motor are in good condition.
Practice Service Call 4
Application: Commercial refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Glass door refrigerator (240 V–1ø–60 Hz and CSR 
motor with external overload)
Complaint: No refrigeration
Symptoms:
1. Evaporator fan motor is operating normally.
2. Proper voltage is available to compressor.
3. Compressor tries to start, but does not.
4. Compressor and motor are in good condition.
5. Start and run capacitor are good.
6. Condenser fan motor is operating properly.
Practice Service Call 5
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Oil-fired furnace with a belt-drive blower motor
Complaint: No heat
Symptoms:
1. Blower motor is not operating.
2. Correct voltage is available to blower motor.
3. Blower motor is drawing locked rotor current.
4. Blower can’t be turned by hand.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

320 
CHAPTER 10   Components for Electric Motors
Practice Service Call 6
Application: Commercial refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Ice machine (120 V–1ø–60 Hz with CS motor)
Complaint: No ice production
Symptoms:
1. Correct voltage is available to compressor.
2. Compressor attempts to start but is cut off by external overload.
3. Current-type starting relay is good.
4. Compressor and motor are in good condition.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗ Explain the parts and operation of contactors and relays.
◗ Explain the application of contactors and relays in control systems.
◗ Correctly install a contactor or relay in a control system.
◗ Draw a simple schematic wiring diagram using contactors and/or relays to 
control loads in a control system.
◗ Understand the types and application of overloads.
◗ Troubleshoot contactors and relays.
◗ Identify the common types of overload used to protect loads.
◗ Explain the operation of the common overloads.
◗ Determine the best type of overload for a specific application.
◗ Draw schematic wiring diagrams using the proper overload to protect loads.
◗ Troubleshoot common types of overloads.
◗ Explain the operation of a magnetic starter.
◗ Size the overload devices to be used in a magnetic starter for motor 
 protection.
◗ Wire a magnetic starter using switches, thermostats, and push-button stations.
◗ Troubleshoot magnetic starter and push-button stations.
Contactors, Relays, 
and Overloads
C H A P T E R
321
R
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

KEY TERMS
Coil 
Magnetic overload
Contactor 
Magnetic starter
Contacts 
Mechanical linkage
Current overload 
Overload
Fuse 
Pilot duty overload
Inductive load 
Push-button station
Internal compressor overload 
Relay
Line break overload 
Resistive (noninductive) load
INTRODUCTION
Control systems used on modern heating, cooling, and refrigeration 
 systems use many different control components to obtain automatic 
control. The purpose of a control system is to automatically control the 
temperature of some medium. The function of a control system is to stop 
and start electric loads that control the temperature of the medium. In 
the case of an air-conditioning or heating system, the primary purpose is 
to control the temperature within a certain area. In a refrigeration sys-
tem, the purpose is to control air temperature or water temperature.
In an air-conditioning or refrigeration system, the compressor is the 
largest load and usually requires a contactor or magnetic starter to ener-
gize it. Loads that require more control and are too large for line voltage 
thermostats or manual switches use relays for the proper control. Relays 
and contactors work similarly. The main difference between them is their 
current-carrying capacity. The contactor can handle a large ampacity. 
Relays are usually limited in the ampacity they can carry.
In all control systems, there must be a means of protecting the loads. 
The overload is used to protect loads such as compressors, heaters, fan 
motors, and pumps. The basic overload device is the common fuse. 
However, the fuse is inadequate to protect effectively all the important 
loads in a heating, air-conditioning, or refrigeration system. Thus, more 
effective devices for overload protection are used. As we will see, over-
loads come in many designs and sizes.
All electric control components serve a definite purpose in the total 
control system. Fortunately, many manufacturers now use simple con-
trol systems with fewer components in their residential air-conditioning 
control systems. However, the commercial and industrial control systems 
322 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 11.1   Contactors 
323
are fairly complex, with more components and better control than the 
residential equipment. Therefore, it is essential that heating, cooling, and 
refrigeration technicians become familiar with control components and 
understand them so they can diagnose faulty components and perform 
effective control system troubleshooting.
In this chapter, we look at the components of a control system that 
control the loads in the system. In succeeding chapters, we discuss other 
control system components and the methods for troubleshooting these 
systems.
11.1 CONTACTORS
A contactor (Figure 11.1) is used to control an electric load in a control 
system. Contactors make or break a set of contacts that controls the 
voltage applied to some load in cooling systems. They isolate the voltage 
controlling its magnetic coil from the voltage applied to the load, making 
it possible to control a higher-voltage or power-consuming load, with a 
lower-voltage or power-consuming control circuit (pilot duty). A contac-
tor consists of a coil that opens and closes a set of contacts due to the 
magnetic attraction created by the coil when it is energized. Magnetic 
starters are also used to start and stop large loads in cooling systems. The 
major difference between magnetic starters and contactors is that the 
magnetic starter houses its own overload. Magnetic starters are discussed 
later in this chapter.
Applications
The largest electric load in any cooling 
system that requires control is the com-
pressor. In smaller equipment, several 
other loads might be connected in paral-
lel with the compressor. Larger systems 
usually maintain a switching device for 
each component. The contactor used in 
a small residential air-conditioning unit 
probably controls the compressor and 
condenser fan motor. Figure 11.2 shows 
a wiring diagram of a small residential 
unit. Large air-conditioning units usually 
have several contactors. A large condens-
ing unit, for example, might use two con-
tactors for the compressor and three for 
the  condenser fan motors. Large electric 
11.1
F I G U R E
Contactor. (Photo by Bill 
Johnson)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

324 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
resistance  heating systems also have several contactors. For example, 
they might use a contactor for each section of heaters and for some 
method of controlling the fan or air supply.
Operation
Different manufacturers design contactors in different ways. But all con-
tactors accomplish the same purpose: opening and closing a set of contacts. 
The armature of a contactor is the portion that moves. The movement 
of the armature can be accomplished in basically two ways, with a slid-
ing armature or a swinging armature. The sliding armature is shown in 
Figure 11.3, and the swinging armature is shown in Figure 11.4. The slid-
ing armature mounts between two slots in the frame of the contactor and 
moves up and down in these slots. The swinging armature is mounted on 
a pivot or hinge and moves up and down in a swinging motion.
The armature of a contactor is connected by a mechanical linkage to 
a set of contacts that causes a completed circuit when the armature is 
pulled into the magnetic field produced by the coil. This operation is true 
for both the sliding armature and the swinging armature. The magnetic 
field that closes a contactor is created by a coil wound around a laminated 
iron core, as shown in Figure 11.5. When the coil is energized, a magnetic 
L1
L2
CRC
FC
C
C
C
LP
HP
COMP
CFM
To thermostat and
24-volt power supply
Legend:
C:
COMP:
CFM:
HP:
LP:
CRC:
FC:
  
Contact
Compressor
Condenser fan
motor
High-pressure
switch
Low-pressure
switch
Compressor run
capacitor
Fan capacitor
11.2
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a small residential condensing 
unit with a contactor controlling the compressor and 
condenser fan motor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 11.1   Contactors 
325
field is created around the laminated core. 
The core then becomes an electromag-
net of sufficient strength to attract the 
armature closing the contacts. Both types 
of contactors use the same principle of 
operation. Some contactors have springs 
mounted between the armature and the 
stationary contacts to ensure the contac-
tor opens when the coil is de-energized.
Coils
Coil characteristics depend on the type 
of wire and the manner in which it is 
wound. The potential coil is energized by 
a certain voltage being applied to it. Coils 
of this type are designed to be operated on 
24 volts, 120 volts, 208/240 volts, and occa-
sionally 480 volts. The coil is identified by 
the voltage marked on it. The potential coil is used on many special relays 
in the industry. The connection of a coil is usually made directly on the 
terminals of the coil, but in some cases, the connections are jumped to a 
section of the contactor frame.
11.3
F I G U R E
Contactor with a sliding 
armature. (Photo by Bill 
Johnson)
11.4
F I G U R E
Contactor with a 
swinging arma-
ture. (Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
11.5
F I G U R E
Solenoid coil of a  contactor. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

326 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
Contacts
The contacts of a contactor make a complete circuit when the contactor 
is energized, allowing voltage to flow to the controlled load. Contactors 
are rated by the ampere draw they can carry. There are two types of 
loads that a contactor can control: an inductive load, such as a motor, 
which has a higher ampere draw on startup than while running; and a 
resistive load, which has a constant ampere draw, such as a resistance 
heater. Some contactors are rated for both inductive loads and resistive 
loads, so care should be taken when selecting a replacement contactor. 
The ratings of contactors are usually marked on the contactor frame.
Contacts are made of silver and cadmium, which resist sticking. The 
contacts are connected to a strong backing by mechanical or chemical bond-
ing. The chemical composition of contacts is such that they operate at cool 
temperatures of up to 125% of their current-carrying capacity. Contactors are 
usually manufactured with two or three poles and in many cases four. The 
fourth pole is used to interlock some load device into the system or can be 
left unused. A two-pole contactor is usually used for single-phase systems. 
However single-pole contactors are sometimes used on single-phase systems. 
A contactor with at least three poles is required for three-phase systems.
Troubleshooting
The diagnosis of a faulty contactor encompasses three sections of the 
contactor: the coil, the contacts, and the mechanical linkage. A defect in 
any contactor parts can cause the total contactor to be faulty.
Coil The contactor coil must be in good condition to create a strong enough 
electromagnetic force to pull in the contactor. The coil of a contactor 
rarely becomes so weak that it does not close the contacts, unless there 
is excessive friction in the mechanical linkage. The coil can be diagnosed 
as good, open, or shorted. The open and shorted conditions indicate a 
bad coil and can be checked with an ohmmeter. If the coil is shorted, the 
resistance reading will be zero. If the coil is open, the resistance will be 
infinite. A measurable resistance usually indicates a good coil.
A coil can also be checked by applying voltage to it and observing the 
contactor to see if it closes. The voltage reading of a coil should be taken 
before checking the coil to see if the contactor should be closed. Care should 
be taken when the diagnosis leads to a shorted contactor coil. If voltage is 
applied to it, the coil will cause a direct short and other damage could result.
Contacts The contactor contacts must be in good condition to ensure that 
the proper voltage reaches the load. In most cases, a visual inspection is 
sufficient to diagnose bad contacts. Figure 11.6 shows a good set and a 
bad set of contacts for comparison.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 11.1   Contactors 
327
A voltage reading taken across the contacts of the same pole will show 
the voltage drop across the contacts. Figure 11.7 shows the proper proce-
dure for testing a set of contacts in this manner. The voltage indicated on 
the meter is the voltage drop across the contacts (the voltage lost to the 
equipment). The 20 volts shown on the meter are considered to be exces-
sive. Hence, the contactor should be replaced or repaired. Any voltage 
above 5% of the rated voltage for the equipment is considered to be exces-
sive. The contactor must be closed with voltage applied to make this check.
Mechanical Linkage Probably the easiest faults to diagnose with a contac-
tor are problems with the mechanical linkage. In most cases, any trouble 
with the mechanical linkage can be detected by visual inspection. Or 
problems can be detected by breaking the power supply and manually 
moving the armature of the contactor to see if the movement is free and 
without excessive friction. The mechanical linkage of a contactor will 
usually fail because of wear, corrosion, or moisture. In many cases when 
a contactor coil burns out, it will heat the coil and cause the varnish of 
the coil to gum up the contactor. For a contactor to operate properly, it 
must seat the contacts accurately and have free moving parts.
Repairing Contactors can be repaired by using replacement parts from the 
manufacturer or a wholesaler if time permits. However, it is often difficult 
to find all the necessary parts, such as contacts and coils, because it is 
almost impossible for a wholesaler to stock all the components needed 
for all contactors. Some manufacturers do sell a kit that will completely 
replace the contact portion of the contactor. But since parts are difficult 
11.6
F I G U R E
A good set and dirty, 
pitted set of contacts. 
(Courtesy of The 
Square D Company)
Volts
20 Volts
L1
L2
L3
T1
T2
T3
11.7
F I G U R E
Procedure for testing a set 
of contacts with a volt-
meter. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

328 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
to obtain, it is usually advisable to purchase a new contactor instead of 
repairing the faulty one. However, be careful to choose the correct contac-
tor for the particular application and size.
11.2 RELAYS
Relays are used to open and close a circuit to allow the automatic control 
of a device or circuit. Relays are similar to contactors with the exception 
of the pole configuration and the amount of current that each device can 
effectively handle. Relays can be used to control most devices in the sys-
tem within a certain ampacity limit.
Operation
Relays are built with the same components as a contactor. These include 
a coil, contacts, and some type of mechanical linkage to open and close 
the contacts when the relay coil is energized. When voltage (or current 
in some cases with small motor starting relays) is applied to a relay, it 
will close because of the magnetic field created in the coil and iron core. 
This magnetic field causes the armature of the relay to be attracted to the 
electromagnet created by the coil and its core. Figure 11.8 shows several 
different commonly used relays. The coil of a relay can be energized by 
voltage or current draw. The general type of relay controlling a device is 
closed by voltage. The current relay is used to control some starting device 
when used with a small hermetic motor.
Relays can be purchased with most any type of pole configuration. 
Normally open or normally closed contacts are both used in control cir-
cuits. The normally open contact opens when the relay is de-energized 
and closes when the relay is energized. The normally closed contact closes 
when the relay is de-energized and opens when the relay is energized. 
The normal position of the relay denotes the position of any control-
ling device in the de-energized position. The 
most common types of pole configuration 
for relays are single-pole–single-throw, 
single-pole–double-throw, 
double-pole–
single-throw, and double-pole–double-throw 
and are shown in Figure 11.9. Any of these 
configurations can be normally open or 
normally closed.
Applications
Relays can be used to control indoor fan motors, 
condenser fan motors, damper motors, start-
ing capacitors, and control lockouts. They are 
11.8
F I G U R E
Relays used in the industry. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 11.2   Relays 
329
SPDT
DPDT
DPST
SPST
11.9
F I G U R E
Relay contact configura-
tions commonly used in the 
industry. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
used for any device that requires an automatic means of opening and closing 
a circuit.
The indoor fan relay is a good example of the use of a relay. On the 
cooling cycle, the indoor fan must be energized. This is accomplished by 
the use of an indoor fan relay, as shown in Figure 11.10. The indoor fan 
relay will energize when the system switch and the fan switch or the 
cooling thermostat are closed, starting the fan motor. The indoor fan 
relay can also be used to control a two-speed fan motor, using high speed 
on cooling and low speed on heating, with a thermal fan switch control-
ling the fan motor on heating, as shown in Figure 11.11. Relays can also be 
used to control large contactors that cannot be effectively energized with 
24 volts in a control system. The control relay in Figure 11.12 is a good 
example of this application.
The potential or voltage-type relay is energized when voltage is 
applied to the relay coil. This relay is used to control some load device by 
opening and closing its contacts. The voltage-type relay can be used for 
many purposes, such as indoor fan relays, condenser fan relays, control 
relays, and lockout relays.
Three types of relays are used to assist in starting motors, as we saw 
in Chapter 10. The potential relay uses voltage to energize its coil and 
drop the starting apparatus out of the circuit. The current relay uses cur-
rent flow to energize the circuit that contains the starting apparatus and 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

330 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
then drops the circuit out when the current has dropped. The solid-state 
relay uses heat to open and close starting circuits when it is used with 
a motor. Starting relays for motors are used throughout the industry. 
However, these relays should not be confused with the general type of 
relay used to control loads.
Construction
The contacts used in relays are made like contacts in a contactor. The 
contact is made of a silver and cadmium alloy attached to some kind of 
strong backing that can withstand the pressure exerted by the armature.
A relay is usually mounted in a plastic enclosure. Hence, visual 
inspection is not as easy for relays as it is for contactors. The relay 
contacts usually cannot be seen unless the relay is disassembled or 
the cover is removed. The contacts of an open type relay are shown in 
Figure 11.13.
The relay armature can be swinging or sliding as shown in Figure 11.14. 
These devices operate in relays in the same way that they do in  contactors.
The relay coil is built to produce enough magnetism to effectively 
close the contacts of the relay. The size of the relay coil is smaller than 
the contactor coil. Figure 11.15 shows a comparison of a coil used in a 
relay and a coil used in a contactor.
L1
L2
IFR
IFM
C
R
G
Y
Fan switch
On
Auto
System
switch
Thermostat
Cool thermostat
IFM:
IFR:
G:
Y:
R:
C:
Indoor fan
motor
Indoor fan
relay
Fan terminal
on thermostat
Cool terminal
 on thermostat
Voltage
 terminal on
 thermostat
 Contactor coil
Legend
IFR
11.10
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of an indoor fan relay 
circuit. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

120 V
IFR
IFM
IFR
FS
IFR
C
R
G
Y
CT
Low
High
Common
On
Auto
Thermostat
IFR:
IFM:
C:
FS:
CT:
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
Contactor
Fan switch
Cool thermostat
Legend
11.11
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of indoor fan relay on heating/cooling application. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 11.2   Relays 
331
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

332 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
11.12
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of control relay used to energize contactor. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
COMP
C
C
RC
CFM
IFM
C
IFR
CR
HPS
LPS
CIT
CH
IFR
CR
G
Y
R
On
Auto
COMP:
C:
IFR:
IFM:
CR:
HPS:
LPS:
CR:
CH:
TRANS:
CIT:
CT:
Compressor
Contactor
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
Control relay
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Control relay
Crankcase heater
Transformer
Compressor internal
thermostat
Cool thermostat
Legend
CR
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Contacts
Armature
Coil
11.13
F I G U R E
Contacts of relay. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 11.2   Relays 
333
11.14
F I G U R E
Two types of relay mechanical linkages used in the industry; (a) swinging 
armature (b) sliding armature. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
(a)
(b)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

334 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
Troubleshooting
The diagnosis of a faulty relay is done in much the same way as the diag-
nosis of a faulty contactor. Diagnosis of a coil is the same whether it is 
for a relay or for a contactor. The relay contacts are usually hidden and 
cannot be visually inspected without disassembly. They must be checked 
with an ohmmeter. The contacts of a relay are not as heavy as the con-
tacts of a contactor and therefore can take less punishment. Normally 
open and normally closed relay contacts will be completely melted if 
 connected across line voltage with no load in series. This must be taken 
into consideration when troubleshooting the contacts of relays.
The mechanical linkage of a relay gives less trouble than that of a 
contactor because of the lighter weight of the armature. Any mechanical 
linkage problem in a relay will usually be caused by sticking contacts.
11.3 OVERLOADS
An overload is an electric device that protects a load from a high ampere 
draw by breaking a set of contacts. The simplest form of overload pro-
tection is the fuse. Fuses can be used to protect wires and noninductive 
loads, but they provide inadequate protection for inductive loads. A load 
that is purely resistive in nature with no coils to cause induction is called 
a resistive or noninductive load. The most common resistive load used in 
the industry is an electric heater.
11.15
F I G U R E
Comparison of solenoid coils of a (a) contactor and (b) relay. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
(a)
(b)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 11.3   Overloads 
335
Fuses
Fuses consist of two ends or conductors with a piece of wire that will 
melt and break the circuit if the current passing through it exceeds the 
amperage rating of the fuse. Fuses are available in many different styles 
and designs (again see Chapter 5). Fuses are used most commonly to 
protect wires, circuit components, and noninductive loads. Electric resis-
tance heaters are the most common resistive loads protected by fuses. 
Figure  11.16 shows a schematic diagram of a set of resistance heaters 
 protected by fuses. The system in Figure 11.16 controls three electric 
heaters by energizing contactors to start the heaters. The fuses in the 
circuit are used as safety devices for the heaters.
Circuit breakers are used for the same purpose as fuses but allow a 
high starting load. However, many control circuits use fuses for  protection.
Line Break and Pilot Duty Overloads
Overload devices used to protect inductive loads are more effective devic-
es than fuses but are also more complex. Inductive loads require more 
amperage to start than to run. The amperage of a motor at the moment 
11.16
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram showing fuses used as overloads for protec-
tion of electric heaters. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
L1
L2
L3
HC1
HC2
HC3
HC3
HC3
HC2
HC2
HC1
HC1
H1
H2
H3
FU3
FU3
FU2
FU2
FU1
FU1
To
control
system
Legend
HC1:
HC2:
HC3:
Heater contactor 1
Heater contactor 2
Heater contactor 3
FU1:
FU2:
FU3:
Heater 1 fuse
Heater 2 fuse
Heater 3 fuse
H1:
H2:
H3:
Heater 1
Heater 2
Heater 3
NOTE: Fuses are used as overloads for H1, H2, and H3.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

336 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
power is applied is largest because the rotor of the motor is in a stationary 
position, locked rotor condition. Figure 11.17 shows a graph of the ampere 
draw of a motor from start to full speed.
Overloads can be divided into two basic groups: line break and pilot 
duty. The line break overload breaks the power to a motor. A pilot duty 
overload breaks an auxiliary set of contacts connected in the control cir-
cuit. Overloads can be manual or automatic reset; the manual reset must 
be reset by the service technician or customer, but the automatic reset 
will reset automatically.
Line Break Overload A line break overload is shown in Figure 11.18. One 
of the most common types of line voltage overloads is a metal disc 
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
70 A
60 A
50 A
40 A
30 A
20 A
10 A
0 A
Motor speed
Ampere draw
11.17
F I G U R E
Ampere draw for motor speeds from locked rotor 
to full speed. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
11.18
F I G U R E
Line break overload. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.20
F I G U R E
Bimetal overload with a heater 
installed below the disc. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
11.19
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of bimetal line break overload in the 
closed and open position. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Bimetal disc
Bimetal disc
Contacts
Contacts
To
load
To
load
From line
L1
L2
From line
L1
L2
(a) Closed
(b) Open
 
Section 11.3   Overloads 
337
mounted between two contacts. It is called a bimetal line break overload. 
Figure 11.19(a) shows a schematic diagram of a bimetal overload in closed 
position. If the current draw or temperature of the motor is sufficient to 
cause the disc to overheat and expand, the contact opens, as shown in 
Figure 11.19(b). This breaks the flow of power to the load. In some over-
loads, a heater or wire installed below the disc is sized to give off heat, 
as shown in Figure 11.20. This gives a more accurate range of protection. 
Figure 11.21 shows a fractional horsepower compressor with an in-line 
overload. Figure 11.22 shows a three-phase overload for a compressor.
Other types of bimetal overloads are the two-wire and three-wire 
klixon overloads. The three-wire overload uses the current draw of both 
windings to open or close the overload and break the common to both 
windings, as shown schematically in Figure 11.23.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

338 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
The most popular line break overload for use in small central 
residential systems is an internal compressor overload, shown in 
Figure 11.24. The internal compressor overload is a small device  inserted 
into the motor windings, as shown in Figure 11.25. This overload can sense 
the current draw of the motor, as well as the winding temperature, more 
effectively than external overloads. Figure 11.26(a) shows a schematic 
diagram of a compressor with a bimetal internal overload. Figure 11.26(b) 
shows a compressor with a three-wire bimetal external overload. Some 
small three-phase hermetic motors also use an internal type of overload. 
Internal overloads should not be confused with internal thermostats. 
11.23
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a 
three-wire bimetal overload. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
To run
terminal on
compressor
Line 1
To start terminal
on compressor
3
2
1
11.21
FIGURE
In-line overload on 
fractional horse-
power compressor. 
(Courtesy of 
Tecumseh 
Products Co.)
11.22
F I G U R E
Three-phase 
overload for 
compressor. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.24
F I G U R E
Internal compressor overload. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
11.26
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of bimetal overloads. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
L1
L2
L1
COMP
COMP
Overload
(a) Bimetal overload
     (internal)
(b) Three-wire bimetal overload
     (external)
They are similar in appearance. The purpose of an internal thermostat is 
to break the control line if the windings overheat.
Pilot Duty Overload The pilot duty overload breaks the control circuit when 
an overload occurs, which would cause a contactor to be de-energized, as 
shown in Figure 11.27. This type of overload is common on larger systems 
and still exists on some smaller systems currently in the field.
11.25
FIGURE
An internal overload 
fitted into a hermetic 
compressor motor 
winding. (Courtesy 
of Tecumseh 
Products Co.)
 
Section 11.3   Overloads 
339
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

340 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
Two basic pilot duty overloads are being used in the industry today: 
the current overload and the magnetic overload. The current overload is 
shown in Figure 11.28. This current overload works similarly to the line 
break overloads except that a pilot duty set of contacts is opened rather 
than the line. In most cases, the bimetal disc of the overload would have 
to be so heavy that it could not control line voltage effectively. Therefore, 
in larger overloads pilot duty contacts are used.
The magnetic, or Heinemann, overload, as shown in Figure 11.29, is 
another type of pilot duty overload used in the industry. The magnetic 
overload consists of a movable metal core in a tube filled with silicone 
or oil. Surrounding the metal tube is a coil of wire. When the current 
increases, so does the magnetic field of the coil. The overload operates by 
the magnetic field created by the coil. The device is designed to create a 
magnetic field that is strong enough to pull the core up, opening the pilot 
contacts on overload.
The magnetic overload has a time-delay feature. There is a small 
hole drilled in the core. Once the field begins pulling the core in, the oil 
or silicone must go from one end of the tube to the other through the 
small hole. Thus, there is a short interval, due to the oil flow, between 
the time the motor starts up and the time the overload would break the 
circuit. Figure 11.30 shows a schematic diagram of magnetic overloads in 
a compressor circuit.
11.27
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram showing pilot duty 
overload in the circuit. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Legend
OL1:
OL2:
C:
COMP:
Overload 1
Overload 2
Contactor
Compressor
Operating controls
of compressor
OL1 OL2
C
COMP
C
C
OL2
OL1
L1
L2
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Many electronic solid-state overloads are used in the industry, 
and more are being developed. The design of the electronic overload 
varies with the application, but in most cases a temperature sensor 
is placed in the motor winding and connected to an external module 
mounted in the control panel of the unit. The sensors mounted in the 
11.28
F I G U R E
Current-type pilot duty overload. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
11.29
F I G U R E
Magnetic overload. 
(Courtesy of Bill 
Johnson)
 
Section 11.3   Overloads 
341
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

342 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
motor windings will change resistance with a change in motor wind-
ing temperature. This change in resistance, when amplified by the 
electronic module overload, will open a set of pilot duty contacts. Most 
electronic overloads use two or three sensors mounted in the motor 
windings. This method of overload protection gives rapid response 
time to an overload condition. An electronic overload is shown in 
Figure 11.31.
Troubleshooting
Most overloads are easy to troubleshoot because they have only one set of 
contacts along with a heater to heat the bimetal disc. An ohmmeter can 
be used to test the contacts in both pilot duty and line break overloads. In 
some cases, there will be a break in the heater or coil, depending on the 
type of overload you are checking. This element of an overload can also 
be checked with an ohmmeter.
The internal overload of a compressor is more difficult to diagnose 
because it cannot be isolated from the system. Most internal overloads 
break the common of the motor. If the motor is checked and there is an 
open starting and running winding, chances are that the common or the 
internal overload is open. If the compressor housing is cool, the motor 
11.30
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram showing magnetic overloads protecting 
the compressor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Legend
C:
COMP:
OL:
T:
Contactor
Compressor
Overload
Thermostat
L2
L1
C
OL
OL
T
COMP
C
C
Magnetic overloads
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

might be damaged rather than the overload. Be sure when making this 
test that the compressor is cool. If the compressor is warm or hot, the 
overload could be open and working properly.
11.4 MAGNETIC STARTERS
A magnetic starter, shown in Figure 11.32, is composed of four sets of 
contacts, a magnetic coil to close the contacts when the coil is energized, 
and a set of overloads. Figure 11.33 shows a magnetic starter with the 
parts labeled. The coil is the heart of the system. All functions of the total 
control, and stopping and starting the equipment, are accomplished by 
the coil being energized or de-energized. The contacts open and close, 
depending on the action of the coil. The magnetic starter also has a 
means of overload protection, which de-energizes the coil in the event 
that an overload occurs. Figure 11.34 shows a simple wiring diagram of a 
starter controlled by a thermostat.
In the heating, cooling, and refrigeration industry, many of the motors 
used are protected by internal overloads in the motor or by some exter-
nal means, such as an overload relay, magnetic overload, or thermal 
11.31
F I G U R E
Electronic 
 overload.
(Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
11.32
F I G U R E
Magnetic 
starter.  
(Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
 
Section 11.4   Magnetic Starters 
343
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

344 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
11.33
F I G U R E
Parts of magnetic starter. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Coil
Overload
contacts
Overloads
Contacts
To
control
11.34
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of starter. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 elements. A contactor is a device that opens and 
closes automatically and allows voltage to flow to 
the equipment (refer again to Chapter 5). Most air-
conditioning equipment uses a contactor with a sep-
arate means of overload protection. In many cases, 
especially with three-phase equipment, manufac-
turers use a magnetic starter, which incorporates a 
means of overload protection along with the ability 
to stop and start current flow to the equipment.
Types of Magnetic Starters 
and Their Operation
The overloads used in a magnetic starter are of three 
general classes: bimetal relay, thermal relay, and 
molten-alloy relay. The bimetal relay is composed of 
two metals welded together with different expan-
sion qualities. One end is fastened securely, and the 
opposite end can move. When this element is heated 
above a certain temperature due to the current flow 
to the equipment, it will warp and thus break the 
circuit, causing the starter to open.
The thermal relay operates on the heat going 
through a wire to determine the current flow. If the 
heat is great enough to indicate an overload, the 
contacts of the relay shown in Figure 11.35 will open.
The molten-alloy overload element, shown in 
Figure 11.36, is nothing more than a link of material 
that is a good electrical conductor. A ratchet wheel is 
soldered to the conductor with a special alloy. When 
the current flow produces a higher-than-normal 
temperature, the solder melts, allowing the ratchet 
wheel to open the contacts.
No matter what type of overload relay is used, 
it should be sized correctly to work properly. 
Manufacturers of magnetic starters distribute much 
information on how to size starters and overloads 
(sometimes referred to as heaters).
Troubleshooting
Magnetic starters are used on most three-phase equipment because 
they contain overloads and can effectively control the operation of loads 
in a heating, cooling, or refrigeration system. Some common faults 
11.35
F I G U R E
Thermal overload.
(Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
 
Section 11.4   Magnetic Starters 
345
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

346 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
of  magnetic starters occur in the contacts, 
solenoid coil heaters or overloads, and the 
mechanical linkage. No matter what part of the 
magnetic starter is faulty, it must be treated as 
a unit at the beginning of the diagnosis.
The service technician must first be cer-
tain that the magnetic starter is at fault. If the 
magnetic starter is at fault, it must be replaced, 
or the faulty section must be repaired. The 
contacts of a starter can be checked by visual 
inspection or by checking the voltage drop 
across each set of contacts. If the contacts are 
badly pitted, or if there is a voltage drop across 
the contacts, then they must be replaced.
The coil of a contactor can easily be faulty; it can be shorted, open, or 
grounded. The linkage that connects the movable contacts to the solenoid 
plunger can be worn or broken and will not close the contacts even if the 
coil is energized.
The overloads are difficult to troubleshoot because of the different 
types. Overloads are designed to open a control circuit when an overload 
exists. The overload circuit of a magnetic starter is connected within the 
control enclosure. The service technician must be familiar with the types 
of overloads and their operation. The size of the overload should also be 
checked. The technician can easily check a magnetic starter step by step 
after it has been determined that the starter is not closing and should be.
11.5 PUSH-BUTTON STATIONS
Push-button stations or switches are switches that are controlled manually 
by the pressing of a button. Figure 11.37 shows a start-stop push- button 
station. Figure 11.38 shows two wiring diagrams using push- button 
switches as controls. They can have two switches (for stop and start) 
or many switches (for such functions as on, off, start, stop, jog, reverse, 
and forward). They are designed in many forms and with many different 
functions. There are relatively few instances in the heating, cooling, and 
refrigeration industry where push-button stations are used. They are used 
mainly for motor control, circuit control, and magnetic starters.
Push-button stations are easy to troubleshoot. The service technician 
must know, or be able to find out, the normal position of the switch. In 
some cases, push-button switches may be quite complex, but this will not 
occur very often. An ohmmeter can be used to diagnose the condition of 
the switch.
11.36
F I G U R E
Molten-alloy overload 
element. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.6 SERVICE CALLS
Service Call 1
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Packaged air-conditioning unit
Complaint: No cooling
Service Procedure:
1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for 
available information. The work order indicates that, according to 
the customer, no part of the unit is operating.
2. The technician informs the customer of his or her presence and 
obtains specifics about what the conditioned air system is doing. 
The customer is unable to provide any additional information. 
Upon entering the house, the technician makes certain that no dirt 
or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician also 
takes care not to mar interior walls.
11.37
F I G U R E
Stop-start push-button 
station. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
11.38
F I G U R E
Wiring diagram of 
some common push-
button control systems. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
FOR
START
FOR
FOR
FOR
FOR
L1
L1
L2
L2
L5
L5
STOP
STOP
REV 2
REV 
REV 
3
3
M
M
2
R 6
4
R
5 F 7
8
8
F
R
OL
OL
(a) Stop-start station
(b) Stop-forward-reverse station
F
 
Section 11.6   Service Calls 
347
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

348 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
 3. The technician begins the procedure by measuring the available volt-
age to the packaged unit. The technician measures 0 volt at the T1 
and T2 terminals and between the neutral and T1 terminals of the 
disconnect. The reading between the neutral and T2 terminals of the 
disconnect is 120 volts. The technician has determined that voltage 
is not available to the unit.
 4. The fuses of the fusible disconnect must be checked. The techni-
cian measures 240 volts across the fuse in line 1 and 0 volt across 
the fuse in line 2. The technician determines that the fuse in line 
1 is blown.
 5. The technician turns the power supply off and locks or labels it.
 6. The blown fuse is changed with the correct size and type of ampacity.
 7. The technician turns the power supply on.
 8. The technician observes the operation of the unit to make certain 
the system is operating properly.
 9. The technician informs the homeowner of the problem and that it 
has been corrected.
Service Call 2
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas-fired furnace with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No cooling
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order information reveals that the gas 
furnace is in a crawl space with the condensing unit located at the 
north end of the house. The housekeeper will be available to allow 
access to the residence.
 2. The technician informs the housekeeper of his or her presence and 
obtain specifics about what the problems are with the conditioned 
air system. The housekeeper informs the technician that the indoor 
fan is not operating while the outdoor unit is still running.
 3. The technician examines the setting of the thermostat, verifying 
the correct setting. Upon entering the house, the technician makes 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 certain that no dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. 
The technician also takes care not to mar interior walls.
 4. An inspection of the condensing unit reveals that the compressor 
motor and condenser fan motor are both operating.
 5. The technician proceeds to the crawl space to check the operation of 
the indoor blower motor.
 6. The technician turns the power off and locks or labels it.
 7. The technician removes the indoor blower access cover.
 8. The technician visually inspects the blower assembly to make cer-
tain that the motor and fan turn easily, eliminating the possibility 
of a bad bearing in the motor. The technician also verifies that the 
motor is not overheating, indicating that the fan motor is not out on 
an internal overload.
 9. The technician restores power to the furnace.
10. The technician measures the voltage available to the indoor fan 
motor. The voltage reading is 0, indicating that voltage is not avail-
able to the fan motor.
11. Using the wiring diagram, the technician locates the component(s) 
that are in series with the fan motor. In most cases, with conven-
tional cooling systems, an indoor fan relay controls the motor during 
the cooling mode of operation.
12. The technician locates the indoor fan relay and finds that 24 volts are 
being supplied to the indoor fan relay coil. The contacts of the relay 
must be checked to determine their condition. The technician checks 
the voltage across the contacts and reads 120 volts, indicating that 
the contacts are open. Several methods are commonly used to check 
the condition of a set of contacts, including other voltage methods 
and resistance methods.
13. The technician replaces the indoor fan relay with a new relay with 
the correct coil voltage and contact configuration.
14. The technician oils the fan motor and checks the operation of the 
system.
15. The technician replaces the indoor blower access panel.
16. The technician informs the housekeeper of the problem and that it 
has been corrected.
 
Section 11.6   Service Calls 
349
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

350 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
Service Call 3
Application: Commercial refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Walk-in cooler with outdoor air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No refrigeration
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order indicates that the evaporator fan is 
operating normally but the outdoor condensing unit is not operating.
 2. The technician informs the store manager of his or her presence 
and obtains any additional information on the operation of the 
equipment.
 3. The technician measures the voltage available to the condensing 
unit at the disconnect. The technician reads 240 volts, indicating that 
power is available.
 4. Using a wiring diagram, the technician locates the component that con-
trols the compressor and condenser fan motor (usually a contactor).
 5. The technician checks the voltage being applied to the contactor coil 
and determines that 240-volt power is available, indicating that the 
contactor should be closed.
 6. The technician, by visual inspection or a voltage reading, determines 
if the contacts are opened or closed. The contacts are open, so the 
contactor coil is bad.
 7. The technician turns power supply off and locks or labels it.
 8. The contactor must be replaced with one that has the correct coil 
voltage and contact ampacity.
 9. The technician checks the equipment for proper operation.
10. The technician informs the store manager of the problem and the 
corrective action taken.
Service Call 4
Application: Domestic refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Domestic chest-type freezer
Complaint: Food thawing
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order information reveals that the food is 
thawing in the freezer and that the customer thinks power is avail-
able. The freezer is in the utility room off the kitchen, and the key is 
under the mat at the back door.
 2. The technician proceeds to the back door to gain access to the resi-
dence. Upon entering the house, the technician makes certain that 
no dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. The techni-
cian also takes care not to mar interior walls.
 3. The technician proceeds to the utility room and checks to make certain 
that power is available to the outlet to which the freezer is plugged in.
 4. The thermostat and compressor are good.
 5. The technician observes the compressor compartment and finds 
that the compressor is cold, indicating that no power is being applied 
to the compressor.
 6. The technician checks the power at the compressor terminals and 
determines that the compressor is not receiving power.
 7. The technician then checks from the power inlet at the compressor 
junction box to the compressor terminals. The overload reads volt-
age to one side, indicating that the overload is not allowing power to 
pass to the compressor. Therefore, the overload is faulty.
 8. The technician replaces the overload with a correct replacement.
 9. The technician leaves the customer a note describing what the prob-
lem was and stating that the freezer has been repaired.
Service Call 5
Application: Commercial and industrial conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Commercial and industrial fan coil unit
Complaint: Fan will not run
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order indicates that the technician is to 
check with the chief custodian upon entering the building.
 
Section 11.6   Service Calls 
351
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

352 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
 2. The chief custodian informs the technician that the main fan for the 
HVAC system is not operating and needs to be repaired as soon as 
possible. The chief custodian has no other information.
 3. The technician proceeds to the mechanical room that houses the 
main blower for the structure.
 4. The technician examines the fan and, in the process, depresses the 
reset on the magnetic starter. The blower motor operates.
 5. The technician checks the operation of the blower motor, ensuring 
proper operation.
 6. The technician informs the chief custodian of the problem and dem-
onstrates how building personnel could depress reset button before 
calling a service company. The technician also warns the chief cus-
todian that continual resets are not normal and should be checked.
SUMMARY
Control systems used on modern heating, cooling, and refrigeration sys-
tems use many different control components to obtain automatic control. 
In this chapter we described four of these components: contactors, relays, 
overloads, and magnetic starters.
Contactors play an important part in the correct operation of equip-
ment in the industry. Their purpose is to make and break a power cir-
cuit to a load, thus allowing the proper control of the equipment due to 
the contactor being energized or de-energized. The contacts, coil, and 
mechanical linkage are the main parts of the contactor. Each part must 
work properly for the contactor to work correctly. The coil can be faulty 
by being shorted or open. If it is good, a measurable resistance can be 
obtained on an ohmmeter. The contacts can be faulty due to wear, cor-
rosion, or excessive friction. Whatever the diagnosis of a contactor, it 
should be repaired or replaced whenever it is faulty or gives erratic opera-
tion. When replacement is necessary, it is essential to select the correct 
contactor for the job.
The relay is used to control many loads in control systems. It is the 
most widely used device in the industry. The application and size of relays 
should be identified before any replacement is attempted. The relay has 
the same components as a contactor: coil, contacts, and mechanical 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

linkage. The coil is easily diagnosed with an ohmmeter as good, open, or 
shorted. The contacts must be in good shape for proper operation and can 
be checked with an ohmmeter or voltmeter. The contacts of a relay are 
usually enclosed, which prevents a visual inspection. A faulty mechanical 
linkage in a relay usually results in sticking contacts.
Overloads play an important part in the industry because they pro-
tect expensive loads. The fuse is the simplest type of overload protection 
used. It is effective on noninductive loads, in protecting wires, and in 
protecting circuit components.
Overloads are divided into two basic types: line break and pilot duty. 
The line break overload breaks the line voltage to the components. It 
is used on small hermetic compressors and motors and is connected 
directly in the line voltage supply to the equipment or load. The pilot duty 
overload breaks a pilot duty set of contacts in the control circuit. Pilot 
duty overloads are arranged so that the line voltage feeds directly through 
them and on to the load. This line voltage will create an operating con-
dition in the element in the overload—thermal, current, or magnetic—
and open a set of pilot duty contacts. The internal overload is mounted 
directly in the windings of the motor and usually has no connections to 
the outside of the motor. The internal overload is connected in series with 
the common of the motor. All overloads must be properly sized to do an 
adequate job of protection.
A magnetic starter is much like a contactor; it has contacts that are 
opened or closed depending upon the action of the solenoid coil that 
energizes or de-energizes the magnetic starter controlling a load. The 
magnetic starter usually has three or four sets of contacts. It provides 
overload protection to the load it controls. The overload in the magnetic 
starter must be sized to the load it is controlling. The overload contacts 
remain in the starter, and the overload elements, called heaters, must 
be correctly sized for the load. The heaters are installed separately in 
the starter. Push buttons and stations are used with magnetic starters 
in many applications but usually not in air-conditioning equipment. The 
most common type of push button is the simple start-stop station.
 
Summary 
353
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

354 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
RQ 
R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
RQ1 
Which of the following is the largest electrical load 
in an air-conditioning or refrigeration system?
a. evaporator fan motor
b. condenser fan motor
c. compressor
d. relay coil
RQ2 
Which of the following is the major difference 
between a relay and a contactor?
a. ampacity rating
b. number of contacts
c. mechanical linkage
d. none of the above
RQ3 
What is the major difference between a magnetic 
starter and a contactor?
RQ4 
What is the purpose of a contactor or relay?
RQ5 
Explain the operation of a contactor and a relay.
RQ6 
What are the two types of armatures used in 
contactors and relays?
RQ7 
What are the three major parts of a contactor or 
relay?
RQ8 
What is the proper procedure for checking the coil 
of a contactor or relay?
RQ9 
Contacts are usually made of _____.
RQ10 
What are the major reasons for replacing the con-
tacts of a contactor?
RQ11 
A contactor or relay coil could be electrically diag-
nosed in which of the following conditions?
a. open
b. shorted
c. good
d. all of the above
RQ12 
True or False: A voltage reading taken across 
closed contacts of the same pole will show the 
voltage drop across the contacts.
RQ13 
The easiest faults to diagnose with a contactor are 
usually problems with the __________________.
RQ14 
Why is it difficult to repair a contactor?
RQ15 
What do the terms “normally open” and 
“normally closed” mean in reference to relays 
and contactors?
RQ16 
True or False: The contacts in a relay are easily 
checked by a visual inspection.
RQ17 
True or False: The size of the relay coil is smaller 
than the contactor coil.
RQ18 
What is the purpose of an overload?
RQ19 
An electric heater is a (an) ________ load.
a. resistive
b. inductive
RQ20 
An electric motor is a (an) ________ load.
a. resistive
b. inductive
RQ21 
Which of the following is the simplest overload 
used in the industry?
a. pilot duty
b. line break
c. fuse
d. magnetic
RQ22 
The line break overload breaks _____________.
a. the control circuit
b. the power voltage to the load
c. the fuse element
d. none of the above
C H A P T E R  1 1  R E V I E W
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Review Questions 
355
RQ23 
The pilot duty overload breaks ____.
a. the control circuit
b. the power voltage to the load
c. the fuse element
d. none of the above
RQ24 
How does a line break overload operate?
RQ25 
True or False: The most popular line break overload 
used in small equipment is the two-wire klixon 
overload.
RQ26 
Which of the following types of overloads gives the 
fastest response time to an overload condition?
a. magnetic
b. current
c. line break
d. electronic
RQ27 
What is the advantage of an internal compressor 
overload?
RQ28 
What is the proper procedure for checking an inter-
nal compressor overload?
RQ29 
Name two basic types of pilot duty overloads and 
describe how they operate.
RQ30 
What is a magnetic starter?
RQ31 
True or False: Magnetic starters are primarily used 
on single-phase motors.
RQ32 
What are the three types of overloads used in mag-
netic starters in the industry? How does each type 
work?
RQ33 
True or False: Push-button stations are widely used 
in the industry.
RQ34 
What is the characteristic of the current draw of 
an electric motor from locked rotor (start) until the 
motor reaches full speed?
RQ35 
Draw a wiring diagram using a contactor to control 
a compressor; the contactor will be controlled by a 
single-pole–single-throw switch.
RQ36 
Draw a schematic diagram with a relay controlling 
a fan motor; the relay will be 24 volts and con-
trolled by a single-pole–single-throw toggle switch.
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 11 in the Lab Manual.
C H A P T E R  1 1  R E V I E W
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

356 
CHAPTER 11   Contactors, Relays, and Overloads
PRACTICE SERVICE CALLS
Determine the problem and recommend a solution for the following ser-
vice calls. (Be specific; do not list components as good or bad.)
Practice Service Call 1
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Packaged air conditioning
Complaint: No cooling
Symptoms:
1. Indoor fan motor is operating properly.
2. Thermostat is calling for cooling.
3. Compressor and condenser fan motor are not operating.
4. Voltage to contactor coil is 24 volts.
5. Voltage reading across contacts L1 and T1 of contactor is 240 volts.
6. Compressor and condenser fan motor are in good condition but not 
operating.
Practice Service Call 2
Application: Commercial refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Small chest-type ice cream display case
Complaint: Ice cream thawing
Symptoms:
1. Correct voltage is available to ice cream box.
2. Thermostat is in good condition.
3. Compressor and starting components are in good condition.
4. Compressor is not operating.
Practice Service Call 3
Application: Commercial refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Walk-in cooler with outdoor air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No refrigeration
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Practice Service Calls 
357
Symptoms:
1. Evaporator fan motor is operating properly.
2. Correct voltage is available to condensing unit.
3. Condenser fan motor and compressor are in good condition but not 
operating.
4. Correct voltage is available to contactor coil, but contactor is not 
closing.
Practice Service Call 4
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No cooling
Symptoms:
1. Indoor blower is operating properly.
2. Correct voltage is available to contactor coil, and contactor is closing.
3. No line voltage is available to condensing unit.
Practice Service Call 5
Application: Commercial and industrial conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Water chiller and fan coil units
Complaint: No chilled water available to fan coil units
Symptoms:
1. Chilled water pump is not operating.
2. Correct voltage is available to L1 and L2 terminals of magnetic 
starter (240 V–1ø–60 Hz).
3. Magnetic starter pulls in but motor doesn’t start.
4. Voltage reading across T1 and T2 or starter is 0 volt.
5. Voltage reading across overload element of magnetic starter is 
240 volts.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗ Explain the purpose of a transformer in a control circuit.
◗ Size a transformer for a control circuit.
◗ Troubleshoot and replace a transformer in a residential air-conditioning 
control circuit.
◗ Explain the basic function of a line- and low-voltage thermostat in a control 
system.
◗ Identify the common types of thermostats used in the industry.
◗ Draw schematic diagrams using line- and low-voltage thermostats as operat-
ing and safety controls.
◗ Install line- and low-voltage thermostats on heating, cooling, and refrigera-
tion equipment.
◗ Correctly set the heating anticipators and cooling anticipators, if adjustable, 
on a residential low-voltage control system.
◗ Explain the modes of operation and be able to correctly set or program a 
clock thermostat.
◗ Explain the function and operation of pressure switches.
◗ Install and correctly set the pressure switches in control systems used as 
operating and safety controls.
◗ Troubleshoot pressure switches.
Thermostats, Pressure Switches, 
and Other Electric Control 
Devices
C H A P T E R
358
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices 
359
◗ Understand, install, and troubleshoot the following controls in control sys-
tems used in the industry: (1) humidistats, (2) oil safety switches, (3) time-
delay relays, (4) time clocks, and (5) solenoid valves.
KEY TERMS
Anticipators 
Range
Clock thermostat 
Snap action
Differential 
Solenoid valve
High-pressure switch 
Staging thermostat
Humidistat 
Thermostat
Line-voltage thermostat 
Thermostat controlling element
Low-pressure switch 
Time clock
Low-voltage thermostat 
Time-delay relay
Oil safety switches 
Transformer
Pressure switches 
INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 11, we discussed some commonly used devices that control 
loads in heating, cooling, and refrigeration systems. In this chapter, we 
discuss devices that control some small loads and contactors and relays 
that control larger loads.
Thermostats are extremely important to the industry because they 
are opened and closed by a change in temperature. In all phases of the 
industry, we control temperature, and in most cases we do this by the use 
of a thermostat. Pressure switches are sometimes used to control temper-
ature by the pressure-temperature relationship, but in most cases pres-
sure switches are used as safety devices. Transformers are used to reduce 
line voltage to the low voltage that is used in many control systems.
Thermostats play an important part in most control systems. The 
thermostat is commonly used as the primary control to control the tem-
perature within a given area. In some cases, it is also used as a safety 
device, as in motor protection and limit switches. Thermostats that are 
used as primary controls can be heating thermostats or cooling thermo-
stats or some combination of the two. Thermostats can also be used for a 
staging effect, that is, for operating equipment at different times, depend-
ing on the demands put on the system. Staging can provide a main stage 
for normal operation and a secondary stage for energizing a specific part 
of the control system at a specific time as the load dictates.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

360 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
Pressure switches can be used for different purposes. Pressure 
switches are often used as safety devices to cut the equipment off if 
the pressure is dangerously high or low. In some cases in refrigeration 
systems, pressure switches are used as operating controls. Whatever 
the purpose of the pressure switch, it always reacts to a specific pres-
sure in a certain way.
Transformers are used to break down the incoming power voltage to 
a voltage that can be easily used for control circuits.
Other control devices that we discuss in this chapter include humidi-
stats, oil safety switches, time-delay relays, time clocks, and solenoid 
valves.
In this chapter, we look at each of the control devices introduced 
in the preceding paragraphs and describe how they operate in the 
system. In the next chapter, we examine heating control devices in 
more detail.
12.1 TRANSFORMERS
The transformer in a heating or cooling system provides the low-
voltage power source for the control circuit. It transforms line voltage to 
the lower voltage needed for the control system. Most residences and 
small commercial installations use a 24-volt control system. The trans-
former for a residential unit (Figure 12.1) is used to convert line voltage 
to 24 volts. Some commercial and industrial high-voltage equipment 
use transformers that drop the line volt-
age to 240 or 120 volts (Figure 12.2).
Operation
Transformers are stationary inductive 
devices that transfer electric energy from 
one circuit to another by induction. The 
transformer has two windings, primary 
and secondary. An alternating current 
voltage is applied to the primary winding 
of a transformer and induces a current in 
the secondary winding.
Many different types of transformers 
are used in the industry. A step-down 
transformer induces a secondary voltage 
at a lower rate than the primary. This 
type of transformer is used for the power 
Transformer. (Photo by Bill 
Johnson)
F I G U R E12.1
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.1   Transformers 
361
supply of a low-voltage system. A step-up 
transformer induces a secondary voltage 
at a rate higher than the primary. This 
type of transformer is used to boost the 
voltage.
Sizing Transformers
Transformers are like many other electric 
components. They are not 100% efficient. 
In other words, there is a loss between the 
primary and secondary windings. This loss 
must be considered when sizing trans-
formers for a certain job. Transformers 
are rated by their primary voltage, sec-
ondary voltage, and voltamperes (VA). 
System equipment must be considered in 
transformer sizing along with the trans-
former rating.
The selection of a transformer vitally 
affects the performance and life of elec-
tric components in heating, cooling, and 
refrigeration equipment. A transformer 
too small for the control circuit will result 
in a lower-than-normal low voltage to 
the control circuit. This will result in improper operation of contactors or 
motor starters due to chattering or sticking contacts, burned holding coils, 
or the failure of contacts to close properly. All these conditions can cause 
system failure and possible damage to the compressor.
Even when transformers are sized correctly, care should be taken to 
avoid an excessive voltage drop in the low-voltage control circuit. When 
using a 24-volt control system with a remote thermostat, size the ther-
mostat wire to carry sufficient current between the transformer and the 
thermostat.
The capacity of a transformer is described by its electric rating, primary 
voltage, frequency, secondary voltage, and the load rating in voltamperes. 
The maximum load of a transformer used in an air-conditioning control 
circuit is 100 VA. The maximum voltage is 30 V. Fuses can be used on the 
secondary side of the transformer for protection.
Transformers should be selected so they will operate all 24-volt 
loads without overheating. Transformers used only on furnaces will 
generally be rated 20 VA or less because of the light low-voltage loads. 
 Air-conditioning systems usually require a transformer rated at 40 VA or 
POWER
RATING
12.2
F I G U R E
Large control transformer. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

362 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
larger, depending on the low-voltage loads. When replacing transformers 
in the field, use the following guidelines:
 1. For replacement, select a transformer the same size or larger than 
the one being replaced.
 2. For new applications, follow the manufacturer’s recommendation.
Troubleshooting
Transformers can be easily diagnosed by two methods. An ohmmeter 
can be used to check the continuity of the windings of a transformer for 
an open, shorted, or good condition. However, it is difficult to diagnose a 
transformer with a spot burnout unless the second method of diagnosis is 
followed. A voltmeter can be used to check the secondary voltage of a trans-
former with the correct line voltage applied to the primary. When checking 
with a voltmeter, a load should be applied to the transformer. In some cases 
when a load is applied, the transformer secondary drops below an accept-
able level, but this condition is rare.
When replacing a faulty transformer, the low-voltage control should be 
checked, because a short in the circuit will cause the transformer to burn 
out again. This is a common occurrence when a contactor coil or relay coil 
shorts out.
12.2 THERMOSTATS
The temperature in any structure, regardless of its age, location, or design, 
can be maintained at comfortable levels with a thermostat. Thermostats 
are designed and built in many different forms and sizes to meet the 
applications required in the industry. Thermostats play an important part 
in the total operation of most systems in the industry.
Applications
The basic function of a thermostat is to respond to a temperature change 
by opening or closing a set of electric contacts. Many different types of 
thermostats are used in the industry to perform a variety of switching 
actions. Figure 12.3 shows several common thermostats in use today.
Thermostats are used for many different purposes. An air-conditioning 
or heating thermostat would basically control the temperature of a 
given area for human comfort. Refrigeration thermostats are designed 
to maintain a specific temperature within a refrigerated space, such as 
in a domestic refrigerator, walk-in cooler, display case, and commercial 
freezer. There are many types of special application thermostats used 
in the industry, such as outdoor thermostats and safety thermostats. 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.2   Thermostats 
363
Whatever use a thermostat is put to, it serves the same function: reacting 
to temperature with the opening and closing of a switch.
A heating thermostat closes on a decrease in temperature and opens 
on an increase in temperature. A cooling thermostat closes on an increase 
in temperature and opens on a decrease in temperature. This is a very 
important factor to consider when ordering or installing thermostats. The 
heating and cooling thermostats are usually built so that the switch reacts 
either for heating or for cooling, with no intermediate position; in other 
words, a single-pole–double-throw switch. Some thermostats must isolate 
the heating and cooling contacts and therefore must use a separate set of 
contacts for heating and for cooling. Modern thermostats have a system 
switch that will determine whether the unit is heating or cooling.
The thermostat is merely a switching device that routes the voltage 
to the correct control for the operation prescribed by the thermostat set-
ting. Figure 12.4 shows the schematic of a low-voltage thermostat with 
its routing. With the system selector in the cooling position, voltage flows 
through the system switch to the cooling thermostat, which operates 
the cooling equipment and the fan motor to maintain the temperature 
setting. If the system switch is in the heating position, the current flows 
through the switch to the heating thermostat, which operates the heating 
equipment. Many thermostats incorporate a fan switch that allows the 
fan to be operated manually or with the cooling equipment, since the fan 
on heating operates from a fan switch.
Controlling Elements and Types of Thermostats
Two types of thermostat controlling elements are commonly used. The 
controlling element of a thermostat is the part that moves when a change 
in temperature is sensed. The bimetal thermostat shown in Figure 12.5 is 
12.3
F I G U R E
Common low-voltage thermostats. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

364 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
12.4
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of the routing of a low-voltage thermostat.  
(Courtesy of Honeywell, Inc.)
Temperature
fall
R1
W1
Y1
Cool
anticipator
Adjustable
heat
anticipator
Off
On
Off
Cool
Cool
Heat
Heat
Auto
fan
Compressor
relay
Heating
damper
motor
Cooling
damper
motor
Electric
heat 
ready
Fan
relay
W
Y
B
R
O
G
P
1
2
1
2
With no O terminal load, thermostat current during
heating cycle varies depending on whether fan switch
is in the On or Auto position.   Heater should be set
for combined current level of heat ready and fan ready
coils.   With O terminal load, set thermostat heat
anticipator to its maximum setting as cooling
anticipator in series O terminal load provides
heat anticipation in the heating cycle.  (Limit the
thermostat heating load current to 0.8 amps to 
assure good performance.)
Power supply provides overload protection and
disconnect means as required.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.2   Thermostats 
365
commonly used to control the temperature of air in an air-conditioning 
or heating application. The remote bulb thermostat is commonly used to 
control the temperature of any medium, whether liquid or vapor, in many 
applications.
Remote Bulb Thermostat. The remote bulb thermostat is shown in Figure 12.6. 
The power element, which is the bulb, and the diaphragm are connected 
with a section of small tubing. The bulb is filled with liquid and gas and 
is then sealed. The pressure exerted by the diaphragm on the mechani-
cal linkage will open and close a set of contacts. As the bulb temperature 
changes, so will the pressure exerted on the diaphragm. If the tempera-
ture of the bulb increases, so will the pressure. If the temperature of the 
bulb decreases, so will the pressure. The increase or decrease in pressure 
causes the contacts to open or close, depending on the design of the 
thermostat.
Bimetal Thermostat. The heart of most other types of thermostats is a 
bimetal element. The element gets its name from the fact that it uses a 
bimetal to cause the movement that opens and closes a set of contacts. 
A bimetal is a combination of two pieces of metal, as shown in 
Figure 12.7(a), that are a given length at a certain temperature. The met-
als are welded together. Each metal has a different coefficient of expan-
sion. If the temperature of these two metals is increased, one will become 
longer than the other because of the different expansion qualities. This 
causes the bimetal to arch, as shown in Figure 12.7(b). If the metal is 
12.5
F I G U R E
Internal parts of bi-metal thermostat. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

366 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
anchored at one end, leaving the other end to move freely, it will move up 
and down according to the temperature surrounding it. In a low-voltage 
thermostat, the bimetal works better and gives better control if it is large.
The first type of bimetal thermostat that was produced is shown in 
Figure 12.8(a). It was unsatisfactory because of the unstable pressure 
from the bimetal that held the contacts together. It would react (close or 
open) to a relatively small change in the temperature around the room 
thermostat.
A thermostat must have a means of making a good connection with 
the contacts. This is accomplished by a snap action of the thermostat 
bimetal to the fixed contacts. The early type of thermostat was not snap 
acting in the switching movement and thus caused problems because 
of its reaction to minor temperature changes. However, if a permanent 
magnet is placed near the bimetal arm, as shown in Figure 12.8(b), it will 
cause a snap action when the bimetal expands enough to move the con-
tacts close together.
Two methods in common use enable thermostats to be snap acting: 
a permanent magnet and a mercury bulb. A permanent magnet mounted 
near the fixed contacts will cause the action of the bimetal to be snap 
acting. The bimetal will make good contact once it is in the magnetic 
field of the permanent magnet. Figure 12.9 shows this type of bimetal 
thermostat.
The mercury bulb thermostat also provides snap action because of the 
globule of mercury moving between two probes sealed inside a glass tube, 
(a)  Two metals with different
      coefficients of expansion
(b)  Metal A expands more than 
       B and causes an arch
A
B
A
B
12.7
F I G U R E
A bimetal element for a thermostat. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
12.6
FIGURE
Remote bulb 
thermostat.
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.2   Thermostats 
367
as shown in Figure 12.10. Figure 12.11 shows a bimetal thermostat with a 
mercury bulb that is used in the industry.
Line-Voltage Thermostat. The line-voltage thermostat is designed to operate 
on line voltage, for example, 120 volts or 240 volts. The line-voltage ther-
mostat, shown in Figure 12.12, is used on many packaged air-conditioning 
12.9
FIGURE
Bimetal thermostat 
with snap action 
contacts. (Photo 
by Bill Johnson)
12.10
FIGURE
Bimetal with 
a mercury bulb 
used for the 
contacts. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Mercury bulb
Probe
Bimetal
Mercury
12.8
F I G U R E
Basic bimetal element (a) Basic bimetal with no means of snap action to 
produce a stable connection (b) Bimetal with permanent magnet to produce 
snap action and maintain good contact. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Contacts
Permanent
magnet
Contacts
(a)
(b)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

368 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
units and refrigeration equipment of commercial design. This type of 
thermostat is used to open or close the voltage supply to a load in the sys-
tem. Figure 12.13 shows the wiring diagram of a common 240-volt win-
dow air conditioner with a line-voltage thermostat. 
Figure 12.14 shows a line-voltage thermostat used to 
control an electric baseboard heater.
The line-voltage thermostat lacks many good 
qualities that are obtained with low-voltage ther-
mostats. For example, depending on the application, 
the line-voltage thermostat functions only to open or 
close a set of contacts. Line-voltage thermostats are 
commonly used in the industry.
Low-Voltage Thermostat. The low-voltage thermostat 
is used on control systems with a 24-volt supply. 
The low-voltage thermostat is used on all residen-
tial heating and air-conditioning systems and many 
commercial and industrial systems. The low-voltage 
thermostat can be used for heating operation, cool-
ing operation, automatic operation of fans, manual 
12.11
F I G U R E
Bimetal thermostat with mercury bulb contacts. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
12.12
FIGURE
Line-voltage 
thermostat. 
(Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.2   Thermostats 
369
operation of fans, and automatic changeover from heating to cooling. 
The difference between a line voltage and a low-voltage thermostat is 
in the size of the bimetal element. With the larger line voltage contacts, 
more pressure is needed to close the contacts, and, therefore, larger 
bimetal elements are required. Figure 12.15 shows a wiring schematic 
of a residential heating and cooling system with a low-voltage thermo-
stat. The low-voltage thermostat is more accurate, less expensive, and 
requires smaller wiring than its counterpart, the line-voltage thermo-
stat. Figure 12.16 shows a low-voltage thermostat used to control the 
temperature in a residence. Figure 12.17 shows a digital low-voltage 
thermostat used in a residence.
Most thermostats installed on new and replacement installations 
in the industry today are digital. Several digital thermostats are shown 
in Figure 12.17. Digital thermostats have many advantages over the old 
mechanical bimetal thermostats. The primary advantage for the home 
owner is that the readout on the thermostat is digital and much more 
accurate than the old bimetal thermometers that were placed on the 
On/off switch
Thermostat
Run capacitor
COMP
Fan
motor
L1
G
12.13
FIGURE
Wiring diagram of 
window unit with line-
voltage thermostat.
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
12.14
FIGURE
Line-voltage 
 thermostat used 
to control an 
electric baseboard 
heater. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

370 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
cover. The readout on digital thermostats is the temperature where the 
thermostat is located. This is also the temperature that is the controlling 
element of the digital thermostat. The customer can no longer complain 
that the temperature on the thermostat does not match when the equip-
ment is starting and stopping. Digital thermostats are more accurate and 
versatile than the old mechanical thermostats because their circuitry is 
electronic and has few moving parts.
Thermostat
Temperature fall
Adjustable
heating
anticipator
Cooling anticipator
Heat
Heat
Cool
Cool
Off
Off
Auto Fan on
Condensing unit
low-voltage terminals
Power
supply
Furnace
low-voltage
terminals
Fan
controls
B
C Y
R C WG
To fan
IFR
O
W
W
Y
Y
G
R
R
Legend
W:  Heating terminals      G:  Fan terminals
 Y :  Cooling terminals      R:  Voltage terminals
12.15
F I G U R E
Wiring diagram of a residential 
heating and cooling system with a 
low-voltage thermostat. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.2   Thermostats 
371
Anticipators
The success of any thermostat depends on the system 
being correctly sized, the air flow being balanced, and the 
thermostat being correctly placed. It is almost impossible 
for thermostats to maintain the exact temperature of any 
given area without spending an unreasonable amount for 
controls. Thus, anticipators are used to give a more evenly 
controlled temperature range. There are two types of antici-
pators: heating and cooling. We discuss each type in turn.
Heating Anticipator. A thermostat that has no means of 
heat anticipation will allow a wide swing from the desired 
temperature, especially on forced–warm-air systems. If the thermostat is 
set on 75°F, the furnace will come on for heating. But there is a delay 
before any warm air is carried to the conditioned space because a warm-
air heating system must heat the furnace first. This delay will allow the 
air temperature to drop to 74°F or lower before the blower begins opera-
tion, and heat is carried to the conditioned space.
The temperature difference between the closing of the thermostat 
and the time when warm air begins to reach the thermostat is called 
system lag. As long as the furnace remains on, the temperature will con-
tinue to rise. If the thermostat differential is 2°F, the thermostat will open 
at 77°F and stop the burner. However, the furnace is still warm and the 
blower must be operated until the furnace cools, which will carry the 
temperature up to 78°F or higher.
The temperature difference between the opening of the thermostat 
and the time when the warm air is no longer being delivered to the 
room is called overshoot. The overshoot and system lag can produce an 
 additional temperature swing of as much as 5°F. Figure 12.18 shows the 
effect of overshoot and system lag.
12.16
FIGURE
Low-voltage 
thermostat used 
in a residence.
(Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
12.17
F I G U R E
Digital thermostats used in the industry. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

372 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
The wide difference in temperature can be controlled by using a heat-
ing anticipator in the thermostat. The heating anticipator is nothing more 
than a small source of heat close to the bimetal element. This allows 
the bimetal to be a little warmer than the surrounding air. The heating 
anticipator is placed in series with the contacts of the thermostat. When 
the contacts close and energize the burner, the current must also flow 
through the heating anticipator, which causes it to heat the bimetal to a 
certain temperature.
A heating anticipator anticipates the point at which the thermostat 
should open and provides a narrow thermostat differential. Suppose the 
thermostat is set at 75°F and the furnace burner is off, with the tempera-
ture dropping slowly. When the temperature falls below 75°F, the burner 
starts and at the same time the heat anticipator begins to heat the bimetal. 
The air temperature will continue to drop until the blower delivers warm 
air to the conditioned space. The room temperature begins to rise, but the 
80
Temperature (°F)
Furnace comes on at
thermostat setting of 75°F
Overshoot: Blower continues running until
furnace has cooled. Conditioned space
continues to warm up to about 78°F
System Lag: Conditioned space continues
to cool to about 74°F until blower turns
on, and then and begins to warm up
With 2°F thermostat differential,
furnace cuts off at 77°F.
79
78
77
76
75
74
73
72
(a)
80
Temperature (°F)
Furnace cuts off when bimetal elements is 77°F, but the
room temperature is only 76°F because of anticipator. 
Overshoot: Blower continues running until
furnace has cooled. Conditioned space
continues to warm up to about 77°F
79
78
77
76
75
74
73
72
(b)
12.18
F I G U R E
(a) Effect of system lag and 
overshoot on room temperature, 
if there is no thermostat setting if and 
there is no thermostat anticipator. 
(b) Reduced temperature swing 
when thermostat anticipator is used 
and set properly. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.2   Thermostats 
373
bimetal temperature is slightly higher because of the heat from the heat-
ing anticipator. Thus, the thermostat anticipates the overshoot and cuts 
off the burner. Due to the shorter length of time the burner operates, the 
furnace will cool more quickly, stopping the fan and preventing the over-
shoot. A heating anticipator does not eliminate system lag and overshoot. 
But these factors become negligible with a heating anticipator, producing 
a temperature swing of only 2°F to 3°F. The thermostat circuit shown in 
Figure 12.15 shows a heating anticipator connected in series with the 
contacts of the thermostat.
Two types of heating anticipators are used: fixed and adjustable. The 
fixed heating anticipator is nonadjustable and is not very versatile. The 
adjustable heating anticipator, shown in Figure 12.19, can be matched to 
almost any control system. The adjustable heating anticipator should be 
set on the current draw of the primary control of the gas valve. For exam-
ple, if a gas valve had a current draw of 0.2 amp, then the heating antici-
pator should be set on 0.2 amp. Figure 12.20 shows the procedure used to 
determine the current draw of the primary control by using a clamp-on 
ammeter. The ampere reading should be divided by the number of loops 
of wire that are made around the jaws of the meter. In most cases, 
Adjustable heating
anticipator
12.19
F I G U R E
Adjustable heating anticipator. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

374 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
From
transformer
To heating
circuit
Thermostat
subbase
R
W
AC ammeter
Jumper wire
12.20
F I G U R E
Procedure used to determine the 
current draw of primary control 
with clamp-on ammeter. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
10 loops is adequate for an accurate measurement. Many primary con-
trols list the current draw directly on the control. Once the current draw 
of the primary control has been determined, the heat anticipator should 
be set at that current. Matching the adjustable heating anticipator to 
the current rating of the burner control assures the best possible heat 
anticipation.
Cooling Anticipator. The cooling anticipator operates somewhat differently 
from the heating anticipator. This type of anticipator is also known 
as an off-cycle anticipator. Figure 12.21 shows a cooling anticipator on a 
thermostat. The cooling anticipator is shown connected to a thermostat 
in Figure 12.22. The cooling anticipator adds heat to the bimetal on the 
“off” cycle of the equipment because of its parallel connection in the 
circuit. When the thermostat contacts close, the current takes the flow 
of least resistance, which is through the contacts rather than the cooling 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.2   Thermostats 
375
anticipator. On the “off” cycle the current passes through the anticipator 
and the contactor coil. The anticipator drops the voltage to a point that 
will not energize the contactor because of the series connection. The 
current flow through the anticipator heats the bimetal and causes the 
thermostat to anticipate the temperature rise. The cooling anticipator is 
not as important as the heating anticipator because cooling equipment 
operation is almost instant, whereas there is a delay in the heat delivery 
of a forced–warm-air system.
Thermostat Installation
The installation of a thermostat is simple because all thermostats are 
marked with identifiable letters, although the letters used are not con-
sistent from manufacturer to manufacturer. Figure 12.23 shows a simple 
heating and cooling thermostat subbase. The terminals are shown with 
their letter designations (the thermostat attaches to the subbase). The let-
ter designations to system functions are given in the chart in Figure 12.23. 
The letter designation should be followed for proper installation.
When checking thermostat operation, check the wiring connections 
and make sure that the selector switch and the temperature setting are 
properly selected.
12.21
F I G U R E
Cooling anticipator on low-voltage 
thermostat. (Courtesy of Bill 
Johnson)
Cooling
anticipator
Adjustable
heating
anticipator
Temperature
fall
Thermostat R
W
Y
12.22
FIGURE
Schematic diagram 
of cooling anticipator 
connection in 
thermostat. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

376 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
When installing a thermostat, choose a loca-
tion that will be most suitable for maintain-
ing the correct temperature in the desired area. 
Thermostats installed in applications that require 
control of the temperature of some enclosed area, 
such as a refrigerator, walk-in cooler, or walk-
in freezer, or some medium, such as water in a 
chilled water system, should be installed where 
the correct temperature can be sensed by the 
thermostat without interference from some other 
source of heat or cold. Thermostat installations in 
commercial refrigeration applications should be 
where the thermostat can sense the temperature 
that reflects the average temperature of the box 
or case. When installing thermostats in applica-
tions where some medium such as water is being 
controlled, mount or insert the thermostat bulb 
or controlling element in the system so that the 
correct temperature is being sensed by the ther-
mostat. When replacing a thermostat on a system, 
make certain that the thermostat is the correct 
type and that it is installed in the same way as the 
one being replaced. The thermostat should not be 
installed where there is a possibility of interfer-
ence by some other installation.
The thermostat in an air-conditioning applica-
tion should be located in the conditioned space on 
a solid inside wall where there is normal air circu-
lation and where it will not be subject to any artificial heat or cold from 
lamps, televisions, appliances, or hot water pipes. The thermostat should 
be installed about 5 feet above the floor.
Troubleshooting
Troubleshooting thermostats will be a common job for installation and 
service technicians in the industry. Most thermostat manufacturers make 
available detailed installation and service procedures for their thermo-
stats. When troubleshooting thermostats, the technician will be involved 
in three basic areas: calibration, diagnosis, and maintenance.
A common complaint is that the thermostat does not turn the equip-
ment on and off at the proper temperature or that the temperature does 
not agree with the thermometer on the thermostat. Calibration is a means 
12.23
FIGURE
Thermostat subbase 
with terminals and 
letter designations.  
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.2   Thermostats 
377
of resetting the thermostat so that the temperature more  accurately 
reflects the temperature of the structure. When calibrating thermostats, 
follow the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Common complaints about thermostats are excessive temperature 
swing, short cycling, the “on” cycle running too long, or the thermostat 
working incorrectly in regard to heating and cooling or not working at 
all. In many cases that involve temperature swing and cycling time, cor-
rectly setting the heat anticipator, if the thermostat has one, will correct 
the problem. Most line-voltage thermostats do not have heat anticipators. 
Other problems often encountered by service technicians are that the 
thermostat is not doing what it is designed to do, or that the thermostat 
is defective and must be replaced.
Maintenance of thermostats covers checking the terminals for tight-
ness, cleaning the contacts if possible, checking the calibration, and 
cleaning the sensing element.
Green Technology
Mercury Disposal
Many thermostats that are in place in the industry and some that are 
being installed now contain mercury. Thermostats containing mercury 
should be disposed of properly. Mercury is a heavy metal that occurs 
naturally as a trace element found in air, water, soil and rocks. Mercury 
is a silver colored liquid often referred to as “quicksilver”. Mercury 
poses a danger to humans, animals, and the environment. The most 
common sources of mercury includes thermometers, light bulbs, and 
thermostats; of course, the amount of mercury in each of these devices 
is small, but the cumulative amount put back into the environment 
would do great harm to the environment. Mercury has been used in cool-
ing and heating thermostats since the 1950s. Each of the mercury bulbs 
in a thermostat contains approximately three grams of mercury, which 
is about the size of a penny. There are many thermostats still in use in 
the control systems of heating and air-conditioning systems. In the past, 
heating and air-conditioning technicians have disposed of these mercury 
bulb thermostats by discarding them in the regular trash. Unfortunately, 
they end up in a landfill; the mercury bulbs get broken and the mercury 
goes back into the environment.
When heating and air-conditioning technicians remove a mercury 
bulb thermostat from a structure, they should be disposed of properly. 
The technicians should never try to remove the mercury from the mer-
cury bulb because in many cases they will break the bulb and a small 
mercury spill will occur. The technician should take the thermostat to a 
HVAC supplier that collects these mercury bulb thermostats for recycling.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

378 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
12.3 STAGING THERMOSTATS
A staging thermostat is designed to operate equipment at different 
times with respect to the needs of the structure (Figure 12.24). The 
staging thermostat has more than one contact and opens and closes 
at different times with regard to the condition of the area being 
controlled.
The heating, cooling, and refrigeration industry has advanced in most 
phases, but in recent years there has been a demand for better control 
and more efficient operation with the modern systems. Staging thermo-
stats have been designed to meet this need. The staging thermostat is 
becoming increasingly popular in the industry because of its versatility 
in system control.
Green Technology
Multistage Equipment
Heating and air-conditioning equipment that has more than 
one stage of either heating or cooling or both is being manufactured 
today. Multistage systems increase the operating efficiency by 
operating only the stages, whether heating or cooling, that are 
needed to provide adequate capacity to heat or cool the structure. 
A multistage system decreases the cost of heating or cooling a 
structure.
Staging System
Many heating and cooling systems are operated in stages because the 
load in some structures fluctuates a great deal. A heating or cooling sys-
tem that has been designed to operate on two different capacity levels 
is a staged system. A staged system is designed to operate at half of its 
capacity or more until the operating section of the equipment can no lon-
ger handle the heating or cooling needs of the structure. Then additional 
stages are called on as they are needed.
Staging systems offer many advantages because of their more effi-
cient operation. For example, on a mild day the cooling load of a building 
is low and the full capacity of the equipment is not needed. The staging 
thermostat permits the equipment to operate at half of its capacity. If the 
day is extremely hot and the full capacity of the system is needed, then 
the staging thermostat makes that available. Staging can be used to many 
advantages in both heating and cooling.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.3   Staging Thermostats 
379
Operation and Types
A staging thermostat is designed to be used on a system that has two 
stages of heating, cooling, or both. The staging thermostat operates on 
the differential in temperature between the stages. For example, a two-
stage cooling thermostat could close one set of contacts at 75°F and the 
other set at 76.5°F to 78°F. A two-stage heating thermostat could close one 
set of contacts at 75°F and the other set at 73.5°F to 72°F. This allows sys-
tems to operate on partial capacity until the need arises for full capacity.
Staging thermostats can be obtained in a variety of stage configura-
tions. Common staging thermostats used in the industry are the one-
stage heating thermostat with two-stage cooling, the two-stage heating 
thermostat with one-stage cooling, and the two-stage cooling thermostat 
with two-stage heating. Figure 12.24 shows a two-stage heating and a 
two-stage cooling thermostat. Figure 12.25 shows the schematic diagram 
for the two-stage heating and two-stage cooling thermostat.
The letter designations are the same for staging thermostats as they 
are for regular thermostats except that heating or cooling stages would 
be lettered with a 1 or 2 after the main letter. The number 1 represents 
the first stage; the number 2 represents the second stage. When installing 
staging thermostats, pay careful attention to the letter designations and 
control hookup to avoid an improperly operating system.
12.24
F I G U R E
Low-voltage two-stage cooling and two-stage 
heating thermostat. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

380 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
Heat Pump
A heat pump is a refrigeration system that heats or cools by reversing the 
refrigerant cycle for the heating operation and then operating conven-
tionally for cooling. Most heat pumps use a staging thermostat to operate 
a set of supplementary heaters. The first-stage thermostat operates the 
compressor. The second stage operates the supplementary heat when 
the first stage cannot handle the load. Figure 12.26 is a wiring diagram of 
a heat pump showing the two stages of heating and what they control.
STAGE 1 
HEATING
STAGE 2 
HEATING
STAGE 1 
COOLING
STAGE 2 
COOLING
FAN RELAY 
COIL
120 VAC
25 VAC
 
Transformer
Red 
jumper wire
RH
RC
O
Y1
Y2
G
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 1
heat
Stage 2
heat
Stage 1
cool
Stage 1
cool
Stage 1
Stage 2
Adjustable
heat
anticipators
Fixed
cooling
anticipators
B
W1
W2
ON
AUTO
AUTO
COOL
OFF
HEAT
FAN SWITCH
SYSTEM SWITCH
CIRCUIT MADE
OPERATION OF
BAR CONTACTS
CIRCUIT BROKEN
LOW-VOLTAGE WIRING
INTERNAL
EXTERNAL
12.25
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram for a two-stage cooling and two-stage heating thermostat. 
(White-Rodgers Division of Emerson Electric Co.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.4   Programmable Thermostats 
381
12.4 PROGRAMMABLE THERMOSTATS
A programmable thermostat is used to control the temperature of a 
structure, allowing the customer to lower or raise the temperature con-
trol point for at least one period in 24 hours. Figure 12.27 shows a digital 
12.26
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a heat pump with two-stage heating and one-stage 
cooling thermostat to control a heat pump. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Legend
COMP:
CFM:
IFM:
RVS:
C:
DFR:
RVR:
CR:
HC1:
HC2:
OTS1:
OTS2:
SH1:
SH2:
IFR:
AS:
RC:
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Indoor fan motor
Reversing value
solenoid
Contactor
Defrost relay
Reversing value relay
Control relay 
Heating coil 1
Heating coil 2
Outdoor thermostat 1
Outdoor thermostat 2
Strip heater 1
Strip heater 2
Indoor fan relay
Air switch
Run capacitor
COMP
CFM
IFM
C
R
C
C
CR
CR
IFR
IFR
RVR
RVR
RVR
DFR
HC1
OTS1
DFR
DFR
RVS
CR
AS
DFR
Y
W1
W2
G
HC1
HC1
HC2
HC2
SH2
HC2
OTS2
SH1
RC
RC
RC
Indoor thermostat
L1
L2
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

382 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
programmable thermostat; both are used in the indus-
try. With energy conservation and high utility bills 
playing a larger part in air-conditioning and heating 
systems, clock and programmable thermostats are 
becoming increasingly popular. These thermostats 
give the customer the option of raising or lowering 
the temperature for a specified period of time to a 
more energy-efficient level and then, at a time that is 
appropriate, bringing the temperature back to a more 
comfortable setting.
Many programmable thermostats being installed 
in the industry today have a touch screen display that 
has a large format and is backlit. These programmable 
thermostats also automatically adapt to daylight sav-
ings time. These new programmable thermostats are 
accurate to plus or minus 1 degree Fahrenheit of the 
thermostat set point. They can be adapted to almost 
any system that is being installed in the industry today. The program-
ming of these touch screen digital thermostats is menu driven; in other 
words, the thermostat guides the programmer through the scheduling 
process. There are setup menus for installer to follow on the initial pro-
gramming that sets modes of operation to specific types of equipment. A 
touch screen programmable thermostat is shown in Figure 12.28.
Applications
The programmable thermostats are used in a structure to allow for a set-
back temperature. This setback operation is usually done at a period of 
time that would least affect the homeowner. In most 
cases, the temperature would be set back when all 
occupants are sleeping or away from home and would 
be automatically reset to the desired level before the 
occupants needed the more comfortable temperature.
Programmable thermostats are available for heat-
ing, cooling, and heating and cooling conditioned air 
systems. There are many different types of clock ther-
mostats being produced today, and there is almost no 
limit to the functions they can perform.
Several different types of programmable thermo-
stats are used today. There are many single-setback 
and multisetback clock and programmable thermostats 
available at a wide variety of prices. Most clock thermo-
stats use a battery or batteries as the power supply to 
12.27
FIGURE
Electronic digital 
programmable 
thermostat. 
(Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
12.28
FIGURE
Touch screen 
programmable 
thermostat.
(Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.4   Programmable Thermostats 
383
operate the clock and are easily accessible for changing. An electronic digital 
programmable thermostat is available that is completely programmable, 
with the homeowner selecting the setback temperatures and times.
The digital programmable thermostats are the most popular clock or 
setback thermostats because of their versatility and the many functions 
they offer to the homeowner. Figure 12.29(a) shows a digital programmable 
thermostat and Figure 12.29(b) shows the thermostat without the cover. 
Most digital programmable thermostats have separate five-day (week-
day) and two-day (weekend) programming, allowing four separate time/
temperature settings per 24-hour period. Most have a continuous LCD dis-
play that shows the set point and alternately displays time and tempera-
ture. These thermostats must be programmed by the homeowner. The 
homeowner should follow the manufacturer’s instructions for program-
ming the thermostat. Once these thermostats have been programmed, 
the homeowner has the option of running the program in order to check 
the times and temperatures. Most programmable thermostats have a 
feature that allows the homeowner to override the program if the home is 
occupied at a time that was previously set to call for a setback.
Installation
The installation of a clock thermostat with regard to the temperature 
function is the same as that of any low-voltage thermostat. Most pro-
grammable thermostats today can be powered by a battery or 24 volts. 
(a)
(b)
12.29
F I G U R E
(a) Electronic digital programmable thermostat. (b) Electronic digital programmable 
thermostat with cover removed. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

384 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
The letter designations are also the same as for other low-voltage ther-
mostats. Figure 12.30 shows a typical installation wiring diagram for 
a programmable thermostat. Most clock and programmable thermo-
stats are easy to install. The technician should make certain that the 
homeowner is instructed on how to set or program the new thermostat 
if the homeowner is available. The operating instructions or guide should 
be left with the homeowner at the time of installation.
Programming the Electronic Digital 
Programmable Thermostat
The programming of the thermostat shown in Figure 12.29 is similar to 
that of most programmable thermostats manufactured today. Most pro-
grammable thermostats are designed so that the average homeowner 
can accurately set and program them. However, each manufacturer will 
use its own method of programming. Most programmable thermostats 
come with detailed instructions on the programming.
Green Technology
Programmable Thermostats
With the cost of energy at an all time high, consumers are using 
programmable thermostats to save energy, thus reducing the operating cost 
of their HVAC system. The consumer can adjust the times that the system 
can turn on and off. The programmable thermostat can be programmed 
to turn the system on and off at a specific time when the structure will 
be unoccupied. A 5/1/1 programmable thermostat would allow the con-
sumer to set the thermostat for 5 days, Monday through Friday, and 
have different programs for the weekend. A 24-hour programmable ther-
mostat would allow the program for a 24-hour period each day of the 
week. Some programmable thermostats can store multiple daily settings 
that can be overridden without affecting the program of the thermostat. 
Consumers can save 10% to 20% of their energy cost for comfort cooling 
and heating by using a programmable thermostat that is correctly set.
12.5 PRESSURE SWITCHES
A pressure switch is a device that opens or closes a set of contacts when 
a certain pressure is applied to the diaphragm of the switch. A high-
pressure switch is connected to the discharge side of the system to sense 
discharge pressure. A low-pressure switch is connected to the suction 
side of the system to sense suction pressure. Pressure switches can be 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.5   Pressure Switches 
385
used as safety devices, as main operating controls, or to operate other 
parts of the system. Figure 12.31(a) shows a common pressure switch 
used in the industry.
Two types of pressure switches are used in the industry today. 
A non-adjustable pressure switch is used by many manufacturers to pre-
vent the pressure setting from changing. An adjustable pressure switch 
can be adjusted to meet any specific need that might arise. Adjustable 
pressure switches are usually obtained for field replacement of a pres-
sure switch. Pressure switches can also be classified as high pressure or 
low pressure. These switches open or close on a rise or fall of pressure. 
Pressure switches are manufactured with a case enclosing the switch, as 
shown in Figure 12.31(a), and for mounting in a control panel without the 
case, as shown in Figure 12.31(b). A dual-pressure switch contains both 
a high-pressure and a low-pressure switch, as shown in Figure 12.32. 
Figure  12.33 shows a compact pressure switch that is presently being 
used in the industry. Pressure switches can be obtained for most any 
purpose that would arise in the industry.
12.30
F I G U R E
Installation wiring diagram of an electronic 
programmable thermostat. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Transformer
Factory-Installed
jumper
T
H
E
R
M
O
S
T
A
T
Hot
VAC
120
24 VAC
RH
RC
W
Y
G
Heating
Control
Cooling
Control
Fan
Control
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

386 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
12.31
F I G U R E
Pressure switch (a) with enclosure (Delmar/Cengage Learning) (b) without enclosure.  
(Courtesy of Bill Johnson)
12.33
FIGURE
Compact pressure switch. 
(Photo by Bill Johnson)
(a)
(b)
12.32
FIGURE
Dual-pressure switch 
(combination high 
and low pressure).
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.5   Pressure Switches 
387
High-Pressure Switches
A high-pressure switch is usually used as a safety device to protect the 
compressor and system from excessively high discharge pressure. A 
high-pressure switch used as a safety control must open on a rise in pres-
sure to shut the equipment down.
The high-pressure setting of the switch must correspond to the type 
of refrigerant in the system. The setting of a high-pressure switch used 
with Freon 134A would be different from the setting of a high-pressure 
switch used with Freon 22. Figure 12.34 lists the common setting points of 
a high-pressure switch for the common refrigerants used in the industry 
today. High-pressure switches may also close on a rise in pressure to oper-
ate a device that would control the highside pressure.
Low-Pressure Switches
Low-pressure switches are used as safety devices, as operating controls, 
and as devices to operate any component by the suction pressure of the 
system. All low-pressure switches are connected to the suction side of 
a refrigeration system. Low suction pressure can damage the compres-
sor. Therefore, low-pressure switches are often used as safety devices to 
prevent damage to the system when the suction pressure drops below a 
predetermined point.
Figure 12.35 lists the common setting points of a low-pressure switch 
for different types of Freon.
High-Pressure 
Setting
Refrigerant
Condenser Type
Cut-Out
Cut-In
12
Air cooled
225
145
Water cooled
170
 90
134A
Air cooled
245
 85
Water cooled
190
 95
22
Air cooled
380
300
Water cooled
210
130
404A
Air cooled
450
354
Water cooled
250
160
12.34
F I G U R E
Table of approximate setting points 
for a high-pressure switch used as 
a safety control. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Low-Pressure 
Setting
Refrigerant
Cut-Out
Cut-In
12
15
35
134A
15
35
22
38
68
404A
50
85
12.35
F I G U R E
Table of 
approximate 
setting points 
for low-pressure 
switch used as 
a safety switch. 
(Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

388 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
If the low-pressure switch opens, it should break the control circuit 
that operates the compressor. Low-pressure switches can also be used as 
operating controls to operate the system by a pressure setting that cor-
responds to a temperature setting. Therefore, by properly setting a low-
pressure switch, you can also control the temperature. Figure 12.36 lists 
the proper pressure control settings for specific applications.
Notation and Terms
You need to understand many terms to successfully maintain and set 
pressure switches. The differential of a pressure switch is the difference 
between the cut-in and cut-out pressure of the switch. The cut-in is the 
pressure of the system when the pressure switch closes. The cut-out is 
the pressure of the system when the pressure switch opens. The range of 
a control is the operating range of the system—for example, the overall 
pressure—over which the switch can operate. These terms are used fre-
quently when setting pressure to obtain the correct operation of the system. 
Many pressure controls can be set by carefully reading the pressure dial of 
a pressure switch. Care should be taken when setting or replacing switches.
REFRIGERANT
            12
             22
404A
Application
In
Out
In
Out
In
Out
Walk-In Cooler
32
15
60
35
72
40
Dairy Case—Open
35
12
64
24
75
30
Reach-In Display Case—Open
36
14
66
33
78
40
Meat Display Case—Closed
35
15
65
34
78
45
Meat Display Case—Open
30
12
55
30
65
35
Vegetable Display—Open
40
15
80
36
90
45
Beverage Cooler—Wet Type
30
20
58
38
68
58
Beverage Cooler—Dry Type
35
15
65
35
76
43
Florist Box
45
28
80
55
85
63
Frozen Food—Open
 6
 6
16
 4
25
10
Frozen Food—Closed
10
 2
22
12
30
15
Walk-In Freezer—(–10ºF)
12
 1
32
10
25
15
Caution: The fi gures are approximate and should be used only as a guide. Special applications should not be 
considered.
12.36
F I G U R E
Table of approximate pressure control settings of a low pressure switch used as an operating 
control. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.6   Miscellaneous Electric Components 
389
Troubleshooting
There are many commonly encountered problems with pressure switches. 
The contacts of pressure switches often cause problems because of pit-
ting, wear, mechanical linkage faults, and sticking. The contacts should 
be checked to see if they are closed or open in relation to the setting of 
the control.
If the contacts show continuity, the resistance should also be 
checked. If the resistance is above allowable limits, or if the contacts 
prove to be faulty, the pressure switch should be replaced. If any resis-
tance is read through a set of contacts, voltage is being lost. A read-
ing of 2 or 3 ohms of resistance in a set of switches indicates that the 
switch should be replaced or at least that the voltage should be checked 
across the contacts.
The pressure connections of a pressure switch can leak and cause a 
faulty control or no control at all. To check for a leak, use an acceptable 
method for locating refrigerant leaks. Never replace a pressure switch 
before its correct position and purpose have been determined.
12.6 MISCELLANEOUS ELECTRIC COMPONENTS
Humidistats
In certain air-conditioning applications, it is essential to control the 
humidity. Humidistats are used to control the humidity of a structure. 
The humidistat uses a moisture-sensitive element to 
control a mechanical linkage that will open or close an 
electric switch according to the humidity. Figure 12.37 
shows a humidistat.
In certain fiber and cotton industries, the humid-
ity must be accurately controlled by a humidistat, 
which controls the operation of air washers to pre-
vent damage to the finished product. Humidity con-
trol is also advisable in the winter in many structures 
to produce a more comfortable area by adding more 
moisture to the air.
Oil Safety Switch
Oil safety controls are essential on commercial and 
industrial equipment to provide adequate protection 
for the compressor in case the oil pressure drops. 
Large compressors use a pressure type of lubrication 
system that must be maintained at a given pressure 
to ensure proper lubrication of the compressor.
12.37
FIGURE
Humidstat. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

390 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
To correctly read the oil pressure of a compressor, you must subtract 
the suction pressure from the oil pressure to get the net oil pressure, 
because the suction pressure exerts pressure on the oil in the crankcase. 
Therefore, the pressure connections of an oil safety switch should be 
connected to the oil pressure port on the compressor oil pump and to 
the suction or crankcase pressure. These connections of pressure to the 
oil safety switch will transfer the net oil pressure to the control by some 
type of mechanical linkage to open and close a set of contacts, depending 
on the oil pressure setting. Figure 12.38 shows an oil safety switch and its 
schematic diagram.
The oil safety switch is designed to allow a certain time delay so that 
the oil pressure will build up in the compressor after the startup of the 
compressor. When the compressor is energized, the time-delay switch 
in the oil safety control is also energized. If the oil pressure does not reach 
a certain level within the time-delay period, the control circuit will be 
de-energized. However, if the oil pressure reaches the desired level, 
the time-delay switch is removed from the circuit and the compressor 
continues to operate. The time-delay switch is nothing more than a 
RESISTOR ACTS
AS HEATER. IF
THE OIL PUMP
DISCHARGE
PRESSURE
DOES NOT OPEN
THE CONTACTS
AND STOP THE
HEAT IN THE
HEATER, IT WILL
OPEN THE
CONTACTS
ABOVE IT AND
STOP THE
COMPRESSOR.
OIL PUMP 
DISCHARGE
PRESSURE
LINE
VOLTAGE
COMPRESSOR 
SUCTION PRESSURE
(SAME AS OIL PUMP 
INLET PRESSURE)
CONTACTS ARE NORMALLY CLOSED 
PILOT-DUTY TYPE IN THE COMPRESSOR 
CONTROL CIRCUIT.
BIMETAL
(a)
(b)
12.38
F I G U R E
Oil safety switch (a) photo (Photo by Bill Johnson) (b) schematic. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.6   Miscellaneous Electric Components 
391
heater that opens a bimetal switch after the speci-
fied period of time delay.
Oil safety switches are rated for pilot duty and 
in most cases must be manually reset. Oil safety 
controls are essential on large, expensive compres-
sors to prevent undue damage because of inadequate 
lubrication.
Time-Delay Relay
Time-delay relays are used in the industry to 
delay the starting of some load for a designat-
ed period of time. Time-delay relays usually 
use some type of heating element that closes 
a bimetal element. The time-delay function 
is brought about by the period of time that it 
takes the heating element to open or close the bimetal. A time 
delay is shown in Figure  12.39. The relay contacts are usually rated 
as pilot duty. The coil or heater of the relay can be rated at 24 volts, 
120 volts, or 240 volts.
Time-delay relays can be used to prevent two heavy loads of a system 
or two units connected in parallel from starting at the same time by put-
ting the contacts of the time-delay relay in series with the load or control-
ling element of the unit. Some commercial and 
industrial units use a part winding motor, which 
uses a time-delay relay to energize the windings 
at different times. The delay period of a time-
delay relay can vary from 15 seconds to 30 sec-
onds or longer.
Time Clock
Time clocks are devices that open and close a 
set of contacts at a selected time by a mechani-
cal linkage between the contacts and a clock. 
Time clocks can operate on a one-day basis 
or a seven-day basis. The one-day time clock, 
shown in Figure 12.40, operates on a 24-hour 
period without regard to the day of the week. A 
seven-day time clock operates on an hourly or 
a daily basis during a week.
Time clocks are set by attaching clips to the 
clock wheel or dial, as shown in Figure 12.40. 
There are two clips that attach to the wheel or 
12.39
FIGURE
Time-delay relay. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
12.40
FIGURE
Twenty-four hour time 
clock. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

392 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
dial. On movement of the dial, one clip closes the 
contacts at the point in time where it is attached 
to the dial. The other clip opens the contacts at 
the point in time where it is set on the dial.
Time clocks are used to operate equipment 
or sections of equipment on a time basis. One 
common use of a time clock is to stop and start 
the defrosting cycle of a refrigeration system. 
Time clocks are also used to cut systems off 
when a structure is to be  unoccupied and to 
cut systems in before building occupants arrive. 
Buildings such as churches, offices, or manu-
facturing plants that close and open at  specific 
times often use time clocks. Time clocks can be 
used  effectively to save the operating cost of 
equipment when it is not needed. A seven-day 
time clock is shown in Figure 12.41.
Solenoid Valves
Solenoid valves are valves that open and close due to a 
magnetic or solenoid coil being energized, which pulls a 
steel core into the magnetic field of the solenoid. A com-
mon solenoid is shown in Figure 12.42. Solenoid valves 
stop or start the flow of a fluid such as water, air, or 
refrigerant. Solenoids may be normally open or normally 
closed, and care should be taken to identify the normal 
position of the valve.
In this section only a few miscellaneous electric 
controls have been covered, but many others are used 
in the industry for special purposes. Most controls 
not covered can be understood by studying the device 
and reading the manufacturer’s instructions on the 
device. Service technicians should understand all basic 
 electric components and their operation to correctly 
diagnose problems in components. Some devices are 
difficult and complex, but in most cases manufacturers 
will assist technicians in becoming familiar with special 
devices by their literature and through service schools.
12.41
FIGURE
Seven-day time clock. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
12.42
FIGURE
Solenoid valve. 
(Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.7   Service Calls 
393
12.7 SERVICE CALLS
Service Call 1
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace and air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No heat
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for 
 available information. The work order information reveals that noth-
ing about the system is operating. The gas furnace is located in the 
basement.
 2. The technician informs the homeowner of his or her presence and 
obtains any additional information about the system problem.
 3. Upon entering the residence, the technician should make certain 
that no dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. The tech-
nician also takes care not to mar or damage interior walls.
 4. The technician sets the thermostat fan switch to the “on” position 
and there is no system action. Next the technician sets the thermo-
stat to call for heat and there is no system action. At this point, the 
technician should suspect that the transformer is bad because there 
appears to be no control voltage.
 5. The technician proceeds to the location of the furnace to determine 
if control voltage is present.
 6. The voltage being supplied to the transformer must be checked along 
with the transformer output voltage.
 7. The technician measures 120 volts input voltage to the transformer 
and 0 volt output voltage and determines that the transformer is bad. 
It must be replaced with one of the correct VA rating.
 8. The technician replaces the transformer and checks the operation of 
the conditioned air system.
 9. The technician informs the homeowner of the problem and that it 
has been corrected.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

394 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
Service Call 2
Application: Domestic refrigerator
Type of Equipment: Domestic frost-free refrigerator
Complaint: Temperature too cold (freezing some food)
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for 
available information. The work order information reveals that the 
produce and liquids are being frozen while stored in the fresh food 
compartment. The homeowner will leave the back door open, and 
the technician is to lock the door when leaving the home.
 2. Upon entering the residence, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician 
also takes care not to mar or damage interior walls.
 3. Upon examination of the refrigerator, the technician notices that the 
milk is almost frozen solid.
 4. The technician measures the temperature of the fresh food compart-
ment of the refrigerator and finds that the temperature is 15°F.
 5. The technician locates and rotates the thermostat to a higher setting 
and observes that the compressor continues to operate. When the 
technician turns the thermostat to the “off” position, the compres-
sor stops. A resistance check of the thermostat should be made to 
ensure that the thermostat will not open at the desired tempera-
ture. The thermostat remains closed in any position except the “off” 
 position.
 6. The technician replaces the thermostat with the correct replacement 
model.
 7. The technician leaves a note for the homeowner explaining the prob-
lem and the actions that have been taken to correct it.
 8. The technician makes certain that the residence is secure before 
leaving.
 9. A call later in the day when the customer is at home to check on how 
the refrigerator is operating builds confidence and good will between 
the homeowner and service company.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.7   Service Calls 
395
Service Call 3
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No cooling
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order information reveals that the sys-
tem is not cooling. The homeowner can turn the fan switch to the 
“on” position and the indoor fan will operate normally.
 2. The technician informs the homeowner of his or her presence and 
obtains any additional information about the system.
 3. Upon entering the residence, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician 
also takes care not to mar or damage interior walls.
 4. The technician sets the thermostat to the cooling mode of operation 
and nothing happens.
 5. The technician sets the fan switch to the “on” position and the 
indoor fan runs. The technician can safely assume that 24 volts are 
available for this action to occur.
 6. The next step for the technician is to determine if the thermostat is 
closing, allowing 24 volts to pass to the indoor fan relay and the out-
door condensing unit. This check can be made at the terminal board 
on the furnace, at the outdoor condensing unit low-voltage connec-
tions, or at the indoor fan relay coil connections. If 24 volts are not 
read at any of these locations, then the thermostat is open and must 
be replaced.
 7. The thermostat must be replaced with one that is designed for 
the system. The technician sets the heat anticipator to the correct 
setting.
 8. The technician checks the operation of the system and makes cer-
tain that the system is operating properly.
 9. The technician informs the homeowner of the problem and that it 
has been corrected.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

396 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
Service Call 4
Application: Commercial refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Walk-in cooler with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: Stored product too warm
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for 
available information. The work order information reveals that the 
temperature of the walk-in cooler is higher than acceptable for the 
product being stored.
 2. The technician informs the store manager of his or her presence 
and obtains any additional information about the problem. The store 
manager informs the technician that the cooler is doing some cool-
ing but is not maintaining the required 35°F.
 3. The technician measures a temperature of 50°F in the cooler. The 
evaporator fan motor is operating normally and the air-cooled con-
densing unit is running for a considerable period of time and cutting 
off before the desired temperature is reached. The technician must 
determine what is cutting the condensing unit off.
 4. The technician examines the controls of the walk-in cooler and 
determines that the operating control is a pressure switch.
 5. The technician must determine if the pressure switch is out of 
adjustment or faulty.
 6. The technician installs a gauge manifold set on the refrigeration sys-
tem to determine the operating pressure of the refrigeration system 
and if the pressure switch is opening at the actual setting on the 
switch. The technician determines that the pressure switch is oper-
ating correctly. The pressure switch must be adjusted to maintain the 
correct temperature for the product.
 7. The technician sets the pressure switch at the estimated setting.
 8. The technician checks the operation of the pressure switch to ensure 
that the temperature is maintained in the right range.
 9. Once the technician has determined that the correct temperature is 
being maintained, the store manager is informed of the problem and 
that it has been corrected by adjusting the setting on the pressure 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 12.7   Service Calls 
397
switch. The technician advises the store manager not to allow any-
one to change the setting of the pressure switch.
Service Call 5
Application: Commercial and industrial conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Water chiller with one air-handling unit
Complaint: System not operating
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The entire system is not operating. The technician 
is to communicate with the manager upon arrival.
 2. The technician informs the manager of his or her presence and 
obtains any additional information. The manager relays the impor-
tance of a fast remedy of the problem because of a meeting in the 
structure in the afternoon.
 3. The technician checks the wiring diagram of the HVAC system con-
trols and determines that the only two possible causes could be a 
power failure or the failure of the time clock to bring the equipment 
on at the desired time.
 4. The technician measures the control system voltage and determines 
that it is correct.
 5. The technician locates a seven-day time clock that is used to start 
and stop the equipment when the structure is going to be occupied. 
The time clock is at the Monday at 2 a.m. setting indicating that the 
power is not available to the clock motor, or the time clock motor is 
faulty. The technician measures and finds 120 volts available to the 
time clock motor and determines that the motor is bad.
 6. The technician removes the on and off pins from the clock dial and 
sets the time clock to the “on” position. The time clock will stay in 
the “on” position until the time clock is manually turned off.
 7. The manager is informed of the action taken by the technician and 
told that when a new time clock is obtained, the faulty one will be 
replaced.
 8. The technician replaces and sets the time clock to the manager’s 
specifications.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

398 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
SUMMARY
In this chapter, we discussed several different types of control devices, 
among them thermostats, pressure switches, and transformers.
Thermostats are designed to open and close a set of electric contacts. 
They are used to control temperature in a structure or the temperature of 
a medium such as a liquid or gas. There are two types of thermostats used 
in the industry today. The remote bulb thermostat is used for the control 
of any medium and is usually used in commercial and industrial applica-
tions. The bimetal thermostat is used in all residences and in many cases 
when air temperature is controlled in commercial and industrial applica-
tions. Thermostats can also be of the line voltage or low-voltage type. The 
line-voltage thermostat is used to open or close the voltage supply to a 
load in a system. The low-voltage thermostat is often used as a switching 
device to control low-voltage loads.
The heating thermostat that does not have a heating anticipator will 
allow the temperature of the controlled area to have a large temperature 
differential. Heating anticipators, when incorporated with a heating ther-
mostat, will create a small temperature differential. Heating anticipators 
are connected in series with the contacts of the thermostat and set to 
match the burner control. Cooling anticipators are connected in parallel 
and operate when the equipment is off. They anticipate the need of the 
equipment to operate sooner because of system lag. Thermostats play 
an important part in the industry because of their temperature control 
function.
Staging thermostats are used to provide a means of controlling two 
stages of heating or cooling with a set differential. The staging of equip-
ment gives better comfort and more efficient operation of equipment. 
Staging is used exclusively in commercial and industrial applications.
A clock thermostat is used to control the temperature of a structure. It 
allows the customer to lower or raise the temperature control point for at 
least one period in 24 hours. The clock thermostat gives the homeowner 
the flexibility of setting back the temperature in his or her home when the 
family is sleeping, for example, or when the family is away from home.
Pressure switches are widely used devices in the industry. They are 
often used to control a load in a system. Pressure switches are designed to 
open or close on a rise or fall in pressure, depending on their application.
Low-pressure switches are often used in the industry to protect refrig-
eration components from low suction pressure. Low-pressure switches 
are used to operate systems or components and to act as safety devices 
to protect the refrigeration components of the system.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Review Questions 
399
High-pressure switches are used as safety devices to protect the 
refrigeration system from excess pressure or to operate a component for 
head pressure control. High head pressure can damage a compressor, 
metering device, and high-side system piping. High-pressure switches 
can also be used to control loads that must be started from the discharge 
pressure. Careful attention should be paid to the type of system and 
refrigerant when checking the pressure setting of a control.
Transformers decrease or increase the applied voltage to the desired 
voltage by use of induction. Transformer ratings include primary voltage 
and frequency, secondary voltage, and voltamperes. Capacity is rated in 
voltamperes, that is, the voltage times the current of the control circuit 
loads. The more low-voltage loads in a control circuit, the larger the 
transformer that must be used.
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
RQ1 
What is the purpose of a thermostat in a control 
system?
RQ2 
Which of the following are the two main types of 
thermostats?
a. low voltage and pilot duty
b. line voltage and high voltage
c. low voltage and line voltage
d. low voltage and high voltage
RQ3 
A heating thermostat opens on a 
_____________________________.
a. rise in temperature
b. fall in temperature
RQ4 
A cooling thermostat opens on a 
_____________________________.
a. rise in temperature
b. fall in temperature
RQ5 
Explain the operation and application of a remote 
bulb thermostat.
RQ6 
True or False: A bimetal is a combination of two 
pieces of metal that are welded together, each 
with a different coefficient of expansion.
RQ7 
Why should a thermostat be snap-acting?
RQ8 
Which of the following methods are used to ensure 
snap action of low-voltage thermostat elements?
a. mercury bulbs and small permanent magnets
b. small permanent magnets and springs
c. springs and solenoids
d. solenoids and mercury bulbs
RQ9 
True or False: The line-voltage thermostat is more 
common in commercial applications than the low-
voltage thermostat.
RQ10 
Low-voltage thermostats would be used for which 
of the following applications?
a. residential air-conditioning control systems
b. refrigerator thermostats
c. window unit thermostats
d. all of the above
C H A P T E R  1 2  R E V I E W
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RQ11 
What are the major differences between the line- 
and low-voltage thermostats?
RQ12 
What mode of operation do the letter designations R, 
Y, Y1, Y2, W, W1, W2, and G represent in a 
low-voltage thermostat?
RQ13 
What is the purpose of a heating anticipator?
RQ14 
What is the proper procedure for troubleshooting 
thermostats?
RQ15 
The temperature difference between the closing of 
the thermostat and the time when warm air begins 
to reach the thermostat is called __________.
a. overshoot
b. heat anticipation
c. system lag
d. system lead
RQ16 
The temperature difference between the opening 
of the thermostat and the time when the warm 
air is no longer delivered to the room is called 
_____________________________.
a. overshoot
b. heat anticipation
c. system lag
d. system lead
RQ17 
The overshoot and system lag can produce an 
additional temperature swing of as much as 
____________.
a. 2°F
b. 5°F
c. 10°F
d. 20°F
RQ18 
What is the purpose of staging heating and cooling 
equipment?
RQ19 
Why are two-stage heating thermostats used on 
heat pumps?
RQ20 
What is the purpose of a low-pressure switch?
RQ21 
What is the purpose of a high-pressure switch?
RQ22 
How can a low-pressure switch be used as an oper-
ating and safety control on a refrigeration system?
RQ23 
Define the following terms:
a. cut-in
b. cut-out
c. range
d. differential
RQ24 
What is the purpose of a transformer and how 
does it work?
RQ25 
True or False: A step-down transformer is used to 
boost voltage.
RQ26 
What is the correct procedure for checking 
transformers?
RQ27 
How is a transformer sized or rated?
a. primary volts
b. secondary volts
c. voltamperes
d. all of the above
RQ28 
What precaution should be taken when replacing 
transformers?
RQ29 
What is the purpose of a humidistat?
RQ30 
The oil safety control is a differential pressure 
switch and operates on what two pressures?
a. oil pressure and suction pressure
b. oil pressure and discharge pressure
c. suction pressure and discharge pressure
d. none of the above
RQ31 
Time-delay relays are used in heating, 
cooling, and refrigeration systems to 
______________________.
RQ32 
Give several reasons for using a time clock in the 
heating and cooling industry.
C H A P T E R  1 2  R E V I E W
400 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 2  R E V I E W
RQ33 
Why is it important for service technicians to 
understand the operation of any electric compo-
nent in the system?
RQ34 
What is the purpose of a clock thermostat?
RQ35 
What is a multisetback clock thermostat?
RQ36 
How is the clock portion of a clock thermostat 
powered?
RQ37 
Explain the difference between a single-setback 
and multisetback clock thermostat.
RQ38 
What routine maintenance should be performed 
on a thermostat controlling residential heating and 
cooling?
RQ39 
What is calibration with respect to a thermostat?
RQ40 
What is the purpose of the fan switch on a residen-
tial low-voltage thermostat?
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 12 in the Lab Manual.
 
Review Questions 
401
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

402 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
PRACTICE SERVICE CALLS
Determine the problem and recommend a solution for the following 
service calls. (Be specific; do not list components as good or bad.)
Practice Service Call 1
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Packaged air conditioner
Complaint: No cooling
Symptoms:
1. Line voltage and control voltage are available to unit.
2. Condensing unit and evaporator blower will not operate.
3. Thermostat is set in cool mode.
4. Evaporator fan motor operates when fan switch is set to “on” 
position.
Practice Service Call 2
Application: Commercial refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Display refrigerator with air-cooled condensing 
unit
Complaint: Unit not cooling
Symptoms:
1. Evaporator fan is operating normally.
2. Compressor and condenser fan motor are in good condition, but 
not operating.
3. Pressure switch is used for safety control.
4. Pressure switch contacts are closed.
5. Thermostat is used for operating control.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Practice Service Calls 
403
Practice Service Call 3
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Split-system heat pump
Complaint: No heating
Symptoms:
1. Equipment is inoperative no matter where thermostat is 
placed.
2. Line voltage to indoor and outdoor units is correct.
3. There are no open safety controls in system.
4. Thermostat is in good condition.
Practice Service Call 4
Application: Commercial refrigeration system
Type of Equipment: Walk-in freezer with air-cooled condensing unit 
with R-12
Complaint: No cooling
Symptoms:
1. Compressor and condenser fan motor are in good condition.
2. Thermostat is calling for cooling.
3. System is equipped with a high-pressure and a low-pressure switch 
for safety controls.
4. Discharge pressure is 450 psig.
5. Suction pressure is 15 psig.
Practice Service Call 5
Application: Domestic refrigerator
Type of Equipment: Frost-free refrigerator equipped with a defrost timer 
to initiate defrost cycle
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

404 
CHAPTER 12   Thermostats, Pressure Switches, and Other Electric Control Devices
Complaint: Temperature too high in fresh food compartment
Symptoms:
1. There is excess frost in frozen food compartment.
2. Thermostat is in good condition.
3. Compressor, evaporator fan motor, and condenser fan motor are 
operating correctly.
4. Refrigerator runs continually.
5. Defrost heaters are in good condition.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
◗ Identify and describe the operation of basic electronic system components.
◗ Identify and describe the operation of common one-function electronic 
 controls.
◗ Troubleshoot one-function electronic controls.
◗ Explain the function of an electronic defrost board used in a heat pump.
◗ Explain the function of an electronic ignition control used in gas furnaces.
KEY TERMS
Anti-short-cycling-timer 
Light-emitting diode
Defrost module 
Rectifier
Diode 
Solid state
Electronic module 
Semiconductor
Electronic motor overloads 
Thermistor
Electronic gas furnace control module 
Transistor
Electronic timer 
Triac
Heat pump control module 
Varistor
Ignition module 
Voltage spike
Electronic Control 
Devices
C H A P T E R
405
13
13
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INTRODUCTION
The refrigeration, heating, and air-conditioning industry has moved rap-
idly to incorporate electronic control circuits into many of the control 
systems currently being used. Vast improvements made in solid-state 
components have revolutionized the industry, yielding smaller, more 
accurate, and more diversified control systems. Electronic controls sys-
tems allow better control for the entire heating and air-conditioning sys-
tem. Along with better control, many other advances have been made: 
in motor speed control, in motor protection, in defrost controls for heat 
pumps, and in ignition modules for gas and oil furnaces.
Many advances have been made in commercial and industrial air-
conditioning application by using electronic and direct digital controls 
systems. Controls for commercial and industrial systems in the past were 
large and bulky and often times did not give adequate control to individual 
zones in the structure. Electronic control systems have vastly improved 
and all but eliminated the slow acting mechanical controls of the past. 
Commercial and industrial electronic control systems are beyond the 
scope of this book.
Residential heating and air-conditioning systems have also been 
affected by the wide use of electronic controls. Many small residential 
systems have been using electronic one-function controls such as solid-
state timing devices as shown in Figure 13.1, electronic programmable 
thermostats as shown in Figure 13.2, defrost controls for heat pumps 
as shown in Figure 13.3, and ignition control modules for gas furnaces 
shown in Figure 13.4.
The new electronic control systems are not unlike conventional ones 
in that they require the same service procedures. Although the term solid 
state or electronic may scare many service people now in the field, there is 
no need to be intimidated by the new electronic controls. The electronic 
control systems are nothing more than a group of circuits used to control 
a system. Furthermore, there is a similarity between these systems and 
the old conventional systems.
The heating, air-conditioning, and refrigeration technician must 
become proficient at troubleshooting the electronic modules that are 
in wide use in the industry today. The main thrust of the technician’s 
troubleshooting will be aimed at the module rather than each solid-state 
component housed in the module. The technician must examine the 
inputs to the solid module and then determine if the electronic module 
output is correct for the input that it received. If the technician deter-
mines that the electronic module is not supplying the correct output for 
406 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices 
407
a given input, he would then change the module. Most heating and air-
conditioning companies are not equipped to repair the module and would 
not want to handle the warranty of a repaired module in most cases. With 
the popularity of electronic controls in the industry, it is imperative that 
technicians be able to correctly troubleshoot them.
13.2
FIGURE
Electronic program-
mable thermostat. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
13.1
F I G U R E
Solid-state 
timer. (Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
13.3
F I G U R E
Heat pump defrost 
control. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
13.4
F I G U R E
Ignition control 
for gas furnace. 
(Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

408 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
13.1 ELECTRONIC SYSTEM COMPONENTS
Electronic systems have seen vast improvements over the past 50 years. 
Along with being large and bulky, the old vacuum and gas-filled tubes 
were made of many delicate parts. The newer solid-state devices are 
smaller and more durable than the old vacuum tubes. Figure 13.5 shows a 
size comparison of a vacuum tube and a transistor. The size and durabil-
ity of solid-state devices have made it possible to incorporate them into 
many heating, air-conditioning, and refrigeration control circuits.
Semiconductors
Many terms and definitions are used in electronic control circuits, but it 
is not necessary for the heating and air-conditioning and refrigeration 
technician to become an electronic technician to efficiently service and 
repair this new breed of control. However, the HVAC technician should 
have a basic understanding of major electronic components.
Although the terms solid state and semiconductor may refer to the 
same device, they indicate different properties of the device. Solid state 
refers to a physical description of the component. Semiconductor refers 
to the electrical conductivity of the materials used in the solid-state 
 components.
A detailed description of semiconductor operation is not necessary 
to understand the function and operation of solid-state modules. Only a 
brief introduction of solid-state components 
and basic electronic fundamentals will be 
presented here.
The conductivity of materials plays an 
important part in the action of semicon-
ductors. For example, good electrical con-
ductors are copper, silver, and aluminum; 
insulators like plastic, glass, and mica are 
poor conductors. Semiconductors, like their 
name implies, are half conductors. Some of 
the materials used as semiconductors have 
a resistance almost halfway between that 
of glass (insulator) and copper (conductor).
Semiconductor devices are versatile. 
They can provide a wide range of electrical 
characteristics, making it easier to apply 
solid-state components to air-conditioning 
and heating control applications. The one 
disadvantage of semiconductors is that they 
13.5
F I G U R E
Size comparison of a vacuum 
tube and a transistor. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 13.1   Electronic System Components 
409
cannot stand surges in voltage. In many applications, it is necessary to 
protect these devices against adverse conditions.
Solid-state devices in their simpler forms date back to the 1930s. 
In the 1940s, transistors were developed by two scientists at the Bell 
Telephone Laboratories. The transistor is a combination of two semicon-
ductor devices: the thermistor and the varistor. The thermistor is a solid-
state device whose resistance decreases with an increase in temperature. 
The varistor’s resistance decreases with an increase in voltage.
The materials most commonly used to make semiconductors are ger-
manium and silicon. At present, silicon is used more than germanium. 
The atomic structure of silicon and germanium is important to the semi-
conductor materials because it basically controls their operation. So the 
semiconductor materials can be readily used, but certain impurities must 
be added to the basic element to improve the atomic structure, allowing 
the semiconductor to do its job. The silicon and germanium atoms are 
extremely pure, and any element added to them is an impurity. The most 
commonly used impurities are aluminum, arsenic, antimony, boron, and 
gallium.
When certain impurities are added to silicon and germanium, the 
atomic structure of the semiconductor changes. This change provides 
the semiconductor with free electrons that can be easily moved and thus 
allow current to flow. Semiconductors with this type of impurity are 
called N-(negative) type materials. If a different 
impurity is added to the semiconductor material, 
the atomic structure will be altered to allow elec-
trons into the semiconductor. These vacancies are 
referred to as holes. The holes allow electrons to 
easily pass through. This type of material is called 
a P-(positive) type semiconductor. When these two 
types are put together, they become a transistor, 
rectifier, or diode. Figure 13.6 shows some common 
examples of P- and N-type materials being com-
bined to form semiconductor components.
Diodes and Rectifiers
The diode and rectifier are the simplest of the 
 solid-state components. The only difference 
between the two is their size; they are basically 
the same device. A component that is rated at 
less than 1 ampere is called a diode. A diode is 
an electronic device that allows current to flow in 
only one direction. It is often used as an electrical 
13.6
F I G U R E
P- and N-type materials 
combined to form 
components. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
PNP junction
NPN junction
P
P
P
N
N
N
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

410 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
check valve and in some cases as a spark arrestor. A similar component 
rated above is called a rectifier. Because the common diode and rectifier 
conduct electricity in one direction much better than they do in the other 
direction, they can be used to rectify alternating current to direct current.
Diodes and rectifiers are composed of P-type materials bonded to 
N-type materials. They are made by taking a solid-state material that has 
free electrons and bonding it to another material that has a shortage of 
electrons.
When the two types of material are bonded, a solid-state component 
is produced that will allow electrons to flow in one direction and act as 
an insulator when voltage is reversed. The electron flow of the devices 
will be from the N-type to the P-type material. Figure 13.7 shows a basic 
drawing of a diode and rectifier. Figure 13.8 shows the symbol for a diode 
and rectifier.
Figure 13.9 shows an electrical circuit using two rectifiers to change 
alternating current (AC) to direct current (DC) voltage. The rectifiers allow 
current to flow in one direction but will not allow the normal alternating 
current reversal, thus rectifying the voltage.
Electron flow
P
N
13.7
F IGURE
Drawing of a diode 
and rectifier. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
13.8
FIGURE
Symbol for a 
diode and rectifier. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
DC voltage output
AC voltage supply
13.9
FIGURE
Rectifier circuit. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Transistors
Transistors are composed of N-type and P-type materials. Their exact 
composition is dependent on the type of material used in the middle. If 
N-type material is sandwiched between two P-type materials, the tran-
sistor is referred to as a PNP transistor. If P-type material is sandwiched 
between two N-type materials, the transistor is referred to as an NPN 
transistor. Figure 13.10 shows the common symbols for the PNP or NPN 
transistors. The basic PNP or NPN transistor has three parts: the base, the 
emitter, and the collector. The transistor can be connected in the circuit 
in several different ways.
The transistor needed for a certain job would depend on the circuit, 
the application, the voltage, the current the device must handle, and the 
temperature. The transistor is used as a switch or to amplify a signal. In 
a radio, the transistor will take a weak signal and increase it until there is 
enough power so that an audible sound can be transmitted to a speaker. 
In heating and air-conditioning control systems, a transistor will amplify 
a small signal obtained from a thermistor to provide enough power to do 
useful work, such as closing a relay or a contactor or driving a small motor.
Triacs
A triac is an electronic control that has two diodes in a single device. 
Triacs are used as switches in AC circuits because they allow current 
to pass in both directions when a current level is 
reached at the gate. Triacs are commonly used as 
relays in electrical circuits. The symbol for a triac 
is shown in Figure 13.11.
LEDs
A light-emitting diode (LED) is an electronic 
device that gives off light when current is passed 
through it. LEDs are often used in solid-state 
control boards and in digital readouts. They 
are used in solid-state boards to send signals of 
some type, such as power to board, a blinking 
light for trouble diagnosis, and other indicators. 
LEDs can be arranged in a specific way so that 
they can form numbers or letters. The symbol 
for an LED is shown in Figure 13.12, and a draw-
ing is shown in Figure 13.13. LEDs can be com-
bined to produce digital readouts as shown in 
Figure 13.14.
Emitter
NPN transistor
Base
Collector
Emitter
PNP transistor
Base
Collector
13.10
F I G U R E
Symbol for NPN and 
PNP transistor. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 
Section 13.1   Electronic System Components 
411
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

412 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
Thermistors
A thermistor is a resistor that changes resistance with temperature. 
There are two types of thermistors: positive temperature and negative 
temperature coefficient. The resistance of the positive temperature coef-
ficient thermistor increases as the temperature increases. The resistance 
of the negative temperature coefficient thermistor increases as the tem-
perature decreases. There are many applications of thermistors in the 
heating and cooling industry, such as sensors for motor overload protec-
tion, start assist devices in PSC motors, and sensors to send a signal to 
an electronic control module. Sensors and nonlinear devices are accurate 
only within a specified range.
13.11
F I G U R E
Symbol for a triac. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
13.12
FIGURE
Symbol for LED. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
LED
13.13
F I G U R E
Drawing of LED. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
13.14
FIGURE
Drawing of LED 
used for digital 
readout. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 13.2   Basic Electronic Control Fundamentals 
413
13.15
F I G URE
Multifunction electronic 
circuit board. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
13.16
FIGUR E
Single-function electronic 
control device. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
13.2 BASIC ELECTRONIC CONTROL FUNDAMENTALS
Electronic controls used in the heating, air-conditioning, and refrigera-
tion industry are built as one component. The industry has taken a black 
box approach to the production and design of electronic controls. These 
electronic devices are produced as circuit boards that are multifunctional, 
such as the one shown in Figure 13.15, or as one-function devices shown 
in Figure 13.16. The electronic circuit boards and one-function devices are 
replaced as a unit if necessary.
Equipment used in the industry is usually powered by alternating 
current in the voltage range from 120 to 480 volts. When alternating 
current is used, there are often voltage spikes due to power surges, cir-
cuit characteristics, or lightning. A voltage spike is a sudden increase in 
the voltage supply that is only momentary. Most refrigeration and air- 
conditioning systems use compressors that require a larger current draw 
than most electronic control circuits can withstand. Electronic control 
circuits generally are direct current circuits with their own power sup-
ply, usually an AC to DC diode rectifier. They operate on a low DC volt-
age, usually between 5 and 20 volts. The amperage that they draw is in 
the milliamp or microamp range. If we examine the difference between 
the electronic and normal control circuits, it is not  difficult to see why 
electronic boards and modules must be handled with care. Electronic 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

414 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
circuits are sensitive to heat, electronic interference, static electricity, 
current surges, and voltage spikes.
Electronic controls used in the industry include temperature controls, 
cycling controls, timers, motor overload protection, heat pump defrost 
controls, gas furnace controls, and motor controls. Temperature controls 
are in the form of electronic thermostats and other control devices. Timing 
devices such as cycling controls and time delay devices, which are elec-
tronic devices, are widely used in the industry. Heat pump defrost controls 
are almost all electronic; they supervise the operation of the heat pump. 
Gas furnaces incorporate electronic controls in their combustion control 
systems as well as in the operation of the required fan motors. There are 
many types of electronic motor controls such as solid-state relays for 
fractional horsepower motors, start assist modules for PSC motors, and 
speed control modules for the operation of variable speed motors. Many 
residential air-conditioning systems are using  microprocessors to control 
the operation of the entire system along with zone control.
13.3 SIMPLE ELECTRONIC TEMPERATURE CONTROL
A simple control circuit for temperature would have a thermistor in the 
input circuit, which varies its resistance with a change in temperature. 
A change in resistance of the input circuit would cause a change in current 
Electronic
thermostat
18 Volts
DC
Thermistor
18-Volt DC control
relay coil
13.17
FIGURE
Simple electronic control temperature circuit. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 13.5   Electronic Timers 
415
to the transistor base, and the change would be amplified through the 
transistor. This amplified signal could be sufficient to operate a switch or 
energize or de-energize a relay or contactor. Figure 13.17 shows a simple 
circuit for temperature control.
13.4 ONE-FUNCTION ELECTRONIC CONTROLS
In the heating, air-conditioning, and refrigeration industry, many solid-
state controls are used as one-function devices. A one-function solid-state 
device is used in a system primarily to control, protect, or start one func-
tion in the operation of the equipment. For example, some one-function 
controls are electronic timers that are used to prevent a device from short 
cycling or delay the starting of a component, motor protection for motors, 
start assist for motors, and for simple temperature controls.
13.5 ELECTRONIC TIMERS
One of the most popular solid-state devices is the electronic timer. 
Electronic timers are available in many different forms and serve vari-
ous functions in the electrical circuitry of refrigeration, heating, and 
air-conditioning equipment. Electronic timers are used in the same 
manner as the conventional time delay relay but 
with added flexibility. The difference between the 
electronic and mechanical timer is that the elec-
tronic timer uses electronic components to facili-
tate the time delay. Electronic timers can operate 
with a delay on the opening or closing of the 
device. They are available with a set delay, used 
by manufacturers and technicians to facilitate a 
specific delay of some type in the control system. 
Most electronic timers are available over a range of 
timing cycles and voltages. The electronic timers 
are compact and easy to install.
Delay-On-Make and Break Timers
A delay-on-make timer would delay the closing of the 
device a predetermined period of time and is shown 
in Figure 13.18. This type of timer would be used to 
prevent two major electrical loads from being ener-
gized at the same time, as shown in the schematic 
in Figure 13.19. A delay-on-break timer would delay 
an electrical component from being  de-energized 
13.18
F I G U R E
Electronic timer 
(delays close of 
contacts when 
energized). 
(Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

416 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
when the operating control opens and is similar to the timer shown in 
Figure 13.18. This type of timer would be used to prevent a fan on a fur-
nace from cutting off before the combustion chamber of the furnace is 
cooled, as shown in the schematic in Figure 13.20.
13.19
FIGURE
Schematic diagram of a control circuit 
using a delay on make timer to prevent two 
major loads from starting at the same time. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Solid-state
time delay
relay
CC1 Compressor
         contactor 1
CC2 Compressor
         contactor 2
Thermostat
R
Y1
CC1
CC2
13.20
FIGURE
Schematic diagram of a control 
circuit using a delay on closing 
timer to keep fan running until 
furnace combustion chamber is 
cool. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
FM
Solid-state
time delay
relay
(off delay)
FS
FS  Fan switch
FM Fan motor
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Anti–Short-Cycling Device
An anti–short-cycling timer is widely used in the 
industry today to prevent electrical loads from stop-
ping and starting in rapid secession. These devices 
can delay the starting time from 30   seconds to 
5 minutes between cycles or attempted starts. An 
anti–short-cycling device is shown in Figure 13.21. 
Figure 13.22 shows a control circuit with an anti–
short-cycling device. This device is like many other 
electronic devices; it should delay the starting of 
the specified component for the designated period 
of time, or the device is not working properly and 
should be replaced.
These devices use a solid-state material whose 
cold resistance is high and will not allow  voltage 
to pass. However, as the device heats, the resis-
tance decreases, allowing voltage to pass through 
the device to energize a  contactor or relay.
Y FROM
THERMOSTAT
24 VAC
AST
COMMON FROM
TRANSFORMER
1
2
3
C
C – Control Coil
AST – Anti-Short Timer
13.22
FIGURE
Schematic diagram of control circuit with 
anti–short-cycling timer. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 
Section 13.5   Electronic Timers 
417
13.21
F I G U R E
Anti–short-cycling 
timer. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

418 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
13.6 ELECTRONIC DEVICES FOR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Many solid-state devices are being used in the industry to assist in the 
starting of single-phase motors. A detailed explanation of many of these 
devices is covered in Section 10.4 of this text.
13.7 ELECTRONIC MOTOR PROTECTION DEVICES
Many electronic solid-state devices are produced for the protection of 
large three-phase compressors or electric motors. These three-phase 
motor protective devices are used for motor protection from high cur-
rent draw, phase reversal, low voltage, phase loss, and other conditions 
that will damage a three-phase motor. These motor protection devices 
have the ability to allow the motor to start with the initial high current 
and then to monitor the operation of the motor. Electronic devices used 
for motor protection can be a one-function device that is used to protect 
a three-phase motor from one particular failure or multifunction that is 
used to protect the motor from more than one failure. One multifunction 
electronic motor protection device is designed to protect against current 
unbalance, phase loss, phase reversal, short cycling, and overload. With 
the high cost of large three-phase compressors and motors, it is impera-
tive that they are protected against conditions that could damage and 
result in replacement.
Overload Protection
Electronic motor overloads are used effectively in the industry to  monitor 
the current draw of a three-phase motor and quickly recognize and stop 
the motor if an overload occurs. These electronic overload modules 
sense the temperature of the motor winding using thermistors that are 
placed in the motor winding or current sensing loops. The electronic 
motor protection is fast acting and sustains periodic and moderate over-
loads without nuisance trip-outs.
Heat is the main enemy of an electric motor. The amount of heat that 
is produced and held in a motor is the result of load heat and motor effi-
ciency. Some of the input to an electric motor is converted to heat as well 
as to do useful work. Motor life is determined largely by the conditions 
that are imposed on the motor. Therefore, it is essential that the electric 
motor be effectively protected. The electronic motor overload protection 
can effectively protect the motor within a reasonable period of time.
The electronic motor overload module senses the resistance of the 
sensors in the compressor, which gives the module the temperature of 
the motor windings. If the resistance is above the overload resistance, the 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 13.7   Electronic Motor Protection Devices 
419
module will open a set of control contacts that is in the control circuit of 
the compressor or motor, thus stopping the operation of the load. These 
devices can be designed such that they must be manually reset or reset 
automatically if an overload does occur. Figure 13.23 shows an electronic 
overload module. Other electronic overload protection senses the current 
of the motor through a current sensing loop that is external to the motor 
and is shown in Figure 13.24.
Single-Phase Protection
In a three-phase voltage system, electrical energy is being supplied by 
three electrical circuits, so in other words we have three separate power 
feeds to the system. If the power supply is interrupted to any one of the 
electrical feeds supplying the power, the single will receive only single-
phase instead of three-phase current. This condition can rapidly destroy 
a three-phase motor if it is operating when the condition occurs. The 
objective of a good control system is not to allow any major load to oper-
ate under an unsafe condition. The load should be disconnected from 
power as soon as possible after a single-phasing condition occurs. Many 
control manufacturers make three-phase protectors that will accom-
plish this task. When a single-phasing condition occurs, a set of contacts 
13.23
FIGURE
Electronic overload 
module. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
13.24
FIGURE
Electronic overload 
with current  
sensing loops. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

420 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
will open in the control circuit stopping 
the load. Figure 13.25 shows a phase loss 
monitor.
Phase Reversal Protector
Three-phase electric motors rotate in the 
direction that they were initially connected. 
If the phases of the motor reverse, then the 
motor will turn in the opposite direction for 
which it was connected, which would cause 
the motor to turn in the opposition direc-
tion for which it was designed. On recipro-
cating compressor and other applications, 
this does not cause a problem because the 
oil pump of most reciprocating compres-
sors can be operated efficiently in either 
direction. Screw, centrifugal, rotary, and 
scroll compressors are designed to oper-
ate in one direction only and should not be 
reversed. It is not uncommon for the phases to be reversed if and when the 
electrical utility has to service the system. This condition can also occur 
when an electrician services the building and reverses the phases when he 
reconnects them. Maintenance technicians should be aware when work is 
being performed in the structure where this condition might occur.
Multifunction Electronic Motor Protectors
Some electronic motor protectors are now being produced that will moni-
tor current unbalance, phase loss, phase reversal, short cycling, and over-
load. Figure 13.26 shows a photo of the multifunction motor protector.
13.8 HEAT PUMP ELECTRONIC MODULES
Almost all heat pumps presently being produced and installed in the 
industry are equipped with an electronic control module that controls the 
electrical loads in the system. In most cases, these electronic control mod-
ules are the junction point of most of the heat pump control systems. The 
heat pump electronic module supervises the entire operation of the heat 
pump from the contactor that controls the compressor to the defrost cycle 
that removes the frost that accumulates on the outside coil during the 
heating cycle and ensures the safe operation of the heat pump. Figure 13.27 
shows an electronic control module that is used on a heat pump.
The heat pump control module receives inputs from various controls 
in the system in order to facilitate the operation of the heat pump. The 
ADJUST
NO
L1
L2
80.300 VAC
PIN ICM492
NC
COM
RELAY
10 AMPS
277VAC RES
MADE IN
THE USA
contross
SELECT
CONTROL VOLTAGE
LOAD ON
240 VAC
18
13.25
F I G U R E
Phase loss monitor. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 13.8   Heat Pump Electronic Modules 
421
inputs to the module come from the thermostat, the defrost termination 
control, and any safety devices. The outputs to the module would be to 
the contactor to operate the compressor, the reversing valve solenoid, the 
outdoor fan motor, and the supplementary heat during the defrost cycle. 
The heat pump control module takes the inputs and determines which 
outputs should be energized in a desired mode of operation. Figure 13.28 
shows the schematic of a split system heat pump.
Like all other controls systems, the technician will be responsible to 
troubleshoot and repair heat pump systems that use some type of elec-
tronic control module. These modules vary from a simple single- or two-
function electronic device to a complex multifunction electronic device 
13.26
F I G U R E
Multifunction 
electronic 
three-phase 
motor moni-
tor. (Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
13.27
F I G U R E
Electronic con-
trol module 
used on a heat 
pump. (Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

422 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
OUTDOOR UNIT
Comp : Compressor
OFM : Outdoor fan motor
BM 
: Blower motor
SH 
: Strip heat
C 
: Contactor
RVS 
: Reversing valve solenoid
SHT 
: Strip heat thermostat
BR 
: Blower relay
SHR 
: Strip heat relay
DT 
: Defrost thermostat
LPS 
: Low pressure switch
 
 DF contacts are
 
 port of the board
DT
DT
DT
PS
PS
LPS
DF2
DF1
SHR
BR
BR
SHR
SHT
SH
INDOOR UNIT
BM
T/stat
DF3
C
R
Y
O
W
Comp
OFM
W
C
G
R
C
C
Y
O
E
W
G
R
RVS
13.28
FIGURE
Schematic diagram of a heat pump using an electronic control 
module. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 13.9   Electronic Control Modules for Residential Gas Furnaces 
423
that could have as many as 12 functions. Many 
electronic modules are built with a diagnostic 
function within the electronic circuitry, which will 
aid the technician in diagnosing problems with the 
heat pump. Figure 13.29 shows a heat pump elec-
tronic module with a diagnostic function, which is 
accomplished with bulbs that are attached to the 
board and blink a certain number times indicat-
ing the fault in the system. Figure 13.30 shows the 
diagnostic code for the electronic heat pump mod-
ule in Figure 13.29.
Chapter 16 covers the residential heat pump 
control system in detail.
13.9 ELECTRONIC CONTROL MODULES 
FOR RESIDENTIAL GAS FURNACES
Most gas furnaces that have been installed within 
the past 10 years and current installations use an 
electronic control board usually called an ignition 
module, which supervises the operation of the 
entire gas furnace, as shown in Figure 13.31. The 
schematic of a furnace with an electronic control 
module is shown in Figure 13.32. The installa-
tion instruction for the furnace generally gives a 
detailed sequence of operation and in many cases 
13.30
F I G U R E
Example of Diagnostic Codes of Heat Pump. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
FLASHES OF DIAGNOSTIC LIGHT ON HEAT PUMP BOARD
FLASHES 
PROBLEM
 
2 
OPEN HIGH PRESSURE SWITCH
 
3 
OPEN LOW PRESSURE SWITCH
 
4  
COMPRESSOR MALFUNCTION
 
5 
REVERSING VALVE FAILURE
 
6 
SUPPPLEMENTARY HEAT FAILURE
 
7 
DEFROST FAILURE 
 
8 
INDOOR BLOWER FAILURE
CONTINUAL SLOW FLASHES 
 
HEAT PUMP OPERATING NORMALLY
CONTINUAL FAST FLASHES 
 
NO CALL FOR HEAT
CONTINUOUS ON 
 
 
REPLACE BOARD
CONTINUOUS OFF 
 
 
NO POWER
13.29
F I G U R E
Electronic module 
used on a heat 
pump with a 
diagnostic func-
tion. (Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

424 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
gives some troubleshooting information. In many cases, the sequence of 
operation will be given on the electronic module. In some cases, the fur-
nace might have an electronic ignition control and an electronic board to 
supervise all modes of operation with the exception of the ignition.
The electronic gas furnace control module supervises the following 
functions within the gas furnace. 
• Pilot safety
• Lockout in the event of flame failure
• Prepurge
• Postpurge
• Blower motor operation
•  Electronic board is used a control point for safety controls
• Diagnostics
The pilot safety mode of operation supervises the operation of the 
ignition of the fuel. The lockout of the furnace occurs when the fuel fails 
13.31
F I G U R E
Gas furnace 
ignition mod-
ule. (Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 13.9   Electronic Control Modules for Residential Gas Furnaces 
425
13.32
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of gas furnace with ignition module. (Courtesy of 
Carrier Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

426 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
to ignites. Prepurge function purges the com-
bustion chamber before the furnace attempts to 
ignite the fuel. The postpurge function purges 
the combustion chamber of any vaporous residue 
that is left in the chamber. The gas furnace elec-
tronic control module stops and starts the furnace 
blower motor. Most safety components are routed 
through the board ensuring safe operation. Most 
of these modern electronic furnace boards are 
equipped with diagnostics.
The diagnostic element of an electronic gas 
furnace controller is shown in Figure 13.33, and 
the diagnostic codes are shown in Figure 13.34.
Modern gas furnaces are also equipped with 
a pressure switch that is used to determine if 
the induced vent blower motor is operating as 
shown in Figure 13.35. The technician will have to 
correctly diagnose problems and repair the fur-
nace. It is imperative that the technician check all 
safety controls to ensure their proper operation. 
A wiring diagram is shown in Figure 13.36 for a 
gas furnace with a pressure switch used to ensure 
induced blower operation.
Chapter 14 covers the electronic gas furnace 
control boards in greater detail.
13.34
F I G U R E
Example of Diagnostic Codes for Gas Furnace. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
FLASHES OF DIAGNOSTIC LIGHT ON IGNITION FURNACE BOARD
FLASHES 
PROBLEM
 
2 
OPEN PRESSURE SWITCH
 
3 
OPEN LIMIT SWITCH
 
4 
INADAQUATE FLAME
 
5 
IGNITER
 
6 
GAS VALVE
 
7 
NO GROUND
CONTINUAL SLOW FLASHES 
 
FURNACE OPERATING NORMALLY
CONTINUAL FAST FLASHES 
 
NO CALL FOR HEAT
CONTINUOUS ON 
 
 
REPLACE BOARD
CONTINUOUS OFF 
 
 
NO POWER
13.33
F I G U R E
Electronic furnace 
control module 
with diagnos-
tics. (Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13.35
FIGURE
Pressure switch used on gas 
furnace. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
13.36
FIGURE
Schematic diagram of a gas furnace with pressure switch. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 13.9   Electronic Control Modules for Residential Gas Furnaces 
427
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

428 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
13.10 OIL FURNACE ELECTRONIC CONTROLS
The control system for modern oil fired furnaces uses a cad cell primary 
control. The cad cell is a device that changes resistance when light is 
present. The cad cell resistance changes from high to low when the cad 
cell sees the flame of the oil burner. The cad cell is shown in Figure 13.37, 
and the cad cell primary control is shown in Figure 13.38. The diagram for 
the cad cell electronic primary control is shown in Figure 13.39.
The cad cell electronic primary control is covered in greater detail in 
Chapter 14.
13.11 TROUBLESHOOTING ELECTRIC CONTROLS
Electronic controls are designed to be one function or multifunction. 
The one-function electronic control basically performs one function 
in the electrical system of air-conditioning. In the HVAC industry, 
the troubleshooting approach for electronic controls is what could 
be called a black box approach. The technician would check the 
inputs to the electronic control, and if the outputs were not what 
they should be then the  electronic control would be bad. On the 
other hand, if the inputs to the electronic control and the outputs 
were what they should be, then the problem is not with the elec-
tronic device. The technician must know what the inputs should be 
and whether the outputs are correct for the input. At no time should 
the technician try to troubleshoot individual electronic components 
13.37
FIGURE
Cad cell. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13.39
FIGURE
Diagram for oil fired furnace 
with a cad cell primary control. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
FS
HT (24 V)
LS
S
S
Cad
Cell
T
T
Blm
L1
L2
BM
IT
OV
1
2
3
 BM: Blower motor
 FS: Fan switch
 LS: Limit switch
 HT: Heating thermostat
 OV: Oil valve
 Blm: Blower motor
 IT: Ignition transformer 
Legend:
13.38
FIGURE
Oil burner primary control.  
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 13.11   Troubleshooting Electric Controls 
429
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

430 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
on an electronic module or circuit board. It is not cost effective for 
HVAC companies to become repairers of electronic boards because of 
the liability and warranty factors.
Many electronic control devices have a fault message system in 
which a microprocessor will give a number code so that the technician 
can look up the code in the service material and find the cause listed. 
Some electronic control boards have some type of mechanism that 
signals a problem. This signal is usually a flashing light or something 
similar. The technician then looks at the fault directory to identify the 
problem.
Many electronic control systems have no troubleshooting functions, 
and the technician must determine the problem by using troubleshoot-
ing charts and wiring diagrams. The technician should take care not to 
condemn the electronic controls when other components may be causing 
the problem. When a technician suspects that the electronic control is the 
problem, he or she should verify that the control is receiving the correct 
input and producing the right output. In most cases, the technician will 
be looking at specific voltage levels. The product data should give the 
technician those figures.
Technicians should develop a good procedure for checking elec-
tronic controls, using manufacturers’ information whenever possible. 
Electronic controls and control systems have many advantages and are 
here to stay, so the technician should become familiar with trouble-
shooting them.
SUMMARY
The heating, cooling, and refrigeration industry is beginning to use many 
solid-state components and control systems. Electronic components and 
control systems produce better control of temperature, better and faster-
acting safety controls, flexibility in the speed control of motors, and more 
efficient control systems for heat pumps and commercial refrigeration 
equipment. Electronic controls are used in most phases of industry, from 
large systems to the small split-hermetic compressors.
Electronic controls are a vast improvement over the older generation 
of electronic controls. The newer solid-state components are smaller and 
more durable than the tubes. Thus, manufacturers have been able to 
incorporate them in modern heating and air-conditioning and refrigera-
tion control systems.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Summary 
431
The terms electronic and semiconductor may refer to the same 
devices. Semiconductor devices are very versatile and can provide 
a wide range of electrical characteristics, making them easy to use 
in the control systems in the industry. Electronic devices have one 
disadvantage: They cannot stand voltage surges. Therefore, often it 
is necessary to protect the electronic devices from surges with surge 
protectors.
The diode and rectifier are similar electronic devices. They allow 
voltage to flow in one direction more easily than in the other direction. 
The diode is rated at 1 ampere or less, whereas the rectifier can handle 
larger loads. Transistors are used to amplify signals from a thermistor to 
establish a strong enough signal to cause an action to a relay or contac-
tor. The thermistor is a device that varies its resistance with variations in 
temperature.
Many electronic modules are used in the industry that control one 
function of the equipment. The simplest one-function device is an 
electronic device that acts as a starting relay for small single-phase 
hermetic compressor motors. An electronic timing device has replaced 
many time delay relays. Motor protection has become vastly improved 
because of the use of electronic overloads. Many heat pump electronic 
control modules have increased the efficiency and improved operation 
of the system.
Large heating and air-conditioning systems have also gone to solid-
state control systems. Such systems are much more sophisticated than 
the one-function control modules. Large systems use electronic controls 
as a total system control.
Troubleshooting electronic devices is relatively simple. The techni-
cian must not know only what input must be carried to the module to 
cause the correct action of the system but also learn to troubleshoot the 
module and the thermistor that send the signal. Many electronic control 
systems have accompanying testers with which to check the systems, 
simplifying the task for the technician. Large HVAC systems often have 
more sophisticated controls and require manufacturers’ information to 
adequately troubleshoot these systems.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3  R E V I E W
432 
CHAPTER 13   Electronic Control Devices
RQ1 
What is the advantage of using solid-state devices 
in electronic controls systems?
RQ2 
Semiconductors are ____________.
a. conductors
b. insulators
c. half conductors
d. none of the above
RQ3 
Diodes and rectifiers allow current to _________.
a. flow in one direction only
b. flow in both directions
c. divide paths of flow
d. none of the above
RQ4 
What is the difference between a diode and 
rectifier?
RQ5 
A thermistor is a resistor that changes resistance 
with _________________.
a. pressure
b. sound
c. light
d. temperature
RQ6 
What are the two types of thermistors and how are 
they different?
RQ7 
What materials are used to make semiconductors?
RQ8 
What is a transistor?
RQ9 
The transistor is used ____________.
a. as a signal
b. to amplify a signal
c. both a and b
d. none of the above
RQ10 
Briefly explain the rectification circuit shown in 
Figure 13.9.
RQ11 
What is the difference between a one-function and 
a multifunction electronic control device?
RQ12 
Label the following components as one-function 
(a) or multifunction (b) electronic modules.
_____ a. defrost module
_____ b. heat pump electronic control module
_____ c. electronic timer
_____ d. gas furnace electronic control module
_____ e. three-phase motor protector
_____ f. phase loss monitor
_____ g. anti–short-cycling device
_____ h. three-phase motor monitor
RQ13 
What is the purpose of an anti–short-cycling 
device?
RQ14 
True or False: The conductivity of materials plays 
an important part in the action of semiconductors.
RQ15 
How have electronic control modules affected 
the control circuits for heat pumps and fossil fuel 
furnaces?
RQ16 
Solid-state timers can ___________________.
a. delay on opening contacts
b. delay on closing contacts
c. have an adjustable delay
d. all of the above
RQ17 
A semiconductor assist kit is use on a _________.
a. PSC motor
b. shaded-pole motor
c. three-phase motor
d. all of the above
RQ18 
True or False: The repair of electronic control mod-
ules is often accomplished by the changing of indi-
vidual electronic components on the circuit board.
RQ19 
What are the functions of the electronic three-
phase motor monitor shown in Figure 13.26?
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 3  R E V I E W
RQ23 
True or False: The technician must know the input 
signals to an electronic module to be able to deter-
mine what the output signals should be.
RQ24 
What are functions of a gas furnace electronic 
control board?
RQ25 
What are electronic control modules used on 
modern gas furnaces and heat pumps?
 
Review Questions 
433
RQ20 
What are the functions of an electronic heat pump 
control?
RQ21 
What is the basic troubleshooting procedure used 
to diagnose a multifunction electronic control 
module?
RQ22 
Which of the following components are used 
for flame detection in a residential oil fired 
furnace?
a. thermocouple
b. flame rod
c. cad cell
f. none of the above
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 13 in the Lab Manual.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗ Explain the purpose of the electrical controls in warm-air and hydronic 
heating applications that are necessary to safely operate and maintain the 
desired temperature in a conditioned space.
◗ Describe the pilot safety controls and the methods of ignition of the burners 
in a gas furnace.
◗ Describe the operation of primary controls used to supervise the operation of 
an oil burner.
◗ Draw a wiring diagram of an oil-fired, warm-air furnace.
◗ Draw a wiring diagram of a gas-fired, warm-air furnace.
◗ Explain the operation of an electric furnace or electric resistance duct heaters 
and the methods of control that are in common use.
◗ Draw a wiring diagram of an electric furnace.
◗ Troubleshoot a gas furnace.
◗ Troubleshoot an oil furnace.
◗ Troubleshoot an electric furnace or electric resistance duct heaters.
KEY TERMS
Heating Control Devices
C H A P T E R
Cad cell 
Gas valve
Electrical resistance heater 
Hot surface ignition
Fan switch 
Ignition module
434
R
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Heating Control Devices 
435
Pilot 
Spark ignition
Pilot assembly 
Stack switch
Primary control 
Thermocouple
Sequencer
INTRODUCTION
The air conditioning of structures during the winter months requires a 
source of heat to maintain the desired temperature level. The three major 
sources of energy used to supply heat to a structure are gas (natural or 
liquefied petroleum), oil, and electricity. These sources of energy can be 
used to heat air in a warm-air heating system, heat water in a hydronic 
heating system, or produce steam for a steam heating system. In this 
chapter, the electrical components are given major emphasis while any 
gas principles only are briefly discussed to ensure the understanding of 
the material. The electric heat pump is not specifically discussed in this 
chapter with the exception of the method of supplementary heat that 
is used.
Many of the controls in warm-air furnaces are similar regardless 
of what type of energy is used as the heating source. There must be a 
method to start the air supply when warm air is available to the con-
ditioned space and to stop the air supply when the supply of warm air 
is no longer available. The safety of the heating appliance must also be 
considered to prevent the furnace from operating under unsafe condi-
tions such as high temperatures, flame rollout, inoperable combustion 
fan, or open blower door.
This chapter discusses the controls used for each type of energy source. 
Gas heating equipment requires one of the following methods to ensure 
that the pilot is available or that there is a method of ignition for the main 
burner: a continuously burning pilot (standing pilot), a method of igniting 
the pilot when needed (intermittent pilot), or a method of directly igniting 
the main burner (direct ignition). The intermittent pilot system and the 
direct ignition system have gained popularity over the past 10 years while 
the old standing pilot system has decreased in popularity because of the 
waste of energy and advanced technology that has allowed for the produc-
tion of inexpensive ignition modules and direct ignition controllers.
There are two types of oil burners in use in the industry today: the 
vaporizing burner and the atomizing burner. In general, before fuel oil can 
be ignited it must be vaporized or broken into a fine mist and mixed with 
air. The vaporizing oil burner depends on natural evaporation facilitated by 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

heating of the fuel oil to provide oil vapor for combustion. A good example 
of this method is the old carburetor used on older-model oil furnaces. The 
atomizing oil burner uses a pump and fan connected to the burner motor 
to accomplish this purpose. The oil pump supplies oil from the storage 
tank and raises the pressure of the oil entering the burner, causing the oil 
to be supplied to the combustion chamber as a fine mist. The fan causes 
the air to mix with the oil and is ignited by a spark. There are two types 
of combustion controls commonly used on residential oil-fired heating 
equipment: the stack switch and the cad cell primary control.
Heating appliances that use electrical energy for the heating source use 
many of the same controls that have already been discussed in this text. 
Controls that are essential to electrical resistance heat will be covered again 
with reference to the control systems used on electric furnaces, supplemen-
tary heaters for heat pumps, and electric heaters installed in air ducts.
Supplementary heat used for heat pump application is usually electric 
resistance heat, but in some cases gas and oil furnaces are being used 
for this purpose. It is not the intent of this chapter to discuss the control 
systems used in fossil fuel applications that provide supplementary heat 
for heat pump systems. The controls for the gas and oil appliances used 
as heat pump supplementary heat will be the same as those in primary 
heating systems, but the way in which they are connected will require a 
different control system.
Troubleshooting gas, oil, and electric heating controls are covered in 
this chapter. Troubleshooting the electronic ignition devices that are used 
in gas heating appliances is generally accomplished using manufactur-
ers’ troubleshooting guides along with necessary technical skills of the 
technician. Troubleshooting the combustion controls of a residential oil 
heating system is accomplished by knowing what input to the control is 
required to prove that combustion has occurred. Troubleshooting the air 
supply to the conditioned space in the heating operation of the equip-
ment will be similar no matter what fuel is used.
The controls that are necessary for hydronic and steam heating 
systems will be briefly covered to give an overview of each application. 
Hydronic and steam control systems are beyond the scope of this text 
because of the size and complexity of these types of systems.
14.1 HEATING FUNDAMENTALS
The basic heating appliance used in the heating and cooling industry 
usually heats air or water or produces steam. Air is the most popular 
method of transferring heat from the appliance to the structure, and 
there are many different styles and designs of warm-air furnaces. Water 
436 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 14.1   Heating Fundamentals 
437
is also a popular method of transferring heat from the appliance to the 
conditioned space; this type of heating is accomplished by using a hot 
water boiler to heat water, which is then pumped to a location where a 
supply of hot water is needed. Steam is also used as a heating source and 
requires a steam boiler and connecting pipe to transfer the steam to the 
desired location in a structure. Hot water and steam boilers are not as 
popular in the residential market as warm-air furnaces, but as the size 
of the structure increases, their popularity also increases. Hot water and 
steam boilers are used mainly in light commercial and commercial and 
industrial structures.
The warm-air furnace, whether its source of energy is gas, oil, or 
electricity, will require a source of heat and a method to supply the heat 
to the desired conditioned space. The gas and oil furnace requires a 
heat exchanger to transfer the heat from the fuel source to the air while 
preventing the products of combustion from entering the conditioned 
space. The heat source, either gas or oil, must be supplied within the heat 
exchanger. The heat source is supplied to the heat exchanger by the use 
of a gas or oil burner. There must be some method 
of moving air across the heat exchanger to facili-
tate the heat transfer from the heat exchanger to 
the air. A typical upflow gas furnace is shown in 
Figure 14.1, and a typical oil furnace is shown 
in Figure 14.2.
Fossil fuel heating appliances must have a 
method to remove the products of combustion 
from the heat exchanger. This can be accom-
plished by natural draft (gravity) or by forced draft 
(fan) through a vent to the outside.
The electric furnace requires no heat 
exchanger because the heat source is from an 
14.1
F I G U R E
Typical gas furnace. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
14.2
F I G U R E
Typical horizontal oil furnace. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

438 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
electrical resistance heater. A typical electric fur-
nace is shown in Figure 14.3.
The hot water heating system must have 
some means of heating water or producing steam. 
The hot water system heats water in a large heat 
exchanger called a hot water boiler, as shown in 
Figure 14.4. This water is then pumped through 
hot water lines to the area of the structure that requires heat. The steam 
boiler shown in Figure 14.5 produces steam that flows by pressure to the 
areas where heat is required in the structure. The hot water and steam 
boilers are merely heat exchangers where heat is transferred from the 
source to the water. In the case of the hot water boiler, water is merely 
heated to its desired temperature. Hot water boilers usually used in 
 residences and small commercial applications are known as low-pressure 
boilers and operate at a maximum of 15 psig. In large commercial and 
industrial applications, high-pressure boilers are used and operate at 
pressures higher than 15 psig.
14.2 BASIC HEATING CONTROLS
In the basic warm-air furnace, there are many controls that are applicable 
to warm-air furnaces regardless of the type of energy that is being used 
to supply the heat to the structure. Several factors must be considered 
in the operation and function of a warm-air heating system, such as the 
14.3
F I G U R E
Typical electric 
furnace. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
14.4
F I G U R E
Typical hot water boiler. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

fan operation at the desired time to effectively supply the warm air to the 
structure, and safety controls that ensure safe operation of the warm-air 
heating appliance. There are other basic considerations, but these two are 
by far the most important, with the exception of gas and oil combustion 
controls, which are discussed later in this chapter.
Fan Controls
In all types of forced-air heating equipment, there must be some method 
of controlling the fan motor so that the warm air is delivered to the con-
ditioned space at the correct temperature. If the temperature of the air 
is not warm enough, a cold draft may result; this is extremely uncom-
fortable when the draft is coming directly in contact with the occupants 
of the structure. At the same time, the air temperature cannot be high 
enough to cause damage to the equipment or structure or to harm the 
occupants. The fan must be started at the correct time to make sure 
that the air is warm enough so as not to be uncomfortable, but it also 
can’t be so hot that it damages equipment or is uncomfortably hot to the 
occupants. Fan controls must be correctly set in order to supply the con-
ditioned air to the structure at the right temperature. There are several 
types of fan switches used in the industry: temperature controlled, time 
and temperature  controlled, and time controlled.
The temperature-controlled fan switch is nothing more than a 
 thermostat that closes on a rise in temperature to start the fan motor 
when the furnace can supply warm air to the structure. The fan switch 
Condensate
return line
Steam supply line
Vent
Rising steam vapor
Water
level
14.5
F I G U R E
Drawing of a typical steam boiler. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
 
Section 14.2   Basic Heating Controls 
439
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

440 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
element is inserted into the air cavity of 
the furnace close to the heat exchanger 
in order to pick up the temperature of 
the heat exchanger. This type of fan 
switch is available with different ele-
ment lengths to meet specific applica-
tions. This type of fan switch is often 
incorporated with a limit switch in the 
same enclosure, allowing both the fan 
and limit switch to use the same thermal 
element to control both switches. Limit 
switches will be covered later in this sec-
tion. Figure 14.6 shows a combination fan 
and limit switch often used on furnaces. 
The wiring diagram of a furnace using 
the temperature-controlled fan switch is 
shown in Figure 14.7.
The 
temperature-controlled 
fan switch must be set correctly in 
order to maintain the temperature 
of the air delivered to the structure 
and prevent overheating the com-
bustion chamber. The setting of 
the fan switch must be such that 
the air supplied to the structure is 
warm enough to prevent uncom-
fortable drafts and not so hot that 
it is uncomfortable to occupants 
or dangerous to the equipment or 
structure. Figure 14.8 shows the 
dial of a combination fan and limit 
switch. This type of fan switch 
uses a bimetal element to provide 
quick and accurate response to the 
air temperature changes. The tem-
perature range of this type of fan 
switch is approximately 50°F to 
200°F with a minimum differential 
of 15°F. Figure 14.9 shows adjustable 
and nonadjustable temperature-
controlled fan switches. The adjustable type has only a pointer that can 
be set to turn the fan on with a set differential.
14.6
F I G U R E
Combination fan and limit 
switch. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Hot
Neutral
Room
thermostat
System switch
Junction
box
Fuse
120 V
Fan
Limit
White
Black
Orange
Cad cell
Ignition
transformer
Burner
motor
Fan
capacitor
Fan
motor
14.7
F I G U R E
Typical wiring diagram of furnace with 
temperature-controlled fan switch. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Some furnaces in the industry use a time-controlled fan switch that 
simply uses the time element to cut the fan on and off. This type of con-
trol is nothing more than a time-delay relay that delays the starting of the 
fan for a certain period of time. The time-delay element is usually con-
nected in parallel to a 24-volt circuit that would be energized with a call 
for heat. This type of fan switch is usually nonadjustable and is shown 
14.8
F I G U R E
Dial of a combination fan 
and limit switch. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
14.9
F I G U R E
Adjustable (a) and nonadjustable (b) temperature-controlled fan 
switches. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
(a)
(b)
 
 
Section 14.2   Basic Heating Controls 
441
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

442 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
in Figure 14.10. This type of fan switch is available with different on and 
off timing. For example, one model closes its contacts in 45 seconds and 
opens the contacts in 75 seconds after the fan has been on for 2  minutes 
if de-energized. A diagram of the fan circuit using a timed-on fan switch 
is shown in Figure 14.11.
The time/temperature-controlled fan switch provides starting of the 
fan within a certain period of time (usually 25 to 60 seconds) and/or by 
temperature. This time function comes after the room thermostat has 
called for heat. The temperature function would come into effect if the 
furnace warmed faster than the setting of the time function. The off mode 
of this type of control is temperature and can be set for 80°F to 110°F. This 
type of fan switch is shown in Figure 14.12. It can include a limit switch.
Many furnaces that have been produced in recent years are equipped 
with electronic furnace controllers that control most of the operations of 
a gas furnace, including the operation of the blower motor. An electronic 
furnace controller is shown in Figure 14.13. The furnace blower motor 
will generally start 30 seconds after the burner has ignited. The “fan-on” 
14.10
F I G U R E
Time-delay relay. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 function is nonadjustable, but the technician can control the “fan-off” 
times with adjustments made to the controller settings on some gas fur-
naces. In many cases, no adjustment to the blower-on or -off cycles can 
be made. The technician must understand the sequence of operations of 
furnace controllers, including the time cycle of the blower motor.
Door
switch
Fused
disconnect
Fan
motor
Timed fan switch may
be a separate control
Limit
Transformer
24 V
Room
thermostat
Gas
valve
14.11
F I G U R E
Typical diagram of a circuit using a 
timed-on fan switch. (Courtesy of 
Honeywell, Inc.)
 
 
Section 14.2   Basic Heating Controls 
443
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

444 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
Limit Switches
Limit switches on heating appliances are 
basically thermostats that open when an 
unsafe condition exists in the furnace, such 
as high furnace temperatures. This type of 
unsafe condition could exist if the fan switch 
failed to start the fan at the proper time or 
the fan motor was faulty, thus allowing 
the temperature of the furnace to reach an 
unsafe condition. In most cases, this tem-
perature is sensed from within the air cavity 
of the warm-air furnace. Other temperature 
limit switches are used in various places in 
warm-air systems to prevent unsafe condi-
tions from damaging the equipment or the 
structure. Limit switches are used in case 
of flame rollout, which is flame extending 
outside the combustion chamber or heat 
exchanger. A limit switch used for this pur-
pose is shown in Figure 14.14. Figure 14.15 
shows the circuitry of a line voltage limit 
switch and Figure 14.16 shows the circuitry 
of a low-voltage limit switch.
14.12
F I G U R E
Time/temperature-
controlled fan switch. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
14.13
F I G U R E
Electronic furnace 
controller. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
14.14
F I G U R E
Flame rollout limit 
switch. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

W
T
LS
FS
IFR
IFM
120 VAC
IFR
GV
IFR
CC
G
R
Y
Thermostat
 IFM: Indoor fan motor
 IFR: Indoor fan relay
 FS: Fan switch
 LS: Limit switch
 GV: Gas valve
 CC: Cooling controls
 
T: Transformer 
Legend:
14.15
F I G U R E
Control circuitry of a line voltage limit switch. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Pressure Switches
Pressure switches, Figure 14.17, are now used in most new furnaces. This 
type of pressure switch is used to ensure that the combustion blower is 
operating. The pressure switch is normally an open device used to mea-
sure the pressure in the exhaust flue chamber at the combustion blower. 
These switches are usually factory set and are not adjustable. This type 
of pressure switch closes when the preset pressure is reached in the 
flue. The furnace requires that the pressure switch be closed before igni-
tion to prevent unsafe conditions from damaging equipment, damaging 
the structure, or causing personal injury or death resulting from carbon 
 monoxide poisoning. This type of pressure switch is located in the com-
bustion chamber adjacent to the combustion blower housing.
 
 
Section 14.2   Basic Heating Controls 
445
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

446 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
W
T
FS
LS
IFR
IFM
IFR
GV
IFR
CC
G
R
Y
 IFM: Indoor fan motor
 IFR: Indoor fan relay
 FS: Fan switch
 LS: Limit switch
 GV: Gas valve
 CC: Cooling controls
 
T: Transformer 
Legend:
14.16
F I G U R E
Control circuitry of a low-voltage limit switch. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
!CAUTION
Safety devices should NEVER be jumped out! Doing 
so can damage property and result in severe personal 
injury or death.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.3 GAS HEATING CONTROLS
The basic control cycle of a gas heating appliance is initiated when a 
switch, usually a thermostat, closes to call for heat. In a gas heating 
system, this call for heat completes the heating control circuit, starting a 
chain reaction that results in lighting the burner. In a gas heating appli-
ance, once there is a call for heat, the function of the gas burner control is 
to ensure safe ignition of the main burner. There are three basic types of 
gas burner controls: standing pilots, where the pilot burns continuously; 
intermittent pilots, where the pilot is automatically lit on a call for heat; 
and direct ignition, where some method is used to light the main burner 
upon a call for heat. Some type of automatic gas valve is used to allow 
the flow of gas to reach the burner at the proper time, ensuring ignition.
Standing Pilot Burner Control System
The standing pilot is often called a continuous ignition system. The pilot has 
to be lit by hand and burns continuously until shut off by hand or until a 
pilot outage occurs. This standing pilot lights the main burner when there 
14.17
F I G U R E
Pressure switch 
used in gas furnace. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 
 
Section 14.3   Gas Heating Controls 
447
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

448 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
is a call for heat from the thermostat. This type of gas burner control sys-
tem must ensure that the pilot is lit when the main gas valve opens. If the 
pilot is not lit, the control system must lock out the opening of the main 
gas valve to prevent the combustion chamber from filling with unignited 
gas, causing an unsafe condition.
In almost all cases, this burner control system uses a thermocouple 
to supply up to 30  mV to the safety shutoff pilot solenoid in the gas 
valve. This thermocouple is made of two dissimilar metals that when 
heated will produce a small voltage. A thermocouple is used to supply 
a millivoltage to the pilot solenoid in the gas valve, holding the pilot 
safety valve open and indicating that a pilot is available to light the 
main burner. Figure 14.18 shows a thermocouple and a pilot burner. 
The pilot burner has three primary functions: to direct the pilot flame 
for proper burner ignition, to provide a mount for the thermocouple, 
and to heat the thermocouple to provide the voltage required to hold 
in the pilot solenoid valve. Figure 14.19 shows the proper pilot flame 
adjustment.
The gas valve is used to supply gas to the main burner when a 
pilot has been proved. Figure 14.20 shows a drawing of a typical gas 
valve with a pilot safety valve and a main gas valve; both these valves 
must be open for the gas supply to reach the main burner. A photo-
graph of a gas valve that incorporates a pilot safety solenoid with the 
connection for the thermocouple is shown in Figure 14.21. A typical 
schematic diagram of a furnace with a combination gas valve is shown 
in Figure 14.22. Gas valves used in this application are available in 
24 and 120 volts.
14.18
F I G U R E
(a) Thermocouple 
and (b) pilot burner. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
3/8 to 1/2 in.
{9.5 to 12.7 mm}
Thermocouple
or thermopile
14.19
F I G U R E
Proper pilot flame 
adjustment. (Courtesy 
of Honeywell, Inc.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The pilot solenoid of this type of gas valve 
is not strong enough to open the pilot valve 
of the main gas valve. The thermocouple only 
produces a voltage source that is capable of 
holding the pilot solenoid open. The pilot valve 
must be manually opened for the initial lighting of the pilot until the pilot 
has adequate time to heat the thermocouple, thus allowing the produc-
tion of a voltage source that is capable of holding the pilot valve open 
once it has been manually depressed.
Figure 14.23 shows a flowchart of the sequence of operation of a 
standing pilot type of ignition system.
Intermittent Pilot Burner Control System
The intermittent pilot burner control system must light the pilot and 
control the main gas valve. The intermittent pilot burns only when there 
is a call for heating and remains off when there is no call for heat. This 
saves operating cost because less gas is being consumed in the furnace 
operation. However, a method of lighting the pilot on the call for heat 
Pilotstat power unit
(screw-in type—
no gasket required)
14.20
F I G U R E
Drawing of a typical 
gas valve using ther-
mocouple as pilot 
safety. (Courtesy of 
Honeywell, Inc.)
14.21
F I G U R E
Photograph of gas valve. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 
 
Section 14.3   Gas Heating Controls 
449
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

450 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
and proving the lighting of the pilot is necessary. Once the pilot has been 
proved, the pilot flame lights the main burner and remains on until the 
main burner goes off at the end of the heating cycle.
There must be some method of igniting the pilot burner in the inter-
mittent pilot control system. The function of the igniter is to smoothly 
light the pilot burner. Once the pilot has been ignited, there must be 
some method of proving that the pilot is lit. This can be accomplished 
by using a liquid-filled pilot sensor, a temperature sensor, a “fire eye” 
sensor, or a flame rod. A liquid-filled pilot sensor is nothing more than a 
probe that is inserted in the lit pilot. As the probe is heated, the pressure 
increases, which exerts pressure on a diaphragm to close a set of contacts 
signaling that the pilot is lit. The “fire eye” or “cad cell” type of sensor is a 
device that changes its resistance in the presence of light. When this type 
of sensor is directed toward light, its resistance will decrease, and when 
Safety shutoff 
circuit
Temperature control 
circuit
Fan or circulator
control circuit
Fan control
or circ. relay
Fan or
 circ.
 motor
Pilot
burner
Thermocouple
Thermostat
(24 volts)
High limit
control
L1 (HOT)
L2
Power
supply
Trans-
former
Control valve
operator
Pilotstat
power
unit
14.22
F I G U R E
Typical diagram of a gas furnace using a combina-
tion gas valve. (Courtesy of Honeywell, Inc.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

it is directed toward darkness, the resistance will increase. This sensor 
must be connected to an electronic module to control the operation of the 
pilot and main burner, and it is used mainly on commercial and indus-
trial gas burners. The flame rod is a sensor that is used to detect a flame 
at the pilot or the main burner. A gas flame conducts electricity, and a 
path is made from the flame rod back to the main or pilot burner head. 
A pilot assembly, which includes the flame rod and ignition components, 
is shown in Figure 14.24. Often, the ignition sensor is used as a flame 
rod to send the correct signal back to the ignition or burner control. 
An ignition module is shown in Figure 14.25. For proper operation, this 
ignition module requires a combination pilot burner/igniter-sensor as 
shown in Figure 14.24, the proper gas valve, and an ignition cable.
This type of intermittent pilot burner control system requires a special gas 
valve, which is shown in Figure 14.26. Most of the gas valves used in this type 
of system are the redundant-type or dual-type valves. In most cases, these 
types of valves actually have three valves within each valve. One is a manual 
shutoff valve that mechanically blocks all gas flow when turned off. There are 
two additional main gas valves that open on a call for heat. Essentially, the 
main gas flow is stopped twice with a redundant-type gas valve.
 If at any time the pilot fails to produce enough 
voltage to keep the pilot solenoid valve closed,
the main gas valve will close and stop the flow
of gas to the burner.
(1) Pilot valve is manually closed.
 (4) Thermostat calls for heat.
 (5) Main burner ignites.
 (2) Pilot ignites.
 (3) Pilot gas valve is manually closed until
      thermocouple produces enough voltage
      to hold pilot valve open.
 (6) Combustion chamber heats; when temperature reaches
      approximately 100˚F the blower motor starts. 
14.23
F I G U R E
Flowchart of the sequence of operation of a standing 
pilot ignition system. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
 
Section 14.3   Gas Heating Controls 
451
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

452 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
The operational sequence of an inter-
mittent pilot burner control system is as 
follows:
 1.  On a call for heat, some modules have 
a prepurge cycle that occurs before 
the spark starts. During this prepurge 
cycle, the combustion blower runs 
to clear the heat exchanger of any 
unburned gas. This cycle usually lasts 
30 to 45 seconds.
 2.  On a call for heat, the ignition module 
does a self-check, and if a failure is 
shown, the ignition won’t start. If the 
checks are good, the module begins 
a safety lockout timing, powers the 
spark igniter, and opens the solenoid 
valve so gas can flow to the pilot. The 
pilot must light within a certain period 
of time or the module closes the valve.
 3.  When the pilot lights, current flows from the ignition sensor through 
the pilot flame to the burner head and then to ground; the ionized 
pilot flame provides a current path between the rod and burner head, 
14.24
F I G U R E
Photograph of a pilot 
assembly with ignition 
components and flame 
rod. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
14.25
F I G U R E
Photograph of an igni-
tion module. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
14.26
F I G U R E
Photograph of redundant 
gas valve. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

rectifying the current. Because of the difference in size of the sensor 
and burner, current flows in only one direction. The current is a pul-
sating direct or rectified current, and it tells the module that a flame 
has been established. Ignition stops and the second main gas valve 
opens, allowing gas to flow to the main burner.
 4. As long as this rectified flame current remains above the minimum, 
the module keeps the main gas valves open. If the current drops 
below the minimum or becomes unsteady, the module closes the 
main gas valves. The module then performs the start safety check 
and, if it’s safe, the module attempts ignition again.
A diagram of this type of control system is shown in Figure 14.27. 
Figure 14.28 shows a flowchart of the sequence of operation of an inter-
mittent ignition system.
 
 
Section 14.3   Gas Heating Controls 
453
L
L
L
L
14.27
F I G U R E
Diagram of a gas furnace with intermittent pilot control. 
(Courtesy of Honeywell, Inc.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

454 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
14.28
F I G U R E
Flowchart of the sequence of operation of an intermittent 
ignition system. (Courtesy of Honeywell, Inc.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Direct Ignition Burner Control System
The direct ignition systems use a spark igniter (direct spark ignition) or a 
silicon carbide igniter (hot surface ignition) to light the main gas burner 
directly. Ignition stops after a designated time or when the main burner 
flame ignition has been properly proved. The typical components of a 
direct ignition burner control system are the ignition module, igniter, 
sensor, gas control, and other common controls used on any type of 
gas furnace. The ignition module is an electronic device that super-
vises the ignition of the flame and monitors the flame during the “on” 
cycle. It is shown in Figure 14.29. The igniter is the device that lights 
the main  burner. There are basically two types used in the industry: 
the spark  igniter as shown in Figure 14.30 and the hot surface igni-
tion device as shown in Figure 14.31. The gas valve is the device that 
controls the flow of gas to the burner and is similar to that shown in 
Figure 14.26. All other controls are common to most gas furnaces used 
in the industry.
The operational sequence of the direct ignition burner control system 
is as follows:
 1. On a call for heat, most modules have a prepurge cycle that occurs 
before ignition. During this prepurge cycle, the combustion blower 
runs to clear the heat exchanger of unburned gas. The cycle usually 
lasts 30 to 45 seconds.
 2. On a call for heat, the ignition module does a self-check, and if a 
failure is shown, the ignition will not start. If the checks are good, 
the module begins a safety lockout, powers the igniter, and opens 
the gas valve.
 3. Once ignition starts, the burner must light and ignition must be 
proved within the safety lockout timing. If the burner does not light, 
then the ignition stops and the gas valve closes. On a lockout, the 
system must be manually reset. Many modules allow for several 
attempts at ignition before locking out.
 4. When the flame lights, current flows from the sensor through the 
ionized pilot flame to the burner head and then to ground. The cur-
rent is a pulsating, direct, or rectified current, and it tells the module 
that flame has been established. Ignition stops and the burner con-
tinues to run.
 5. As long as this rectified flame current remains above the mini-
mum, the module keeps the gas valve open. If the current drops 
below the minimum or becomes unsteady, the module  interrupts 
 
 
Section 14.3   Gas Heating Controls 
455
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

456 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
power to the gas valve, closing the 
valve and stopping gas flow. The 
module then performs the start 
safety check and, if it’s safe, the 
module attempts ignition again. 
Figure 14.32 shows a flowchart of the 
operation of a direct ignition system.
A diagram of the direct spark igni-
tion burner control system is shown 
in Figure 14.33, and the hot surface 
ignition burner control system is 
shown in Figure 14.34. Figure 14.35 
shows a typical diagram of a gas-
fired, warm-air furnace using a direct 
ignition burner control.
14.30
F I G U R E
Photograph of 
a spark igniter. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
14.29
F I G U R E
Photograph of an 
ignition module used 
on direct ignition 
system. (Courtesy 
of Honeywell, Inc.)
14.31
F I G U R E
Photo of a hot surface 
igniter. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 14.3   Gas Heating Controls 
457
14.32
F I G U R E
Flowchart of the sequence of operation of a direct ignition 
system. (Courtesy of Honeywell, Inc.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

458 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
L
L
L
L
14.33
F I G U R E
Diagram of direct spark ignition module. (Courtesy 
of Honeywell, Inc.)
Furnace Control Boards
Furnace circuit boards are being used in most furnaces manufactured 
today. A furnace control board is shown in Figure 14.36. Some furnaces 
have incorporated new technologies to incorporate all system functions 
of a gas-fired, forced-air furnace on a single circuit board. This type of 
circuit board will control ignition, combustion blower operation, and 
blower operation, as well as monitor all safety switches designed to 
provide system, structural, and personal safety. Some circuit boards are 
capable of system self-diagnostics, using an LED display or light arrange-
ment to display fault codes that technicians can use to help them isolate 
the problem. Most of these control boards can also control accessories 
for humidification or dehumidification. The circuit board is used in a 
direct ignition system. Troubleshooting this type of circuit board is not 
difficult if the technician understands the sequence of operations.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 14.3   Gas Heating Controls 
459
The sequence of operations for a direct ignition burner system using a 
furnace control board to control all functions of the furnace is as follows:
 1. On a call for heat from the thermostat, most furnace control boards 
do a furnace control self-check. This checks to ensure that all limit 
and rollout devices are closed and that the combustion air-proving 
switch is open. These components are checked to ensure safe opera-
tion of the furnace.
 2. The furnace control board energizes the combustion blower motor. 
This is known as valve-on-delay and is intended to clear the heat 
exchanger of any unburned gas. Valve-on-delay was previously 
known as prepurge. Once the combustion blower starts to achieve 
full speed, the combustion air-proving switch closes. Valve-on-delay 
usually lasts 15 seconds.
L
L
L
L
L
L
14.34
F I G U R E
Diagram of hot surface ignition module. (Courtesy 
of Honeywell, Inc.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

460 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
L
L
L
L
L
L
14.35
F I G U R E
Typical diagram of gas furnace with direct ignition controller. 
(Courtesy of Honeywell, Inc.)
14.36
F I G U R E
Furnace control board. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3. Once the circuit board knows that the combustion air-proving switch 
is closed, it will send voltage to the hot surface igniter for a warm-up 
period, usually lasting 17 seconds.
 4. After the warm-up period is completed, the circuit board will ener-
gize the gas valve. The gas valve opens, allowing the burners to 
ignite. After 5 seconds the hot surface igniter is de-energized and 
a flame-proving period begins, usually lasting no more than 2 or 
3 seconds.
 5.  Once the burner proves flame, a signal is sent to the furnace circuit 
board through the flame sensor. The furnace blower delay built into 
the circuit board begins the blower-on delay period, usually 25 or 
30 seconds. After this delay period has elapsed, the furnace blower 
is energized through the blower heat speed on the circuit board. The 
blower-on delay period is not adjustable.
 6. When there is no longer a call for heat from the thermostat, the 
gas valve is de-energized and the blower-off delay period begins. 
The combustion blower is de-energized after 5 seconds for motor-
off delay. The blower will shut off after the blower delay-off period 
has passed. This period is adjustable and determined by dip switch 
 positions selected on the circuit board. The switches can allow for 
90-, 120-, 150-, or 180-second delay-off periods.
Furnace control boards have an ignition lockout for safety. The sys-
tem will lock out if ignition fails to prove three consecutive times or if a 
limit, rollout, or combustion air-proving switch opens after ignition. This 
safety feature ensures safe operation of the unit. Once the system has 
locked out, the LED light will flash a fault code to help the technician 
troubleshoot the problem.
14.4 OIL HEATING CONTROLS
The function of an oil burner control system is to turn the heating 
 system on and off in response to the needs of the conditioned space. 
The control must also safeguard the operation of the heating appliance 
and oil  burner. Various thermostats in the control system are used to 
maintain the temperature in the conditioned space while others are 
used as limits that respond to unsafe conditions in the heating system. 
The primary control is the heart of an oil burner control system and 
supervises the operation of the oil burner. The primary control must 
control the oil burner motor, ignition transformer, and oil solenoid 
valve, if used, upon a call for heat.
 
 
Section 14.4   Oil Heating Controls 
461
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

462 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
The gun-type atomizing oil burner will be discussed briefly to provide 
a basic understanding of its operation. Figure 14.37 shows a typical oil 
burner with its components labeled. The oil burner is made up of an oil 
pump and fan driven by an electric motor. In many cases, this oil pump is 
responsible for transferring oil from the oil supply and for delivering the oil 
to the nozzle under high pressure. As the oil is forced through the nozzle 
under high pressure, the electrodes of the oil burner create a high-voltage 
spark from the ignition transformer. The ignition electrodes should be 
behind the extreme outer edge of the oil spray pattern that is created by 
the oil nozzle, and they will ignite the oil in the combustion chamber. If so 
equipped, the oil valve will open at the correct time by the supervision of 
the primary control. The oil burner directs the flame into a heat exchanger 
that is isolated from the conditioned space and has a vent that allows 
products of combustion to exit the heat exchanger through a chimney or 
vent stack.
The primary control must safely control the operation of the oil burner. 
The primary control must ensure that the burner has lit and that the flame 
has been proved. If the burner is allowed to run without a flame being 
established, a large amount of oil will be pumped into the heat exchanger, 
creating an unsafe condition and problems when the burner does light. 
The primary control senses the heat from the oil burner flame through a 
thermal sensor known as a stack switch, shown in Figure 14.38, or a light-
sensitive sensor known as a cad cell, shown in Figure 14.39. The oil burner 
Fuel
unit
Oil line
Oil line
from tank
Static 
pressure
disc
Ignition electrode
Ignition 
transformer
Electrode 
bracket
Nozzle
Nozzle strainer
Nozzle adaptor
Nozzle tube
Fan
Burner motor
14.37
F I G U R E
Typical oil burner with components labeled. (Courtesy 
of Honeywell, Inc.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

primary control can interrupt the transformer 
operation once a flame has been established. 
However, not all oil burner primary controls are 
equipped with this function. Most primary con-
trols will have to be manually reset once a flame 
failure has occurred in the oil burner.
Cad Cell Oil Burner Primary Controls
This primary control device consists of a pri-
mary control and a light-sensitive cad cell 
mounted so that it views the oil burner flame. 
The cad cell changes its resistance according to 
the intensity of the light. The resistance of the 
cad cell decreases as the intensity of the light 
increases. Figure 14.40 shows the light response 
tolerance of a typical cad cell. The resistance 
of the cad cell is used to determine if there is 
a flame present in the combustion chamber. 
The resistance of the cad cell is the input to 
the primary control detection circuit, which 
determines whether the control senses 
the flame, thus allowing the oil burner 
to continue operation or to lock out on 
safety. One of the major advantages of 
the cad cell is the rapid response time 
to light, making the control fast acting.
The cad cell is made from a ceramic 
disc coated with cadmium sulfide and 
overlaid with a conductive grid. Electrodes 
are attached to the disc that transmit a 
resistance to the primary control. The 
entire assembly is sealed to prevent the 
cad cell from deteriorating. If an oil burner 
is properly adjusted, the cad cell resistance 
will be approximately 300 to 1000 ohms when the burner is operating. To 
continue operation, the cad cell resistance should remain below 1600 ohms. 
The placement of the cad cell should be so that the cad cell has a good view 
of the flame with adequate light reaching the cell. The cad cell must be pro-
tected from external light sources. Figure 14.41 shows the correct placement 
for a cad cell in an oil burner.
When the primary control starts the burner, a bimetal-operated 
safety switch in the primary control starts to heat. The primary control 
14.39
F I G U R E
Photograph of a cad cell. 
(Photo by Bill Johnson)
14.38
F I G U R E
Photograph of a stack 
switch. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
 
Section 14.4   Oil Heating Controls 
463
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

464 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
will open the circuit to the oil burner motor and ignition transformer 
unless a flame has been established. If a flame is established, the cad 
cell resistance drops and the  current through the cad cell actuates 
a relay or an electronic network in the primary control. The circuit 
to the safety switch is broken and the electrical flow to the bimetal 
is  interrupted, thus removing the heat and allowing the burner to  
continue operation. If the flame goes out, the cad cell resistance goes 
Cadmium
sulfide
resistance
range
300,000
200,000
100,000
60,000
30,000
10,000
6,000
3,000
1,000
600
300
100
Resistance (ohms)
Illumination (ft.-candles)
.02
.04
.03
.06 .10
0.3
0.6
1.0
3
6
10
.08
0.2
0.4
0.8  
2
4
8
14.40
F I G U R E
Light response tolerance of typical cad cell. 
(Courtesy of Honeywell, Inc.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Ignition 
transformer
Ignition 
electrode
Cad 
 cell
Air tube
Nozzle
14.41
F I G U R E
Correct placement of a 
cad cell. (Courtesy of 
Honeywell, Inc.)
FS
HT (24 V)
LS
S
S
Cad
Cell
T
T
Blm
L1
L2
BM
IT
OV
1
2
3
 BM: Blower motor
 FS: Fan switch
 LS: Limit switch
 HT: Heating thermostat
 OV: Oil valve
 Blm: Blower motor
 IT: Ignition transformer 
Legend:
14.42
F I G U R E
Typical diagram of an oil-fired furnace with cad cell 
primary control. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
up, causing a signal to be sent to the primary control to energize the 
safety switch heater. The heater being energized will, in a matter of sec-
onds, break the electrical circuits to the oil burner. Figure 14.42 shows 
a typical diagram of an oil-fired, forced-air furnace. Figure 14.43 shows 
a cad cell primary control.
 
 
Section 14.4   Oil Heating Controls 
465
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

466 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
Stack Switch Oil Burner Primary Controls
The stack switch is a heat-actuated control that uses the stack tempera-
ture to indicate that the oil burner has or has not established a flame. 
A bimetal element inserted into the stack actuates a push rod when 
the bimetal senses heat, signaling that the flame has been established 
and breaking the circuit to the safety switch. At the same time, another 
circuit is established to allow continued operation of the oil burner. The 
components of the flame detector are shown in Figure 14.44. The correct 
location and mounting of the stack switch is in the center of the stack or 
vent in the direct path of the hot flue gases.
The stack switch primary control starts the burner and supervises 
burner operation. When the thermostat calls for heat, the stack switch 
closes a relay, which starts the burner motor and ignition transformer 
and opens the oil solenoid, if used. At the same time, the safety switch 
heater starts to heat. If the oil burner establishes a flame and heat is felt 
in the stack, the bimetal in the stack switch will open a set of contacts, 
thus de-energizing the safety switch heater. The oil burner will run until 
14.43
F I G U R E
Cad cell primary control 
with electronic compo-
nents. (Photo by Bill 
Johnson)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Mounting 
bracket
Drive shaft
Contact holder
Bimetal element
Hot contacts
(made when running)
Cold contacts
(made when
starting)
Stop arm
Reset lever
Drive shaft
Back of case
Clutch
fingers (2)
14.44
F I G U R E
Components of a typical stack switch flame 
detector. (Courtesy of Honeywell, Inc.)
FS
LS
T
K
Stack
switch
Blm
IT
OV
HT (24 V)
BM
1
2
K
Detector
120 VAC
 BM: Blower motor
 LS: Limit switch
 IT: Ignition transformer 
 OV: Oil valve
 Blm: Blower motor
 FS: Fan switch
Legend:
14.45
F I G U R E
Typical diagram of oil-fired furnace with stack 
switch. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
 
Section 14.4   Oil Heating Controls 
467
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

468 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
14.46
F I G U R E
Typical wiring diagram of 
stack switch. (Courtesy of 
Honeywell, Inc.)
the thermostat has been satisfied. If the stack switch does not sense a 
temperature rise in the stack, thus determining that no flame has been 
established, the safety switch heater will remain energized and the 
bimetal will be heated sufficiently to de-energize the relay in the pri-
mary control, thus interrupting the electrical path to the burner motor, 
ignition transformer, and oil solenoid, if so equipped. Figure 14.45 shows 
a typical diagram of an oil-fired, forced-air furnace with a stack switch. 
Figure 14.46 shows a typical diagram of the internal wiring of the stack 
switch.
Stack switches are available with intermittent ignition that stops the 
ignition transformer when the flame has been proven.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.5 ELECTRIC HEATING CONTROLS
Forced-air electric furnaces use electric resistance heaters to provide the 
heat to the conditioned area with the assistance of a blower motor to 
facilitate the movement of air. Electric resistance heaters are also used 
as duct heaters with an external means of supplying the air flow. Some 
other types of primary heating systems are manufactured so that electric 
resistance heaters can be mounted in the equipment.
The electric heating control system will be similar whether the appli-
cation is an electric furnace or a duct heater. An electric furnace is shown 
in Figure 14.47. An electric resistance heater is shown in Figure 14.48. 
Most electric heaters are similar whether they are mounted in an electric 
furnace or straight into the air flow as a duct heater.
There are several methods of controlling the electric heaters in 
an electric heating system. One of the most popular methods is a 
 sequencer, which is nothing more than a time-delay relay. Sequencers 
can have as many as five sets of contacts that 
close at different intervals after the control has 
been energized. This function allows the con-
trol system to sequence the heaters and fan 
motor in over a period of time. The diagram 
of a sequencer is shown in Figure  14.49, and a 
picture of a sequencer is shown in Figure 14.50. 
A typical diagram of a sequencer used to con-
trol the fan and heaters in an electric furnace 
 
 
Section 14.5   Electric Heating Controls 
469
14.48
F I G U R E
An electric resis-
tance heater. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
14.47
F I G U R E
An electric 
furnace. (Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

470 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
F1
F2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Auxiliary switch
HTR
14.49
F I G U R E
Diagram of 
a sequencer. 
(Courtesy of 
Honeywell, Inc.)
is shown in Figure 14.51. Care should be taken that the fan is brought 
on before any overheating occurs. Contactors are sometimes used to 
control electric resistance heaters. When contactors are used for this 
purpose, care should be taken that the fan is interlocked so that the 
heaters cannot be on without the fan operating. Thermostats are used 
as safety overloads in the case of an electric heater overheating.
14.6 HYDRONIC AND STEAM CONTROLS
Most controls used in hydronic and steam heating systems have 
been discussed in the thermostat and the pressure switch sections of 
Chapter 12. Hydronic and steam heating systems require some type of 
heat exchanger, usually a boiler, that is used to heat water or produce 
steam. There are additional controls on many of these systems that 
are used basically for safety, such as low-water cutoffs, water tempera-
ture limits, pressure limit switches, and flow switches. The supervision 
of the gas or oil burner will be the responsibility of the gas or oil burner 
controls. Gas and oil burner controls for the smaller boilers will be much 
the same as those discussed in earlier sections of this chapter. However, 
the larger heating plants used in the commercial and industrial sectors 
usually require a quicker-acting control because of the amount of fuel 
that could enter the combustion chamber in a short period of time.
The controls of a hydronic system are mostly immersion thermo-
stats that are inserted into the water in the boiler or piping. These 
14.50
F I G U R E
Photograph 
of sequencer. 
(photo by Bill 
Johnson)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

thermostats are used as operating controls, which control the tem-
perature of the water in the system, and safety controls, which are used 
as limits to disrupt power in case of unsafe temperatures within the 
system. Thermostats that are immersed in water are sometimes called 
aquastats. Many hydronic systems have a low-water cutoff that will 
L
L1
L2
14.51
F I G U R E
Typical diagram of an electric furnace using a sequencer to 
control heaters. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
 
Section 14.6   Hydronic and Steam Controls 
471
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

472 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
interrupt the power to the burner if the level of water in the boiler gets 
too low. A typical diagram of the control system of a hydronic heating 
system is shown in Figure 14.52.
Hydronic heating systems must have some method of circulat-
ing the water throughout the structure in order to deliver heat to the 
conditioned space or spaces. Hydronic heating systems commonly use 
centrifugal water pumps to circulate water through the hot water pip-
ing of the building. There must be some method of controlling the flow 
of water to the building in order to maintain the desired temperature. 
In small structures with only one heating zone, it would be necessary 
to cut off the flow of water by stopping the pump or closing a hot water 
valve that is installed in the hot water supply lines. A thermostat would 
be used to control the hot water valve or hot water pump. In larger 
structures that have more than one heating zone, a valve must be 
installed in the hot water line supplying each zone in order to control 
the flow of water to each zone. Hot water valves used in this application 
generally regulate the flow proportionally, supplying whatever flow is 
needed for the zone being supplied to maintain the desired tempera-
ture. Some hot water valves are being used that have only two posi-
tions, open and closed.
BC
LWC
LS
Hwt
 Hwt: Hot water thermostat
 LS: Limit switch
 LWC: Low-water cutoff
 BC: Boiler control
Legend:
14.52
F I G U R E
Simplified diagram 
of a control sys-
tem for a hydronic 
heating system. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Some larger residences now use a type of zoned hydronic system 
that uses a zone control system connected to the pumps and valves to 
supply the hot water needed to condition each zone. In commercial and 
industrial control systems, the hot water zone valves can be electronic or 
pneumatic, but the same principle is applied for each zone.
There are two main types of hot water heating units used to supply 
heat to the conditioned space: natural convection units and forced con-
vection units. Natural convection units use the natural flow of warm air 
to heat the desired space and are commonly found as baseboard heat-
ers, radiators, and panel heaters. The forced convection type of heating 
unit uses a fan to circulate air across a coil to supply the desired heat 
to the conditioned space. These types of units are available as room 
forced-air convectors, forced-air unit heaters, or hot water coils placed 
in an air supply.
A steam system would use a pressure switch as an operating con-
trol and a limit switch. The system would use a low-water cutoff to 
stop the burner if the water level is low. The steam system uses a 
condensate pump to return water to the boiler and is controlled by a 
flow switch. A simplified control system for a steam boiler is shown in 
Figure 14.53.
Steam flows naturally because of the pressure in the system. As the 
steam is cooled at the heating transfer unit, it will condense back to a 
BC
LWC
SPS
OPS
LS
 OPS: Operating pressure switch
 SPS: Safety pressure switch
 LWC: Low-water cutoff
 LS: Limit switch
 BC: Burner control
Legend:
14.53
F I G U R E
Simplified con-
trol system for 
a steam boiler. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 
 
Section 14.6   Hydronic and Steam Controls 
473
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

474 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
liquid and will have to be delivered back to the boiler. Steam systems 
have devices called steam traps that allow the condensate to flow back 
through the lines to the boiler or to a  reservoir, where it is pumped back 
into the boiler. A condensate pump is used to pump the condensate 
water back to the boiler. These pumps are controlled by a flow switch, 
which, when the water level is high enough in the reservoir, closes to 
energize the pump. Various types of control valves are used to regulate 
the flow of steam to devices that are controlling the temperature of a 
conditioned space or devices that need a steam source in a manufactur-
ing process.
The hydronic and steam control systems become increasingly com-
plex as the size increases with more sophisticated combustion controls 
and system controls. The intent of this material on hydronic and steam 
heating systems has been only to provide an overview of what a techni-
cian might come in contact with in the industry.
14.7 SERVICE CALLS
Service Call 1
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with standing pilot ignition
Complaint: No heat
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order reveals that there is no pilot light.
 2. The technician informs the homeowner of his or her presence and 
obtains any additional information about the problem. The furnace 
is located in the crawl space.
 3. The technician asks the homeowner to set the thermostat to the 
heating mode of operation.
 4. The technician proceeds to the furnace in the crawl space and deter-
mines that there is no pilot burning. The technician attempts to light 
the pilot, but every time the pilot safety valve is released, the pilot 
flame goes out.
 5. The technician must determine if the problem exists with the ther-
mocouple or the gas valve.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6. To check the thermocouple, the technician uses an adapter that 
allows a millivolt reading of what the thermocouple is producing. 
The voltage reading of the thermocouple is 4 mV, which is an indica-
tion that the thermocouple is at fault.
 7. The thermocouple must be replaced with a new thermocouple of 
adequate length.
 8. The technician runs the furnace through at least one complete cycle 
to make certain that the system is operating properly.
 9. The technician informs the homeowner of the problem and that it 
has been corrected.
Service Call 2
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with intermittent pilot control
Complaint: No heat
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order information reveals that the fur-
nace is in the basement. The homeowner will leave the basement 
door open, which is located on the north end of the house. The ther-
mostat will be set in the heating mode.
 2. The gas supply is turned off by the technician.
 3. The technician measures the line voltage available to the furnace 
and reads 120 volts.
 4. The technician determines that limit switches and other safety 
devices are in good condition.
 5. The technician measures the voltage at the ignition module and 
reads 24 volts.
 6. The technician resets the ignition module by resetting the thermo-
stat or breaking 24 volts at the terminal board of the furnace.
 7. After the ignition module has been reset, the module should produce 
a spark across the igniter/sensor gap. The ignition lead should be 
pulled off and the spark checked at that location. If no spark exists, 
 
 
Section 14.7   Service Calls 
475
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

476 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
the technician should check the fuse on the ignition module. If the 
technician finds the fuse is good, the ignition module should be 
replaced. The fuse is good.
 8. The technician replaces the ignition module with the correct replace-
ment.
 9. The technician leaves a note for the homeowner explaining the prob-
lem and that the furnace has been repaired.
10. The technician secures the basement door upon leaving the residence.
Service Call 3
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with direct spark ignition
Complaint: No heat
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for 
available information. The work order reveals that the furnace is an 
upflow gas-fired, forced-air furnace located in a closet within the liv-
ing space of the house.
 2. The technician informs the homeowner of his or her presence and 
obtains any additional information about the system problem. The 
homeowner informs the technician that the furnace goes off before 
the desired temperature within the structure is reached.
 3. Upon entering the structure, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician 
also takes care not to damage any interior walls.
 4. The technician locates the furnace and sets the thermostat to the 
heating mode. The technician observes that the furnace burner is 
igniting but stays lit for only approximately 5 minutes.
 5. The lighting of the burner eliminates some of the possible prob-
lems that the technician needs to check. If the burner lights, the 
technician can eliminate checking for a call for heat, voltage to 
the  ignition module, and correct operation of the spark across the 
igniter/sensor gap.
 6. The module does not lock out, so there is no need to reset the con-
trol. The technician checks to see if flame current is correct, and for 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

excessive heat at the sensor insulator. The technician checks these 
items and both are in acceptable ranges or in good condition. The 
ignition module is faulty and needs to be replaced.
 7. The technician replaces the ignition module with an acceptable 
replacement.
 8. The technician checks the operation of the furnace and makes cer-
tain that the problem has been corrected.
 9. The technician informs the homeowner of the problem and that it 
has been corrected.
Service Call 4
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Oil furnace with a cad cell primary control
Complaint: No heat
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for 
available information. The work order reveals that the oil furnace is 
located in the basement, which is accessed through the house. The 
housekeeper will be at the residence and will let the technician in.
 2. The technician informs the housekeeper of his or her presence 
and obtains any additional information about the operation of the 
 furnace. The housekeeper informs the technician that they can hear 
the burner start and light, but it goes off almost immediately.
 3. Upon entering the residence, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure and that no inte-
rior walls are marred.
 4. The technician makes a visual inspection of the oil burner and resets 
the safety switch. The oil burner starts, ignites, and cuts off on safety 
control.
 5. The cad cell lead wires are disconnected and connected to an ohm-
meter. The safety switch is again reset and while the burner is 
operating, the technician checks the ohm reading of the cad cell, 
which should be between 300 and 1000 ohms. The ohm reading is 
1000 ohms, proving that the cad cell is good.
 
 
Section 14.7   Service Calls 
477
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

478 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
 6. Once the technician has proved that the cad cell is in good working 
condition, this indicates that the primary control is bad and should 
be replaced.
 7. The technician changes the primary control and checks the opera-
tion of the furnace.
 8. The technician informs the housekeeper of the problem and that it 
has been corrected.
Service Call 5
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Oil furnace with stack switch control
Complaint: No heat
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order reveals that the furnace is in the 
crawl space which is unlocked. No one will be available to allow the 
technician access to the home; the key will be located under the mat at 
the front door. The thermostat will be in the heat position and will be 
set for the desired temperature. No additional information is available.
 2. The technician decides that there is no need to enter the home if the 
system is receiving a call for heat from the thermostat.
 3. The technician proceeds to the crawl space and makes a visual 
inspection of the furnace and sees nothing out of the ordinary.
 4. The easiest way to determine if power is available and the ther-
mostat is calling for heat is to reset the stack switch safety switch 
and observe the operation of the burner. If the technician resets 
the switch and the burner starts, it confirms that both power and a 
call for heat are available to the burner. When the safety switch is 
reset, the burner starts and lights but cuts off on a safety control.
 5. The technician cleans the contacts of the primary control relay(s) 
and cleans the bimetal element that is inserted into the stack. The 
technician again tries the oil burner controls to see if the burner 
operates properly.
 6. The technician again resets the safety switch and the burner oper-
ates correctly. By cleaning the contacts and bimetal element of the 
control, the technician has corrected the problem.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7. The technician operates the furnace through a complete cycle of 
starting and stopping. (This can be accomplished by disconnecting 
the thermostat leads at the primary control, which the technician 
makes certain to reconnect when completed.)
 8. The technician leaves a note for the homeowner explaining the prob-
lem and what was done to correct it.
SUMMARY
There are basically two mediums that are used to heat structures: air and 
water. The forced-air furnace heats and delivers air to the desired loca-
tion in the structure. Hydronic boilers heat water that is pumped through 
pipes to the area of the structure where heat is required. The steam boiler 
produces steam and piping directs the steam to the desired location. 
Warm-air furnaces have many controls that are the same whether the 
fuel being used is gas, oil, or electricity. There are also some differences 
in the control of the fossil fuels; for example, oil and gas burners are 
controlled in a different manner. The hydronic control system uses ther-
mostats as operating and safety controls. Steam systems are controlled 
by pressure, which requires the use of a pressure switch for an operating 
control.
In most types of heating appliances using fossil fuels, a heat 
exchanger is required to transfer the heat to the medium being cooled. 
In a warm-air furnace, the fuel source heats a combustion chamber and 
the furnace forces air across the surface thus heating the air and forc-
ing it to the conditioned space. The hot water or hydronic and steam 
boiler are nothing more than heat exchangers that heat water or pro-
duce steam. In an application where fossil fuel is used, there must be 
some method to vent the products of combustion.
There are some common controls to all types of forced-air furnaces, 
such as fan switches and limit switches. The fan switch is used to stop 
and start the fan when the air is at the proper temperature for delivery 
to the structure. The air delivered to the structure must be warm enough 
to prevent cold drafts coming in contact with occupants of the structure 
and causing discomfort. If the temperature of the air is excessively hot, 
it could damage the structure and/or equipment. The three types of fan 
switches most commonly used in warm-air furnaces are temperature, 
time and temperature, and time controlled. The temperature-controlled 
 
 
Summary 
479
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

480 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
fan switch is controlled by the temperature of the ambient air surround-
ing the heat exchanger. The time- and temperature-controlled fan switch 
is controlled by the timing of the fan switch and/or the ambient tem-
perature of the heat exchanger. The time-controlled fan switch is nothing 
more than a time-delay relay and the only function is time. All forced-air 
heating appliances have some form of safety control that opens if the fur-
nace, or a section of the furnace, gets too hot. These limit switches open 
on a temperature rise and are used at strategic locations in the furnace 
that might be prone to overheating.
The basic functions of gas heating controls are to safely operate the 
heating appliance and to ensure safe ignition of the main burner. The 
three basic types of gas burner controls are standing pilot, intermittent, 
and direct ignition. These three methods have to do with how the main 
burner ignition is accomplished. The standing pilot is a continuous flame 
that is located near the burner and can easily ignite the main burner. The 
intermittent pilot is lit when there is a call for heat from the thermostat 
and is extinguished when the call has been satisfied. The direct ignition 
burner control lights the main burner without a pilot. The intermittent 
pilot and direct ignition burner controls use electronic ignition modules 
to light pilots or main burners. The ignition module uses a spark or a hot 
surface element to light the pilot or main burner.
The function of the oil burner control is to turn the oil burner on and 
off in response to the needs of the conditioned space. The oil burner 
control supervises the operation of the oil burner, maintaining the level 
of safe operation that is required by the industry. The two types of oil 
burner controls currently used in the industry are the stack switch and 
cad cell controls. The stack switch primary control uses the heat available 
in the stack or vent to determine if the burner has ignited the fuel oil. 
The cad cell primary control visually inspects the combustion chamber 
to determine if the oil burner has properly ignited the oil. The cad cell 
primary control has a much faster response time than does the stack 
switch. The resistance of the cad cell is determined by the intensity of 
the light that the cad cell is viewing. If an oil burner is properly adjusted, 
the  approximate resistance of the cad cell will be 300 to 1000 ohms. Most 
oil burner controls are available with continuous or intermittent ignition.
Burner controls used for hydronic and steam heating systems, with 
the exception of the burner controls on the larger applications, would be 
similar to those discussed in this chapter. Hydronic systems use thermo-
stats as operating and safety controls. Steam heating systems use pres-
sure switches as their operating and safety controls.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Review Questions 
481
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
C H A P T E R  1 4  R E V I E W
RQ1 
Which of the following is the most popular medium 
used to transfer heat from the heating appliance to 
the conditioned area of a residential structure?
a. air
b. water
c. steam
d. none of the above
RQ2 
Which of the following types of heating systems is 
most popular in the commercial and industrial sec-
tion of the industry?
a. air
b. water
c. steam
d. either b or c
RQ3 
How is the heat transfer from the heating appli-
ance to the conditioned space accomplished in a 
residential warm-air furnace?
RQ4 
What methods are used to remove the products 
of combustion from the combustion chamber of a 
heating appliance using a fossil fuel source?
RQ5 
True or False: An electric furnace requires a vent 
from the heat exchanger.
RQ6 
Which of the following is not a common method 
used to start the blower motor in a forced-air fur-
nace?
a. temperature
b. time and temperature
c. time
d. pressure
RQ7 
What is the purpose of the fan switch in a warm-
air furnace?
RQ8 
Explain the operation of the three types of fan 
switches used in the industry.
RQ9 
What is the result of the following conditions in 
regard to the operation of a fan switch in a 
furnace?
a. fan switch setting too low
b. fan switch setting too high
RQ10 
What is the purpose of a limit switch in a warm-air 
furnace?
RQ11 
True or False: The standing pilot is a continuous 
flame that is located near the burner and can easily 
ignite the main burner.
RQ12 
An intermittent pilot ignites when the _________.
a. thermostat is set to “heat”
b. thermostat calls for heat
c. manual pilot valve is opened
d. main gas valve opens
RQ13 
Which component is most commonly used to prove 
that a standing pilot is lit?
a. bimetal element
b. thermostat
c. thermocouple
d. none of the above
RQ14 
How are most intermittent pilots lit?
a. manually
b. glow coils
c. heat
d. spark
RQ15 
What is a typical operational sequence of an inter-
mittent pilot burner control system?
RQ16 
True or False: A thermocouple is strong enough to 
close the pilot safety solenoid in a gas valve.
RQ17 
What is the purpose of a gas valve?
RQ18 
What is a redundant gas valve?
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 4  R E V I E W
482 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
RQ19 
How many valves could be incorporated in a 
redundant-type gas valve?
a. one
b. two
c. three
d. four
RQ20 
Which of the following are the two types of igni-
tion used with direct ignition?
a. spark and glow coil
b. spark and hot surface
c. spark and thermocouple
d. thermocouple and glow coil
RQ21 
Most hot surface ignition devices are made of 
______________________.
a. silicon
b. crystallized sulfur
c. silicon-coated steel
d. silicon sulfide
RQ22 
What is a typical operational sequence of a direct 
ignition pilot control system?
RQ23 
What is the function of an oil burner primary 
 control?
RQ24 
Which of the following is not a component of a 
gun type atomizing oil burner?
a. burner motor
b. oil pump
c. ignition electrodes
d. thermocouple
RQ25 
What are the two types of primary controls used to 
supervise the operation of an oil burner?
RQ26 
Which of the following devices uses light to prove 
the flame of an oil burner?
a. silicon sulfide cell
b. cad cell
c. photo cell
d. none of the above
RQ27 
True or False: A stack switch uses pressure to prove 
the flame of an oil burner.
RQ28 
What is the approximate resistance reading of 
a cad cell viewing a properly adjusted oil burner 
flame?
a. 300 to 1000 ohms
b. 1000 to 1300 ohms
c. 1500 to 2000 ohms
d. over 2000 ohms
RQ29 
Where does the stack switch primary control pick 
up the signal that a flame has been proven?
RQ30 
Explain the operation of a cad cell primary control.
RQ31 
Explain the operation of a stack switch primary 
control.
RQ32 
True or False: The ignition transformer is always 
energized as long as the thermostat is calling for 
heat.
RQ33 
Where is a stack switch mounted in the oil burner 
system?
RQ34 
What is the correct location of a cad cell?
RQ35 
What type of control is commonly used as an 
 operating control in a hydronic system?
RQ36 
What type of control is commonly used as an 
 operating control for a steam boiler?
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
the chapter, refer to Chapter 14 in the Lab Manual.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Practice Service Calls 
483
PRACTICE SERVICE CALLS
Determine the problem and recommend a solution for the following ser-
vice calls. (Be specific; do not list components as good or bad.)
Practice Service Call 1
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Oil furnace with stack switch control
Complaint: No heat
Symptoms:
1. There is correct line voltage to primary control.
2. Thermostat is calling for heat.
3. Contacts and element of stack switch have been cleaned.
4. Contacts have been put in step.
Practice Service Call 2
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with standing pilot
Complaint: No heat
Symptoms:
1. Correct line voltage is available to primary control.
2. Thermostat is calling for heat.
3. Pilot is lit.
4. Gas valve is supplied with 24 volts.
Practice Service Call 3
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with direct spark ignition
Complaint: No heat
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

484 
CHAPTER 14   Heating Control Devices
Symptoms:
1. Correct line voltage is available to ignition module.
2. Thermostat is calling for heat.
3. There is no spark at igniter or sensor gap.
Practice Service Call 4
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with intermittent pilot
Complaint: Constant clinking noise when the furnace is operating
Symptoms:
1. Correct line voltage is available to ignition module.
2. Thermostat is calling for heat.
3. Spark continues when pilot lights.
Practice Service Call 5
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Oil furnace with cad cell primary control
Complaint: Oil burner ignites but cuts off almost immediately
Symptoms:
1. There is correct line voltage to primary control.
2. Thermostat is calling for heat.
3. Safety switch has been reset with same results.
4. Cad cell reads 5000 ohms when the burner is ignited.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

485
C H A P T E R
OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗ Troubleshoot electric motors.
◗ Troubleshoot contactors and relays.
◗ Troubleshoot overloads.
◗ Troubleshoot thermostats.
◗ Troubleshoot pressure switches.
◗ Troubleshoot transformers.
◗ Troubleshoot electric heating controls.
◗ Troubleshoot gas heating controls.
◗ Troubleshoot oil heating controls.
KEY TERMS
Contactor 
Relay
Ignition module 
Thermostat
Motor 
Transformer
Pressure switch 
Troubleshooting Electric 
Control Devices
15
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INTRODUCTION
Most troubleshooting in a system involves a specific problem that the 
customer is encountering. Most problems in a system stem from one 
source—an electric component that is not functioning properly or is 
faulty. It is the responsibility of the service technician to locate the 
component that is not functioning correctly and to replace or repair 
it. Sometimes it is difficult to locate the exact trouble in the entire 
system, but the task should be relatively simple once the problem has 
been narrowed down to a single or several components. In this chapter, 
we discuss troubleshooting for most of the basic electric control 
components.
The first step in troubleshooting any component is to understand its 
operation and function. If the operation of an electric component is not 
understood, it is impossible to effectively check the component. Electric 
meters will usually be needed in the diagnosis of the component. Thus, 
it is essential for service technicians to understand the use of electric 
meters. Service technicians and other personnel must also understand 
the proper procedures for checking electric components and be able to 
correctly diagnose the condition of the component. In the following sec-
tions, we will discuss some guidelines to use in checking electric com-
ponents and in diagnosing problems of components in modern heating, 
air-conditioning, and refrigeration systems.
!CAUTION
Caution should be used when servicing any electrical 
device that is supplied with electrical energy.
15.1 ELECTRIC MOTORS
Motors are the most important loads in any heating, cooling, or refrig-
eration system. They are used almost exclusively to cause the rotating 
motion of fans, compressors, pumps, and dampers. Many different types 
of electric motors are used in the industry. However, the type of motor 
used will have no effect on diagnosing the condition of the motor but will 
have a great effect on the selection of a replacement motor if needed.
!CAUTION
Always stand clear of the shaft end of an electric motor 
when it is mechanically connected to a device that 
requires rotation when it is started.
486 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 15.1   Electric Motors 
487
Open-type electric motors will fail in three different areas: windings, 
centrifugal switch, and bearings. The windings can be checked for opens, 
shorts, and grounds. One important element in the diagnosis of an elec-
tric motor winding is to know the type of motor because of the winding 
layout. The condition of the centrifugal switch can best be determined 
by visual inspection after disassembling the motor; the operating char-
acteristics can also tell much about the condition and operation of the 
centrifugal switch. The bearings can usually be checked by turning the 
motor by hand to determine if hard or rough spots exist in the rotating 
movement of the motor.
Make sure that the electrical power is turned off and 
locked before attempting to turn a motor by hand. Fans 
and pumps are generally easy to turn by hand, while 
compressors may require a wrench.
!CAUTION
The only part of a sealed motor, such as a hermetic compressor, that 
can be checked is the windings because there are no internal parts other 
than the bearings. The winding can be checked as in any other motor 
for opens, shorts, and grounds. Diagnosing bearing failure in a hermetic 
motor is often difficult because no visual inspection or feeling of the 
rotation can be accomplished. Bearing failure on hermetic motors must 
be diagnosed through amperage readings of the motors along with run-
ning characteristics. However, several different types of starting appara-
tus need to be checked. It is imperative that service technicians be able 
to diagnose the condition of the many types of starting relays and start 
assist devices used in the industry. These starting components were dis-
cussed in Chapter 10.
!CAUTION
When motor changes are necessary, the technician 
should make certain that all electrical characteristics 
and the mounting are correct.
!CAUTION
Motors should be mounted in the method intended by 
the manufacturer.
Motor replacement procedure is important to the technician in the 
field. Many times the exact replacement motor is not available, and 
the technician must adapt a different motor to meet the specifications. 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

488 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
Replacement motors can sometimes be identified by a manufacturer’s part 
number or by the model number of the unit, but in many cases identifica-
tion must be made by the motor and its nameplate. The technician must 
have enough information to identify a motor that will replace the defective 
one. Many unknown elements, such as type of motor, rotation, number of 
motor speeds, and horsepower, can be identified by the technician when 
removing the faulty motor from the unit. The technician must be sure the 
replacement motor selected will operate properly for the application.
Troubleshooting motors was covered in detail in Chapter 9.
15.2 CONTACTORS AND RELAYS
Contactors and relays are used on most heating, cooling, and refrigera-
tion equipment for the operation of loads in the system. Contactors and 
relays are similar in their operation because both contain sets of contacts 
and a coil used to open or close the contacts. The contactor is larger and 
capable of carrying more amperage than the relay.
The same procedure can be used to check both contactors and relays. 
Three types of problems are encountered with contactors and relays: con-
tacts, coil, and mechanical linkage. Any one of the three areas can cause 
a contactor or relay to malfunction.
Contacts
The contacts of a relay or contactor must make good direct contact when 
energized for the device to function properly. One problem often encoun-
tered with contactors and relays is the contacts’ inability to make good 
contact. The contacts can be burned, pitted, or stuck together. A set of 
burned or pitted contacts can cause a 
voltage drop across the contacts.
There are several methods of check-
ing a set of contacts to determine if they 
are burned or pitted enough to warrant 
changing the device. The easiest method 
is to make a visual inspection. Figure 15.1 
shows a contactor with a severely dam-
aged set of contacts. Most contactors 
have movable covers, which allow easy 
visual inspection. Most relays are sealed 
and visual inspection is impossible.
A resistance check can also deter-
mine the condition of a set of contacts. 
The device must be energized to check 
15.1
F I G U R E
Damaged contacts of a contactor. 
(Courtesy of Square D Company)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 15.2   Contactors and Relays 
489
normally open contacts. Normally, closed contacts must be checked with 
the device de-energized. If the resistance is greater than 1 ohm, the con-
tact should be considered faulty.
A voltage check can also determine the condition of a set of contacts. 
When a voltage check is made, the contactor or relay should be energized. 
To make a voltage check on a set of contacts, take a voltage reading from 
one side of the contacts to the other, as shown in Figure 15.2. The read-
ing will show how much voltage is being lost. The load must be energized 
when a voltage test is being performed. If the voltage loss across the 
contacts exceeds 5% of the line voltage, the contacts are faulty and the 
contactor or relay should be replaced.
The contact alignment can also cause a contactor or relay to mal-
function. Contacts should close directly in line with each other and seat 
directly in line with good, firm contact. The major cause of contact mis-
alignment is a faulty mechanical linkage. If the contacts are out of align-
ment, the contactor or relay must be rebuilt or replaced.
1
0 
  
V 
 A
C
 
120 V AC
IFM
15.2
F I G U R E
Voltage test of a set of contacts; 
10 volts AC are being lost across 
contacts. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

490 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
Coil
The coil of a relay or contactor is used to close the contacts by creating 
a magnetic field that will pull the plunger into the magnetic field. If the 
coil of a relay or contactor is faulty, the device will not close the contacts. 
A contactor or relay coil should be checked for opens, shorts, or a mea-
surable resistance. If a coil is shorted, the resistance will be 0 ohm and 
the coil should be replaced. An open coil will give a resistance reading of 
infinity, and this coil should also be replaced. A measurable resistance 
almost always indicates that the coil is good. Almost any measurable 
resistance indicates a good coil because of the variance in coil voltages. A 
shorted contactor coil will cause a transformer to burn out, and the ser-
vice technician should take caution not to allow this to happen.
Mechanical Linkage
The mechanical linkage of a contactor or relay can cause malfunctions 
in many different forms, such as sticking contacts, contacts that will 
not close due to excess friction, contacts that do not make good direct 
contact, and misalignment of contacts. The best method for detecting 
a faulty mechanical linkage is by visual inspection. On contactors and 
some relays, this can be done by removing the device and merely look-
ing it over. However, most relays are sealed and inspection is impossible. 
A sealed relay must be checked by determining if the contacts open and 
close when the relay coil is energized or de-energized.
A mechanical linkage problem can cause a contactor or relay to stick 
open or closed or cause misalignment of the contacts. If a contactor or 
serviceable relay has a mechanical linkage problem, it should be replaced 
(unless it can be easily repaired). A sticky armature can cause a relay, 
contactor coil, or transformer to burn out.
15.3 OVERLOADS
Most major loads used in heating, cooling, and refrigeration equipment 
have some type of overload protection. Overloads are often overlooked as 
being a problem in the system, but they may be faulty. A faulty overload 
can cause the equipment to run without protection or not operate at all. 
The high cost of the major loads in a system makes it necessary to protect 
all major loads.
!CAUTION
When replacing overload devices, make sure they are 
correctly sized.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Fuse
The fuse is the easiest type of overload to check because of its simplicity. 
A fuse can easily be checked with an ohmmeter in most cases. If a 0-ohm 
resistance is shown, the fuse is good. No continuity indicates a bad fuse.
A fuse on rare occasions will not completely blow or break but will 
partially burn out. In this case, the fuse will show 0 ohm but will not allow 
enough current through it to operate the load. A voltage check across each 
fuse while power is applied to the load will show a partially burned-out 
fuse. The voltage check is done by placing the leads of a voltmeter across 
each end of the fuse, as shown in Figure 15.3. If line voltage is read on the 
meter, the fuse is bad and should be replaced. If no voltage is read, the 
fuse is good. This method of checking fuses would not always be accurate 
on three-phase circuitry.
Circuit Breaker
The circuit breaker is another type of overload device used by some equip-
ment manufacturers and in many electric panels that are commonly 
used in the industry today. The circuit breaker is a device that will trip or 
open on an overload and must be manually reset. The circuit breaker is 
1
2
0 
  
V 
 A
C
 
120 V AC
Motor
Blown fuse
15.3
F I G U R E
Voltage check of a bad fuse. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
 
Section 15.3   Overloads 
491
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

492 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
checked by taking a voltage reading on the load side of the circuit breaker, 
as shown in Figure 15.4. If line voltage is read on the load side of the cir-
cuit breaker, it is probably good.
A circuit breaker can also cause trouble if it trips at an amperage 
lower than the rated amperage of the breaker. (A clamp-on ammeter is 
used to check the amperage of a circuit breaker.) If this occurs, replace the 
breaker. A circuit breaker can also cause nuisance trippings if it is unable 
to handle its rated amperage.
Line Voltage Overload
A line voltage overload installed on a load device is the easiest type of 
overload to check. It is used on small hermetic compressors and motors 
and is connected directly to the line voltage supply. The line voltage 
overload can be open, permanently closed, or open on a lower-than-rated 
ampere draw. A line voltage overload has only two or three terminals to 
check. A resistance reading across the terminals will indicate whether the 
overload is open or closed.
Care should be taken not to condemn an overload when, in fact, it is 
open because of a malfunction of the load it is controlling. If a line voltage 
overload is weak, an amperage check should be made to see what amper-
age is causing the overload to open. If the dropout amperage is lower than 
the overload rating, the device should be replaced.
15.4
F I G U R E
Checking a circuit breaker with a voltmeter. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Pilot Duty Overload
A pilot duty overload has a set of contacts that will open if an over-
load occurs in the line voltage side of the overload. These overloads are 
arranged so that the line voltage feeds directly through a current sensing 
element and then on to the load. The line voltage section of a pilot duty 
overload can be controlled by heat, amperage, or magnetism—all three are 
in common use in the industry today. This type of overload is harder to 
check than the overloads discussed previously because of its complexity. 
The pilot duty contacts and the controlling line voltage element must be 
checked.
The pilot duty contacts on a pilot duty overload are easy to check by 
using an ohmmeter. The pilot contacts are usually easy to distinguish 
from the line voltage components of the overload because of their small 
size in relation to the large size of the line voltage connections, as shown 
in Figure 15.5. The contacts will either be open or closed. If the contacts 
are open, the overload is bad (or there is an overload in the circuit). If the 
contacts are closed, the overload is good.
The line voltage part of the pilot duty overload indicates an overload 
by several methods: heat, current, and magnetism. All three methods 
determine the current flow, but they use different elements to determine 
an overload. The heat (thermal) type of pilot duty overload shown in 
Figure 15.6(a) actually transfers current to heat. The current type of over-
load is similar in design to the magnetic. The current type of pilot duty 
15.5
F I G U R E
Pilot duty and line voltage connections of an 
overload. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Pilot duty
connections
Line voltage
connection
 
 
Section 15.3   Overloads 
493
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

494 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
overload, shown in Figure 15.5, uses the current through a coil to indicate 
an overload and open the pilot duty contacts. The magnetic overload 
shown in Figure 15.6(b) uses the strength of the magnetic field to open 
and close the pilot duty contacts. The magnetic overload gives a certain 
amount of built-in time delay due to its makeup.
To check the thermal element of a thermal overload, take a resistance 
reading across the thermal element. If the resistance is above 0 ohm, the 
element is bad and the overload should be replaced. The magnetic and 
current types of pilot duty overload can be checked in the same way. 
However, the magnetic and current overloads use a coil that is larger than 
the element of a thermal overload. This coil is connected in series with 
the load and therefore indicates the current being used by the load. The 
coil in the magnetic or current types of pilot duty overload can be easily 
checked with an ohmmeter. The resistance of the coil should be 0 ohm 
because it is part of the conductor going to the load. The overload should 
be replaced if the coil reads any resistance.
Internal Overloads
Another type of overload is the internal overload used in hermetic 
compressors. This type of overload is actually embedded in the windings 
of the hermetic compressor motor, which gives it a faster response to 
overloads.
15.6
F I G U R E
Pilot duty overloads. (a) Heat (thermal) type of pilot duty overload. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning) (b) Magnetic type of pilot duty overload. (Photo by Bill Johnson)
(a)
(b)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The early type of internal overload used sepa-
rate terminals extending from inside the com-
pressor to the outside of the compressor terminal 
box, as shown in Figure 15.7. This type of internal 
overload can be simply and easily checked with 
an ohmmeter to determine if it is open or closed. 
It is embedded in the winding but makes no elec-
tric connections to the windings.
The type of internal overload currently used is 
hard to check because it has no external connec-
tions. It is in series with the common terminal of 
the compressor motor. This type of overload must 
be checked as part of the windings of the motor, 
which makes it extremely hard to diagnose for 
troubles. The only way to check this type of over-
load is with an ohmmeter, just as you would check 
a motor. If an open is present, it could be due to 
the windings or the overload. Service technicians 
should never condemn a hermetic compressor 
that is temporarily overloaded. The compressor 
should be given ample time to cool.
!CAUTION
When troubleshooting electric motors or hermetic com-
pressor motors that are extremely hot, make sure they 
have ample time to cool before condemning them.
15.7
F I G U R E
Early type of internal 
overload on a her-
metic compressor. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Many semi-hermetic compressors have an internal thermostat 
embedded in the motor windings. The thermostat has a separate con-
nection to the compressor terminals as shown in Figure 15.8. An internal 
thermostat can easily be checked with an ohmmeter. If any resistance is 
read, the device is faulty and should be replaced.
Electronic overloads are becoming increasingly popular for the protec-
tion of large compressors in the industry. Electronic overloads use sen-
sors with a certain resistance that are placed in the motor windings. The 
resistances of these sensors change with the temperature of the motor 
winding: The higher the temperature of the motor winding, the higher 
the resistances of the sensors. The sensors are connected to an electronic 
module that amplifies the resistances of the sensors. If the module senses 
an overloaded condition due to the resistances of the sensors, then the 
control contacts of the module open and stop the compressor. Electronic 
overloads are easy to troubleshoot because most manufacturers give 
 
 
Section 15.3   Overloads 
495
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

496 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
detailed resistance charts on the sensors at certain temperatures. The 
technician only needs to measure the resistances of the sensors to deter-
mine if an overloaded condition exists. If an overloaded condition exists, 
then the pilot duty contacts should be open; but if the motor windings are 
at normal temperature, the pilot duty contacts should be closed.
!CAUTION
Safety devices should be connected in series to 
ensure that unsafe conditions will cut off the load 
being protected.
!CAUTION
At no time should a technician jump out safety controls 
and leave them jumped out.
15.4 THERMOSTATS
Some type of thermostat is used on most heating, cooling, and refrigera-
tion equipment. Therefore, it is essential to know how to correctly diag-
nose the condition of thermostats.
There are two basic types of thermostats used in the industry today: 
the line voltage thermostat and the low-voltage thermostat. The line 
15.8
F I G U R E
Semi-hermetic overload 
terminals. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

voltage thermostat is used to make or break line voltage to a load. Its 
only function is to open or close a set of contacts on a temperature rise 
or fall. Thus, the line voltage thermostat is usually simpler than the low-
voltage thermostat because it does not have as many functions as the 
low-voltage thermostat. The low-voltage thermostat is used when a volt-
age lower than 120 volts—usually 24 volts—is used to operate a control 
system. The low-voltage thermostat can have many functions. It can 
stop and start a fan motor, operate a fan motor independently of other 
parts of the system, and do many other functions sometimes required 
in control systems. The line voltage thermostat is not as accurate as the 
low-voltage thermostat due to the contacts’ larger size, which is neces-
sary to carry the higher voltage and amperage. Low-voltage thermostats 
are usually used on residential heating and cooling control systems and 
on many commercial and industrial systems. The line voltage thermostat 
is used on window air conditioners and commercial and industrial air-
conditioning, heating, and refrigeration equipment.
Line Voltage Thermostat
The line voltage thermostat is easy to troubleshoot because of its sim-
plicity. A line voltage thermostat could have two, three, or four terminals 
depending on contact configuration. A typical thermostat is shown in 
Figure 15.9. The most important element of checking line voltage ther-
mostats is to be sure the contacts are closed in the correct temperature 
range. Once it has been determined that the thermostat should be opened 
or closed, it can be checked with an ohmmeter. Or the control voltage can 
be checked at the equipment. The wires must be removed from the ther-
mostat to check it with an ohmmeter. The ohmmeter will read 0 ohm if 
the thermostat is closed, and infinity if it is open. The service technician 
must determine the correct terminals to check on the thermostat. This 
information can be found on the unit’s wiring diagram. In many cases, 
it is difficult to remove the wires of a thermostat, so a voltage check is 
made, as shown in Figure 15.10. When voltage is read across the contacts 
of a thermostat, the thermostat is open. If no voltage is read, the thermo-
stat is closed. The voltage check must be made with power applied to the 
unit and the switches placed in an operating position.
Low-Voltage Thermostat
The low-voltage thermostat is more difficult to troubleshoot than the 
line voltage thermostat because of the many functions of the low-voltage 
thermostat. The low-voltage thermostat operates the heating and cooling 
of the system, operates the fan motor with the heating and cooling opera-
tions, operates the fan motor independently, often operates two-stage 
 
 
Section 15.4   Thermostats 
497
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

498 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
systems, operates damper motors, and operates a pilot function of a gas 
heating system. A common subbase of a low-voltage thermostat is shown 
in Figure 15.11. All the letter designations, which indicate the different 
functions of the low-voltage thermostat, are also shown in the figure.
In troubleshooting a system, the low-voltage thermostat and the 
subbase may be at fault. The low-voltage thermostat and subbase can 
be checked with an ohmmeter. This can be done at the equipment or at 
the junction point of the thermostat wires. Service technicians seldom 
need to remove the thermostat and install a set of wires on it to check it. 
A low-voltage thermostat can also be checked by taking a voltage check 
at the equipment to ensure that the thermostat is functioning properly. 
The low-voltage thermostat and subbase are merely a point in the control 
system that is fed with low voltage. The thermostat sends a voltage signal 
to the equipment, which must then operate to meet the conditions called 
for by the thermostat.
The chart shown in Figure 15.12 can often be used in troubleshooting 
thermostats.
15.9
F I G U R E
Line voltage 
thermostat. 
(Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Thermostat
Motor
120 V AC
1
2
0 
  
V 
 A
C
 
15.10
F I G U R E
Voltage check of open 
thermostat. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15.11
F I G U R E
Common low-voltage thermostat 
subbase. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 
 
Section 15.4   Thermostats 
499
T/S not at fault; check elsewhere.
T/S wiring hole not plugged;
       drafts.
T/S not exposed to circulating
       air.
T/S not mounted level (mercury
       switch types).
T/S not properly calibrated.
T/S exposed to sun, source of
       heat.
T/S contacts dirty.
T/S set point too high.
T/S set point too low.
T/S damaged.
T/S located too near cold air
       register.
Break in T/S circuit.
System sized improperly.
NOTE:  T/S indicates room
   thermostat.
T/S jumpered; system
   won't work.
T/S jumpered; system
   works.
Room temp. overshoots
   T/S setting; too cold.
Room temp. doesn't
   reach setting; too warm.
System cycles too
   often.
System doesn't cycle
   often enough.
Room temp. swings
   excessively.
Condition:
Possible causes:
15.12
F I G U R E
Troubleshooting chart for thermostats. (Courtesy 
of Honeywell, Inc.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

500 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
15.5 PRESSURE SWITCHES
Pressure switches are used on heating, cooling, and refrigeration systems 
to start or stop some electric load in the system when the pressure in the 
system dictates this action. Pressure switches are used as safety devices 
or as operating controls. A pressure switch used as a safety device will 
stop an electric load when the pressure in a system reaches an unsafe 
condition. A pressure switch used as a safety device can be used to 
protect a refrigeration system from excessive discharge pressure or low 
suction pressure. It can be used in a gas heating system to protect the 
equipment from low or high gas pressure.
An operating-control pressure switch is used to operate some load 
in the system. The most common use of an operating-control pressure 
switch is on a commercial refrigeration system to control the tempera-
ture of a walk-in cooler or freezer. Some pressure switches are also used 
to operate unloading devices on large compressors, to operate con-
denser fan motors to control the discharge pressure of a refrigeration 
system, and to operate pumps and cooling tower fans on water-cooled 
condensers.
The most important aspect of checking a pressure switch is to under-
stand what it is used for in the system. The service technician must also 
determine if the pressure switch should be opened or closed. Once the 
service technician has determined what the pressure switch is used for 
and whether it should be opened or closed, it is easy to check the pressure 
switch. A resistance or voltage check should be made to determine if the 
pressure switch is opened or closed.
In troubleshooting pressure switches, it may be that the pressure 
switch is faulty or that the system is malfunctioning. Figure 15.13(a) 
shows a pressure switch in the control circuit malfunctioning by opening 
at a higher setting than that on the pressure switch. Figure 15.13(b) shows 
a pressure switch operating correctly and opening due to a low suction 
pressure.
The pressure switch can be stuck open or closed, it can open or 
close on the wrong pressure, or there can be a mechanical problem 
with the switch itself. If a pressure switch is stuck open or closed, then 
the pressure in the system will have no effect on the pressure switch. 
The service technician will have no trouble detecting a faulty pressure 
switch that should be opened or closed and is keeping a load from oper-
ating as it should. The technician should make sure the pressure switch 
is not stuck in a position that will result in damaged loads. If a pressure 
switch is not opening and closing on the right pressure, it should be 
correctly set or replaced.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

On some occasions, a pressure switch has been opened and closed 
so many times that the switch is worn out. Other mechanical linkage 
problems include broken springs, leaking bellows, corroded linkages, 
and broken linkages. Any condition that occurs in the mechanical link-
age of a pressure switch will usually call for replacement of the pres-
sure switch.
In most cases when a pressure switch opens, this is due to a malfunc-
tion in the system. But occasionally the pressure switch itself is at fault. 
The service technician must determine which condition is occurring. 
A pressure switch used as an operating control will often have to be reset 
but seldom replaced. The same troubleshooting procedure is used regard-
less of the function of the pressure switch.
15.6 TRANSFORMERS
A transformer is a device used to raise or lower the incoming voltage by 
induction to a more usable voltage for the control system. Some types of 
transformers are used to buck (lower) or boost (raise) the incoming volt-
age to an air-conditioning unit. A buck-and-boost transformer is used in 
conjunction with a voltage system that is too high or too low to supply the 
correct voltage to a system. Figure 15.14 shows a typical buck-and-boost 
transformer.
15.13
F I G U R E
Pressure switch operation. (a) Faulty pressure switch. (b) Properly 
operating pressure switch. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Pressure switch
open
Pressure switch
open
Pressure applied
40 psig
Pressure applied
10 psig
Pressure control
setting 20 psig
Pressure control
setting 20 psig
Cont.
coil
Cont.
coil
 
 
Section 15.6   Transformers 
501
(a)
(b)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

502 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
A transformer can be checked in two 
ways: a resistance check or a voltage check. 
An ohmmeter can be used to check the con-
dition of the windings of a transformer. If the 
ohmmeter reads 0 ohm, the windings of the 
transformer are shorted. A reading of infinity 
indicates an open  transformer. A measurable 
resistance indicates that the transformer is 
probably good. The number of ohms mea-
sured would be determined by the voltage of 
the transformer.
A transformer can also be checked by 
reading the output voltage if the correct 
primary voltage is applied. In some cases, 
the transformer might check out as good 
if the load is not put across the secondary. 
But when the load is inserted in the line, 
the transformer voltage will not be enough 
to energize the load. In this case, the trans-
former has a spot burnout and should be 
replaced. Often transformers are burned out 
because other devices in the circuit are being 
shorted. The service technician should take 
every precaution to prevent this.
15.7 ELECTRIC HEATING CONTROLS
The sequencer and contactor are commonly 
used to control the operation of electric 
resistance heaters in electric furnaces and 
other applications such as duct heaters or 
supplementary heat for heat pumps. There 
are many other electrical components that are used in electric heating 
control circuits for effective and safe operation of the electric heat-
ing appliance. Thermostats are used as operating controls and limits 
switches in these appliances. Electric motors are used to move air 
through the heaters to the conditioned space. Controls and devices that 
have been covered previously will not be covered again. When trouble-
shooting these components, the technician should focus on the func-
tion of the component in the circuit. For example, a thermostat could be 
used as an operating control to control the temperature of conditioned 
space or a safety control to interrupt the power to an electrical load if 
15.14
F I G U R E
Buck-and-boost trans-
former. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

an unsafe condition occurs. The technician must know the function of 
the control in the control system in order to effectively troubleshoot 
electrical devices.
In most cases, sequencers are used to control the operation of the 
electrical resistance heaters in an electric furnace and other applica-
tions. The sequencer is an electrical switch that acts much like a time-
delay relay. The sequencer has an electric heater that heats the bimetal 
element, causing the contacts of the sequencer to close. Sequencers 
can have as many as five sets of contacts that close in sequential order. 
The contacts of a sequencer close and open in a sequential order, thus 
spreading out the switching times to avoid large electrical loads at one 
time. The closing of the contacts of a currently used sequencer are 18, 
30, and 45 seconds. This allows each resistance heater to be staged into 
operation, decreasing large loads being placed on the electrical sys-
tem at one time. Figure 15.15(a) shows a sequencer used in an  electric 
furnace and Figure 15.15(b) shows the diagram of that sequencer. 
Figure 15.16 shows a diagram of an electric furnace with three electric 
resistance heaters and the blower motor being controlled by a single 
sequencer.
15.15
F I G U R E
(a) Photograph of sequencer. (Photo by Bill Johnson) (b) Diagram of a sequencer. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
(a)
(b)
 
 
Section 15.7   Electric Heating Controls 
503
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

504 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
The first check on any electrical circuit would be to determine if the 
correct voltage is available to the device controlling the load. In check-
ing the electric heating components, the technician should first check 
the power supply to the sequencer, both line voltage for the heaters 
and low voltage for the control element. If the control voltage is not 
available to the sequencer, then the technician must check the control 
circuits, but if the sequencer element is receiving 24 volts and not clos-
ing the contacts, then the sequencer is faulty and should be replaced. 
The condition of the sequencer element can be checked to determine if 
the element is open, shorted, or good (has continuity). With the heavy 
electrical load placed on contacts with electrical resistance heaters, 
often the contacts merely burn out because of the heat. Each set of con-
tacts of a sequencer must be checked if there is reason to believe that 
Tran
S4
S
S3
S2
S1
F3
F2
F1
H3
H2
H1
ST3
ST2
ST1
Thermostat
BM
S:
F:
H:
ST:
BM:
Tran:
Sequencer
Safety fuses
Heater
Safety thermostat
Blower motor
Transformer
Legend:
15.16
F I G U R E
Diagram of an electric furnace. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

not all heaters are operating; it is possible 
for any one set of contacts of a sequencer to 
be bad even though the remaining contacts 
may be operating properly. The condition of 
the contacts can be determined by a voltage 
check as shown in Figure 15.17. If a techni-
cian reads a voltage across the contacts of a 
sequencer, contactor, or relay, it shows that 
voltage is being lost across that set of con-
tacts. If the contacts are open, then the volt-
age reading will be line voltage because of 
feedback through the circuit. A closed set of 
good contacts should read 0 volt because it 
is the same leg of power, but if the set reads 
line voltage, then it is reading one line and 
the other reading is from feedback through 
other electrical devices in the circuit. A 
switch or fuse can usually be checked in this 
manner. Of course, control voltage can be supplied to the sequencer 
and then a resistance check can be made of each set of contacts, but 
this method requires more time than the voltage check. The technician 
must know the timing of the contacts’ closing in order to effectively 
troubleshoot a sequencer.
Other elements of electric resistance heaters that often give prob-
lems are the limits used for overcurrent or overtemperature protection. 
The check of these devices can be accomplished like any thermostat or 
switch. Electrical resistance heaters can burn into; the call on this type of 
problem would be “insufficient heat” and the technician would only have 
to check the continuity of the heater.
15.8 GAS HEATING CONTROLS
There are many thermostats used in gas heating control circuits. 
Thermostats that close on a rise in temperature are used in gas heating 
circuits to start the fan once the furnace heat exchanger has been heated. 
Thermostats that open on a rise in temperature are used as limits to 
prevent dangerous conditions in or around the furnace. The operating 
thermostat is usually low voltage, but line voltage thermostats can also 
be used for this function. Limit switches can also be line or low voltage, 
but will generally have only one function in the control circuit. The tech-
nician must know the function of the thermostat in the circuit. Often, 
wiring diagrams will help in determining this.
Sequencer
contacts
Safety
fuse
Heater
Safety
thermostat
25 volts
Bad set of contacts
15.17
F I G U R E
Voltage check of a set 
of contacts. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
 
Section 15.8   Gas Heating Controls 
505
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

506 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
Gas Valves
Gas valves are available in many different 
designs. Some valves have only one function, 
which is to open or close, while many have a 
number of different functions. The two com-
monly used gas valves today are the combi-
nation and redundant-type gas valves, both 
having more than one function. The combi-
nation gas valve has a pilot solenoid that is 
held open by the millivoltage produced by a 
thermocouple. The thermocouple produces 
a small voltage when heated. The source of 
heat is the pilot flame. Figure 15.18 shows 
a thermocouple with the proper flame. The 
thermocouple is attached to the pilot solenoid of the gas valve; the small 
voltage applied to the solenoid will not open the valve without assis-
tance but will hold the valve open once it has been manually opened. 
The thermocouple produces a maximum voltage of 30 mV with the 
operating range being between 10 mV and 20 mV when loaded. Along 
with pilot solenoids, combination gas valves house an on and off gas 
flow manual valve and an automatic valve that opens when a call for 
heat occurs, provided that the manual on and off valve is open and the 
pilot solenoid valve is open. The redundant gas valve has three valves 
incorporated in one housing: a manually operated shutoff valve that 
mechanically blocks all gas flow when turned off; an electrically oper-
ated solenoid valve that opens to allow gas to flow to the second valve; 
and a pilot duty electrically operated servo valve that opens to allow gas 
to enter the gas burners. There are many types of gas valves that have 
only one function and are operated by various types of elements, such as 
the heat motor valve, the diaphragm valve, electrically operated solenoid 
valves, and others.
Troubleshooting gas valves is accomplished first by knowing the type 
of gas valve used and its operation. The technician must determine the 
type of gas valve used in the control system. New model gas warm-air 
furnaces will almost always be equipped with redundant gas valves. 
The gas valves used on older model heating appliances will be a combi-
nation of different types of gas valves. The most common of these will 
be the combination gas valve with one manual valve, one semiautomatic 
valve, and one automatic valve. Other types of gas valves have only one 
valve that opens and closes by energizing whatever element controls 
the valve. The technician must know how the gas valve operates in order 
to correctly troubleshoot it.
3/8 to 1/2 in.
{9.5 to 12.7 mm}
Thermocouple
or thermopile
15.18
F I G U R E
Proper pilot flame. 
(Courtesy of 
Honeywell, Inc.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The easiest gas valves to troubleshoot will be valves that only open 
and close on a signal from other controls, generally thermostats. The 
technician has several options when checking these types of valves. A 
voltage check can be made to determine if the valve is receiving the cor-
rect voltage. If the valve is receiving the correct voltage and is still not 
operating, the valve should be changed. The technician should give the 
valve adequate time to open because in many cases the controlling ele-
ment of the valve does not operate instantly but has a delay in opening 
because of the design of the controlling element. Others operate instantly. 
A resistance check with an ohmmeter is another method of checking the 
controlling element of a gas valve. The resistance reading on the control-
ling element of a gas valve should be a measurable resistance. The gas 
valve could be electrically sound but faulty if any internal ports within 
the valve are restricted.
The combination gas valve has several valve operating elements 
that must be checked. The combination gas valve has a manually 
operated valve that interrupts the gas flow at the entrance of the gas 
valve. The next valve in a combination gas valve is the pilot solenoid, 
which opens the first valve, allowing gas to the pilot and to the sec-
ond valve. This pilot solenoid is not strong enough to open the valve 
without assistance. The valve must be physically opened and then the 
pilot solenoid will keep the valve open as long as the signal from the 
thermocouple is adequate. Figure 15.19 shows the unloaded and loaded 
millivolt output of a good thermocouple. The pilot solenoid or the 
thermocouple could be bad and prevent the pilot valve from remain-
ing open. A special thermocouple adapter used to measure the voltage 
produced by the thermocouple is shown in Figure 15.20. The millivolt-
age of the thermocouple must be adequate to keep the pilot solenoid 
energized with a correctly burning pilot flame. The pilot solenoid could 
be open, shorted, or grounded, which would prevent the solenoid from 
holding the valve open. To determine the condition of a pilot solenoid, 
it can be checked with an ohmmeter. If the thermocouple is not pro-
ducing adequate millivoltage to hold the pilot solenoid open, it must 
be replaced. The pilot solenoid or gas valve must be replaced if the 
pilot solenoid is faulty. Often, pilot solenoids are available and can 
be replaced, but many technicians choose to change the entire valve. 
Figure 15.21 shows a safety troubleshooting chart for a standing pilot 
control system using a thermocouple.
Redundant-type gas valves have two valves built into the main body. 
The first valve acts as a pilot valve and on a call for heat, the igniter and 
the pilot valve open; if the pilot is established, then the main valve will 
open, allowing gas to pass to the burner for ignition. On the gas valve, the 
 
 
Section 15.8   Gas Heating Controls 
507
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

508 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
electrical elements operating these internal 
valves are PV and MV; PV is the pilot valve 
and MV is the main valve. This type of valve 
operates by supervision of the ignition mod-
ule; on a call for heat, the pilot must be estab-
lished before the main valve is energized. 
Troubleshooting of the ignition modules will 
be covered in the next section. The technician 
could perform an electrical check or continu-
ity check of the pilot and main valve elements 
to determine their condition. If the correct 
voltage is available to the valve and the valve 
being checked is not opening, then the valve is faulty and should be 
replaced.
A gas valve used on a direct ignition system houses two valves, but 
the electrical connection is for both valves. There is no need for a pilot 
valve because no pilot flame is used on a direct ignition burner control. 
On some valves the connections for both valves are made externally and 
can be checked by using the voltage or resistance methods. If only one 
connection is available for both valves, the technician must have an idea 
15.20
F I G U R E
Adapter to check milli-
volt production of ther-
mocouple. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
Closed circuit
Output millivolts
Open circuit
Output millivolts
Acceptable
range
Check
power
unit
Dropout range
Replace thermocouple
15.19
F I G U R E
Millivolt output of thermocouple. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

of what the resistance reading should be for a resistance check, while the 
voltage check is merely for the correct voltage to the valve. If the valve is 
receiving voltage and not opening, the valve is bad.
Troubleshooting Intermittent Pilot Systems
An intermittent pilot control system supervises the operation of the heat-
ing source in a gas warm-air furnace and other gas heating appliances. 
This type of control system lights the pilot and ensures that it is estab-
lished before allowing the main gas valve to open and supply gas to the 
main burners. When troubleshooting or checking the operation of an inter-
mittent ignition module, there is always a fire or explosion hazard that can 
cause personal injury or property damage. If a technician suspects a gas 
leak or smells gas, the manual gas valve should be turned off until the con-
dition is corrected. Do not try to light any pilot or appliances while spilled 
gas remains. A gas leak test should be performed at the time of installation 
and anytime new connections are made or components changed.
Check pilot flame
Check and /or 
replace
• Pilot burner
   orifice
• Pilot gas filter
Check 
thermocouple
and 
power unit
Adjust flame
Handle other
problems
Replace 
control
Check for
cause of outage
Check gas supply
and try to relight
Handle other
problems
Hold down gas cock
knob for 1 minute
Pilot lights while
gas cock knob is
depressed but does
not stay lit when
knob is released
Pilot
on 
Pilot
off 
Check
pilot
Check 
temperature
control
circuit
Pilot 
remains 
lit
Pilot 
does
not
light
Pilot 
still
won't
light
Pilot 
lights
Incorrect
size
Correct
size
15.21
F I G U R E
Safety shutoff troubleshooting. (Courtesy of Honeywell, Inc.)
 
 
Section 15.8   Gas Heating Controls 
509
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

510 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
The technician often will have to check out the operation of the gas 
burner of a heating appliance. This procedure could be performed during 
a preseason startup call or a heating check call. The following steps could 
be used when performing this type of call.
 1. Visually inspect the heating appliance, making sure that all electri-
cal connections are tight and clean. Open gas valves and make sure 
there are no leaks.
 2. Review the normal operating sequence and the timing of the igni-
tion control system. The normal operating sequence of this type of 
control is shown in Figure 15.22.
 3. Reset the module by turning the thermostat to its lowest setting. 
Wait 1 minute and proceed to step 4.
 4. Check the safety operation of the ignition module by closing the 
manual gas valve. Set the thermostat to a call for heat. The ignition 
control system should spark and try to light the pilot. When a pilot 
can’t be established, check the operation of the pilot or safety lock-
out. Open the gas supply and set the thermostat to its lowest setting.
 5. Check the ignition module for normal operation by setting the ther-
mostat to call for heat. Check for smooth ignition of the pilot and 
main burner without flame disturbances.
This procedure will ensure that the ignition control system is operat-
ing safely and properly.
A troubleshooting chart for an intermittent ignition control system is 
shown in Figure 15.23. Troubleshooting charts are available for most igni-
tion modules in production.
Troubleshooting Direct Ignition Control Systems
A direct ignition control system supervises the operation of the heating 
source in a gas warm-air furnace and other heating appliances. This type 
of control system lights the main burner without any type of pilot flame. 
When troubleshooting or checking the operation of a direct ignition mod-
ule there is always a fire or explosion hazard that can cause personal injury 
or property damage. If the technician suspects a gas leak or smells gas, 
the manual gas valve should be turned off until the condition is corrected. 
Do not attempt to light any pilot or appliance while spilled gas remains. 
A gas leak test should be performed at the time of installation and any-
time new connections are made or components changed.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15.22
F I G U R E
Normal operating sequence of an intermittent pilot control system. (Courtesy 
of Honeywell, Inc.)
511
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

512 
15.23
F I G U R E
Troubleshooting chart for an intermittent pilot control system. (Courtesy of 
Honeywell, Inc.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The technician often will have to check out the operation of the gas 
burner of a heating appliance. This procedure could be performed during 
a preseason startup call, a heating check call, or an initial startup call. 
The following steps could be used when performing this type of call on a 
direct ignition system.
 1. Visually inspect the heating appliance, making sure that all electrical 
connections are clean and tight. Open the gas valve and make sure 
there are no leaks.
 2. Review the normal operating sequence and timing of the ignition 
control system. The normal operating sequence of this type of con-
trol is shown in Figure 15.24.
 3. Reset the module by turning the thermostat to its lowest setting. 
Wait 1 minute and proceed to step 4.
 4. Check the safety operation of the ignition module by closing the 
manual gas valve. Set the thermostat to a call for heat. The ignition 
control should create a spark or energize the hot surface ignition 
device immediately or following prepurge. Check the operation of 
the safety lockout. Open the gas supply and set the thermostat to its 
lowest setting.
 5. Check the ignition module for normal operation by setting the ther-
mostat to call for heat. Check for smooth ignition of the burners.
This procedure will ensure that the ignition control system is operat-
ing safely and properly.
A troubleshooting chart for a direct ignition control system is shown 
in Figure 15.25. Troubleshooting charts are available for most ignition 
modules in production.
15.9 OIL HEATING CONTROLS
Thermostats are used in oil furnaces just as they are in gas furnaces and 
basically for the same purpose. They are used as operating controls to 
stop and start the source of heat to the furnace, to stop and start fans 
according to the temperature of the furnace heat exchanger, and to 
de-energize components when unsafe operating conditions exist. The 
technician must know the function of these thermostats in the system 
in order to effectively troubleshoot the system. There are two types of 
primary controls that are used to supervise the combustion and operation 
of an oil burner: the stack switch and cad cell control. The stack switch 
 
 
Section 15.9   Oil Heating Controls 
513
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15.24
F I G U R E
Normal operating sequence of a direct ignition control system. 
(Courtesy of Honeywell, Inc.)
514 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15.25
F I G U R E
Troubleshooting chart for a direct ignition control system. (Courtesy 
of Honeywell, Inc.)
515
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

516 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
senses the combustion by heat and the cad cell detects the combustion 
by sight. Other electrical devices in oil heating control systems have been 
discussed in other parts of this text and will not be covered again.
Troubleshooting Stack Switch Primary Controls
The stack switch is a heat-actuated control that uses the stack tem-
perature to indicate the presence or absence of combustion. A bimetal 
is inserted into the stack that actuates a push rod on temperature rise 
to break the safety switch circuit. At the same time an alternate circuit 
is established to keep the burner operating. The stack switch should be 
located in the center of the stack, where the element will be exposed to 
rapid temperature changes when combustion is established and extin-
guished. The temperature in the stack where the stack switch element 
is located should be less than 1000°F. The stack switch must be mounted 
ahead of any draft regulator and, if installed in an elbow, should be in the 
outside curve of the elbow. With a call for heat the safety switch is ener-
gized until the bimetal senses the heat in the stack and opens, keeping 
the burner operating. If the bimetal does not sense that the temperature 
in the stack has increased, the safety switch will remain energized and 
open the contacts controlling the burner. If combustion has been estab-
lished, the safety switch will open and the oil burner will continue to run. 
If at any time the stack temperature decreases sufficiently to cool the 
bimetal, the safety switch will energize and interrupt power to the burner. 
Regardless of the reason for lockout, a tripped safety switch must be man-
ually reset before the stack switch will attempt to start the burner again.
There are certain safety checks that should be made on a stack switch 
primary control when the burner is initially started, during preseason 
start-up, or on other calls when checking the operation of the burner is 
necessary. Safety checks that should be made are flame failure, ignition 
or fuel failure, and power failure. It is essential that the oil burner pri-
mary control correctly shut down the burner if there is no combustion. 
The technician should shut the oil supply hand valve while the burner is 
operating. The control in some cases will attempt one restart before lock-
ing out. Some controls maintain ignition until the burner is locked out. 
The technician can check for ignition or fuel failure in the same manner 
as a flame failure. The power failure check can be made merely by remov-
ing power from the burner and, after waiting until the stack has cooled, 
restoring power and making sure the burner starts correctly. On a flame, 
ignition, or fuel failure, the safety switch will have to be manually reset.
When troubleshooting a stack switch primary control, the burner 
must be in satisfactory operating condition. If the problem does not seem 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

to be in the burner and/or ignition system, then the primary control 
must be checked. If the burner does not start when a call for heat occurs, 
preliminary checks that should be made are checking the voltage to the 
control, checking limit switches, and resetting primary control. There are 
basically three conditions that can occur when a call for heat is made to 
the primary control: The burner starts, the burner does not start, or the 
burner starts then locks out on safety. If the burner does not start when 
the thermostat is set for heat, the first check is to see if the thermostat 
is actually closed. This can be done by jumpering the thermostat leads 
at the primary control. The operation of the oil burner would indicate that 
the thermostat is the problem. If the burner does not start, the contacts of 
the stack switch detector must be put in step by gently pulling the drive 
shaft lever out ¼   inch and releasing. The correct operation of the burner 
indicates that the primary control is good. If the burner will not start after 
this procedure, the detector contacts should be cleaned. Failure of the 
burner to operate at this point would indicate that the primary control 
must be replaced.
Another common problem with the oil burner controls is when 
combustion is indicated and it locks out on safety. The primary control 
should be reset. If the burner ignites and operates properly, the problem 
was only a temporary condition. After the primary control is reset, if the 
burner starts and locks out on safety again, there are two problems that 
could exist. The location of the bimetal element could be the problem if 
it is in a location under 300°F, or the entire bimetal element could need 
cleaning. After cleaning or moving the detector to a better location, reset 
the primary control. If the same results occur, the stack switch should be 
replaced. The technician should make certain that the installation is cor-
rect and no other control system components are faulty before replacing 
a stack switch.
Troubleshooting Cad Cell Primary Controls
The cad cell primary control consists of a primary control and a cad cell, 
which is light sensitive and can view the flame of the oil burner. When 
the cad cell views the light of an oil burner, its decreased resistance com-
pletes the flame detection circuit, preventing the primary control from 
locking out on safety. The fast response time of the cad cell to light elimi-
nates the lag time found in the bimetal-controlled stack switch. The cad 
cell location is carefully determined by the manufacturer of the burner 
and is installed inside the air tube with a clear view of the oil burner 
flame. The cad cell should be able to view the flame directly, and care 
should be taken to prevent the cell from viewing external light sources 
 
 
Section 15.9   Oil Heating Controls 
517
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

518 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
because the cad cell responds to any light source. The location of the cad 
cell should not be changed. Normal service only involves cleaning accu-
mulated dirt and soot from the cell or replacing the cell.
On a call for heat the burner is started and at the same time a bimetal-
operated safety switch in the primary control starts to heat. If the cad cell 
does not view a flame, the safety switch will continue to heat and shut 
down the burner. If flame is viewed by the cad cell, the resistance will 
drop, thus interrupting the power to the safety switch and allowing the 
burner to continue operating until the desired temperature is reached in 
the conditioned space. If at any time the flame goes out, the cad cell’s 
resistance increases and the circuit containing the safety switch is ener-
gized, heating the bimetal and locking out the oil burner.
In order to effectively troubleshoot a cad cell primary control, the 
technician must make certain that the oil burner and its components 
are in good operating condition. If the burner does not start when the 
thermostat calls for heat, the first order of business is to check the power 
supply to the primary control and all limit switches. After the technician 
has determined that there is a call for heat to the primary control, then 
the technician must troubleshoot the cad cell and the primary control. 
A cad cell primary control tester is available, but it is not widely used in 
the industry because of its lack of compatibility with some types of cad 
cell primary controls.
The cad cell primary control is responsible for the safe operation of the 
oil burner. The primary control must stop the oil burner in the event that 
there is no combustion and keep the burner operating if combustion is 
proven. The technician should check the operation of the cad cell primary 
control, ensuring that it is operating correctly on initial installation and 
during any normal service call. A faulty cad cell could allow the burner to 
operate even without seeing a flame if it was shorted or viewing external 
light sources. This condition must be corrected by shielding the cad cell 
from the external light source or replacing the faulty cad cell. The cad 
cell can be checked with an ohmmeter while the cell is viewing a flame. 
When viewing a properly adjusted oil burner flame, the cad cell’s resis-
tance should be between 300 and 1000 ohms. If the cad cell’s resistance is 
higher than 1600 ohms when viewing a properly adjusted oil burner flame, 
the cad cell must be replaced. If a 1500-ohm resistor is placed between 
the F terminals of the cad cell primary control, the system should operate 
correctly; care should be taken when testing in this manner because the 
technician is supervising the oil burner flame. The primary control is bad 
when it does not operate correctly with this resistor in place, and it must 
be replaced. Care should be taken when troubleshooting cad cell primary 
controls for the safety of the structure and occupants.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 15.10   Service Calls 
519
15.10 SERVICE CALLS
Service Call 1
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Packaged heat pump with electric resistance heaters 
used for supplementary heat
Complaint: Insufficient heat on cold days
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for 
available information. The work order indicates that the heat pump 
does well on mild days but does not adequately heat the home on 
extremely cold days.
 2. The technician informs the homeowner of his or her presence and 
obtains any additional information about the system problem. The 
homeowner states that at times, the heat pump is blowing extremely 
cold air into the structure.
 3. Upon entering the residence, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician 
also takes care not to mar or damage interior walls.
 4. The technician knows that most system items can be eliminated 
if the heat pump is heating the home to the desired temperature on 
most days. The technician determines that the heat pump refriger-
ant cycle is operating properly. With the system operating on the 
normal heating cycle, the technician can eliminate the (1) trans-
former, (2) components that operate in the normal heating cycle, and 
(3) indoor blower circuits.
 5. With these items eliminated the technician can assume that the 
supplementary heat is the problem because heat pumps need some 
form of supplementary heat in extremely cold weather and when the 
system is in defrost. The technician must check to see if this is the 
problem and, if so, determine the corrections that are necessary.
 6. One of the simplest methods that can be used to check the opera-
tion of the supplementary heat is to set the thermostat set point at 
least 3°F above the room temperature; this setting should bring the 
supplementary heater on if the outdoor temperature is low enough. 
The technician will have to check the setting of the outdoor thermo-
stats and make that determination.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

520 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
 7. If the supplementary heaters do not come on, the technician should 
check the control voltage being supplied to the supplementary heat-
er control circuit. In this case, the technician measures no voltage to 
the heater control circuit, thus indicating that the second-stage heat 
section of the thermostats is inoperative.
 8. The technician replaces the faulty thermostat with one of the cor-
rect design. Care is taken to make certain that the thermostats are 
compatible.
 9. The technician informs the homeowner of the problem and that it 
has been corrected.
Service Call 2
Application: Domestic refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Frost-free refrigerator
Complaint: Temperature in fresh and frozen food sections is not cold 
enough
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispather for avail-
able information. The work order reveals that the temperature in the 
fresh and frozen food sections of the refrigerator is not low enough. 
No one will be home, but the key will be in the mailbox. Upon leaving 
the residence, the technician is to lock the door and place the key on 
top of the refrigerator.
 2. Upon entering the residence, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician 
also takes care not to mar or damage interior walls.
 3. The technician makes a visual inspection of the refrigerator. While 
making this inspection, the technician notices a larger-than-normal 
amount of frost in the frozen food section of the refrigerator, which 
leads him to believe that the appliance could be experiencing a 
defrost problem.
 4. The technician locates the defrost timer and rotates the timer until a 
click is heard, which stops the compressor and supplies power to the 
defrost heaters. The technician should check the voltage being sup-
plied to the heater and the current of the heater, all of which can be 
done at the defrost timer. If voltage is available from the timer but no 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

reading is observed on the ammeter, the reading indicates that the 
heater is not being energized.
 5. Once the technician determines that there is no current being used 
in the heater circuit, the indication is that the circuit is open past 
the defrost timer or that the heater is bad. Most refrigerator defrost 
heater circuits have a defrost thermostat that breaks power going to 
the heater once the evaporator has reached a certain temperature.
 6. Because they are in series, the only way to check these components 
is to isolate both components, which can only be done by removing 
the evaporator cover. Once the cover is removed, the technician has 
access to both the heater and the defrost thermostat.
 7. The technician makes a resistance check of the heater and defrost 
thermostat and finds that the defrost thermostat is open.
 8. The defrost thermostat should be replaced with one of the same 
temperature setting.
 9. The technician replaces any cover that was removed and puts the 
refrigerator back in working order.
10. Because of the amount of time required for the refrigerator to drop 
the temperature, it is impractical for the technician to check the 
defrost cycle. The technician should call back in several days to check 
on the refrigerator’s operation.
11. The technician makes certain that the homeowner’s wishes are 
followed regarding the security of the home and the placement of 
the key.
Service Call 3
Application: Commercial refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Walk-in cooler
Complaint: No refrigeration
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order indicates that the evaporator fan is 
not operating and the evaporator coil is completely covered with frost.
 2. The technician informs the store owner of his or her presence and 
obtains any additional information about the problem.
 
 
Section 15.10   Service Calls 
521
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

522 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
 3. The technician observes that the evaporator fan motor is not operat-
ing and checks the voltage being supplied. The voltage measured is 
the correct voltage for the fan motor. The technician notices that the 
fan motor is cold, indicating that it is not even trying to start. The 
technician measures infinite resistance at the motor windings, giv-
ing an indication that the motor windings are open.
 4. The technician determines that the fan motor must be replaced.
 5. The rotation, rpm, and horsepower of the replacement motor must 
be the same as those of the faulty motor.
 6. The technician should cut off the condensing unit and start the fan 
motor to remove the frost from the evaporator.
 7. The technician checks the operation of the new fan motor, including 
checking the current.
 8. The store manager is informed that when the evaporator is defrost-
ed, the disconnect to the condensing unit should be closed.
Service Call 4
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Electric furnace
Complaint: No heat
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order reveals that the electric furnace is 
not heating, but the blower motor will operate when the fan switch 
on the thermostat is turned to the “on” position. The electric furnace 
is located in the attic with access through a disappearing stairway in 
the hall of the structure.
 2. The technician informs the homeowner of his or her presence and 
obtains any additional information about the problem.
 3. Upon entering the residence, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician 
also takes care not to mar or damage interior walls.
 4. The technician sets the thermostat fan switch to the “on” position 
and the fan operates, indicating that control and line voltage are 
available to the unit.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5. The thermostat is set to the heating position and the technician 
proceeds to the electric furnace. The technician removes the access 
cover to the control panel of the electric furnace and measures the 
voltage available to the sequencer. It is 24 volts, indicating that there 
is a call for heat to the furnace.
 6. The technician next checks the voltage across the contacts of the 
sequencer feeding the electric heaters and reads 240 volts, indicating 
that the contacts of the sequencer are not closing and with all three 
contacts not closing, the sequencer controlling element is bad.
 7. The technician replaces the sequencer.
 8. The operation of the electric furnace is checked to make certain that 
the furnace is operating properly.
 9. The technician informs the homeowner of the problem and that it 
has been corrected.
Service Call 5
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with time-delay relay controlling fan
Complaint: No heat
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order reveals that the burner is igniting 
and remaining on for only a short period of time. The blower is not 
operating. The furnace is located in hall closet of the home.
 2. The technician informs the homeowner of his or her presence and 
obtains any additional information available about the problem. 
The homeowner states that a small amount of warm air is coming 
through the air vents.
 3. Upon entering the residence, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician 
also takes care not to mar or damage interior walls.
 4. The technician observes the operation of the gas furnace and notices 
that the burner ignites for approximately 2 minutes and is cut off by 
a limit switch.
 
 
Section 15.10   Service Calls 
523
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

524 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
 5. The technician knows that the furnace is warm enough for the blow-
er to be operating, but that the motor is off and is cool to the touch, 
indicating that it has not operated for some time.
 6. The technician is unable to locate a temperature-controlled fan 
switch on the furnace and examines the diagram to determine what 
controls the blower motor. The technician finds that the blower 
motor is controlled by a time-delay relay.
 7. The technician must now determine the condition of the time-delay 
relay. The relay controlling element is receiving 24 volts, which indi-
cates a call for the relay to be energized. The relay contacts remain 
open, thus preventing the blower motor from starting. The indoor fan 
relay controlling the blower motor is faulty.
 8. The technician replaces the time-delay relay with one of the same 
delay time period.
 9. The homeowner is informed of the problem and the action taken by 
the technician.
Service Call 6
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No cooling
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work from the dispatcher for available 
information. The work order information reveals that no part of the 
system is operating. The dispatcher requested that the homeowner 
place the fan switch in the “on” position when the call was received. 
The homeowner revealed that nothing happened. The gas furnace is 
in a utility room located off the carport.
 2. The technician informs the housekeeper of his or her presence and 
obtains any additional information about the problem. The tech-
nician asks the housekeeper to set the thermostat to the cooling 
position.
 3. Upon entering the residence, the technician makes certain that no 
dirt or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician 
also takes care not to mar or damage interior walls.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Summary 
525
 4. The technician proceeds to the location of the furnace and finds that 
no voltage is available to the furnace.
 5. The technician locates the electrical breaker panel for the structure 
and finds that no circuit breakers are in the tripped or overloaded 
position.
 6. The technician removes the breaker panel cover in order to check 
voltage available from the breaker supplying power to the furnace. 
The technician measures 0 volt at the circuit breaker, thus determin-
ing that the circuit breaker is faulty.
 7. The technician replaces the faulty circuit breaker with one of an 
equal ampacity rating.
 8. The technician starts the system, reads the current being used by 
the furnace circuit, and determines that the furnace is operating 
properly.
 9. The technician replaces the cover on the breaker panel.
10. The technician informs the housekeeper of the problem and the 
actions taken.
SUMMARY
Most heating, cooling, and refrigeration technicians are required to do 
some diagnosing of components. Thus, it is imperative for technicians to 
understand how components work, to know how to use electric meters 
to check components, and to know the proper procedures for checking 
electric components. In this chapter, we have presented some guidelines 
that technicians may find helpful in troubleshooting electric systems and 
their components.
Contactors and relays can be effectively diagnosed by checking the 
contacts, the coil, or the mechanical linkage.
Several types of overloads are used in the industry. The fuse can be 
checked with an ohmmeter. The circuit breaker can often be checked 
with a voltmeter. The line voltage overload can be checked with an ohm-
meter. The pilot duty overload must have its contacts and controlling line 
voltage elements checked. These components can usually be checked 
with an ohmmeter. The internal overload used in hermetic compressors 
can best be checked with an ohmmeter.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

526 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
Two basic types of thermostats are used in the industry. The line volt-
age thermostat can be checked with an ohmmeter. The low-voltage ther-
mostat can also be checked with an ohmmeter but care must be taken 
with this type of thermostat because of its many functions.
There are two types of common pressure switches: low pressure and 
high pressure. Both can be serviced with either a resistance check or a 
voltage check. Transformers can also be checked by using either an ohm-
meter or a voltmeter.
There are three sources of energy used to supply heat to a structure: 
electricity, gas, and oil. Electrical energy is easy to control because the 
controls used do not have to supervise any type of combustion as do gas 
and oil heating controls. Electric heating control systems tend to use con-
ventional controls such as contactors, sequencers, and time-delay relays. 
There are three types of ignition control systems for gas-fired equip-
ment: standing pilot, intermittent ignition, and direct ignition systems. 
The standing pilot burns continuously and lights the main burner on a 
call for heat from the thermostat. A thermocouple is used to energize 
a pilot solenoid proving the pilot. The intermittent pilot is used only to 
light the main burner on a call for heat from the thermostat. The direct 
ignition control system lights the main burner from a spark igniter or a 
hot surface ignitor. A gas valve is used to control the flow of gas to the 
main burners in each of these ignition systems. The gas valves are usually 
24 volts except in light commercial applications. An electronic ignition 
module controls both the intermittent and direct ignition control sys-
tems. The technician should check the power supply of these modules. 
Other checks are made using a manufacturer’s troubleshooting chart(s). 
Oil-fired equipment uses two types of primary controls: stack switches 
and cad cell primary controls. The stack switch uses a bimetal element 
and the cad cell views the flame of the oil burner. The technician will 
have to determine if the primary control is receiving the signal that com-
bustion has occurred. Once the correct signal is received, the technician 
must determine if the primary control is operating properly. If an unsafe 
condition occurs, the primary control must interrupt power to the burner. 
Safety is of the utmost importance when troubleshooting fossil fuel con-
trol systems that require some type of combustion.
!CAUTION
When installing safety components, make certain that 
they are installed to manufacturers’ specifications.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 5  R E V I E W
RQ1 
What is the first step in troubleshooting any system 
or component?
RQ2 
Open-type electric motors will fail in which of the 
following three areas?
a. windings, bearings, and centrifugal switch
b. windings, bearings, and contactor
c. windings, centrifugal switch, and contactor
d. centrifugal switch, contactor, and mobile module
RQ3 
Electric motor windings fail in which of the follow-
ing conditions?
a. open
b. shorted
c. grounded
d. all of the above
RQ4 
How can bearing failure be determined in a her-
metic compressor motor?
RQ5 
True or False: The best way to check the contacts 
of a contactor is by visual inspection.
RQ6 
In troubleshooting contactors and relays, three 
areas must be checked: the ____________, 
_____________, and ____________.
RQ7 
How do you make a voltage check to diagnose the 
condition of a set of contacts in a relay or contactor?
RQ8 
What is the major cause of contact misalignment?
a. coil failure
b. pitted contacts
c. faulty mechanical linkage
d. none of the above
RQ9 
If the coil of a relay is shorted, the resistance read-
ing will be ________ ohms.
a. 0
b. 500
c. 10,000
d. infinite
RQ10 
If the coil of a relay is open, the resistance reading 
will be ________ ohms.
a. 0
b. 500
c. 10,000
d. infinite
RQ11 
How do you check a fuse?
RQ12 
How do you check a circuit breaker?
RQ13 
When a line voltage overload is weak, an 
amperage check should be made to see what 
___________ is causing the overload to open.
RQ14 
True or False: The internal overload is difficult to 
check because it is in parallel with the common 
terminal of the compressor.
RQ15 
What precaution should a service technician take 
when diagnosing the condition of an internal over-
load in a hermetic compressor?
RQ16 
True or False: The low-voltage thermostat is easier 
to troubleshoot than the line voltage thermostat.
RQ17 
What procedure should be used to troubleshoot a 
low-voltage thermostat?
RQ18 
The line voltage thermostat usually has ________ 
function(s).
a. 1
b. 2
c. 3
d. multiple
RQ19 
Give some common applications for line and low-
voltage thermostats.
RQ20 
What do the letters R, Y, G, and W represent on a 
thermostat subbase?
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
 
 
Review Questions 
527
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

528 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
RQ21 
How do you diagnose a bad pressure switch?
RQ22 
The most important aspect of checking a pressure 
switch is to understand its _________ in the 
system.
RQ23 
What is the proper procedure for checking a 
transformer?
RQ24 
What thermostat is used in a forced-air furnace to 
start and stop the blower motor?
a. limit switch
b. fan switch
c. combination switch
d. none of the above
RQ25 
List three uses of limit switches in a forced-air 
furnace.
RQ26 
What is the millivolt reading of a good 
thermocouple?
a. 5 mV
b. 18 mV
c. 50 mV
d. 120 mV
RQ27 
What procedure is used to check a combination 
gas valve?
RQ28 
The combination gas valve has ________ valves.
a. 1
b. 2
c. 3
d. 4
RQ29 
What should be the first check a technician should 
make when troubleshooting ignition modules?
a. voltage across gas valve terminals on module
b. spark across igniter/sensor gap
c. good ground connection
d. power supply to module
RQ30 
True or False: The spark on an intermittent pilot 
ignition system sparks the entire call for heat cycle 
of a gas warm-air furnace.
RQ31 
What is the difference between spark ignition and 
hot surface ignition?
RQ32 
The resistance of the cad cell (increases or 
decreases) when the cell views a correctly adjusted 
oil burner flame.
RQ33 
The stack switch uses which of the following 
methods to determine combustion in an oil-fired 
furnace?
a. sight
b. pressure
c. heat
d. none of the above
RQ34 
How would you troubleshoot a stack switch and 
cad cell primary control?
RQ35 
What is the purpose of a rollout switch?
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
the chapter, refer to Chapter 15 in the Lab Manual.
C H A P T E R  1 5  R E V I E W
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PRACTICE SERVICE CALLS
Determine the problem and recommend a solution for the following ser-
vice calls. (Be specific; do not list components as good or bad.)
Practice Service Call 1
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No cooling
Symptoms:
1. There is correct line voltage to furnace and condensing unit.
2. Thermostat is calling for cooling.
3. Condensing unit is receiving 24 volts.
4. All safety controls in condensing circuitry are closed.
5. Contactor coil resistance reading is 0 ohm.
Practice Service Call 2
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Fan coil unit with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No cooling
Symptoms:
1. There is correct line voltage to fan coil unit and condensing unit.
2. Thermostat is calling for cooling.
3. Compressor contactor is closed.
4. Compressor and condenser fan motor are extremely hot.
5. Condenser fan motor resistance readings are C to R  6 ohms, C to 
S  28 ohms, and R to S  34 ohms.
6. Compressor run capacitor is in good condition.
7. Compressor motor and bearings are in good condition.
8. Condenser fan blade turns with ease.
9. Condenser fan is turning slower than normal until overload cuts out.
 
 
Practice Service Calls 
529
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

530 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
Practice Service Call 3
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Oil furnace with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No cooling
Symptoms:
1. Air-cooled condensing unit is operating correctly.
2. Indoor fan motor is not operating.
3. Indoor fan motor is cold to the touch.
4. Indoor fan relay is receiving 24 volts.
Practice Service Call 4
Application: Commercial refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Commercial refrigerator (no contactor) supply volt-
age 230/1/60
Complaint: No refrigeration
Symptoms:
1. Compressor is not operating.
2. Condenser fan motor is operating properly.
3. All starting components of compressor are good.
4. Compressor is receiving correct line voltage.
5. Compressor body is extremely hot.
6. Compressor overload is open.
7. Compressor resistance readings are C to S  18 ohms, C to R  
4 ohms, S to R  22 ohms, and from case to S  1000 ohms.
Practice Service Call 5
Application: Commercial refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Walk-in cooler with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: Not enough refrigeration
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Symptoms:
1. Evaporator fan motor is running.
2. Condensing unit is receiving correct line voltage.
3. Contactor is not closed.
4. Contactor coil is not receiving 240 volts.
5. Safety components and operating controls in contactor coil control 
circuit are low-pressure switch, high-pressure switch, thermostat, 
and manual switch.
6. Hopscotching through the circuit, the technician places a voltmeter 
lead on L2 feeding the contactor coil.
7. Checking on the line side of the low-pressure switch, 240 volt is 
measured but on the load side of the low-pressure switch, 0 volt is 
measured.
Practice Service Call 6
Application: Commercial and industrial conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Fan coil unit with large air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: Not enough cooling
Symptoms:
1. Indoor blower is operating properly.
2. Compressor contactor is closed and compressor is operating prop-
erly.
3. Condenser fan motors contactor is closed (contactor controls both 
condenser fan motors).
4. One condenser fan motor is operating.
5. Second condenser fan motor is not operating.
6. Outdoor temperature is 100°F.
7. Second condenser fan motor is good.
8. Thermostat is in series with second condenser fan motor; voltage 
across this thermostat is 240 volts.
 
 
Practice Service Calls 
531
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

532 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
Practice Service Call 7
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No heat
Symptoms:
1. Line voltage is available to the furnace.
2. Indoor fan motor operates with thermostat fan switch in the “on” 
position.
3. Ignition module is receiving 24 volts.
4. Fuse is good on ignition module.
5. There is no spark across igniter/sensor gap.
6. There is no spark at ignition stud on module.
Practice Service Call 8
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Oil furnace with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No heat
Symptoms:
1. Line voltage is available to furnace.
2. Cad cell primary control is receiving correct line and control 
voltage.
3. Cad cell relay is closing.
4. There is sparking across ignition points of oil burner.
5. Oil burner motor is not operating.
Practice Service Call 9
Application: Commercial refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Chest-type frozen food display case with CSR com-
pressor motor
Complaint: Product thawing
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Symptoms:
1. Compressor will not operate.
2. Compressor is receiving correct line voltage.
3. Starting and running capacitor is good.
4. Compressor motor and bearing are good.
Practice Service Call 10
Application: Domestic refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Refrigerator
Complaint: No refrigeration
Symptoms:
1. Thermostat is closed, supplying 120 volts to compressor.
2. Compressor housing is cold to touch.
3. Compressor motor is winding good.
4. Current-type starting relay coil is good.
Practice Service Call 11
Application: Domestic refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Chest-type freezer with CS motor
Complaint: Food thawing
Symptoms:
1. Compressor is hot to touch.
2. Compressor tries to start but overload opens.
3. Current-type relay is good.
4. Compressor is receiving correct voltage.
Practice Service Call 12
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Packaged heat pump
Complaint: Not enough heat
 
 
Practice Service Calls 
533
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

534 
CHAPTER 15   Troubleshooting Electric Control Devices
Symptoms:
1. Compressor and outdoor fan motor are operating.
2. Indoor fan motor is operating.
3. Supply of air is not warm enough.
4. System is not calling for supplementary heat.
5. Outdoor coil is frosted.
6. Heat pump is equipped with a differential pressure switch to initi-
ate defrost cycle.
Practice Service Call 13
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Packaged air conditioner
Complaint: No cooling or fan operation
Symptoms:
1. Line voltage is available to unit.
2. Closing of thermostat fan switch causes no action.
3. Voltage at terminals C and R on unit low-voltage terminal board is 
0 volt.
Practice Service Call 14
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: System operates but home temperature goes from too hot to 
too cold
Symptoms:
1. Low-voltage thermostat is closed.
2. Equipment is operating properly except for large temperature 
swing.
3. Installation is only 2 weeks old.
4. Fan switch good.
5. Fan operates longer than normal on “off” cycle before stopping.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Practice Service Call 15
Application: Commercial and industrial conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Large condensing unit
Complaint: No cooling
Symptoms:
1. Indoor blower is operating properly.
2. Control relay on condensing unit is closed, which should start con-
densing unit.
3. No voltage is available to condensing unit.
 
 
Practice Service Calls 
535
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗ Understand how major loads are controlled in residential air-conditioning 
systems.
◗ Understand how safety controls are used in residential air-conditioning 
 systems to protect the equipment.
◗ Understand residential air-conditioning control systems.
◗ Understand residential furnace control systems.
◗ Understand residential heat pump control systems.
◗ Understand the types of equipment (configuration) that are used in the 
 heating and air-conditioning industry.
◗ Explain where each type of air-conditioning equipment (packaged and split 
systems) is used.
◗ Explain the sequence of operation of a residential packaged air-conditioning unit.
◗ Explain the sequence of operation of a residential split air-conditioning 
 system with a fan coil unit.
◗ Explain the sequence of operation of a residential split air-conditioning 
 system with a furnace.
◗ Explain the sequence of operation of a residential heat pump.
◗ Make all electrical connections for a complete packaged unit installation.
◗ Make all electrical connections for a complete condensing unit and furnace 
installation.
Residential Air-Conditioning 
Control Systems
C H A P T E R
536
R
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

◗ Check, test, and start a completed residential air-conditioning installation.
◗ Explain why customer relations are important to the technician and 
 company.
KEY TERMS
Check, test, and start procedure 
Gas furnace
Condensing unit 
Heat pump
Customer relations 
Oil furnace
Control wiring 
Packaged unit
Electric furnace 
Power wiring
Factory-installed wiring 
Reversing valve
Fan-coil unit 
Split system
Field wiring
INTRODUCTION
The control systems for air-conditioning systems are designed to super-
vise the operation of the electrical loads of the equipment in order to 
maintain the desired temperature set by the occupant of the structure. 
Most residential air conditioners are multifunctional. In other words, the 
control system must operate the blower motor on a call for heating or 
cooling, must operate the compressor and outdoor fan motor on a call for 
cooling, and must operate the furnace or heating source on a call for heat-
ing. The control system must incorporate all of these modes of operation 
along with the adequate safety controls to safely operate the equipment 
and protect the consumer and their property from damage. The very 
basic air-conditioning control systems, but in this day and time very 
few air-condition units, can be considered to be basic any more. With 
the advancements in electronic controls, many residential systems use 
variable-speed motors, zone controls, microprocessor controls, and more. 
The HVAC industry now makes equipment from very simple to very 
complex just in the residential market. Many residential control systems 
are simple, but their function in the overall scope of an air-conditioning 
installation is far from simple. In this chapter, the basic residential sys-
tem will be covered along with some of the electronic controls systems.
The basic residential control system must control the compressor, heat-
ing source, condenser fan motor, and blower motor. Along with  controlling 
 
Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems 
537
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

538 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
these elements, the control system must maintain safe operation to ensure 
that the equipment is not damaged. Safety is not only important for equip-
ment but also for the structure and occupants. Almost any type of heat 
source could cause a fire if the equipment were allowed to operate at an 
unsafe condition. All equipment should be properly grounded to prevent a 
possible shock to the occupants if they came in contact with the equipment. 
It is the technician’s responsibility to ensure that the air-conditioning con-
trol system is operating properly when he leaves the job site.
The configuration of the air-conditioning and heating equipment is 
important because many times it will dictate what type of control system 
is used with the equipment. A packaged air-conditioning unit is made in a 
complete unit. The compressor, fan motors, and heat source are all made 
in one complete package. A split system is designed in two sections; a con-
densing unit and a device that is used for the air flow in the system and the 
heat source if it is not a heat pump. Packaged units are used for roof-top 
installations, crawl spaces where the unit can be placed under the edge 
of the structure with ducts supplying air to the structure, and window air 
conditioners. When installing packaged units, the installation technician 
would only need to supply electrical power to the unit, make the thermostat 
connects, and install duct work for air supply if required. The split system 
is more popular than the packaged unit because of its versatility. The split 
system would be installed in two sections. The condensing unit would be 
installed outside, whereas the air source would be installed in a crawl space, 
attic, or closet that would supply air to the residence. The installation tech-
nician would have to supply power to both the indoor unit and the condens-
ing unit, connect the evaporator to the condensing unit with refrigerant 
lines, and make connections for the air supply to the structure.
The installation technician of air-conditioning or heating equipment 
must be able to connect the control system of the equipment and the 
thermostat and in some cases the furnace. Manufacturers furnish a wir-
ing diagram with the equipment that shows the proper hookup of the 
equipment being used. Occasionally, the installation technician must 
install the air conditioning without a diagram. It is extremely important 
for installation technicians to know how the unit operates so that they 
can make the correct connections for proper operation.
All heating, cooling, and refrigeration personnel are at one time or 
another required to be familiar with modern control systems. For exam-
ple, sales people may be called on to assist customers with control system 
design. Engineers are required to design control systems. Service techni-
cians are required to maintain and repair control systems.
Many of the problems in heating, cooling, and refrigeration con-
trol systems can be traced to some electrical problem. Although it is 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 16.1   Residential Air-Conditioning Equipment 
539
 impossible to study all the different control systems used in the industry 
today, familiarity with the more common systems will enable you to 
understand special systems because of the similarities of design. In this 
chapter, we present the more common residential control systems.
Green Technology
Energy Efficiency Ratings
The efficiency of conditioned air equipment in the cooling mode of oper-
ation is the SEER (Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio). The SEER of condi-
tioned air equipment in the cooling mode is the cooling output in Btu 
per season divided by the total energy input in watt-hours. The higher 
the SEER, the higher efficiency and cost savings to operate equipment in 
the cooling mode of operation. The HSPF (Heating Seasonal Performance 
Factor) is used to measure the efficiency of a heat pump in the heating 
mode of operation. The HSPF of a heat pump is the heating seasonal Btu 
output used divided by the total energy input in watt-hours. The higher 
the HSPF, the higher the efficiency and cost savings to operate a heat 
pump in the heating mode of operation. Most conditioned air systems 
must meet required efficiency standards.
16.1 RESIDENTIAL AIR-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
Residential air-conditioning equipment is generally manufactured in two 
basic configurations, packaged units and split systems. A packaged air-
conditioning unit is built with all the com-
ponents housed in one unit and is shown in 
Figure 16.1. In most cases, packaged units 
are complete except for the power connec-
tions and the control connections. A split 
air-conditioning system is basically made 
up of two sections of equipment, a con-
densing unit and an evaporator with an air 
source. A split air-conditioning system is 
shown in Figure 16.2. The condensing unit
is the portion of a split air-conditioning sys-
tem that is mounted outside and generally 
contains the compressor, the condenser, 
the condenser fan motor, and the neces-
sary devices to control these components. 
The other section of equipment in a split 
air-conditioning system is some type of air 
source such as a fan coil unit or a furnace.
16.1
F I G U R E
Packaged air-conditioning unit. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

540 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
Packaged Air-Conditioning Equipment
A packaged air-conditioning unit houses all the components necessary 
for safe and efficient operation with the exception of the thermostat, 
which is mounted in the conditioned space. Residential packaged units 
are manufactured as air cooled packaged units that supply only cooling, 
gas heat and electric air-conditioning units that are called gas packs and 
supply heating and cooling, and packaged heat pumps that supply both 
heating and cooling to the structure. The heat pump is a refrigeration 
system that reverses the refrigerant flow to effectively heat a structure 
in the winter. These types of packaged air-conditioning units are in com-
mon use in the HVAC industry today.
The configuration of the packaged air-conditioning unit limits where 
this type of equipment can be installed. If a structure has a crawl space, 
the packaged unit can be positioned at the edge of the crawl space 
so that the air distribution system can be connected to the equipment 
and continue on into the crawl space to supply conditioned air to the 
structure, as shown in Figure 16.3. Another popular application for pack-
aged air conditioners would be a roof-top installation where the equip-
ment is placed on the roof and the air supply to the structure is through 
16.2
F I G U R E
Drawing of a split-system air-conditioning unit. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
CONDENSING UNIT
OIL
ED
E
CONDENSING UNIT
CONDENSATE
A
DRAIN
SUCTION 
LINE
FURNACE
RETURN
AIR
DUCT
COOLING CO
IN INSULATE
A
ENCLOSURE
LIQUID 
LINE
FROM
PO
POWER
W
SOOUURCEE
FUUSEED 
DISCONNECTT
1'-0"
0
1'-0"
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FROM POWER 
SOURCE
INDOOR 
THERMOSTAT
SIDE PANEL
SUPPLY AIR
RETURN
 AIR
CONCRETE 
PAD
CORNER
SERVICE 
PANEL
TOP COVER
ELECTRIC HEATER
FUSED DISCONNECT(S)
UNIT
FUSED 
DISCONNECT
the roof to the conditioned space and is shown in Figure 16.4. There are 
other applications of a packaged unit, but they are generally in the com-
mercial and industrial phase of the industry.
Air-cooled packaged units use air to remove the heat from the con-
denser and are the most widely used types of packaged units in residen-
tial air-conditioning applications. Water-cooled packaged units use water 
to remove the heat from the condenser and are used mostly in commer-
cial and industrial applications. The water source heat pump is a pack-
aged unit that uses water to reject heat in the cooling mode of operation 
and absorb heat in the heating mode of operation. This type of unit is 
discussed later in this chapter.
Split Air-Conditioning Systems
A split air-conditioning system is made up of a condensing unit that is 
mounted outside of the structure and some type of air source that sup-
plies an air flow to the evaporator. The condensing unit and the evapora-
tor must be connected with refrigerant lines and supplied with the power 
supply and the control wiring. The thermostat would be mounted inside 
16.3
F I G U R E
Packaged unit installed in a crawl space. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.1   Residential Air-Conditioning Equipment 
541
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

542 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
RETURN AIR
AIR SUPPLY
FROM POWER 
SOURCE
ROOFTOP ADAPTER
UNIT FUSED
DISCONNECT
TOP COVER
ROOF CURB
SIDE PANEL
CORNER SERVICE PANEL
INDOOR THERMOSTAT
ELECTRIC HEATER
FUSED DISCONNECT(S)
the conditioned space and connected to 
the condensing unit and blower unit or 
furnace. In many cases, there is a termi-
nal board mounted with the blower unit 
or furnace and is used as a junction point 
between the controls for the major loads 
so that the thermostat will be controlling 
those loads from the terminal board. A 
terminal board for a furnace used as the 
air source on a residential air-conditioning 
system is shown in Figure 16.5.
The condensing unit is used to remove 
the heat from the refrigeration system 
that had been absorbed by the evaporator. 
It houses a compressor that raises the 
pressure of the refrigerant, a condenser 
that rejects the heat from the refrigerant, 
a condenser fan motor that forces air across the condenser to facilitate 
the removal of the heat from the condenser, and the necessary control to 
operate the condensing unit safely and efficiently. Figure 16.6 shows an 
air-cooled condensing unit.
16.4
F I G U R E
Packaged unit installed on a roof top. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
16.5
F I G U R E
Terminal board on a furnace. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The condensing unit is used with some 
type of equipment that will produce an air 
flow across the evaporator that must be 
mounted in the air flow. The air flow source 
can be a fan-coil unit as shown in Figure 16.7. 
The evaporator and the blower are mounted 
in this fan-coil unit. Another common source 
of air flow for a residential air-conditioning 
system is a fossil fuel furnace. The evapora-
tor would be mounted somewhere in the air 
flow usually close to the airflow outlet of the 
furnace as shown in Figure 16.8. The air sup-
plied to the structure must be distributed through an air distribution system 
that has been designed to supply the correct amount of air to each room of 
the structure. Fan-coil units can be supplied with electrical resistance heat-
ers that will also produce a heating source just as fossil fuel furnaces. Heat 
pumps can incorporate electrical resistance heaters or use gas furnaces for 
the supplementary heat that is used when heat pumps operate in conditions 
below their balance point. This is discussed later in this chapter.
16.6
F I G U R E
Air-cooled condensing unit. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
16.7
FIGURE
Fan-coil unit. 
(Photo by Bill 
Johnson)
16.8
F I G U R E
Furnace with evaporator. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
LIQUID LINE
GAS LINE
RETURN 
AIR
 
Section 16.1   Residential Air-Conditioning Equipment 
543
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

544 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
16.2 BASIC RESIDENTIAL CONTROL CIRCUITRY
All control systems have certain circuits and components in common. 
The compressor is the largest electric load in an air-conditioning system. 
Most air-conditioning systems use a contactor to start and stop the com-
pressor because of the required ampacity. The condenser fan motor is 
wired in parallel with the compressor and is controlled by the contactor 
on many systems. Circuits controlling the evaporator fan motor on cool-
ing systems are common because most use an indoor fan relay, but on 
heating systems different methods are used. Variable-speed motors are 
used as both evaporator fan motors and condenser fans motors on some 
of the high-efficiency equipment. The safety devices used on control sys-
tems vary greatly.
The control systems of residential air-conditioning systems can 
range from simple to complex. Almost all residential conditioned air-
control systems are low voltage, with the exception of the control system 
on window air conditioners, which are line voltage. Many residential 
air-conditioning controls systems use the minimum controls possible 
and still maintain a safe and efficient operating system with an accept-
able temperature control range of the entire structure. Residential air-
conditioning control systems in the last few years have become more 
complex because of advancements made in the HVAC industry but at the 
same time provide a better level of comfort and better cost effectiveness 
for the customer. An overview of these advanced control systems can be 
found in this chapter.
Furnace control systems have changed rapidly due to the necessity 
of manufacturing of higher efficiency furnaces. With higher efficiency 
furnaces, additional controls are required to control devices that increase 
the efficiency of modern furnaces, such as induced draft fans, ignition 
controls, variable-speed motors, and additional safety controls. Heat 
pump control systems are similar to air-conditioning control systems 
except for the components that are required to reverse the refrigeration 
cycle allowing the system to supply heat to the structure during heating 
modes of operation.
Compressor Control Circuits
The first basic circuit of almost any residential control system is the 
device that stops and starts a compressor. On a low-voltage control 
system, the thermostat opens or closes to energize or de-energize the 
contactor, which starts or stops the compressor, as shown in Figure 16.9. 
This circuit is common to almost all residential air-conditioning systems 
in operation today.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The condenser fan motor is usually connected to the contactor to 
ensure that it is operating whenever the compressor is in operation, as 
shown in Figure 16.9.
Condenser Fan Motor Control Circuits
Most condenser fan motors on residential air-conditioning systems are 
controlled by the contactor because of the simplicity and the economy 
of using one control. Some condenser fan motors are cycled on and off 
through an outdoor thermostat set at a temperature that will maintain 
L1
L2
Legend
C:
COMP:
CFM:
CRC:
CFMC:
TR:
Contactor
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Compressor running capacitor
Condenser fan motor capacitor
Transformer
C
COMP
CFM
CFMC
CRC
C
C
Y
R 
G
TR
Fan
Auto
System
On
16.9
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of the contactor circuit controlling a compressor, showing the 
connection of the condenser fan motor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.2   Basic Residential Control Circuitry 
545
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

546 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
a constant discharge pressure. High-pressure switches connected in 
series with condenser fan motors that close on a rise in pressure are also 
used to maintain a constant discharge pressure. Maintaining a constant 
head pressure produces a better and more efficient operating system. 
Figure  16.10 shows a high-pressure switch controlling a condenser fan 
motor to maintain the discharge pressure. There are many methods used 
to maintain a constant discharge pressure, which will not be discussed 
because they are used in commercial and industrial applications.
Evaporator Fan Motor Control Circuits
Evaporator fan motor circuits are almost alike in the smaller ranges 
of equipment. The evaporator fan motor is controlled by an indoor 
fan relay controlled by the thermostat. If the thermostat switch is 
set on the “auto” position, the indoor fan relay will be energized by 
the cooling function of the thermostat. Figure 16.11 shows the indoor 
fan motor with the connections of the fan motor and the thermostat 
highlighted in blue. Notice the fan switch on the thermostat and note 
how the indoor fan is cut on and off by the indoor fan relay. This con-
trol system is common only to air-conditioning and most heat pump 
systems. On heating installations, other controls are needed to start 
the fan. Figure 16.12 shows the evaporator fan in a small packaged air 
conditioner highlighted in blue.
COMP
CRC
CFM
CFPS
CFMC
C
C
L1
L2
C:
COMP:
CFM:
CRC:
CFMC:
CFPS:
Contactor
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Compressor running capacitor
CFM capacitor
Condenser fan motor
pressure switch
16.10
F I G U R E
High-pressure switch controlling condenser fan motor in order to maintain 
constant discharge pressure. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

L1
L2
Legend
COMP:
C:
CRC:
CFM:
CFMC:
IFR:
IFM:
TR:
CT:
Compressor
Contactor
Compressor running capacitor
Condenser fan motor
Condenser fan motor capacitor
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
Transformer
Cooling thermostat
COMP
CFM
IFM
IFR
CFMC
CRC
C
C
IFR
C
G
R 
Y
Fan
Auto
System
On
TR
Thermostat
16.11
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram showing  the indoor fan motor circuit is highlighted in navy blue. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Safety Control Circuits
Most safety controls used in residential control systems are connected in 
series with the contactor coil. One of the few exceptions is the internal 
thermostat in a compressor, which breaks the power wires inside the 
compressor. Any other safety device used in the control system, such as 
a high-pressure switch or a low-pressure switch, and other safety devices 
 
Section 16.2   Basic Residential Control Circuitry 
547
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

548 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
L2
L1
L1
L1
L2
L2
240
AUX IFR
C
CB
CH
CHS
COMP
DB
DFT
DL
DR
EG
GND
IFM
IFMC
IFR
LPS
NEC
OFM
OFR
OFMC
PCB
Auxiliary indoor fan relay
Contactor
Circuit breaker
Crakecase heater
Crankcase heater switch
Compressor
Defrost board
Defrost thermostat
Delay board (PCB)
Defrost relay
Equipment ground
Ground
Indoor fan motor
Indoor fan motor capacitor
Indoor fan motor relay
Low-pressure switch
National electrical code
Outdoor fan motor
Outdoor fan relay
Outdoor fan motor capacitor
Printed circuit board
Legend
QT
RVS
ST
TB
TH
TRAN
Quad terminal
Reversing valve solenoid
Start thermistor
Terminal board
Thermostat
Transformer
Component connection (marked)
Component connection (unmarked)
Junction
Junction (thermostat to subbase)
Field power wiring
Equipment ground wiring
Factory wiring
Field control wiring
To indicate common potential only,
not to represent wire
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
16.12
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a small packaged unit with the evaporator fan motor highlighted. 
(Courtesy of Carrier Corporation) 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

L1
L2
Legend
C:
COMP:
CRC:
CFM:
CFMC:
IFR:
IFM:
HP:
LP:
CH:
Contactor
Compressor
Compressor running capacitor
Condenser fan motor
Condenser fan motor capacitor
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Crankcase heater
COMP
CFM
IFM
IFR
CFMC
CRC
C
C
IFR
C
G
R 
Y
Fan
HP
LP
Auto
System
On
TR
CH
16.13
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of an air-conditioning unit highlighting the high- and low-pressure 
switch. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
used for protection of the compressor are connected in series with the 
contactor coil. The series connection ensures that in the case of an unsafe 
condition, the compressor will be de-energized.
Figure 16.13 shows a high-pressure and a low-pressure switch in the 
control circuit highlighted in red. Any additional safety devices would be 
connected in the same manner. The internal overload in the compressor 
 
Section 16.2   Basic Residential Control Circuitry 
549
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

550 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
is connected in series with the common termi-
nal of the compressor, so the compressor will 
be de-energized when an overload occurs and 
is shown in Figure 16.14.
Furnace Controls
The function of gas furnace control systems is 
to supervise the operation of the loads in a gas 
furnace, maintain a reasonable temperature in 
the conditioned space, and protect the struc-
ture and equipment from excessive tempera-
tures and flame accidents due to equipment 
malfunctions. The early furnaces used in the 
HVAC field used a standing gas pilot, which 
remained lit throughout the heating season and was supervised by the 
pilot gas solenoid and a thermocouple. The gas valve was controlled by 
the thermostat with the necessary safety devices to maintain safe opera-
tion of the furnace. The fans in the early furnaces were controlled by a 
fan switch, which was nothing more than a thermostat that would close 
when the temperature of the combustion chamber was warm enough to 
supply warm air to the structure.
The late model gas furnace has additional loads that are used to 
improve the safety and efficiency of the new furnaces. The function of 
the gas furnace control remains the same, but additional controls are 
now necessary to provide the same level of supervision that is necessary 
for safe and efficient operation. Most new furnaces are equipped with 
some type of draft fan that removes the flue gases from the combustion 
chamber to the chimney or stack. Additional temperature limits are used 
because of the induced draft and the use of more efficient burners. Some 
furnaces use an ignition control module as shown in Figure 16.15 to 
supervise and control the ignition of pilot and/or main burner. However, 
some furnaces use an electronic furnace control shown in Figure 16.16 
that ignites the pilot and or main burner and controls the blower motor. 
A schematic wiring diagram of a furnace with hot surface ignition is 
shown in Figure 16.17.
Oil furnace control systems have not developed nearly as fast as 
gas furnace control systems. The oil furnace is not as popular as its gas 
counterpart because of the access of natural gas to many parts of the 
country in the last 40 years. In areas were natural gas is available and 
affordable, it is the primary fossil fuel that is used by the industry. The 
oil furnace control system’s function is the same as that of gas, and 
C
S
R
16.14
F I G U R E
Schematic of com-
pressor with internal 
overload. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

many of the controls are similar. The oil furnace uses limit switches 
to prevent the overheating of the furnace, a thermostat to control the 
blower motor, and a primary control to safely supervise the ignition 
and continued operation of the oil supply when it enters the combus-
tion including combustion. The schematic diagram of an oil fired fur-
nace is shown in Figure 16.18, and Figure 16.19 shows an oil furnace cad 
cell primary control.
Heat Pump Controls
Heat pump control systems and air-conditioning control systems are 
similar in many ways. The heat pump in the cooling mode and the air-
conditioning in cooling mode operate alike, and the control systems 
are very similar. Of course, in the heating mode the conventional air-
conditioning unit uses some type of furnace as a heating source, whereas 
the heat pump reverses the refrigeration cycle supplying heat to the 
structure with some additional type of supplementary heat for low out-
door temperature conditions.
16.15
F I G U R E
Ignition control 
module. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
16.16
F I G U R E
Furnace control 
module. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.2   Basic Residential Control Circuitry 
551
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

552 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
16.17
F I G U R E
Schematic of a gas furnace with hot surface ignition. (Courtesy of Carrier Corporation, 
Syracuse, NY)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

HOT
SYSTEM SWITCH
FUSE
BLACK
FAN
LIMIT
HIGH
LOW
FAN
RELAY
RUN
CAPACITOR
120 V
120 V
24 V
10 000 V
COMMON
LOW-VOLTAGE
TERMINAL 
BLOCK
BURNER AND PUMP MOTOR
IGNITION TRANSFORMER
ELECTRODES
COOL RELAY
WHITE
START 
SWITCH
ORANGE
BLACK
WHITE
W
HOT
2-SPEED FAN MOTOR
WHITE
JUNCTION BOX
NEUTRAL
ROOM THERMOSTAT
R (HOT)
G (FAN)
W (HEAT)
Y (COOL)
120 V
16.18
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of an oil furnace. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.2   Basic Residential Control Circuitry 
553
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

554 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
The heat pump reverses the flow in 
the mechanical refrigerant cycle in the 
heating cycle. At this point, the heat 
pump absorbs heat from the outside 
air and transfers the heat to the inte-
rior of the structure. A reversing valve 
is used to facilitate this flow reversal. 
An outdoor section of a heat pump with 
the reversing valve marked is shown in 
Figure 16.20.
The heat pump must have a means of 
defrost because the outdoor coil becomes 
the evaporator when the heat pump is 
operating in the heating cycle. The out-
door coil operating as an evaporator in 
low temperature will ice and periodically 
need to be defrosted. The heat pump uses 
a defrost control shown in Figure 16.21 to 
initiate and terminate the defrost cycle, 
clearing the ice or frost from the outdoor 
coil. This defrost control facilitates the 
Reversing Valve
16.20
F I G U R E
Heat pump with the reversing valve marked. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
16.19
F I G U R E
Oil furnace cad cell 
control. (Photo by 
Bill Johnson)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

defrosting of the coil by controlling the reversing valve, stopping the 
outdoor fan motor, and turning on the supplementary heat that adds 
heat during the defrost cycle. The heat pump switches to the cooling 
mode to defrost the outdoor coil.
The heat pump control system must control some type of supple-
mentary heat, which could be resistance electric heat or a fossil fuel fur-
nace, when the outdoor reaches 
the point where little heat can 
be absorbed into the system. 
This supplementary heat is ini-
tiated by the second-stage heat 
of the thermostat.
The thermostat used with a 
heat pump looks exactly like a 
heat/cool thermostat with the 
exception of the labeling of the 
switches on the thermostat 
and the letter designation of 
the low-voltage hookup. A heat 
pump thermostat is shown in 
Figure 16.22. The letter designa-
tions of a heat pump are  different 
from a conventional fossil fuel 
heating with electric air condi-
tioning and are shown with their 
function in Figure 16.23.
16.21
F I G U R E
Heat pump defrost control. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
16.22
F I G U R E
Hat pump thermostat subbase. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
R   -  Power from transformer
Y   -  Contactor
O   -  Reversing valve solenoid
G   -  Fan
W2 -  Supplementary heat
E    -  Emergency heat
X    -  Common from transformer
16.23
F I G U R E
Some common 
heat pump letter 
designations. 
(Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
 
Section 16.2   Basic Residential Control Circuitry 
555
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

556 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
16.3 PACKAGED AIR-CONDITIONING CONTROL SYSTEMS
Packaged air-conditioning control systems depend on whether the pack-
aged unit is a straight cooling unit that only cools or units that heat and 
cool like a gas pack or heat pump. The control system of a packaged unit 
that only cools is usually simple. The control systems used on gas packs 
are usually more complex because the unit not only cools but also heats 
using gas as its fuel source. The packaged heat pump control system is 
more complex because the refrigerant flow reverses, the outdoor coil 
must be defrosted in the heating cycle, and supplementary heat is needed 
in defrost and extremely cold ambient temperatures.
Package Air-Conditioning Unit Control Systems
The control panel of a residential cooling-only packaged air-conditioning 
unit is simple and usually has three major loads that must be controlled 
in the system and is shown in Figure 16.24. The loads that must be con-
trolled are the compressor, condenser fan motor, and evaporator fan 
motor. Figure 16.25 shows the wiring diagram of a small cooling-only air 
cooled packaged air-conditioning unit controlled by a low-voltage heat-
ing and cooling thermostat. When the temperature in the conditioned 
space reaches a higher temperature than the setting of the thermostat, 
16.24
F I G U R E
Control panel of small cooling-only 
packaged air-conditioning unit. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16.25
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a cooling-only packaged air conditioner used in a residence. 
(Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
L2
L1
L1
L1
L2
L2
240
AUX IFR
C
CB
CH
CHS
COMP
DB
DFT
DL
DR
EG
GND
IFM
IFMC
IFR
LPS
NEC
OFM
OFR
OFMC
PCB
Auxiliary indoor fan relay
Contactor
Circuit breaker
Crakecase heater
Crankcase heater switch
Compressor
Defrost board
Defrost thermostat
Delay board (PCB)
Defrost relay
Equipment ground
Ground
Indoor fan motor
Indoor fan motor capacitor
Indoor fan motor relay
Low-pressure switch
National electrical code
Outdoor fan motor
Outdoor fan relay
Outdoor fan motor capacitor
Printed circuit board
Legend
QT
RVS
ST
TB
TH
TRAN
Quad terminal
Reversing valve solenoid
Start thermistor
Terminal board
Thermostat
Transformer
Component connection (marked)
Component connection (unmarked)
Junction
Junction (thermostat to subbase)
Field power wiring
Equipment ground wiring
Factory wiring
Field control wiring
To indicate common potential only,
not to represent wire
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
 
 
557
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

558 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
the thermostat will close, supplying 24 volts to the contactor coil and the 
indoor fan relay coil highlighted in blue in Figure 16.26. At this point, 
the indoor fan relay coil and the contactor coil will be energized, clos-
ing the contacts of both. When the indoor fan relay contacts are closed, 
230 volts will be supplied to the indoor fan motor through the circuit 
that is highlighted in green in Figure 16.26. The closing of the contactor 
L1
L2
Legend
COMP:
C:
CRC:
CFM:
CFMC:
IFR:
IFM:
TR:
CT:
Compressor
Contactor
Compressor running capacitor
Condenser fan motor
Condenser fan motor capacitor
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
Transformer
Cooling thermostat
COMP
CFM
IFM
IFR
CFMC
CRC
C
C
IFR
C
G
R 
Y
Fan
Auto
System
On
TR
Thermostat
16.26
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a cooling-only packaged air conditioning. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

will make a circuit through the contactor to the compressor highlighted 
in red and the condenser fan motor highlighted in orange, starting both 
of these loads as shown in Figure 16.26. When the temperature of the 
conditioned space reaches the desired level, the thermostat will open, 
removing the 24 from the indoor fan relay and contactor de-energizing 
both and interrupting the power supply to the loads. Often electrical 
resistance heat is added to this type of packaged unit to supply heat to 
the structure.
Gas Heat Electric Air-Conditioning Packaged Unit 
Control System
The combination of electric air conditioning and gas heating in a pack-
aged unit requires a control system that is somewhat more complex than 
a straight air-cooled package unit. The main difference between the two 
units is the extra components that are necessary for the safe operation 
of the gas heating section of the equipment. The basic control system for 
the air conditioning is the same as the control system discussed in the 
previous section.
A gas heat electric air-conditioning packaged unit is shown in 
Figure  16.27, which looks similar to the air cooled packaged unit 
except for the outlet of the combustion gases and gas supply piping. 
Figure 16.28 shows a schematic diagram of the control system used on a 
gas-heating and electric air-conditioning 
packaged unit.
Figure 16.29 shows the cooling mode of 
operation highlighted in red. The cooling 
mode of operation begins when the ther-
mostat closes, energizing the contactor 
coil through the time delay control (TDC) 
and the blower relay (BR) highlighted in 
blue in Figure 16.29. This action closes 
the compressor contactor (CC) and blower 
relay (BR), sending power through the con-
tactor contacts, starting the compressor 
and outdoor fan motor, and blower relay 
contacts starting the blower motor high-
lighted in orange in Figure 16.29.
The high-pressure control (HPC), low-
pressure control (LPC), and hot gas sensor 
(HGS) are safety controls that are connected 
in series with the compressor contactor 
16.27
F I G U R E
Gas heat electric air-
conditioning packaged unit. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.3   Packaged Air-Conditioning Control Systems 
559
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

560 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
coil and will de-energize the compressor contactor if any of these safety 
controls open due to an unsafe condition in the system.
The heating cycle of the gas heat electric air-conditioning packaged 
unit must control the lighting of the pilot light and the main burner along 
with the operation of the fan draft motor (FDM) and the blower motor. 
The control system must maintain safe operation of the packaged unit 
in the heating and cooling modes of operation. In the heating mode of 
operation, the temperature at certain locations such as the combustion 
chamber and inlet of combustion chamber must be monitored to make 
sure that the appliance is not overheating. This is accomplished by the 
limit control, which is placed in the air stream near the combustion 
chamber, and the rollout control, which is placed at the inlet of the com-
bustion chamber, in the event that flames rolled out of the chamber. The 
16.28
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a gas heat electric air-conditioning packaged unit. (Courtesy of 
Rheem Air Conditioning Division)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

centrifugal switch is placed in the circuitry of the appliance supplying 
power to the pilot relight control (PRC) to prevent it from being energized 
if the forced draft motor is not operating. Figure 16.30 shows the diagram 
of a gas heat electric air-conditioning packaged unit with these safety 
controls highlighted in red. This type of packaged unit would be installed 
in a residence.
The following explanation is of the heating sequence of operation 
for the gas heat electric air-conditioning packaged unit that is shown in 
Figure 16.28. On a call for heat from the thermostat, 24 volts is supplied to 
the “W” terminal of the unit. From the “W” terminal, 24 volts is supplied 
to one side of the draft relay (FDR), the FDR contacts close, and the fan 
draft motor (FDM) starts. The next component that must be energized is 
the pilot relight control (PRC), which lights the pilot and supervises the 
16.29
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a gas heat electric air-conditioning packaged unit. (Modes of 
operation highlighted) (Courtesy of Rheem Air Conditioning Division)
 
Section 16.3   Packaged Air-Conditioning Control Systems 
561
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

562 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
lighting of the main gas valve. The common side of the 24 volts coming 
from the transformer passes through the time delay control (TDC) and 
centrifugal switch (CS) to supply the common to the pilot relight control. 
The other side of the 24 volts power is supplied straight from the “W” ter-
minal of the unit through the safety controls LC and RDC. At this point, 
24 volts is being supplied to the pilot relight control (PRC). These circuits 
are shown highlighted in green in Figure 16.31. Once these circuits have 
been energized, the circuits highlighted in orange will become active. 
The fan draft motor will be running. The PRC supplies 24 volts to the pilot 
valve (PV) and energizes the spark electrode, which ignites the pilot. Once 
the pilot light has been proved by the PRC, the main valve (MV) will be 
energized and ignition of the main burner occurs. Once the main burner 
has ignited, the temperature of the combustion chamber will rise and 
16.30
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a gas heat electric air-conditioning packaged unit. (Safety 
controls highlighted in red) (Courtesy of Rheem Air Conditioning Division) 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the fan cycle control (FCC) will close and voltage will flow through the 
normally closed contacts of the blower relay and start the fan motor. The 
unit will operate in heat until the thermostat has been satisfied.
Packaged Heat Pump Control Systems
Residential packaged heat pumps are manufactured in two basic designs, 
air to air and water to air. The air-to-air heat pump uses air as the heat 
transfer medium in both the indoor and outdoor coils and is shown in 
Figure 16.32. A water-to-air package heat pump system uses air to transfer 
the heat to the conditioned space and water as the heat transfer medium 
for the heat exchanger used as the condenser in the cooling cycle and 
the evaporator in the heating cycle. A water source heat pump is shown 
in Figure 16.33. Most water-to-air heat pumps used in the industry today 
are packaged units.
16.31
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a gas heat electric air-conditioning packaged unit. (Heating 
circuit highlighted in yellow) (Courtesy of Rheem Air Conditioning Division) 
 
Section 16.3   Packaged Air-Conditioning Control Systems 
563
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

564 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
16.32
F I G U R E
Air to air packaged heat pump. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
16.33
F I G U R E
Water to air packaged heat pump. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The water source or water to air 
heat pump has advantages over the 
air to air heat pump in that it requires 
no defrost cycle and no supplemen-
tary heat because the water tempera-
ture of the medium being used for the 
heat exchanger is in a temperature 
range so that these elements of the 
control system will not be required. 
The water source heat pump system 
does require pumps to move the 
medium that is being used to transfer 
heat in the heat exchanger. A sche-
matic diagram of a water source heat 
pump is shown in Figure 16.34.
Basically, the packaged air to air heat pump control system is similar 
to the split system heat pump and is covered in detail in Section 17.5 of 
this chapter.
16.4 SPLIT-SYSTEM AIR-CONDITIONING CONTROL SYSTEMS
Most residential air-conditioning systems installed in residences and 
small structures are split systems. Split system air-conditioning sys-
tems are made up of two components, a condensing unit and an air 
source with an evaporator that are interconnected with refrigerant 
lines to transfer the refrigerant and control wires that operate the 
system. Figure 16.35 shows a drawing of a split system installed in a 
structure.
Basic Condensing Units
A condensing unit is a portion of a split air-conditioning system that 
is mounted outside and contains the compressor, the condenser, the 
condenser fan motor, and the necessary devices to control these com-
ponents. A split system is one that is made up of two parts, usually a 
condensing unit (outside) with a fan coil unit or furnace and evaporator 
(inside). Figure 16.36 shows an air-cooled condensing unit.
In residential and small commercial air-conditioning applications, the 
condensing unit is used with some equipment that will produce the air 
flow and an evaporator that is mounted in the air flow. The air flow can 
be produced by a fan that is mounted in a metal cabinet with the evapo-
rator shown in Figure 16.37 and is called a fan-coil unit or evaporator 
16.34
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a water 
source heat pump. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.4   Split-System Air-Conditioning Control Systems 
565
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

566 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
CONDENSING UNIT
CONDENSATE 
DRAIN
SUCTION 
LINE
FURNACE
RETURN 
AIR 
DUCT
COOLING COIL
IN INSULATED
ENCLOSURE
LIQUID 
LINE
FROM 
POWER
SOURCE
FUSED 
DISCONNECT
1'-0"
16.35
F I G U R E
Drawing of a split system. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
16.36
F I G U R E
Air-cooled condensing unit. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

blower. Another common air source 
for a residential air-conditioning split 
system is a furnace with an evaporator 
put the air flow. Figure 16.38 shows a 
gas furnace with an evaporator.
The condensing unit takes the cool 
suction gas coming from the evapora-
tor, compresses it, condenses it from 
a gas to a liquid, and forces it back to 
the evaporator. The standard compo-
nents of an air-cooled condensing unit 
are the compressor, the condenser fan 
motor, and the controls. The compo-
nents of an air-cooled condensing unit 
are shown in Figure 16.39. Most of the 
controls used to operate the condens-
ing unit are mounted somewhere in 
the unit itself, with the exception of 
the interconnection between the ther-
mostat and the condensing unit.
In early control systems, almost all 
components necessary for the oper-
ation of the air-conditioning system 
were mounted in the condensing unit. 
This practice has all but disappeared 
in the industry because of the expense 
that was required and the realization 
that it was unnecessary. Most modern 
condensing units pick up the 24 volts 
needed to close the contactor start-
ing the compressor and condenser fan 
motor from the thermostat. The evapo-
rator motor is usually controlled by a 
relay when the system uses a furnace 
or fan-coil unit as the air source.
The schematic diagram of a con-
densing unit is shown in Figure 16.40. 
The compressor and condenser fan 
motor are the major loads in a con-
densing unit and are generally con-
nected in parallel and controlled by the 
contactor. When 24 volts is supplied 
LIQUID LINE
GAS LINE
RETURN 
AIR
16.38
F I G U R E
Gas furnace with an evaporator.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.4   Split-System Air-Conditioning Control Systems 
567
16.37
F I G U R E
Fan-coil unit. (Photo by 
Bill Johnson)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

568 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
to the contactor coil from the control system as shown highlighted in 
blue in Figure 16.41, the circuits of supplying 230 volts to the compressor 
and condenser fan motor highlighted in red in Figure 16.41. The safety 
controls that are necessary to maintain safe operating conditions for the 
equipment are shaded in blue and are all connected in series with the 
contactor coil. Figure 16.42 shows a control panel with the components 
labeled used on a residential air-conditioning condensing unit. Most com-
pressor motors are protected by an internal overload that is mounted in 
the winding of the compressor motor.
There are many other controls that could possibly be found on the 
high-end residential air-conditioning units. Some condensing units are 
equipped with an anti-short cycling device, which prevents damage to 
the compressor from short cycling. Some condensing units that use vari-
able or multispeed compressors requiring additional controls are being 
produced today. Service technicians should always use the schematic 
diagram to guide them in the operation of the unit and displays all of the 
electrical components in the condensing unit.
Compressor and
condenser fan
motor capacitor
Contactor
16.39
F I G U R E
Air-cooled condensing unit 
with the components lableled. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Air Supply Sources for Split-System 
Residential Systems
All residential heating and air-conditioning systems must have some 
means of air flow in order to remove heat from the conditioned space. 
The air flow on most structures that use a fossil fuel for a heat source 
have a furnace that would be used as an air supply. The furnace air supply 
would be across the evaporator that takes the heat out of the structure. 
Fan coil units are used with air-conditioning units that generally require 
no heat and with heat pumps. The blower motor or evaporator fan motor 
must operate when the air-conditioning system is in the cooling mode of 
operation. This is usually accomplished by energizing the evaporator fan 
relay, which would close the contacts of the evaporator fan and start the 
evaporator fan motor. Figure 16.43 shows the schematic of the fan motor 
circuit in a fan coil unit.
L1
L2
FRC
CFM
CRC
COMP
C
C
C
Common (transformer)
thermostat
24-volt power
supply from thermostat
Legend
C:
CRC:
COMP:
CFM:
FRC:
Contactor
Compressor running
capacitor
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Fan running capacitor
16.40
F I G U R E
Air-cooled condensing unit control panel with the 
components labeled. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.4   Split-System Air-Conditioning Control Systems 
569
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

570 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
CFM
CFMRC
COMP
CRC
C
HPS
LPS
C
L2
L1
C:
COMP:
CFM:
CRC:
CFMRC:
HPS:
LPS:
Contactor
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Comp run cap
CFM run cap
High pressure switch
Low pressure switch
24 Volts
from indoor
unit
240 Volts
C
16.41
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a condensing unit with operating circuits shaded. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16.5 HEAT PUMP CONTROL SYSTEMS
Early model heat pumps were loaded with controls that the industry 
thought was necessary at that time, but time and experience proved that 
the first heat pumps were overengineered. Many of the heat pumps that 
were manufactured in the 1950s and 1960s had more that 10 relays and 
other electrical components that were unnecessary. As time progressed, 
the basic heat pump has been made simpler through past experience, 
better engineering, and better and more versatile electrical controls. 
Present day heat pumps are simple and easy to understand, which has 
improved the installation and service procedures benefiting both the 
consumer and technician. Advancements in the industry today have 
produced dual-speed heat pumps, variable-speed heat pumps, and heat 
pumps that use gas furnaces as supplementary heating. The heat pump 
that will be covered in this section will be a basic heat pump with moder-
ate efficiency ratings.
 
Section 16.5   Heat Pump Control Systems 
571
Compressor and
condenser fan
motor capacitor
Contactor
Line voltage
field connections
Low voltage field
connections
(L1 and L2 of contactor)
16.42
F I G U R E
Control panel of a condensing unit. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

572 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
The heat pump is nothing more than a basic mechanical refrigeration 
system that reverses the cycle in the heating mode of operation at which 
time heat is absorbed from the outdoor air and transferred to the condi-
tioned space. A reversing valve is used to reverse the flow of refrigerant in 
a mechanical refrigeration system. In the cooling mode of operation, the 
L1
L2
Legend
COMP:
C:
CRC:
CFM:
CFMC:
IFR:
IFM:
TR:
CT:
Compressor
Contactor
Compressor running capacitor
Condenser fan motor
Condenser fan motor capacitor
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
Transformer
Cooling thermostat
COMP
CFM
IFM
IFR
CFMC
CRC
C
C
IFR
C
G
R 
Y
Fan
Auto
System
On
TR
Thermostat
16.43
F I G U R E
Evaporator fan motor circuit. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

indoor coil (evaporator) absorbs heat from the indoor air and rejects the 
heat through the outdoor coil (condenser) cooling the conditioned space. 
In the heating mode of operation, the outdoor coil (evaporator) absorbs 
heat from the outside air and rejects the heat through the indoor coil 
(condenser) heating the conditioned space. Figure 16.44 shows the heat-
ing and cooling cycle of a heat pump using a reversing valve to reverse 
HEATING
CAPILLARY
TUBE
COOLING
CAPILLARY
TUBE
INTERCONNECTING GAS LINE 
INTERCONNECTING LIQUID LINE
INDOOR UNIT
OUTDOOR UNIT
COMPRESSOR
FILTER DRIER FOR COOLING
FILTER DRIER FOR HEATING
(a)
16.44
F I G U R E
(a) Refrigeration cycle of a heat pump in the cooling mode of operation. 
(b) Refrigeration cycle of a heat pump in the heating mode of operation. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
HEATING
CAPILLARY
TUBE
COOLING
CAPILLARY
TUBE
INTERCONNECTING GAS LINE 
INTERCONNECTING LIQUID LINE
INDOOR UNIT
OUTDOOR UNIT
COMPRESSOR
FILTER DRIER FOR COOLING
FILTER DRIER FOR HEATING
(b)
 
Section 16.5   Heat Pump Control Systems 
573
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

574 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
the flow. Heat pumps must have a means of defrosting the outdoor coil in 
the heating mode of operation. Heat pumps reverse the refrigerant cycle 
to facilitate the defrosting of the outdoor coil.
Heat Pump Electrical Components
Heat pumps require additional electrical components because the refrig-
eration cycle is reversed in order to transfer heat to the conditioned space 
in the heating mode of operation. The reversing valve solenoid is the 
electrical component that energizes or de-energizes the reversing valve 
and thus changes the refrigerant flow. When a heat pump operates in 
the heating mode, the outdoor coil becomes the evaporator and many 
times will operate with low outdoor temperature, which will cause the 
outdoor coil to ice restricting the air flow. Heat pumps use some type of 
defrost control to initiate and terminate the defrost cycle, which is used 
to remove the ice build up from the outdoor coil. Heat pumps use defrost 
control modules to initiate the defrost cycle, usually a defrost thermostat, 
and to terminate the defrost cycle of a heat pump. Heat pumps must 
have some means of supplying additional heat when the capacity of the 
heat pump is not sufficient to heat the conditioned space. This is usu-
ally accomplished by using resistance heat or a fossil fuel furnace as the 
supplementary heat source. A schematic diagram of an air-to-air heat 
pump is shown in Figure 16.45.
Reversing Valves
The reversing valve is used to reverse the flow of refrigerant in a heat 
pump and is shown in Figure 16.46. The reversing valve is basically a 
mechanical device that is moved from one position to another. The 
movement of the valve from its normal operating position to the posi-
tion that reverses the refrigerant flow is accomplished by energizing 
the reversing valve solenoid. A reversing valve solenoid is shown in 
Green Technology
Hybrid Heat Pump System
A hybrid system is a heat pump system that uses an oil or gas furnace 
to supply the supplementary heat rather than electrical resistance heat 
when the heat pump cannot transfer adequate heat from the outside 
air to adequately condition a structure when operating at low outdoor 
ambient temperatures. Using this method, supplementary heat could 
save the consumer up to 20% of the cost of conditioning a structure 
depending on energy cost and outdoor temperature.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C
C
COMP
DF3
OFM
DT
DT
DT
PS
PS
C
R
Y
O
W
DF2
C
RVS
DFI
Heat pump/defrost
control
To thermostat
and indoor unit
LPS
COMP:
OFM:
C:
RVS:
PT:
LPS:
DF:
Compressor
Outdoor for motor
Contactor
Reversing valve solenoid
Defrost thermostat
Low pressure switch
Defrost relay (Built into
heat pump/defrost control)
16.45
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of the outdoor unit of an air to air heat pump. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.5   Heat Pump Control Systems 
575
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

576 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
Figure 16.47. This solenoid opens and closes a pilot valve, which in turn 
changes the position of the reversing valve, reversing the refrigerant flow 
as shown in Figure 16.48.
Defrost Controls
Due to the fact that heat pumps operate at temperatures below 
32 degrees Fahrenheit, they accumulate ice on the outdoor coil (evapora-
tor) in the heating cycle. The outdoor coil must be periodically defrosted to 
ensure that the heat pump can absorb sufficient heat from the outside to 
heat the conditioned space and operate efficiently. Defrost controls for 
heat pumps can range from simple to complex depending on the oper-
ating and defrost parameters that the manufacturer is trying to accom-
plish. Some defrost controls are actually heat pump control modules 
that supervise the operation of the heat pump after receiving system 
inputs from the thermostat as shown in Figure 16.49, whereas some of 
the defrost controls basically handle the defrosting of the heat pump and 
just the necessary functions that must be accomplished on defrost. This 
type of heat pump defrost controls is shown in Figure 16.50. The basic 
function that must be accomplished by a defrost control are (1) initiate 
and terminate the defrost cycle, (2) change the heat pump from the heat-
ing to the cooling mode of operation, (3) stop the outdoor fan motor, and 
(4) energize the supplementary heat.
16.46
F I G U R E
Reversing valve. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
16.47
F I G U R E
Reversing valve 
solenoid. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(b) REVERSING VALVE POSITION IN COOLING CYCLE
DISCHARGE LINE
FROM COMPRESSOR
CONNECTED TO
OUTDOOR COIL
SUCTION LINE
TO COMPRESSOR
CONNECTED TO
INDOOR COIL
CONNECTED TO
OUTDOOR COIL
SUCTION LINE
TO COMPRESSOR
CONNECTED TO
INDOOR COIL
(a) REVERSING VALVE POSITION IN HEATING CYCLE
DISCHARGE LINE
FROM COMPRESSOR
VALVE BODY
SLIDE
16.48
F I G U R E
Drawing of a reversing valve. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
The defrost control must initiate and terminate the defrost cycle. Most 
defrost controls use a time and temperature initiation and  temperature 
termination with a time element to prevent long defrost cycles that could 
harm the equipment. The defrost control has a cycle timer that closes a 
set of contacts in the defrost control module at a predetermined com-
pressor run time; if the defrost thermostat that closes at approximately 
25 degrees Fahrenheit is closed, the heat pump defrost cycle will be 
 
Section 16.5   Heat Pump Control Systems 
577
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

578 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
energized. Once the defrost cycle is energized, the defrost control will 
first close a set of contacts, putting the heat pump in the cooling mode 
of operation by energizing the reversing valve solenoid as shown in red 
in Figure 16.51. Second, the defrost control will open a normally closed 
set of contacts, de-energizing the outdoor fan motor as shown in orange 
in Figure 16.51, which stops the air flow across the outdoor coil. Third, 
the defrost controls energize the supplementary heat through a set of 
contacts as shown in blue in Figure 16.51 to prevent cool drafts in the 
conditioned space while the unit is in defrost. The defrost control sends 
a 24 signal to the indoor unit, which will start the supplementary heat. 
The defrost control will terminate the defrost cycle when the defrost ther-
mostat shaded in green reaches 60 degrees Fahrenheit and opens. The 
defrost control will automatically terminate the defrost cycle after the 
unit stays in defrost for a period of approximately 10 minutes to prevent 
damage from high operating discharge pressures.
Supplementary Heat
When a heat pump goes into the defrost cycle, it goes from the heating 
mode to the cooling mode to direct hot discharge refrigerant to enter 
the outdoor coil to melt the ice from the outdoor coil surface of the heat 
pump. Just like in the cooling mode of operation the indoor fan will sup-
ply cool air to the conditioned space. The cooling mode operating for 
10 minutes when the temperature is cool or cold outside can lower the 
16.49
F I G U R E
Heat pump control 
module. (Photo by 
Bill Johnson)
16.50
F I G U R E
Heat pump defrost 
module. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

COMP
Outdoor unit
DF3
OFM
DT
DT
DT
PS
PS
C
R
Y
O
W
DF2
DF1
T/stat
SHR
BR
LPS
COMP:
OFM:
BM:
SH:
C:
RVS:
SHT:
BR:
SHR:
DT:
LPS:
Compressor
Outdoor fan motor
Blower motor
Strip heat
Contactor
Reversing valve solenoid
Strip heat thermostat
Blower relay
Strip heat relay
Defrost thermostat
Low pressure switch
DF contacts are
port of the board
C
C
Y
O
E
G
R
RVS
W
BM
C
W
G
R
SHR
SHT
BR
SH
Indoor unit
16.51
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a heat pump with defrost circuits shaded. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.5   Heat Pump Control Systems 
579
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

580 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
temperature in the structure, but even more bothersome is the cool draft 
that will be caused by the cool air flow into the conditioned space. The 
heat pump must use some method to temper (warm) the air to prevent 
this cool draft and an uncomfortable temperature drop in the structure. 
Air to air heat pumps generally use electrical resistance heat shown in 
Figure 16.52 or a fossil fuel furnace shown in Figure 16.53 to supply this 
supplementary heat to the conditioned space. When the heat pump goes 
into the defrost cycle, a 24-volt signal is sent from the defrost control 
module to the indoor unit to start the supplementary heat.
16.6 HEAT PUMP SEQUENCE OF OPERATION
The thermostat of an air to air heat pump has a two-stage heating single-
stage cooling operation and is shown in Figure 16.54. The thermostat 
modes of operation are controlled by a system switch on the thermostat 
and are cool, heat, off, and emergency heat. The emergency heat function 
uses the supplementary heat to heat the structure. This might occur in 
extremely cold outdoor temperatures and a possible malfunction of the 
first-stage heat source. The common thermostat letter designations used 
in heat pump systems are shown in Figure 16.55.
16.52
F I G U R E
Electrical resistance 
heaters used as 
supplementary heat. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
LIQUID LINE
GAS LINE
RETURN 
AIR
16.53
F I G U R E
Fossil fuel furnace 
used as supplemen-
tary heat. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The sequence of operation for the heat pump will be divided in three 
modes of operation, cooling, heating, and supplementary. The defrost 
cycle has been previously discussed. The schematic diagram shown in 
Figure 16.56 will be used for the sequence of operation.
The cooling cycle of the heat pump is the same as an air-conditioning 
system. The cooling circuits are highlighted in blue in Figure 16.57. In the 
cooling mode of operation, the control system will have to energize the 
compressor, condenser fan motor, indoor fan motor, and reversing valve 
solenoid for cooling. When the thermostat calls for cooling, the “R” termi-
nal of the thermostat is connected to the “Y,” “O,” and “G” terminals, and 
the following actions take place.
 1. Twenty-four volts is supplied to the “Y” terminal of the defrost board 
from the thermostat. Twenty-four volts is supplied from the defrost 
board to the contactor coil. The contactor coil is energized, starting 
the compressor and condenser fan motor.
 2. Twenty-four volts is supplied to the “O” terminal of the defrost board 
from the thermostat. Twenty-four volts is supplied from the defrost 
board to the reversing valve solenoid, which places the reversing 
valve in the cooling mode of operation.
 3. Twenty-four volts is supplied to the “G” terminal of the indoor unit, 
which energizes the indoor fan relay starting the indoor fan motor.
 4. The heat pump is now operating in the cooling mode of operation.
16.54
F I G U R E
Heat pump ther-
mostat. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
R - Power from transformer
C - Common from thermostat
Y - Contactor
O - Reversing value
E - Emergency heat
W - Second stage heat
G - Fan
16.55
F I G U R E
Some common letter 
designations of a heat 
pump control system. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 
Section 16.6   Heat Pump Sequence of Operation 
581
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

582 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
OUTDOOR UNIT
Comp : Compressor
OFM : Outdoor fan motor
BM 
: Blower motor
SH 
: Strip heat
C 
: Contactor
RVS 
: Reversing valve solenoid
SHT 
: Strip heat thermostat
BR 
: Blower relay
SHR 
: Strip heat relay
DT 
: Defrost thermostat
LPS 
: Low pressure switch
 
 DF contacts are
 
 port of the board
DT
DT
DT
PS
PS
LPS
DF2
DF1
SHR
BR
BR
SHR
SHT
SH
INDOOR UNIT
BM
T/stat
DF3
C
R
Y
O
W
Comp
OFM
W
C
G
R
C
C
Y
O
E
W
G
R
RVS
16.56
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a heat pump. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OUTDOOR UNIT
Comp : Compressor
OFM : Outdoor fan motor
BM 
: Blower motor
SH 
: Strip heat
C 
: Contactor
RVS 
: Reversing valve solenoid
SHT 
: Strip heat thermostat
BR 
: Blower relay
SHR 
: Strip heat relay
DT 
: Defrost thermostat
LPS 
: Low pressure switch
 
 DF contacts are
 
 port of the board
DT
DT
DT
PS
PS
LPS
DF2
DF1
SHR
BR
BR
SHR
SHT
SH
INDOOR UNIT
BM
T/stat
DF3
C
R
Y
O
W
Comp
OFM
W
C
G
R
C
C
Y
O
E
W
G
R
RVS
16.57
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a heat pump with the cooling cycle 
highlighted in blue. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.6   Heat Pump Sequence of Operation 
583
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

584 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
The heating mode of operation for the heat pump shown in 
Figure 16.56 is highlighted in red in Figure 16.58. In the heating mode of 
operation, the heat pump will only have to energize the contactor coil 
and the indoor fan relay. When the thermostat calls for heat, the “R” 
terminal of the thermostat is connected to the “Y” and “G” terminals; the 
following actions take place.
 1. Twenty-four volts is supplied to the “Y” terminal of the defrost board 
from the thermostat. Twenty-four volts is supplied from the defrost 
board to the contactor coil. The contactor coil is energized, starting 
the compressor and condenser fan motor.
 2. Twenty-four volts is supplied to the “G” terminal of the indoor unit, 
which energizes the indoor fan relay, starting the indoor fan motor.
 3. The heat pump is now operating in the heating mode of operation.
In the event that the heat pump cannot maintain the conditioned 
air temperature in the structure, the temperature will continue to fall. 
When the conditioned air temperature is approximately 2 degrees 
Fahrenheit, then the second stage of the thermostat will close mak-
ing a connection between the “R” terminal and the “W” terminal of the 
thermostat. When this connection is made, 24 volts is supplied to the 
“W” terminal of the indoor unit, which energizes the supplementary 
heat sequencer that cycles through a time delay and then energizes the 
supplementary heaters. These circuits can be seen highlighted in orange 
in Figure 16.58. Refer to the section on defrost controls for an explana-
tion of the defrost cycle.
16.7 ADVANCED RESIDENTIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS
Most air-conditioning and heating systems being installed in residential 
applications today are still of the basic control system design that has 
been previously discussed in this chapter. In the quest for better com-
fort, convenience, and higher efficiencies, air-conditioning manufactur-
ers are producing air-conditioning control systems that step to another 
level for their high-end customers. This level of customers generally 
contract to build their home from scratch and make most of the deci-
sions in the design and construction. Some residences use zone control 
systems, which divide the structure into individually controlled zones 
and provides comfort levels that meet the needs of the occupants. This 
section gives only an overview of the advanced air-conditioning control 
system and the zone systems that are being installed in the industry.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 16.7   Advanced Residential Control Systems 
585
OUTDOOR UNIT
Comp : Compressor
OFM : Outdoor fan motor
BM 
: Blower motor
SH 
: Strip heat
C 
: Contactor
RVS 
: Reversing valve solenoid
SHT 
: Strip heat thermostat
BR 
: Blower relay
SHR 
: Strip heat relay
DT 
: Defrost thermostat
LPS 
: Low pressure switch
 
 DF contacts are
 
 port of the board
DT
DT
DT
PS
PS
LPS
DF2
DF1
SHR
BR
BR
SHR
SHT
SH
INDOOR UNIT
BM
T/stat
DF3
C
R
Y
O
W
Comp
OFM
W
C
G
R
C
C
Y
O
E
W
G
R
RVS
16.58
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a heat pump with the heating cycle 
highlighted in red and the supplementary heat cycle in orange. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

586 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
Advanced Air-Conditioning 
Control Systems
These new air-conditioning control sys-
tems are taking comfort to a new level; 
the system controls the temperature and 
humidity, improves indoor air quality with 
better air filtration, and operates with a 
high seasonal energy efficiency rating. On 
most of these systems, the capacity of 
the compressor can be varied to meet the 
needs of the cooling or heating load in 
the structure. The indoor fan motor and 
outdoor fan motor are variable speed. The 
system is designed to maintain the air 
quality by adequate filtration and adding 
fresh air. The control systems on these 
total comfort systems go far beyond what 
the conventional control system is capable 
of accomplishing. A total system control module is shown in Figure 16.59. 
The total system control module must supervise the operation of the fol-
lowing elements of the air-conditioning system.
• Control the capacity of the compressor.
• Control the speed of the indoor fan motor.
• Control the speed of the outdoor fan motor.
• Control the temperature of the structure.
• Control the humidity of the structure.
• Maintain the air quality of the structure.
• Maintain adequate ventilation.
These modern control systems are programmable, allowing the home-
owner to set back the temperature for times when the structure is not 
occupied. Some of these control systems allow access to the control 
system from locations away from the structure, which would allow 
the homeowner to adjust the temperature while they were away and 
would also allow the flexibility to set the temperature on their way 
home and the structure to be comfortable when they arrived. The 
control determines the operation of the loads ensuring that they oper-
ate at the most  efficient level to conserve energy costs. Some of these 
16.59
F I G U R E
Total system control 
module. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

air-conditioning systems operate at a seasonal energy efficiency rat-
ing of 22. From the 3 ton  air-conditioning system, the saving between 
a normal 12 SEER (seasonal energy efficiency rating) to 22 SEER would 
save the consumer approximately 45 dollars per month or more. The 
controls system of many total comfort air-conditioning systems have 
a diagnostic function included to assist the technicians in diagnosing 
problems with system operation.
Zone Control Systems
A zone control system is a control system that is used to distribute 
an adequate quantity of air to maintain the desired temperature in a 
specific area of the structure. Structures could be divided into as many 
zones as are needed to maintain comfort. Zone control systems give 
the occupant of the structure the ability to control the temperature in 
any zone in the structure by controlling the air flow. Structures can be 
divided into as many zones as are necessary for a comfortable environ-
ment. For example, if a room in a residence is facing west with a large 
amount of glass, that room is probably warm or even hot in the after-
noon. Two options are available, the room could be cooled to a lower 
temperature in the morning to maintain a comfortable temperature in 
part of the afternoon, and in the mornings the area would be cold or we 
could install a zone control system, which would vary the amount of 
air that was being supplied to both areas and thus maintain a desired 
temperature level in both 
areas. Zone control systems 
can have as many zones as 
needed to maintain comfort 
in each location.
The air distribution system 
for a three-zone control sys-
tem is shown in Figure  16.60 
with each zone shaded a dif-
ferent color. Some type of 
damper would be installed 
in the air flow going to each 
zone that would control the 
amount of air that is supplied 
to each area to maintain the 
desired temperature. For the 
system shown in Figure 16.60, 
 
Section 16.7   Advanced Residential Control Systems 
587
Zone
damper 1
Zone
damper 2
AIR FLOW
AC
Zone
damper 3
Zone 1
Zone 2
Zone 3
16.60
F I G U R E
Zone control system. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

588 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
we would need one damper and 
motor for each zone. The damper 
and motor are shown in Figure 16.61. 
A zoning control panel would be 
required to control the system that 
would be connected to thermostats 
in each zone. The damper motor 
would be controlled from the zone 
control panel shown in Figure 16.62. 
An electrical diagram is shown in 
Figure 16.63 of a zone control system. 
Zone control systems are gaining 
popularity in the industry because 
they meet the needs of consumers, 
they are readily available, and they 
are relatively easy to install.
16.62
F I G U R E
Zone control panel. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
16.61
F I G U R E
Damper and motor used in a 
zone control system. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 16.7   Advanced Residential Control Systems 
589
16.63
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a zone control system.(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

590 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
16.8 FIELD WIRING
In all heating, cooling, and refrigeration systems there is a certain amount 
of wiring that must be connected to the equipment after it has been set 
in place. The wiring must be installed by the installation technician and 
is called field wiring. Field wiring includes both the power wiring that 
supplies electrical energy to the unit and control wiring that is used to 
control the equipment.
The factory-installed wiring is the wiring installed at the factory. It 
usually takes care of the connections between the components in the 
control panel and the system components. The factory wiring has been 
sized, color coded, and installed in the control system to operate the 
equipment properly. The remainder of the wiring, whether it be power 
wiring or control wiring, must be connected in the field.
Power Wiring
The power wiring of a cooling and heating system is usually simple and 
easy to install on residential systems. There are two power connections 
that must be made on a split air-conditioning and heating system: the 
connections to the condensing unit and the connection to the evaporator 
fan motor or furnace. Figure 16.64 shows the power wiring on a condens-
ing unit and a furnace with the correct connections from the distribution 
panel in the residence.
The power connections for a residential air-cooled packaged unit are 
shown in Figure 16.65. The circuit is relatively simple, containing only the 
power connection and some type of bonding ground.
The power connection for a split-system heat pump would 
be to the condensing unit and to the indoor unit. These would 
be the only connection necessary if the supplementary heat is part of 
Green Technology
Zoned Air-Conditioning Systems
Systems that are zoned use less energy than the conventional system. 
A zone system is when the structure is divided into zones with each 
zone being supplied with the conditioned air that is needed to meet the 
load of each individual zone. A zoned system allows for the occupant of 
the structure to increase the setting that would stop the air flow to the 
desired zone. A zoned system would compensate for a section of a struc-
ture that has a large solar load. Zone systems save energy and produce a 
greater comfort level in structures where they are used.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the air handler. In most cases, the air handler will house the supple-
mentary heat even though the installation technician will have to 
install them. Prepared connections are made during the manufacturing 
process for the supplementary heat, and in most cases the indoor fan 
motor will plug into a receptacle in the supplementary heat section as 
shown in Figure 16.66. Even though there are three power connections, 
the manufacturer makes it an easy hookup.
The electrical supply wiring of a commercial and industrial system is 
sometimes more complex than the simple residential systems. The use 
of three-phase current in commercial and industrial establishments does 
not add to the complexity of the system, only to the number of power 
wires that must be supplied to the equipment. An installation techni-
cian would supply three power wires and a bonding ground to systems 
Junction box
FS
FM
Common
Low speed
High
speed
Control panel
COMP
CFM
CSR
Condensing unit
C S R
CAP
CAP
Legend
COMP:
CFM:
FS:
FM:
CAP:
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Fan switch
Fan motor
Capacitors
Furnace
L1  L2
L1
 G
Power connection
for condensing unit
Power connection for furnace
16.64
F I G U R E
Power supply to furnace and condensing unit. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.8   Field Wiring 
591
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

592 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
requiring three-phase power as 
shown in Figure 16.67. Like a res-
idential split system, commer-
cial and industrial evaporator fan 
motors would require an addi-
tional power supply.
Wire and Fuse Sizing
When installing heating, cooling, 
and refrigeration systems, air-
conditioning 
technicians 
in 
charge of the installation must 
make sure that all power wiring 
is of the correct size and type. 
The distance of the supply cir-
cuit is important because of the 
voltage drop that can occur on 
long circuit runs. The installa-
tion instructions usually contain 
a wiring chart with the length 
that is allowable for each size 
CAP
CAP
CAP
IFR
C
IFM 
COMP
CFM
L1
L2
Power connections
for unit
Legend
IFM:
COMP:
CFM:
IFR:
C:
CAP:
Indoor fan motor
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Indoor fan relay
Contactor
Capacitors
To control
panel
16.65
F I G U R E
Power supply connected to an air-cooled packaged unit. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
16.66
F I G U R E
Supplementary heat connection plug 
for heat pump. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

of wire as shown in Figure  16.68. Installation technicians should be 
capable of sizing the wire if it is not listed in the installation instruc-
tions (refer again to Chapter 8).
It is also important to follow the manufacturer’s recommendations 
for the fuse and breaker size. Remember: before any heating, cooling, or 
refrigeration system can be expected to operate properly, it must first be 
supplied with the correct size wire and fuse to deliver the proper voltage 
to the system.
L1
L2
L3
L1
L2
L3
L1
L2 L3
CFM
CFMC
C
COMP
IFM
IFMS
Supply air duct
Electric heater
Power supply
from disconnect
Power supply
from disconnect
Condensing unit
Power supply
from disconnect
Air-handling
unit
Legend
IFMS:
IFM:
CFM:
COMP:
CFMC:
C:
Indoor fan motor starter
Indoor fan motor
Condenser fan motor
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
contactor
Contactor
16.67
F I G U R E
Three-phase connection for a condensing unit. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.8   Field Wiring 
593
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

594 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
Control Wiring
The control wiring of heating and air-conditioning systems is just as 
important as the supply power wiring. In most cases, low-voltage con-
trol systems are used in residential and small commercial applications. 
In large commercial and industrial applications, line voltage control 
systems are often used. Many large commercial and industrial systems 
are controlled by special control systems. These specialized control 
systems can be electric, pneumatic, or electronic. Specialized control 
systems are a complete subject in themselves and hence will not be 
covered in this section.
All residential packaged air-conditioning systems use a low-voltage 
control system that connects the thermostat to the unit, as shown in 
Figure 16.69 shaded in blue. These control systems are simple and easy 
to install by following the installation instructions.
The control system for residential split systems is usually easy to 
install. They all incorporate a 24-volt control system, with the low-voltage 
power usually being supplied from the indoor section whether it be a fan 
coil unit or a fossil fuel furnace. The furnace or fan coil unit, whichever 
is used, has a terminal board that is labeled with letter designations for 
hook up as shown in Figure 16.70. This terminal board is the junction point 
between the fan coil unit or furnace, the thermostat, and the outdoor unit. 
The connection of a furnace, thermostat, and condensing unit is shown 
16.68
F I G U R E
Wiring chart from the installation instructions. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Recommended Wire Size for Air-Cooled Packaged Equipment
Unit Model 
Number
Voltage 
Characteristics
Minimum 
Circuit 
Ampacity
Minimum 
Wire 
Size (AWG)
Maximum 
Wire 
Length (ft)
Maximum 
Overcurrent 
Protection
ACP18
ACP24
ACP30
ACP36
ACP48
ACP48
ACP60
ACP60
208/230-1-60
208/230-1-60
208/230-1-60
208/230-1-60
208/230-1-60
208/230-3-60
208/230-1-60
208/230-3-60
14
20
22
28
40
25
50
35
14
12
10
10
6
10
6
8
70
80
100
90
100
85
100
95
20
30
30
45
60
40
60
50
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

in Figure 16.71. The connection of the indoor section, the thermostat, and 
the outdoor unit of a pump is shown in Figure 16.72 highlighted in blue.
The control system of a residential split system and fan coil unit or 
furnace can be connected in many different ways. The technician should 
always follow the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
Control systems for relatively small commercial units are similar in 
design to the residential low-voltage system. The only exception is that 
the system uses a control relay that closes and supplies the condensing 
with 240 volts while using a normal 24-volt control system. Two-stage 
L1
L2
L3
L1
L2
L3
L1
L2 L3
CFM
CFMC
C
COMP
IFM
IFMS
Supply air duct
Electric heater
Power supply
from disconnect
Power supply
from disconnect
Condensing unit
Power supply
from disconnect
Air-handling
unit
Legend
IFMS:
IFM:
CFM:
COMP:
CFMC:
C:
Indoor fan motor starter
Indoor fan motor
Condenser fan motor
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
contactor
Contactor
16.69
F I G U R E
Drawing of the control connections for a residential packaged air 
conditioning. (Courtesy of Lennox Industries, Inc.)
 
Section 16.8   Field Wiring 
595
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

596 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
heating and/or two-stage cooling 
can also be used with a low-voltage 
control system.
Twenty-four-volt control wir-
ing in most cases is a small wire 
(# 18 to #20) that is usually multi-
strand and covered with a rubber 
jacket as shown in Figure 16.73. 
Thermostat wire can be purchased 
single stranded or multistranded, 
with or without a rubber jacket 
protecting the small thermostat 
wires. The size of the control wir-
ing should follow the manufac-
turer’s specifications.
The wiring of air-condition-
ing and heating systems is one 
of the most important factors in 
the installation of equipment. The 
control system is actually the heart 
of the electric system because 
its function is to properly con-
trol the entire system. The life of 
the equipment can be drastically 
16.70
F I G U R E
Furnace terminal board. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
C
R
Y
G
W
Furnace terminal
board
Condensing
unit contactor
coil
Thermostat
R
Y
G
W
16.71
F I G U R E
Drawing of the control connections on 
a furnace, thermostat, and condensing 
unit. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OUTDOOR UNIT
Comp : Compressor
OFM : Outdoor fan motor
BM 
: Blower motor
SH 
: Strip heat
C 
: Contactor
RVS 
: Reversing valve solenoid
SHT 
: Strip heat thermostat
BR 
: Blower relay
SHR 
: Strip heat relay
DT 
: Defrost thermostat
LPS 
: Low pressure switch
 
 DF contacts are
 
 port of the board
DT
DT
DT
PS
PS
LPS
DF2
DF1
SHR
BR
BR
SHR
SHT
SH
INDOOR UNIT
BM
T/stat
DF3
C
R
Y
O
W
Comp
OFM
W
C
G
R
C
C
Y
O
E
W
G
R
RVS
16.72
F I G U R E
Drawing of the heat pump control connections on the indoor unit, thermo-
stat, and outdoor unit. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
Section 16.8   Field Wiring 
597
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

598 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
reduced by undersized wire or by having loose 
connections. Therefore, wiring to all compo-
nents must be sized correctly. The installation 
instructions are the best place to look for the 
proper method of wiring and the proper con-
nection points. Overlooking the smallest detail 
in the electrical connections of a system can 
give trouble and improper operation.
16.9    CHECK, TEST, AND START 
PROCEDURES
A check, test, and start procedure is one way 
of ensuring that a new installation is operating 
correctly and efficiently. An air-conditioning, 
heating, and refrigeration system should not 
be installed, started, and left without a thor-
ough inspection by the installation technician. 
In today’s market, the installation technician is 
oftentimes under time restraints to complete 
an installation and move on to the next one. It 
is essential that installation technicians make 
certain that the installation is operating cor-
rectly and efficiently before leaving the instal-
lation. This can be accomplished by establishing a check, test, and start 
procedure of the installed installation.
There are many elements of a new installation that should be 
checked before the installation technician loads his tools and takes off 
to the next installation. If technicians check the vital signs of a new 
installation, oftentimes this will prevent a call back for a problem in 
the installation that was undetected at the time of installation. The 
technician should check all electrical characteristics that are important 
to system operation. These electrical checks will give the technician 
the information necessary to make a sound judgment on the electrical 
operation of the system. The technician should check the operation of 
the mechanical refrigeration system in order to determine correct sys-
tem operation.
The technician should make a thorough check of the electrical char-
acteristics of the system. The line voltage supplied to equipment should 
be checked and recorded, establishing a record that at installation the 
power supply to the equipment was correct. The running amp draw of the 
16.73
F I G U R E
Thermostat 
wire with outer 
jacket. (Delmar/
Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

compressor and entire unit should be checked and recorded, establishing 
that at the time of installation the compressor and system were operating 
correctly. The following items should be checked; they are important and 
often times overlooked.
• Check all electrical connections for tightness.
• Check the condition of the insulation of all conductors.
• Make sure that all electrical loads in the system are operating 
properly.
• Make sure all electrical circuits are labeled at the power supply.
• Make sure the equipment is properly grounded.
• Make sure all exterior electrical connections are waterproof.
• Make sure all wires passing through metal have the proper connector.
• Check the overload protection of the equipment.
• Make sure that all exposed controls are level.
• Make sure all equipment covers are in the proper position and cor-
rectly attached.
• Made sure area around equipment is clean.
These items may seem small and insignificant, but they are extremely 
important. A loose connection in part of the wiring on a conditioned air 
system could lead to equipment or structure damage. Oftentimes during 
the installation, conductors are damaged, which could result in personal 
injury. Nothing is more confusing to a homeowner than to attempt to 
disconnect the power source from an appliance and be unable to find the 
correct breaker. The condition of the equipment and surrounding area 
is a reflection on the installation technician and the company that was 
given the privilege to install the new system.
Figure 16.74 shows a check, test, and start form used by installa-
tion technicians when initially starting a residential heating and air-
conditioning installation.
16.10 CUSTOMER RELATIONS
A customer is one who makes a purchase whether it be a ball point pen, 
gallon of gasoline, new suit of clothes, new appliance, or servicing an 
air-conditioning system. It is the responsibility of the seller to provide a 
product or service to the customer. It is the responsibility of the customer 
 
Section 16.10   Customer Relations 
599
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

600 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
ABC MECHANICAL
CHECK, TEST, AND START CHECKLIST
CHECKLIST
All electrical connects tight
YES
NO
YES
NO
YES
NO
YES
NO
YES
NO
YES
NO
YES
NO
YES
NO
Electrical circuits properly labeled
Equpment properly grounded
All equipment level
All equipment covers in place and properly attached
Caps attached to refrigerant connections
Installation area clean
Homeowner instructed on operation of equipment
Voltage being supplied to outdoor unit:
volts
Voltage being supplied to indoor unit:
Amp draw of compressor
Amp draw of outdoor fan motor
Amp draw of indoor fan motor
Amp draw of supplementary heat
Discharge pressure
Suction pressure
Supply air temperature (cooling)
Return air temperature (cooling)
Supply air temperature (heating)
Return air temperature (heating)
volts
amps
amps
amps
amps
Psig
Psig
degrees F
degrees F
degrees F
degrees F
16.74
F I G U R E
Check, test, and start Form. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
to pay for those products or services that the seller has provided. This 
sounds simple and straight to the point but is it. The seller and customer 
are looking at things from two different points of view. The customer 
wants or needs a product or service for a fair price, and the seller wants to 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 16.10   Customer Relations 
601
make a profit from what he or she sells the customer. Customer  service is 
the relations that are built between the customer and the seller. The cus-
tomer wants to feel like he is being treated fairly and can trust the seller, 
while the seller wants to make a fair profit by selling a product or per-
forming the service to the customer’s satisfaction. Many times this task 
is almost impossible for each party is not looking at the situation in the 
same way. It falls on the organization that is selling the product to make 
the customer happy and hopefully call the next time that service is needed 
while making a profit. In the HVACR industry, the center of customer 
relations is the technician, because they have the most contact with 
customer. It is imperative that the technician make the right impression 
on the customers so that they will feel like they are being treated fairly 
and receive the necessary and proper service by a competent technician. 
Customer service involves making a good first impression, good listening 
skills, effective communication, technical skills to solve problems, work-
ing together as a team, and following up on problems. If the technician 
can put all this in one package, then they will gain the trust and respect 
of the customer.
The impression that the technician makes on the initial call with the 
customer is of utmost importance. On the very first contact, the customer 
is at that point developing his opinion about the technician and the com-
pany. Of course, the technician plays a large part in that opinion. The 
technician’s appearance is the first thing that the customer will notice. If 
the technician greets the customer on the first call rudely, unshaven (a 
neatly trimmed beard is fine), dirty uniform, shirt tail out, and no socks; 
then what is the customer to expect. The technician should make every 
effort to be clean and neat and treat the customer in the way that they 
want to be treated. Customers like to see a technician in a uniform that 
displays the name of the employer. The technician should greet the cus-
tomer in a polite business-like manner and during the conversation listen 
to obtain any information about the problem or the system that they. 
From this initial contact, the technician should be developing a relation-
ship with the customer that builds trust in them and the company for 
which they work.
The success of a technician goes far beyond that first impression; the 
first impression is only the start.
The customer if available and the technician should communicate 
once the technician arrives at the location of the call. It is imperative 
that the technician treat the customer as they are important and listen to 
what service they desire or problem they have with the system. Once the 
initial discussion is completed, the technician can disseminate the infor-
mation that the customer has given them and proceed to  perform the 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

602 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
necessary service that is required by the customer. When the  technician 
has finished the requested service, the technician has not completed his 
call until they communicate with the customer if they are available. The 
technician should give the customer a brief description of the services 
that they provided and give them any other information they need to 
know. A good example is when a technician installs a programmable ther-
mostat; they should make certain that the customer understands how to 
program the thermostat and leave the thermostat information with the 
customer. The technician’s communications skills with the customer are 
just as important as his technical skills are to the equipment.
The employing company has in most cases made quite an investment 
in the training of technicians, and the technician should effectively use 
those skills to perform the requested services on a call. The technician 
should give the appearance to the customer that they are competent 
and well trained. A customer always feels better if he sees a company 
logo on the techs shirt especially on the first call. The manner in which 
the technician approaches a service call gives the customer a good idea 
of their technical skills. If the technician approaches a service call in a 
helter-skelter method with no clear direction, most customers pick that 
up immediately and their confidence goes down. No matter what the 
technician thinks, the customer is watching them closely as they work. 
The technician builds confidence if they have the right tools for the job 
and have them in an orderly fashion not thrown all over the work area. 
The technician must use good communication skills with the customer 
and by their actions give the customer confidence in the technical skills.
The technician should always build up the company to the customer. 
They should if possible communicate that the company is a team and 
their first priority is to do a good job and satisfy the customer. It would 
be nice if the company could send the same technician to the same cus-
tomers, but logistically this is impossible. The technician should instill to 
the customer that all personnel employed by the company are competent 
and eager to please the customer.
The technician should never leave the customer in a state where they 
don’t feel like they know what’s going on with their problem or situation. 
The technician should keep the customer informed of the progress that is 
being made to correct the problem that they have. If the technician can’t 
do this in person, they or other personnel from the company should make 
the customer aware of exactly what is going on. Technicians or company 
personnel should follow up on all calls to make certain the problem has 
been repaired and the customer is happy.
Technicians are called on now to follow procedures that years ago 
would never happen. Some organizations require that technicians collect 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

for a service call at the time it is performed or make arrangements with 
the business office. In this day and time, it is imperative that companies 
cut cost and this is good way to trim cost, but an efficient procedure must 
be used. Many organizations pay commission to technicians on the sales 
of parts and new systems. Technicians should never get to the point where 
they are driven by the commission that they receive from the selling of 
parts and systems. A good technician sells his company to the consumer.
SUMMARY
Residential heating and air-conditioning control systems range from 
simple to complex using a line voltage thermostat to control a window air 
conditioner to a low-voltage thermostat controlling a heat pump. Many 
residential conditioned air systems use basic control systems that use 
simple circuitry that produces adequate results in residential systems. 
The top of the line air-conditioning control systems go far beyond basic 
control circuits. With the development of electronics, residential control 
systems have advanced to a point that a microprocessor communicates 
with the control system to control the speed of fans and the compressor, 
moving comfort to a higher level. The zoning of residences is becoming 
increasingly popular. The residential conditioned air market is expanding 
at a rapid pace.
Packaged air-conditioning units that are used in residential sectors 
of the industry are generally equipped with air-cooled condensers. Most 
packaged air-conditioning units use electrical resistance heat or gas as 
a heating source. Many packaged units are designed so that electrical 
resistance heating packages can be added to the unit in the field as the 
heat source. A packaged unit that uses gas heat as a heating source must 
be designed for that purpose and purchased in that manner. Heat pumps 
are also manufactured as packaged units. The air to air heat pump uses 
air as the medium in both the evaporator and condenser whereas the 
water to air heat pump uses water as the medium of heat transfer for the 
condenser in the cooling cycle and the evaporator in the heating cycle.
Split-system air-conditioning systems consist of two sections. The 
condensing unit is made up of the condenser, condenser fan motor, com-
pressor, and the necessary controls to safely operate these loads. The 
other section of a split system could be a furnace or fan coil unit that 
would supply the air flow across the evaporator for heat transfer. The 
indoor section of a split system usually houses the evaporator, heating 
source, and all the necessary controls to safely operate the system.
 
Summary 
603
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

604 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
Conditioned air systems in most cases must have a cooling and heating 
mode of operation. The heating source could be electric resistance heat, 
a gas furnace, or an oil furnace, whereas the cooling mode of operation 
is accomplished by an evaporator and a condensing unit. The heat pump 
is often used for heating and is nothing more than an air-conditioning 
system that has the ability to reverse the mechanical refrigeration cycle. 
In the cooling mode of operation, the heat pump absorbs heat from the 
inside and rejects it to the outside. In the heating mode, the refrigeration 
cycle is reversed, and the heat is absorbed by the outdoor coil (evapora-
tor) and rejected to the inside by the indoor coil (condenser). The control 
system of a conditioned air system using a fossil fuel heat source must 
control the operation of the cooling and heating modes of operation. If 
using a fossil fuel furnace as a heat source, the furnace will have a control 
system for the heating and blower motor operation, while the condensing 
unit would house the necessary controls for the operation of the com-
pressor condenser fan motor. However, an air to air heat pump control 
system is complicated by the fact that the outdoor coil in the heating 
operation must be defrosted because it accumulates ice and at that point 
the supplementary heat must be started to supply warm air to the struc-
ture. The water to air heat pump does not require a defrost cycle because 
the water used for the heat transfer medium is in the right temperature 
range and cannot freeze because it is moving.
Residential air-conditioning systems where they are packaged or 
split systems require a source of power and conductors to connect the 
thermostat to the packaged unit and to connect the thermostat to the 
indoor unit and the outdoor unit. The conductor carrying the line volt-
age to the unit must be connected from the power supply to the equip-
ment with some form of disconnecting means at the air-conditioning 
equipment. Electrical connections must be made between the thermo-
stat and packaged unit in order for the thermostat to pass the correct 
signal to the unit creating the correct mode of operation. The electrical 
power supply connections on a split system installation must be both to 
the indoor unit and the outdoor. The control connections would prob-
ably go from the thermostat to a terminal board at the indoor unit and 
from that terminal board to the outdoor unit. The technician must make 
certain that all conductors have been correctly sized for the application 
and all electrical connections are tight. Once the technician has com-
pleted a system installation he or she should go through a check, test, 
and start procedure.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Review Questions 
605
C H A P T E R  1 6  R E V I E W
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
RQ1 
What is the purpose of an air-conditioning control 
system?
RQ2 
Which of the following components is not in a typi-
cal condensing unit?
a. compressor
b. condenser
c. condenser fan motor
d. all of the above
RQ3 
Most residential condensing units require a control 
voltage of _______.
a. 24 volts
b. 120 volts
c. 240 volts
d. none of the above
RQ4 
Safety controls used for a condensing unit would 
be wired in ____________ with the contactor 
coil.
a. series
b. parallel
RQ5 
The condenser fan motor and compressor in a 
residential condensing unit are generally wired in 
______________.
a. series
b. parallel
RQ6 
A packaged air-conditioning unit is built 
________________________.
a. with all components housed in one unit
b.  with the evaporator fan motor in a separate 
compartment
c. with the compressor in a separate compartment
d. none of the above
RQ7 
What is a gas pack?
RQ8 
True or False: The simplest control system used on 
a condensing unit is a contactor.
RQ9 
Briefly explain the operation of a condensing unit.
RQ10 
Draw a wiring diagram of a simple residential air-
cooled condensing unit with a contactor, condenser 
fan motor, and compressor with starting compo-
nents and the control voltage supplied from the 
furnace.
RQ11 
What is a split air-conditioning system?
RQ12 
Which of the following would not be used to 
supply the air for a split system air-conditioning 
installation?
a. condensing unit
b. oil furnace
c. gas furnace
d. fan coil unit
RQ13 
What kind of heat could be added to an air-cooled 
packaged unit for the unit to supply heat to a 
structure?
a. heat pump
b. fossil fuel
c. electrical resistance heat
d. none of the above
RQ14 
Which of the following items would not be used in 
a heat pump?
a. defrost control
b. contactor
c. indoor fan motor
d. gas valve
RQ15 
Which of the following types of units would be 
used to condition a small light commercial building 
and would be installed on the roof?
a. split system
b. condensing unit
c. fan coil unit
d. packaged unit
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

606 
CHAPTER 16   Residential Air-Conditioning Control Systems
C H A P T E R  1 6  R E V I E W
RQ16 
Which of the following applications would require 
supplementary heat?
a. gas furnace
b. oil furnace
c. heat pump
d. all of the above
RQ17 
On an air-conditioning split-system installation, the 
two parts of the system that require power connec-
tions are the ____________ and ___________.
a. furnace and condensing unit
b. indoor blower motor and condensing unit
c. fan coil unit and condensing unit
d. all of the above
RQ18 
Field wiring is installed by _______________.
a. assembly line personnel
b. installation technicians
c. service technicians
d. all of above
RQ19 
True or False: Electrical resistance heat is com-
monly used in residential applications.
RQ20 
What are two major considerations an installation 
technician must take into account when installing 
air-conditioning power wiring?
RQ21 
What type of control system is used on most resi-
dential air-conditioning systems?
a. line voltage
b. low voltage
c. both a and b
RQ22 
What is the purpose of control wiring?
RQ23 
How many power supplies would be required for 
a split system using electric resistance heat as the 
heating source?
a. 1
b. 2
RQ24 
What does the terminal “O” on a heat pump ther-
mostat control?
a. contactor
b. compressor
c. indoor fan motor
d. reversing valve
RQ25 
What type of air-conditioning system could use a 
closet space for installation?
a. packaged unit
b. split system
RQ26 
True or False: The outdoor fan motor is de-energized 
on a heat pump during the defrost cycle.
RQ27 
Why are customer relations important to the technician?
RQ28 
What is the purpose of using supplementary heat 
on a heat pump?
a.  heat the supply air during the defrost cycle
b.  assist the heat pump in heating the structure in 
extremely low ambient conditions
c.  have a source of heat if or when the heat pump 
is inoperable
d. all of the above
RQ29 
The thermostat on a residential conditioned air split 
system would connect directly to _____________.
a. terminal board in air handler or furnace
b. condensing unit
c. gas valve
d. indoor fan relay
RQ30 
Which of the following tasks should a technician 
do when performing a check, test, and start proce-
dure on a new installation?
a. check all electrical connections for tightness
b. check the voltage input to the equipment
c. check the current draw of the compressor
d. all of the above
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 16 in the Lab Manual.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
◗ Understand basic commercial and industrial control circuitry, including 
compressor, evaporator fan motor, condenser fan motor, and safety control 
circuits.
◗ Understand control circuits that are used in commercial and industrial 
equipment like specialized compressor motor circuits, water chiller controls, 
component interlocks, anti-short-cycling devices, and other.
◗ Understand the basic circuitry of control systems used on light commercial 
and commercial and industrial applications.
◗ Identify the methods of control for commercial and industrial systems.
◗ Describe the control loop as it relates to control circuitry.
◗ Explain a basic pneumatic control system.
◗ Explain a direct digital control system.
KEY TERMS
Anti-short-cycling 
Interlock
Control loop 
Pneumatic control system
Direct digital control system 
Water chiller
Electronic control system 
Water-cooled condensing unit
Hot water boiler 
Commercial and Industrial 
Air-Conditioning Control Systems
C H A P T E R
607
R
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INTRODUCTION
Control systems used in the heating, cooling, and refrigeration industry 
are designed to control the electric loads of a system to maintain the 
desired level of comfort in a given area or the temperature of a medium. 
Control systems must contain the necessary safety components to ensure 
safe operation of the equipment. In commercial and industrials equip-
ment, larger loads are used which requires greater safety, more than its 
residential counterparts. For example, compressors used in commer-
cial and industrial systems often cost in thousands of dollars making 
it imperative to monitor its operation in order to prevent the load from 
operating at unsafe conditions.
Many different types of control systems are used in the industry today, 
but most systems have certain components and circuits in common, 
depending on the control voltage and the type of equipment. Low-voltage 
control circuits are different from line voltage control circuits because 
of the devices that can be used with each type of system. Low voltage 
(24 volts) will not effectively energize some of the large control compo-
nents that are used in larger systems so line voltage control systems are 
used. The basic control system contains several components common to 
all control systems, such as the compressor, the evaporator fan motor, 
and the condenser fan motor along with their controlling devices. Of 
course, large commercial and industrial control system would be more 
complicated that the smaller residential control system.
It is essential that installation and service technicians understand 
basic circuitry of control systems to be able to install or troubleshoot the 
wide range of heating and air-conditioning systems that are presently 
being used in the industry. Not all equipment or structures will have the 
same type of controls, and there are different methods of controlling cer-
tain devices in commercial and industrial systems. There is a wide range 
of equipment being used in the HVACR industry today and in most cases 
companies tend to specialize in the residential and light commercial or 
the heavy commercial systems. However, this is not a rule some larger 
companies install and service any type of system. In this chapter, we will 
be looking at some control system circuitry that is used in larger heating, 
air-conditioning, and refrigeration systems.
Equipment used in the light commercial segment of the HVAC indus-
try is often similar to the residential systems discussed previously. The 
major difference is the capacity of the equipment; light commercial 
air-conditioning systems usually range from a capacity of 5 to 25 tons. 
In most cases, because the equipment and components are larger and 
608 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.1   Commercial and Industrial Heating and Air-Conditioning Equipment 
609
more expensive, more safety controls are used to protect the higher 
investment in light commercial equipment.
Large commercial and industrial equipment ranges from the light 
commercial range up to extremely large capacities, both heating and 
cooing that could supply the heating and cooling for an entire complex. 
Most commercial and industrial control systems are designed specifically 
to maintain the comfort and possibly other manufacturing processes in 
large structures, such as manufacturing facilities, schools, hospitals, mul-
tistoried office and apartment building, and so on. In modern structures, 
direct digital control has become popular and is widely used. This chapter 
will cover a broad overview of commercial and industrial equipment and 
controls systems.
17.1  COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL HEATING 
AND AIR-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
Commercial and industrial heating and air-conditioning systems supply 
conditioned air for large structures and possibly chilled or hot water for 
manufacturing processes that might be needed in the facility. What type 
of cooling and heating systems, what heat transfer mediums will be used 
for heat transfer in the evaporators and condensers, where the equip-
ment will be located, how much infiltration air, and what type of controls 
systems are important consideration that must be made by the owner 
of the structure and the engineer or architect. There are many types of 
systems that are used in the industry today using a variety of equipment 
to accomplish the conditioning of the structure. This section will give an 
overview of some of the commercial and industrial equipment that is 
being used in the industry today.
The selection of the equipment to be used to condition the structure 
and possibly provide chilled or hot water for industrial processes in most 
cases is made by architects and mechanical engineers in the initial plan-
ning and drawing of the complex. The architects must examine a multi-
tude of options before selecting the equipment to be used in a structure. 
With the high cost of energy today, the operating cost of the equipment 
will always be a factor that must be considered in equipment selection. 
The capacity of the heating and cooling equipment will have to be cal-
culated to ensure that the supply will be adequate for the structures’ 
heat gain and loss and any industrial processes that will be needed. The 
medium that will be used for the heat transfer process will have to be 
determined along with its availability. The selection of the type of control 
system that is best for the application must be made considering any 
industrial processes that are required. The location of the equipment 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

610 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
must be decided; considerations must be made to the size of the equip-
ment and the placement of the equipment in the complex. The type of 
the conditioned air flow system will have to be selected. The type of con-
trol system that will give the best results for the objective of the owner 
will have to be determined. The architect and engineer will have to make 
all these decisions and the HVAC technician will have to install and ser-
vice the equipment.
Commercial and Industrial Condensing Units
Many commercial and industrial conditioned air systems use large 
condensing units to supply mechanical refrigeration to the conditioned 
space. The condensing unit would supply liquid refrigerant to the evapo-
rator metering device through the liquid line and return the refrigerant 
to the condensing unit through the suction line. The condensing unit 
rejects the heat that is being absorbed into the evaporator. Commercial 
and industrial condensing units would be used with a large evaporator 
blower with a direct expansion evaporator. Commercial and industrial 
condensing units are seldom use in applications above 50 tons. A large 
commercial and industrial condensing unit is shown in Figure 17.1 and a 
large fan coil unit shown in Figure 17.2.
17.1
F I G U R E
Commercial and industrial condensing unit. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.1   Commercial and Industrial Heating and Air-Conditioning Equipment 
611
Commercial and Industrial 
Packaged Units
Most commercial and industrial 
packaged units are installed on 
the roof of a structure and can be 
equipped to serve more than one 
zone. The commercial and industrial 
packaged unit used in this applica-
tion is a complete unit and is shown 
in Figure 17.3. The only connections 
necessary when installing this type 
of unit is the power and control wir-
ing and the gas supply if the unit uses 
gas as the heating source. These units are often called multi-zone units 
because they can be manufactured to supply the specific number of zones 
in a structure which would have to be designated during the manufactur-
ing process. Figure 17.4 shows the damper motor setup controlling each 
zone. The damper motor in this application is controlled by a thermostat 
and is designed to supply air to the conditioned space that is the correct 
temperature to maintain the temperature of the conditioned space.
17.2
F I G U R E
Commercial and industrial fan coil unit. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
17.3
F I G U R E
Multi-zone roof top packaged unit. 
(Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

612 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
Blower Units
Most large commercial and industrial conditioned air systems use large 
blowers to supply the air flow that is needed to condition the structure. A 
large commercial and industrial blower unit is shown in Figure 17.5 that 
is used to supply air for a large structure.
17.4
F I G U R E
Dampers of multi-zone roof top packaged unit.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
17.5
F I G U R E
Commercial and industrial blower unit. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.1   Commercial and Industrial Heating and Air-Conditioning Equipment 
613
Hot Water Boilers
Many commercial and industrial 
complexes use a hot water boiler to 
heat water that is supplied to heat 
transfer devices that condition the 
air in a structure or zone. A large hot 
water boiler is shown in Figure 17.6. 
The control system maintains the 
water temperature at the designed 
temperature level. Hot water pumps 
then supply the hot water to hot 
water coils that have been placed 
in the supply air flow to each zone 
as shown in Figure 17.7. Individual 
zone controls would regulate the 
flow of hot water being supplied to 
the hot water coil for that zone.
17.6
F I G U R E
Hot water boiler. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Boiler
Hot water
pump
Hot water
coils
17.7
F I G U R E
Drawing of hot water system. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

614 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
Water Chillers
Some commercial and industrial systems use water chillers to cool water 
and supply it to chilled water coils in the air flow. A water chiller is shown 
in Figure 17.8. Chilled water pumps supply chilled water to the chilled 
water coils that are placed in the air supply to a zone. In most cases, a hot 
water boiler and water chiller are used to maintain the desired tempera-
ture in the zones of a structure. An individual zone control would regulate 
the chilled water flow to the coil thus maintaining the desired tempera-
ture in the zone. A drawing of a commercial and industrial system using 
hot water and chilled water coils to maintain the desired temperature in 
the conditioned space is shown in Figure 17.9.
There are many types of equipment and control systems that are 
used in the commercial and industrial phase of the industry. It would be 
impossible to cover each type of equipment and control system. This is a 
general overview of some of the systems used in the industry.
17.2 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL CONTROL CIRCUITRY
All types and designs of control systems are used in commercial and 
industrial air-conditioning, heating, or refrigeration systems. The con-
trols systems used in equipment from 25 to 75 tons cannot afford to be as 
simple and use as few a components as the smaller residential systems. 
17.8
F I G U R E
Water chiller. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.2   Commercial and Industrial Control Circuitry 
615
This type of control system must ensure that the electric loads are oper-
ating in a safe manner because of their greater cost. The control of this 
type of equipment is generally more complex than the smaller systems 
because of its size and operation.
Most commercial and industrial systems use some method of capac-
ity control because of the variations in the load in the conditioned areas. 
When capacity control is used on these larger air-conditioning systems, it 
usually involves some means of changing the compressor load to meet the 
load in the conditioned space. Also, most large air-conditioning and heat-
ing systems have several important controls circuits that prevent short-
cycling and operation of the equipment under conditions that would cause 
damage. Thus, we see that commercial and industrial equipment uses 
considerably more components than small residential equipment because 
of size, cost, capacity control, and the general design of larger systems.
It would be impossible to cover all the control circuitry used in com-
mercial and industrial equipment. However, many of the most common 
control circuits will be covered.
Blower
Hot water
circulator
Hot water coil
Hot water
boiler
Water chiller
Chilled water
circulator
Chilled water coil
17.9
F I G U R E
Drawing of system using hot water and chilled 
water coils. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

616 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
Compressor Motor Controls
There are two methods used to start three-phase compressors on large 
systems: part winding and across-the-line. The contactor is used to start 
the compressor on most systems. An across-the-line type of motor start-
ing requires only a single contactor, as shown in Figure 17.10(a). The 
across-the-line starting is nothing more than a contactor controlling the 
compressor motor. However, a part winding motor starting is quite a bit 
different. A part winding motor would require two contactors along with 
a time delay relay. The part winding motor is used to allow the compres-
sor to start easier, with less wear and tear. A part winding motor con-
nection is shown in Figure 17.10(b). The part winding motor is actually 
divided into two separate winding, with the first winding being energized 
1.5 to 3 seconds before the second winding is energized. The purpose of a 
part winding motor is to reduce the initial starting ampacity of the motor.
Most commercial and industrial systems have some method of 
capacity control. Capacity control is the method that is used to vary the 
capacity of the compressor as the load increases and decreases. The 
methods that are commonly used to vary the capacity of commercial 
T1
BLK
OL3
OL2
OL1
TB1
Field Power
Field Power
C
YEL
BLU
BLK
YEL
BLU
BLK
YEL
BLU
T2
T3
T1
BLK
OL4
TB1
C1
C2
6
5
2
3
1
YEL
BLU
RED
BRN
ORN
BLK
YEL
BLU
RED
BRN
ORN
BLK
YEL
BLU
RED
BRN
ORN
T2
T3
T7
T8
T9
(a) Across-the-line starter (shaded area)
(b) Part winding motor hookup (shaded area)
17.10
F I G U R E
(a) Across-the-line compressor motor connections. (b) Part-winding compressor motor 
connections. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.2   Commercial and Industrial Control Circuitry 
617
and  industrial compressors are cylinder unloading and hot gas bypass. 
The hot gas bypass method bypasses hot gas from the discharge of the 
compressor back to the suction port of the compressor allowing recircu-
lation of the same refrigerant through the compressor. The most com-
mon method used is cylinder unloading, where the gas in some of the 
cylinders in a multiple cylinder compressor is not being compressed. 
This can be accomplished by some type of solenoid acts as a pilot duty 
device and directs the refrigerant flow to open the cylinder valves mak-
ing that particular cylinder in active. This reduces the load on the com-
pressor because the number of cylinders that have been unloaded are 
no longer compressing refrigerant. When the operating suction pressure 
of a mechanical refrigeration system decreases, it is an indication that 
the load is decreasing also. Pressure switches are used to energize the 
unloader solenoid which unloads the compressor cylinder.
Water Chiller Control Circuitry
Water chillers are refrigeration systems that cool the water, pumped into 
other parts of the system to maintain the desired condition of a specific area 
or zone. The control on a water chiller will usually come from the chilled 
water temperature, which will relate information back to the refrigeration 
control system. This type of control can also include a pump-down system. 
The system maintains a certain chilled water temperature at all times. A 
typical control system for a water chiller is shown in Figure 17.11.
Water chillers require an interlock in the chiller control circuit to 
ensure that the chilled water pump is operating before the water chiller 
refrigeration unit operates. This interlock ensures that the water chiller 
will not accidentally freeze the water in the evaporator, causing a rupture 
of the evaporator. Figure 17.11 shows two interlock circuits which are 
shaded, that ensure the operation of the chilled water pump before the 
chiller will operate. The interlocks are connected into the TB3 (terminal 
board three) on the diagram and are the chilled water flow switch (CWFS) 
and the cold water pump interlock.
If the water chiller were to operate without the chilled water pump 
operating, there could be danger of the water freezing inside the chiller 
and causing tremendous damage to the system. With two interlocks in 
the chiller control circuit, it is highly unlikely that the chiller control 
would start without the chilled water pump operating.
Blower Motor Circuitry
The control of the blower motor in large commercial and industrial air-
conditioning and heating systems is accomplished through the main 
HVAC control system. Fan motors in these applications are generally 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

618 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
B
T2
T1
COM
A
NO
NC
CB1
Remove when wiring
CB2
A
Accessory
ground fault interrupt
Sensor
Logic
13
12
11
C2
C1A
C1
23
22
21
13
12
11
C2
C1
C1
23
22
21
ground fault interrupt
Remove when wiring
proof of flow switch  (CWF5)
Remove when wiring
Neutral   (346,
380, 400 V only)
Equip Gnd
chilled water pump (CWP)
RED
23
22
21
13
12
11
TB1
Field power supply
Fused
NEC Disconnect
[22.2] 7/8" Dia. hole
[63.5] 2 1/2"
or
[92.1]  3 5/8"
Dia. hole
11
12
13
14
15
16
21
22
23
24
25
26
208/240, 240 V Only
FU1
Alarm
or
 light
Alarm
shut-off
switch
BLK
BLK
TB3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Field 
supplied
Field supplied
demand limit
switch
Accessory
proof of flow
switch (CWFS)
Field 
supplied
cold
water pump
 interlock
NO
C
Fused
NEC disconnect
Field control
power supply
Equip GND
L1
L2
1
2
3
TB2
[22.2]  7/8" Dia. hole
To compressor
To compressor
Accessory ground fault sensors
(wires from the contactors to
the compressor are to pass thru
the torroids)
RED
ORN
BRN
BLK
BLU
YEL
-
17.11
F I G U R E
Typical water chiller control system. (Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.2   Commercial and Industrial Control Circuitry 
619
designed to operate whenever the building is occupied. Time clocks are 
used to cut the blower motor off during times when the building is 
unoccupied. These blower motors are interlocked into the main control 
system to ensure their operation when the heating and air-conditioning 
system is operating.
The smaller light commercial heating and air-conditioning systems 
usually cut off their fan motors on the “off” cycle of the equipment. 
However, they are equipped with a fan switch that allows continuous 
operation if desired. Many times, light commercial heating and air-
conditioning systems use a low-voltage control system using a conven-
tional low-voltage thermostat.
Various other methods are used to control evaporator fan motors, but 
none is as common as the constant air flow and the fan cycling with the 
equipment operation.
Condenser Fan Motor Circuitry
The condenser fan motors used on most commercial and industrial air-
conditioning units are usually designed to maintain a constant head 
pressure by operating a certain number of condenser fans to maintain the 
desire discharge pressure in the refrigeration system. The number of con-
denser fan that are operating at any given time is controlled by a outdoor 
thermostat or a high pressure switch that would close on an increase of 
the control medium to start the condenser fan motors maintaining the 
desired discharge pressure. Figure 17.12 shows a pressure switch high-
lighted in red that is used for head pressure control. The condensing 
temperature of a condensing unit should be maintained at or around 
90 degrees F for proper operation of the air-conditioning equipment.
Water-Cooled Condenser Interlocks
Water-cooled condensing units require an interlock in the condensing 
unit control circuit to ensure that the compressor does not start unless 
the cooling tower pump is operating. If an air-conditioning unit with a 
water-cooled condenser were to operate without water flowing to the 
condenser there would be no way for the heat to be rejected from the 
condenser causing a high discharge pressure. It is imperative that some 
type of interlock be used to make sure that the cooling tower water pump 
is operating when the compressor is operating.
Anti-Short Cycling Circuitry
The control circuit in Figure 17.12 is equipped with a time-delay module 
(TCD) and is highlighted in blue. This module prevents the condensing 
unit in this case from short-cycling (rapid starting and stopping), which 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

620 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
X
Field
Power
Supply
Neutral 400 V, 380 V,
only
RED
BLK
BLK
BLK
BLK
YEL
YEL
YEL
YEL
QT 
YEL
YEL
RED
BLK
ORN
RED
RED
RED
BRN
RED
RED
CH
BLU
BLU
BLU
BLU
BLK
BLK
BLK
YEL
COMP
YEL
BLU
YEL
YEL
OFM 1
BRN
BLK
YEL
OFM2
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
FCPS
BRN
DU1   
BLK
VIO
BLU
BLU
BLU
13
12
11
13
12
11
23
23
22
21
22
21
TB1
CB
Equip GND
208-240 V only
GRN
VIO
C1
C1
C
C1
C1
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
C1 C2
OFC
1
OFR
1
OFC 1
OFR1
OFC1 
OFR1
Tran1
C2
LLS1
C2
YEL
YEL
BLU
C2
C1
13
12
11
13
12
11
23
22
21
23
22
21
OFC1
OFC1
OFR1
OFC1
Cap1
Cap2
4
1
1
3
3
2
2
2
4
6
QT
Connect to
red for 
208 V only
(COM)
(200  V)
(240  V)
(480  V)
(See note 7)
B
C
Tran 1
Logic
13
12
11
TGD
LPS
HPS
TB2
IP
8
9
C1
(See notes 6,8)
(240 V-50 016, 024 only)
(208/240 V-60 013-024 only)
3
3
3
1
2
FUI
3.2 AMPS
(See note 4)
TC1
TB2
TC2
Cont
Auto
TB2
LLS
IFC
1
9
3
4
TB2
TB2
Schematic
17.12
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a large commercial and industrial condensing unit with 
pressure switch highlighted in red. (Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.3   Commercial Condensing Unit 
621
could occur from a faulty thermostat or possibly a safety control that is 
opening and closing rapidly. Short-cycling of a compressor could dam-
age or overload the compressor motor. The TCD module is an electronic 
timer that allows for a 5-minute delay from the time the unit shuts down 
to when it starts again. Earlier control systems used a mechanical timer 
assembly to facilitate this task. The mechanical timers worked with a 
relay to accomplish the same purpose, but they were more expensive and 
harder to troubleshoot. This timing method is one of the several methods 
used as a protective circuit in the industry to prevent a heavy load from 
short-cycling.
17.3 COMMERCIAL CONDENSING UNIT
A schematic diagram of a large condensing unit is discussed in this sec-
tion. The unit is energized by applying 240 volts to the condensing unit. 
Unlike the small residential units, the control circuit of this unit is com-
pletely line voltage. The unit operates on 208 volts-three phase-60 hertz. 
The schematic diagram for the unit discussed in this section is shown in 
Figure 17.13. The unit is started by the closing of the control relay con-
tacts of the control relay. This relay could be energized by a thermostat, 
pressure switch, or any other controlling device. The diagram will be 
discussed in three sections: the compressor circuits, the condenser fan 
motor circuits, and the safety controls of the circuit.
Compressor Circuits
The compressor circuit is shown in Figure 17.14. The equipment is using a 
part winding motor to operate the compressor. A part winding motor has 
two separate motor winding wound into one motor, which are energized 
at different times (although close together), built in one housing. The 
second motor winding is energized a few seconds after the first motor 
winding has been energized by a time delay relay. The motor is supplied 
by voltage through two contactors (marked in blue), C1 for the first motor 
winding and C2 for the second winding. The compressor motor circuits 
are equipped with a circuit breaker to protect the wiring and the motor. 
The power wiring is then supplied to the two contactors C1 and C2 that 
control the compressor. When the contacts of the contactors are closed, 
the compressor will operate.
The control circuit of the contactor is through the 208-volt-single phase-
60 hertz section of the diagram shown highlighted in red in Figure 7.14. 
This includes the CR contacts, safety controls, the contactor coils, the 
time-delay relay, and crankcase heater. The crankcase heater operates 
through the normally closed contacts of the control relay (CR).
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

622 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
C1
TDR
TDR
OL2
OL1
OPS
TS1
TS2
HPS
LPS
CR
CR
C2
OFC1
OCF2
OFC3
L1 L2 L3
CB1
TB
C1
C2
OFC1
OFC2
OFC3
COMP
FU
CR
CH 
CB2
CB3
TB:
TM:
FU:
TR:
C:
CB:
OFC:
OFM:
CH:
OPS:
TDR:
LLP:
DLT:
TS:
CR:
HP:
LP:
Term block
Timer motor
Fuse
Timer relay
Contactor
Circuit breaker
Outdoor fan contactor
Outdoor fan motor
Crankcase heater
Oil pressure switch
Time-delay relay
Liquid line pressure
stat (field supplied)
Discharge line thermostat
Temperature switch
Control relay
High pressure
Low pressure
OFM3
OFM2
OFM1
Legend
DLT
FU
From building
control system
CR
17.13
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of commercial and industrial condensing unit. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.3   Commercial Condensing Unit 
623
The compressor contactors control the operation of the compressor. 
When the CR contacts close, if all safety switches are closed, contactor 
coil C1 and the time-delay relay (TDR) are energized. The time-delay relay 
closes approximately 1 second after the C1 has energized, and this ener-
gizes C2. The compressor is now operating.
C1
TDR
TDR
OL2
OL1
OPS
DLT
From building
control system
HPS
LPS
CR
C2
L1 L2 L3
CB
C1
C2
COMP
FU
FU
CR
CH 
CB
CB
CR
TB:
TM:
FU:
TR:
C:
CB:
OFC:
OFM:
CH:
OPS:
TDR:
DLT:
TS:
CR:
HP:
LP:
OL:
Term block
Timer motor
Fuse
Timer relay
Contactor
Circuit breaker
Outdoor fan contactor
Outdoor fan motor
Crankcase heater
Oil Pressure switch
Time-delay relay
Discharge line thermostat
Temperature switch
Control relay
High pressure
Low pressure
Overload
Legend
17.14
F I G U R E
Compressor circuits. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

624 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
Condenser Fan Motor Circuits
The condenser fan motors OFM1, OFM2, and OFM3 are shown in 
Figure 17.15. The condenser fan motors are all controlled by separate con-
tactors OFC1, OFC2, and OFC3. The first condenser fan motor contactor 
OFC1 is energized by the closing of the control relay contacts in circuit 3. 
When the coil of contactor OFC1 is supplied with 230 volts and ener-
gized, the condenser fan motor one (OFM1) is started. The additional two 
condenser fan motors (OFM2 and OFM3) operate by the temperature sur-
rounding the unit. If the temperature is high enough to close temperature 
switch TS1, then contactor OFC2 is energized and starts condenser fan 
motor (OFM2). Condenser fan motor (OFM3) follow the same operating 
sequence as OFM2. These circuits are shown highlighted in green.
Circuit Safety Controls
The schematic diagram of the condensing unit in Figure 17.15 shows the 
circuitry of the safety controls highlighted in orange. The safety devices 
discussed here will not include fuses and circuit breakers.
All safety devices are added in one circuit and are connected between 
the CR contacts and the contactor coils in series. If any of the safety 
devices open, the contactor coils are immediately deenergized.
The high pressure switch (HPS) and low pressure switch (LPS) moni-
tor the pressure in the high and low side of the refrigeration system and 
open if the pressure reaches an unsafe condition. The discharge line 
thermostat (DLT) opens to protect the compressor if the discharge line 
temperature exceeds a set temperature. The overload’s (OL1, OL2, and 
OL3) protect the compressor motor from an overload by opening if an 
overload occurs.
The schematic diagram covered in this section is not the most dif-
ficult diagram service technicians may encounter. However, it is a good 
example of what the service technician will come in contact within the 
industry.
17.4 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PACKAGED UNITS
Commercial and industrial air-cooled packaged units are used in many 
applications in the HVAC industry. They can be mounted on the outside 
of a structure on ground level and through an air delivery system sup-
ply conditioned air to the structure. A large packaged unit used in this 
application is shown in Figure 17.16. The most common application of a 
commercial and industrial packaged unit is as a roof top unit mounted on 
the roof and supplying conditioned air to the structure. A large packaged 
unit used in this application is shown in Figure 17.17. Large air-cooled 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.4   Commercial and Industrial Packaged Units 
625
C1
TDR
TDR
OL2
OL1
OPS
TS1
TS2
HPS
LPS
CR
CR
C2
OFC1
OCF2
OFC3
L1 L2 L3
CB1
TB
C1
C2
OFC1
OFC2
OFC3
COMP
FU
CR
CH 
CB2
CB3
TB:
TM:
FU:
TR:
C:
CB:
OFC:
OFM:
CH:
OPS:
TDR:
LLP:
DLT:
TS:
CR:
HP:
LP:
Term block
Timer motor
Fuse
Timer relay
Contactor
Circuit breaker
Outdoor fan contactor
Outdoor fan motor
Crankcase heater
Oil pressure switch
Time-delay relay
Liquid line pressure
stat (field supplied)
Discharge line thermostat
Temperature switch
Control relay
High pressure
Low pressure
OFM3
OFM2
OFM1
Legend
DLT
FU
From building
control system
CR
17.15
F I G U R E
Outdoor fan motors circuits highlighted in green and safety circuit high-
lighted in orange. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

626 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
 packaged units may be equipped with a heating source to supply both 
heating and cooling to the structure. The heating sources used in these 
types of units could be electrical resistance heat or gas heat. Large pack-
aged unit-mounted ground level is usually a single zone system while 
roof top units are multi-zone systems.
The multi-zone roof top units are usually custom manufactured for a 
specific application with a specific number of zones. This type of unit basi-
cally can be divided into four sections: the air delivery section, the cooling 
section, the heating section, and the zoning section. Figure 17.18 shows the 
damper motors used in the 
zoning section. Each of these 
damper motors is one zone 
and each damper motor must 
be controlled by a thermostat 
centrally located in the zone 
served by that damper. The 
control system of the unit is 
designed to supply air at a cer-
tain temperature to a hot deck 
and cold deck and the damper 
motor mixes the air supplying 
the right temperature to each 
zone. A drawing of the hot 
and cold decks is shown in 
Figure 17.19.
17.17
FIGURE
Roof top multi-zone packaged 
unit. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
17.16
FIGURE
Large packaged unit showing 
ground level installation. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
17.18
FIGURE
Zone damper section of multi-zone roof top 
packaged unit. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.5   Air-Cooled Packaged Unit with Remote Condenser 
627
17.5 AIR-COOLED PACKAGED UNIT WITH REMOTE CONDENSER
The air-cooled package unit is a unit that houses all components within 
the same enclosure. These types of units are generally used more in the 
residential side of the industry rather than the commercial and industrial 
with the exception of the multi-zone roof 
top packaged unit and large packaged units 
used in special applications. An air-cooled 
packaged unit with a remote condenser 
is different from the normal packaged 
units that have been previously discussed 
in that all components are mounted in 
one enclosure except for the condenser 
which is placed outside. A drawing of an 
air-cooled packaged unit with a remote 
condenser is shown in Figure 17.20. The 
advantage of using a remote condenser 
is that the majority of the components 
can be mounted inside the structure and 
Dampers for
zones
Hot Deck
air supply
Cold Deck
air supply
Blower
section
Roof top packaged
unit
Compressor
section
Air Return
Supply
air +
zones
Elec Resistance
heaters
Evaporator coil
17.19
F I G U R E
Drawing of hot and cold deck of multi-zone 
packaged unit. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Air cooled
Condenser
Liquid line
discharge line
Field
power
supply
Air out
Air in
17.20
F I G U R E
Drawing of air-cooled packaged 
unit with a remote condenser. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

628 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
condenser can be mounted at a 
location where the rejection of the 
heat is unobjectionable. This could 
be especially advantageous when a 
freestanding packaged unit shown in 
Figure 17.21 is installed in a large area.
In most cases, these units are 
shipped from the factory with all con-
trols mounted and wired, including 
the thermostat and a relay that will 
control the signal to the remote con-
denser. These types of units usually 
have a line voltage control system. The 
electrical installation of these units is 
simple because all that is necessary in 
placing the unit the correct location 
and installing the power wires to the 
main unit and the remote condenser 
and providing conductors for the 
signal to the remote condenser. The 
only other installation considerations 
would be the condensate drain and 
the refrigerant piping.
Figure 17.22 shows the schem-
atic diagram of an air-cooled pack-
aged unit with a remote condenser. 
The condenser fan motors are inter-
locked to the operation of compres-
sor by the use of the OFR (outdoor 
fan relay) highlighted in red in the 
diagram. This interlock is nothing 
more than set of relay contacts that 
close when the system calls for cool-
ing. The installation technician would have to complete in electrical 
installation for the remote condenser which would probably contain 
some type of head pressure control.
The unit shown in the schematic diagram of Figure 17.22 has a 
line voltage control circuit. The SW (switch) shaded in blue marked 
“off,” “fan,” and “cool” controls the operating modes of the unit. With 
the switch set on “fan,” the only portion of the unit will operate is the 
IFM (indoor fan motor); it is energized through the manual switch and 
is shown  highlighted in green in Figure 17.23. If cooling is desired, the 
Accessory
plenum
Field
power
supply 
Condensate
Water out
Water in
Thermostat and
selector switch
17.21
F I G U R E
Freestanding packaged unit. 
(Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.5   Air-Cooled Packaged Unit with Remote Condenser 
629
VIO
BLK
BU ONLY
BU ONLY
CLO
LOGIC
FIELD
POWER
SUPPLY
EQUIP
END
L2
L1
L3
YEL
YEL
YEL
YEL
CCH
BU ONLY
BU ONLY
BLK
BLK
BLK
BLK
BLU
YEL
COMP.
IFM
TRAN 1
TRAN 2
YEL
BLK
BLK
BLU
BLU
C
IFC
13
23
11
21
13
23
11
4
5
C
C
A
1
5
2
2
1
1
1
C2
C
C2
C2
C2
IFC
C
HR
OFR
C1
C2
C
C1
C2
3
2
4
5
1
21
1
3
2
GRN
CHR
GRN
H1
H2
X2
X1
RED
RED
VIO
VIO
GRN
BLK
BLK
(NOTE 3)
FAN
COOL
OFF
SW
GRN
T
OFR
BU ONLY
BLU
BLU
BLU
BLU
BLU
BLU
BT ONLY
BLU
BLU
BLU
LPS
HPS
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
TRAN
CLO
IFC
IFC
CHR
OFR
CLO
CHR
C
C
1
1
1
3
3
TO OUTDOOR
FAN MOTOR
(NOTE 4)
L1
TB1
TB2
SC
SR
SW
T
TB
TC
Tran
Start capacitor
Start relay
Switch
Thermostat
Terminal block (board)
Thermostat cooling
Transformer
Field splice
Terminal block (board)
Terminal compressor lockout (CLO)
Terminal (unmarked)
Terminal (marked)
Factory wiring
Field wiring
Indicates common potential only;
does not represent wire.
C
CH or
CCH
CHR
CLO
COMP
CR
DU
Equip
  Gnd
HPS
IFC
IFM
IP
LLS
LPS
OFR
OL
QT
RC
S
Compressor contactor
Crankcase heater
Crankcase heater relay
Compressor lockout
Compressor
Control relay
Dummy terminal
Equipment ground
High-pressure switch
Indoor-fan contractor
Indoor-fan motor
Internal protector
Liquid line solenoid
Low-pressure switch
Outdoor-fan relay
Overload
Quadruple terminal
Run capacitor
Compressor solenoid
Legend
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
17.22
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of an air-cooled packaged unit with a remote 
condenser. (Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

630 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
17.23
FIGURE
Schematic diagram of an air-cooled packaged unit with a remote condenser 
with circuitry highlighted. (Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
VIO
BLK
BU ONLY
BU ONLY
CLO
LOGIC
FIELD
POWER
SUPPLY
EQUIP
END
L2
L1
L3
YEL
YEL
YEL
YEL
CCH
BU ONLY
BU ONLY
BLK
BLK
BLK
BLK
BLU
YEL
COMP.
IFM
TRAN 1
TRAN 2
YEL
BLK
BLK
BLU
BLU
C
IFC
13
23
11
21
13
23
11
4
5
C
C
A
1
5
2
2
1
1
1
C2
C
C2
C2
C2
IFC
C
HR
OFR
C1
C2
C
C1
C2
3
2
4
5
1
21
1
3
2
GRN
CHR
GRN
H1
H2
X2
X1
RED
RED
VIO
VIO
GRN
BLK
BLK
(NOTE 3)
FAN
COOL
OFF
SW
GRN
T
OFR
BU ONLY
BLU
BLU
BLU
BLU
BLU
BLU
BT ONLY
BLU
BLU
BLU
LPS
HPS
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
TRAN
CLO
IFC
IFC
CHR
OFR
CLO
CHR
C
C
1
1
1
3
3
TO OUTDOOR
FAN MOTOR
(NOTE 4)
L1
TB1
TB2
SC
SR
SW
T
TB
TC
Tran
Start capacitor
Start relay
Switch
Thermostat
Terminal block (board)
Thermostat cooling
Transformer
Field splice
Terminal block (board)
Terminal compressor lockout (CLO)
Terminal (unmarked)
Terminal (marked)
Factory wiring
Field wiring
Indicates common potential only;
does not represent wire.
C
CH or
CCH
CHR
CLO
COMP
CR
DU
Equip
  Gnd
HPS
IFC
IFM
IP
LLS
LPS
OFR
OL
QT
RC
S
Compressor contactor
Crankcase heater
Crankcase heater relay
Compressor lockout
Compressor
Control relay
Dummy terminal
Equipment ground
High-pressure switch
Indoor-fan contractor
Indoor-fan motor
Internal protector
Liquid line solenoid
Low-pressure switch
Outdoor-fan relay
Overload
Quadruple terminal
Run capacitor
Compressor solenoid
Legend
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.6   Water-Cooled Packaged Units 
631
switch must be set on “cool,” which will not interrupt the operation of the 
indoor fan motor. The circuit energizes the outdoor fan motor or motors 
highlighted in red in Figure 17.23 depending on the size of the system. 
The compressor circuit is energized through the contacts of the contactor, 
which is energized through the holding relay and the timer highlighted in 
blue in Figure 17.23.
17.6 WATER-COOLED PACKAGED UNITS
The water-cooled packaged unit is built in one unit, much like the air-
cooled packaged unit with a remote condenser except that the condenser 
of the water-cooled packaged unit is 
also mounted with unit. The water-
cooled packaged unit uses water as 
the medium to reject the heat of the 
condenser. A drawing of a typical 
water-cooled package unit and the 
necessary components are shown 
in Figure 17.24. The water absorbs 
the heat and is pumped to a cooling 
tower where the heat is rejected in 
the cooling tower. It is imperative 
that an interlock be used to ensure 
that the compressor is not operat-
ing without the cooling tower pump 
operating.
The unit shown in the schematic 
diagram in Figure 17.25, a water-
cooled packaged unit, also has a line 
voltage control system. The switch 
marked “fan” and “cool” actually 
stops and starts the unit. When the 
switch is in the fan position, the fan 
will run. When the switch is moved 
to “cool,” the fan will continue to run 
and the cooling thermostat will oper-
ate the compressor through the con-
tactor. Notice the CWI (condenser 
water interlock). The schematic 
is only a representation giving an 
example of a small water-cooled 
packaged unit.
Accessory
plenum
Field
power
supply 
Condensate
Water out
Water in
Thermostat and
selector switch
17.24
F I G U R E
Drawing of water-cooled packaged unit. 
(Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

632 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
17.7  TYPES OF TOTAL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL 
CONTROLS SYSTEMS
The commercial and industrial control system that controls the entire 
HVAC system is complex because it controls the comfort level in the 
entire structure. In order to maintain the comfort level it could include 
controlling the air supply, a hot water boiler, the delivery of hot water 
for heating the structure, the cooling system whether it be a water chiller 
or large condensing unit, the humidity of the structure, the ventilation 
air required for the structure, and in some cases, the energy manage-
ment system used by the structure. Controls systems in commercial and 
industrial application have advanced from the system that required an 
operator to monitor and regulate the temperature in the entire structure 
to a modern electronic controls system that can be controlled from a 
central computer console.
Initial commercial and industrial control systems merely turned 
loads on and off to maintain the desired comfort level or manufacturing 
processes, but as time went on the technology advanced so that from 
L1
L3
Legend
C: 
  Contactor
COMP:   Compressor
BM: 
  Blower motor
T: 
  Thermostat
LPS: 
  Low-pressure switch
HPS:   High-pressure switch
CWI: 
  Condenser water
 
  interlock
SW: 
  Switch
L2
208/3Ø/60Hz
COMP
C
CWI
C
C
C
BM
Off
Fan
SW
Cool
T
LPS
HPS
17.25
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of water-cooled packaged unit. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.7   Types of Total Commercial and Industrial Controls Systems 
633
an input the control system could modulate the amount of cooling and 
heating. A good example of a modulating control would be a valve that 
modulated the flow of water to a hot water coil to meet the needs of a 
particular zone. The control of the hot water valve would commonly be 
done from one input the room temperature alone. Modern commercial 
and industrial control system go far beyond one input and one out-
put. Most modern control systems used in commercial and industrial 
application have many control inputs, such as the indoor temperature, 
outdoor temperature, humidity, room temperature, supply air tempera-
ture, and return air temperature that are supplied to a controller and 
the controller determines many outputs that are used to control the 
water temperature in a hot water boiler, how much fresh air could be 
used for cooing, the flow of chilled water or hot water to a particular 
zone, and the temperature of the chilled water or how many condens-
ing units need to operate.
Almost all control systems use a control loop to control the tem-
perature within a given structure, space or zone: (1) the inputs of the 
 conditioned space, (2) the 
controller that takes this 
input signal(s) and deter-
mines the necessary action 
of the (3) devices that are to 
be controlled to maintain the 
desired temperature levels 
in the structure. The inputs 
could come from a room 
thermostat, a thermostat in 
the return air flow, the out-
side temperature, the humid-
ity and other elements. The 
controller would then take 
these inputs and determine 
what action should be taken 
by the equipment to get the 
desired output. A basic con-
trol loop of a room thermo-
stat controlling a condensing 
unit is shown in Figure 17.26. 
A more advance control loop 
is shown in Figure 17.27 that 
used more than one input 
and more than one output.
17.26
F I G U R E
Basic control loop. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
C
al
l f
or
 c
o
ol
in
g
Sensor
room
thermostat
Controller
contactor of
Res A/C
Compressor
St
ar
t 
co
m
pr
es
so
r
Ca
ll 
fo
r 
co
ol
in
g 
sa
ti
sf
ie
d
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

634 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
17.27
F I G U R E
Advanced control loop. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Return air
thermostat
Supply air
thermostat
Controlled
devices
Condensing unit
outdoor air damper
Controller
Call
Call
satisfied
Early commercial and industrial control systems used mechanical/
electrical control systems to stop and start loads to maintain the 
 temperature in a structure, zone, or room. The schematic diagram of a 
mechanical electrical control system is shown in Figure 17.28. The pneu-
matic control system with air being used as the control element was 
the first to use a truly modulating system. The same basic control loop 
was used, but if the room thermostat used air then the pressure could 
vary and a valve could be opened partially against a set spring pressure. 
The diagram of a basic pneumatic control system is shown in Figure 17.29. 
The electronic control system uses a signal that varies the voltage that 
can modulate a valve or damper motor. A simple electronic diagram is 
shown in Figure 17.30. The three basic types of controls systems used 
in commercial and industrial control systems are the seldom used 
mechanical/electrical, the pneumatic, and the electronic control system. 
The pneumatic and digital electronic are the two basic types of control 
systems being installed in commercial and industrial applications today. 
Electronic controls systems are quickly taking the place of pneumatic 
controls systems in new installation, but the many pneumatic systems 
that are in the industry will remain viable for years to come.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.8   Pneumatic Control Systems 
635
17.8 PNEUMATIC CONTROL SYSTEMS
The pneumatic control system uses air to transmit the signal 
from the sensor to the controller and on to the controlled device. 
Figure 17.31 shows a basic pneumatic control system. A technician with 
good mechanical skills can easily master pneumatic control systems. In 
a pneumatic control system, the control signal is air and is carried from 
the sensor to the controller and on to the controlled device through 
small pipe, usually ¼ inch or 3/8 inch. The controlled devices can be 
modulating because the air pressure can be easily increased or decreased 
17.28
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a mechanical 
electrical control system. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
T1
Legend
T1 
Zone 1 Thermostat
T2 
Zone 2 Thermostat
T3 
Zone 3 Thermostat
Z1C 
Zone 1 Cooling contractor
Z2C 
Zone 2 Cooling contractor
Z3C 
Zone 3 Cooling contractor
Z1H 
Zone 1 Hot water valve
Z2H 
Zone 2 Hot water valve
Z3H 
Zone 3 Hot water valve
T2
T3
Z3C
Z3H
Z2H
Z2C
Z1H
Z1C
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

636 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
RETURN TO
BOILER
RETURN
AIR
SUPPLY
AIR
HOT
WATER
IN
ROOM
THERMOSTAT
20 psig OF AIR IN (MAIN)
5 to 15 psig OF AIR OUT (BRANCH)
17.29
F I G U R E
Diagram of a basic pneumatic control system. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
17.30
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a basic electronic control system. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
RETURN
AIR
C
F
S
DESIRED: MAINTAIN A
CONSTANT SUPPLY AIR TEMP.
AT A DESIRED SET POINT BY
MODULATING THE HOT
WATER COIL HEATING VALVE.
S = SENSOR
C = CONTROLLER
F = FINAL CONTROL DEVICE
INFORMATION PATH =
HOT WATER COIL
EXHAUST
AIR
OUTDOOR
AIR
SUPPLY
AIR
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.8   Pneumatic Control Systems 
637
depending upon the action of the sensor. Advantages of pneumatic con-
trol systems: they are simple and easy to understand; they are safe and 
explosion proof; they are very versatile; they are reliable, and the cost 
of installation may be less. The pneumatic control system must have a 
constant supply of air that is clean and dry. The air would have to be dis-
tributed to the pneumatic controls in the structure through small lines 
usually 3/8 inch or less.
The starting point for any pneumatic controls system is the air sup-
ply. A pneumatic control system requires a continuous supply of clean 
and dry air at approximately 20 psig. Most pneumatic controls systems 
have a separate air compressor and in some cases two using the second 
as a backup if the first became inoperative. The controls used in a pneu-
matic control system will have many small air passages and orifices that 
could become easily clogged with water or trash. For this reason the air 
supplied to the control system must be have no foreign particles that 
17.31
F I G U R E
Drawing of a basic pneumatic control system. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
CONTROLLER
DIAPHRAGM
NORMALLY
CLOSED HOT
WATER VALVE
DIAPHRAGM
AIR
GAGE
3-WAY
VALVE
HOT
WATER
COIL
HOT WATER
RETURN
HOT
WATER 
SUPPLY
SUPPLY AIR
RETURN
AIR
BRANCH AIR
BRANCH
AIR
MAIN AIR
MAIN AIR
CHILLED
WATER
RETURN
CHILLED
WATER
SUPPLY
ROOM
THERMOSTAT
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

638 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
could stop up the passages in the controls or the lines. Most pneumatic 
control systems use an air compressor that will supply air at 100 psig to 
a pressure reducing valve that reduces the pressure being supplied to the 
control system to approximately 20 psig. In most cases the air will leave 
the main tank and pass through an air drier that will remove moisture 
from the air next the air will flow through a liquid separator that will 
catch any water or oil that is left in air after the air drier. The air then 
passes through a filter that will remove any small particles. At this point 
the air should clean and dry and will pass through a pressure regulator 
that will reduce the air pressure from 100 psig down to 20 psig. An air 
compressor system used to supply air for a pneumatic control system is 
shown in Figure 17.32. From this point clean dry air will be supplied to 
pneumatic control system.
There are many control components that used in pneumatic controls 
systems, but we will limit our discussion to the three main controls: the 
sensor, the controller, and the actuator. The sensor is the device that 
senses the desired temperatures and relays them to the controller by sup-
plying specific air pressures representing a specific temperature. These 
sensors could sense the room temperature, the return air temperature, 
the supply air temperature, the outdoor air temperature, the hot water 
temperature being supplied from a boiler and the chilled water tempera-
ture being supplied from a chiller. Figure 17.33 shows a pneumatic room 
thermostat. Figure 17.34 shows a  thermostat  controlling a hot water 
valve to control the room temperature. The controller in a pneumatic 
control system receives the inputs from the sensors and determines the 
action of the actuators to perform the necessary functions to equipment, 
Comp
Motor
Air
dryer
Liquid
trap
Filter
Regulator
Air
supply
to
system
17.32
F I G U R E
Compressed air source for pneumatic control system. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.8   Pneumatic Control Systems 
639
17.33
F I G U R E
Pneumatic room 
thermostat. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
17.34
F I G U R E
Drawing of a pneumatic thermostat controlling 
a hot water valve. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Zopsig
air supply
Room
T/Stat
Hot Water
out
Hot Water
in
Pneumatic
valve
Room
hot water
coil
Room
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

640 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
dampers, valves, and so on, to maintain the conditioned space at the 
desired level. The controller would send the signal to the actuators which 
controls the movement of valves, dampers and pneumatic relays which 
control equipment. A pneumatic controller is shown in Figure 17.35. A 
valve and damper actuator is shown in Figure 17.36.
A pneumatic control system is shown in Figure 17.37. The inputs 
to the controller are highlighted in red. Figure 17.38 shows the modes 
of operation highlighted. These inputs will determine how far the hot 
water will open highlighted in red. The cooling for this system is from 
a large condensing unit that would be controlled by a  pneumatic relay. 
The mixed air  thermostat would control the position of the outdoor air 
 damper and the return air damper high-
lighted in green. The room thermostat 
controls the hot water supply to the room 
hot water valve actuator that controls the 
room temperature and is shown high-
lighted in yellow.
17.35
F I G U R E
Pneumatic controller. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
17.36
FIGURE
Pneumatic valve 
and damper actuator. 
(Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.8   Pneumatic Control Systems 
641
3
T-2
V-2
Convectors
OA
DO-1
5
5
5
3
5
2
2
D-1
T1-1
C-1
SV-1 (Air)
V-24
PE-1
D-2
DO-1
TEL-1
H
T
G
D
X
T-3
V-1
HW
Ret A
RC
SM-
1
NC
Supply air
20 psi
Legend
Ret A:
OA:
C-1:
DO-1:
DO-2:
D-1:
D-2:
PE-1:
T-3:
RSCM-1:
T-1:
Return air
Outdoor air
Minimum position controller
Outdoor air damper controller
Return air damper controller
Outdoor air damper
Return air damper
Cooling controller
Mixed air thermostat
Receiving controller
Return air thermostat
Room thermostat
Discharge air thermometer
Hot water valve
Room hot water valve
(convector)
Discharge air thermostat
Air solenoid valve (outside
air)
Freeze protector
Air lines field installed
Supply air lines
T-2:
T1-1:
V-1:
V-2:
TT-1:
SV-1:
TEL-1:
T-1
TT-1
17.37
F I G U R E
Pneumatic control system. Controller inputs highlighted in red. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

642 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
3
T-2
V-2
Convectors
OA
DO-1
5
5
5
3
5
2
2
D-1
T-1
T1-1
C-1
SV-1 (Air)
V-24
PE-1
D-2
DO-1
TEL-1
H
T
G
D
X
T-3
V-1
HW
Ret A
TT-1
RC
SM-
1
NC
Supply air
20 psi
Legend
Ret A:
OA:
C-1:
DO-1:
DO-2:
D-1:
D-2:
PE-1:
T-3:
RSCM-1:
T-1:
Return air
Outdoor air
Minimum position controller
Outdoor air damper controller
Return air damper controller
Outdoor air damper
Return air damper
Cooling controller
Mixed air thermostat
Receiving controller
Return air thermostat
Room thermostat
Discharge air thermometer
Hot water valve
Room hot water valve
(convector)
Discharge air thermostat
Air solenoid valve (outside
air)
Freeze protector
Air lines field installed
Supply air lines
T-2:
T1-1:
V-1:
V-2:
TT-1:
SV-1:
TEL-1:
17.38
F I G U R E
Modes of operation highlighted in pneumatic control system. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.9   Electronic Control Systems (Direct Digital Controls) 
643
17.9 ELECTRONIC CONTROL SYSTEMS (DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROLS)
Through technological advancements in the electronics industry, elec-
tronic controls have become the most popular method of control in 
commercial and industrials applications. This section will focus on the 
commercial and industrial applications of electronic control (direct digi-
tal control) systems, but by no means are the advancements limited to 
this phase of the industry. Many residential control systems are using 
microprocessors to control system operation. The same control loop that 
has been discussed previously applies to electronic controls. A signal or 
signals to a controller which sends a signal to the controlled device which 
supplies the needs of the comfort level in the structure. One advantage 
of direct digital controls is that it operates on a very low voltage. A direct 
digital control system can give a variable signal to the controlling device 
which will allow the controlled device to modulate between full open and 
fully closed like a pneumatic control system. The direct digital control 
system components are much smaller and easier to work with that pneu-
matic control system components. A direct digital control system also has 
the versatility to control the speed of a variable speed motor which has 
become increasingly popular in the industry.
Direct digital control uses a microprocessor which acts as a digital 
controller. A direct digital control system works similar to a conventional 
control system (pneumatic, electric, and electro/mechanical) except for 
the speed which the control system can process digital signals. A direct 
digital control system uses binary information which is based on two 
things or parts. In the direct digital control process, everything consists 
of zeroes and ones which represents some element in the scope of the 
control system. The micro-processor in direct digital controls systems 
can process two signals much faster than it could handle any type of 
modulating signal. The direct digital control system takes an analog sig-
nal and converts it to a digital or binary signal, passes that signal through 
a microprocessor and converts that signal back to an analog signal that 
can be used by the controlled devices in the system. A sketch of this pro-
cess is shown in Figure 17.39.
Figure 17.40 shows the inputs and outputs of a direct digital control 
system. The direct digital controller has been programmed with a set of 
parameter’s, desired conditions within the structure, that it will deter-
mine what each controlled device will do in order to meet the parameters 
that have been set. The inputs to the controller are supply air tempera-
ture, return air temperature, outdoor air temperature, mixed air tempera-
ture, and enthalpy. These signals would pass through an analog/digital 
converter which would convert the signal from an analog signal to a 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

644 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
digital signal that the direct digital controller (microprocessor) could pro-
cess. The controller would take these digital signals process them accord-
ing to the parameters that have been pre-programmed and supply a set of 
digital signals to a digital/analog converter converting the signal to a ana-
log signal. These analog signals would be sent to the controlled devices 
in the system, the damper control, the hot water valve, the condensing 
unit controls, and the blower motor. Many controlled device are now able 
to respond to either digital or analog signals which would eliminate the 
need for a digital/analog converter.
INPUT SIGNAL
INFORMATION
DIGITAL
CONTROLER
TERMINATION BOARD
STEP 1
STEP 2
STEP 3
OUTPUT SIGNAL
INFORMATION
ANALOG-TO-DIGITAL
(A/D) CONVERTER
DIGITAL-TO-ANALOG
(D/A) CONVERTER
CENTRAL PROCESSING
UNIT (CPU)
17.39
F I G U R E
Procedural drawing of the 
converting analog signals to 
direct digital signals. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Section 17.9   Electronic Control Systems (Direct Digital Controls) 
645
Some examples of operating modes in the system shown in 
Figure 17.40 are fan operation, fresh air being used for cooling, mechan-
ical cooling, and hot water valve open for heating. The controller would 
supervise the operation of the blower motor which would probably be 
programmed into the controller to stop the fan when the building is 
unoccupied and start the fan when the building is occupied. This would 
be accomplished with the timer element of the controller and is shown 
highlighted in green as shown in Figure 17.41. If there is a call for cool-
ing and the controller determines that the system could use outside 
air for cooling purpose then the damper control would be positioned 
to increase the air from outside and cut down on the return. These 
17.40
F I G U R E
Inputs and outputs of direct digital 
control system. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
DIGITAL CONTROLLER
Supply
Air
Temp.
Fan
Control
Damper
Control
Heating
Control
Cooling
Control
Return
Air
Temp.
INPUTS
OUTPUTS
Outside
Air
Temp.
Mixed
Air
Temp.
Enthalpy
Control
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

646 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
circuits are shown in blue in Figure 17.41. The controller would have to 
determine if the humidity of the outdoor air is suitable to be brought 
into the structure, this would be accomplished by the enthalpy sensor. 
If the controller determines that only mechanical cooling is available, 
it would send a signal to adjust the damper motor which would return 
the outdoor air damper to the minimum position and open the return 
air damper and start the mechanical cooling as shown in Figure 17.41, 
highlighted in  yellow. If the controller determines from the inputs that 
heat was needed in the structure then the hot water valve would be 
positioned to pass the desired amount of hot water through the hot 
water coil heating the structure as shown in red in Figure 17.41. Most 
systems will be more complex that the system used as an example.
Supply
Air
Temp.
Fan
Control
Damper
Control
Heating
Control
Cooling
Control
Return
Air
Temp.
INPUTS
OUTPUTS
Outside
Air
Temp.
Mixed
Air
Temp.
Enthalpy
Control
DIGITAL CONTROLLER
17.41
F I G U R E
Inputs and outputs of direct 
digital control system highlighted. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Summary 
647
The set of instructions that is maintained in the memory of the con-
troller plus the information that is available from the sensors determine 
the output to the controlled devices to maintain structure conditions. 
Figure 17.42 shows a computer monitoring and controlling the building 
conditions.
Direct digital control systems use energy management for the struc-
ture in many cases and are responsible for comfort conditions in the 
structure, structure energy management, lighting, and fire protection.
Fan 
45°F 
ANALOG
SENSOR
IN RETURN
AIRSTREAM 
ANALOG/DIGITAL
DEVICE 
DIGITAL/ANALOG
DEVICE 
ANALOG
TO DIGITAL
ELECTRONIC
THREE-WAY MIXING
VALVE 
CHILLED
WATER COIL 
WATER 
DIGITAL
INPUT 
DIGITAL INPUT 
COMPUTER IN
REMOTE LOCATION 
OUTDOOR AIR
SENSOR 
DIGITAL
OUTPUT
AIR
17.42
F I G U R E
Computer monitoring and controlling building conditions. 
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
SUMMARY
Commercial and industrial air-conditioning equipment comes in many 
different types, depending on the size of the structure and the comfort 
level desired in the conditioned space. Another consideration that must 
be made is if any manufacturing processes will require steam, hot water, 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

648 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
or chilled water. Many different types of control systems are used in com-
mercial and industrial HVAC system from basic low voltage to pneumatic 
to direct digital control systems. The type of control system used depends 
on the capacity requirements of the structure, the type of equipment 
that has been selected, and the specifications of the control system. The 
owner and the architect would have to establish each of these elements 
before equipment selection and control determination could be made.
Commercial and industrial equipment covers a broad spectrum of 
choices. Packaged unit would be used when no interior floor space has 
been allocated for equipment. Packaged units could be mounted on the 
outside of the building or on the roof and supply conditioned air to the 
structure. Most commercial and industrial applications allocate mechani-
cal rooms to house blower units which supply air to the structure, water 
chiller to supply chilled water for cooling and manufacturing processes, 
hot water boilers to supply hot water for heating and manufacturing pro-
cesses, and space for control and control system. If the equipment uses 
water as a cooling medium for the condenser then an outside location for 
a cooling tower must be allocated. If direct expansion refrigeration is used 
then condensing units will have to be located outside. Many decisions 
have to be made by the owner or his representative and the architect 
before selection of equipment and a control system could be determined.
The circuitry used in commercial and industrial equipment and con-
trol systems will generally be complex because with the larger, commer-
cial, and industrial equipment comes larger more expensive loads that 
require controls circuits that will protect these loads from damage. The 
largest load in most HVAC systems is the compressor. The across-the-line 
and part-winding starting method are two methods that are used to effec-
tively start large compressors and reduce large inrush current on starting. 
Most compressors that are used in large equipment have some type of 
capacity control which decreases the load on the compressor when the 
building load is decreased. Water chillers are used many times in large 
applications and must be equipped with interlock to ensure the flow of 
chilled water when the equipment is operating to prevent freezing of the 
water in the evaporator. Interlocks are also used with water-cooled con-
densers to ensure that condenser water is flowing when the compressor 
is operating. Blower motor circuitry depends on what type of equipment 
that is used to condition the structure. Individual blowers for each zone 
would require a different type of control as those supplying large section 
of the structure.
One of the most widely types of equipment used in the commercial 
and industrial applications is the large condensing unit. Condensing unit 
basically have a control system that supervises the operation of all loads 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
Summary 
649
within the piece of equipment. Condenser fan motors circuitry must use 
some method of controlling the head pressure of the refrigeration system. 
If a water-cooled condenser is used, there must be some type of interlock 
that ensures the flow of condenser water when the compressor is oper-
ating. The control system of the condensing unit must ensure that the 
electrical loads are operating in a safe manner.
Large packaged units are frequently used in commercial and indus-
trial air-conditioning applications. These units can be mounted on the 
roof or on ground level where the air is delivered to the conditioned 
space through duct work. The large roof top packaged units are often 
multi-zone units that are designed to supply air to each zone of a specific 
area in the structure. Package units are also designed to be free standing 
within a given area of the structure with the condenser water being piped 
to the inside unit or a remote condenser be mounted outside and the 
refrigerant lines connect the condenser to the interior unit.
Large commercial and industrial applications will often use control 
systems that control all the air-conditioning equipment of the structure. 
No matter what type of control system is used there is a basic control 
loop that is used on almost all types of control systems that include a 
sensing element that supplies a signal to the controller that determines 
the action the controlled element should take to meet the conditioned 
air needs of the structure. There are basically three types of control sys-
tems that are used in these commercial and industrial applications. The 
electro/mechanical control system was used widely used in the past, but 
advancements with pneumatic and electronic controls systems have 
increased their popularity past the old electro/mechanical controls sys-
tems. Pneumatic controls systems use air as their medium to transfer 
signals from component to component in small lines. Pneumatic control 
systems are simple, easy to install, safe, and versatile. The pneumatic 
control system now takes a back seat to the electronic control systems 
or direct digital control systems. These controls systems follow the same 
control loop basics; signal to controller to controlled device. It is impera-
tive that the technician understand this basic control loop theory in order 
to understand control systems.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

650 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
RQ1 
Briefly explain the operation of the unit in Figure 17.43.
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
17.43
F I G U R E
Field
Power
Supply
Neutral
L2
L1
L3
YEL
YEL
BLK
BLK
BLK
BLU
BLU
Equip
end
400-3-50 Only
BLK
21
11
YEL
23
4
4
13
21
4
5
3
6
11
23
13
CLB
BLK
BLK
BLU
BLU
COMP.
IFM
BLU
TB2
BLU
BLK
YEL
3
1
2
3
1
2
CLA
CHR
CFR
CCH
To outdoor
fan motor
IFC
YEL
YEL
Only
460-3-60
240-3-50
208/240-3-60
(Note 3)
SCHEMATIC
1
1
L1
1
2
2
3
4
5
2
A
C
C
1
3
3
9
1
5
5
4
C
C
C2
C2
1
C2
C2
C2
C1 IFC
CFR
C1
C2
1
1
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
BRN
C
C
CHR
CLO
IFC
TRAN
CFR
CHR
CLO
IFC
C
Tran (Note 6)
GRN
VIO
BLK
GRA
ORN
BLK
 RED 
 RED 
 BLU 
BLU 
BLU 
CLA
CHR
CLB
IP
RED
VIO
RED
VIO
COOL
ORN
ORN
BLK
BLK
BLK
SW
OFF
FAN
T
TB1
LPS
CLO
HPS
C
HR
CLO
Logic
5
1
Diagram for questions 1 and 18 through 21. (Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
C H A P T E R  1 7  R E V I E W
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RQ2 
Briefly explain the operation of the unit in Figure 17.44.
 
Review Questions 
651
17.44
F I G U R E
C1
TDR
TDR
OL2
OL1
OPS
TS1
TS2
HPS
LPS
CR
CR
C2
OFC1
OCF2
OFC3
L1 L2 L3
CB1
TB
C1
C2
OFC1
OFC2
OFC3
COMP
FU
CR
CH 
CB2
CB3
TB:
TM:
FU:
TR:
C:
CB:
OFC:
OFM:
CH:
OPS:
TDR:
LLP:
DLT:
TS:
CR:
HP:
LP:
Term block
Timer motor
Fuse
Timer relay
Contactor
Circuit breaker
Outdoor fan contactor
Outdoor fan motor
Crankcase heater
Oil pressure switch
Time-delay relay
Liquid line pressure
stat (field supplied)
Discharge line thermostat
Temperature switch
Control relay
High pressure
Low pressure
OFM3
OFM2
OFM1
Legend
DLT
FU
From building
control system
CR
Diagram for questions 2 and 22 through 25. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
C H A P T E R  1 7  R E V I E W
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RQ3 
What are the two methods used to energize a 
compressor motor on a large condensing unit?
a. part-winding and full winding
b. full winding and load winding
c. part-winding and across-the-line winding
d. across-the-line winding and full winding
RQ4 
True or False: In the larger systems, many blower 
motors are designed to operate at all times.
RQ5 
What is the purpose of an interlock between the 
compressor and cooling tower pump in a unit with 
a water-cooled condenser?
RQ6 
True or False: The high cost of energy will always 
be a factor in equipment selection.
RQ7 
True or False: Blower motors supplying air to large 
commercial and industrial systems often times 
operate continuously.
RQ8 
What is the difference between an air-cooled pack-
aged unit and an air-cooled packaged unit with a 
remote condenser?
RQ9 
Which of the following elements of a control circuit 
would be considered in a control lop?
a. sensor (input signal)
b. controller
c. device being controlled
d. all of the above
RQ10 
What air pressure should be supplied to a pneu-
matic control system?
a. 100 psig
b. 50 psig
c. 20 psig
d. 10 psig
RQ11 
What is the purpose of an interlock between the 
compressor and cooling tower pump in a unit with 
a water-cooled condenser?
RQ12 
True or False: The compressor is the most expen-
sive component of an air-cooled condensing unit.
RQ13 
Which of the following acts as the controller in a 
direct digital control system?
a. thermostat
b. motor
c. thermistor
d. microprocessor
RQ14 
The air supply for a pneumatic control must be 
__________________ .
a. under 15 psig
b. lubricated
c. clean and dry
d. none of the above
RQ15 
What is the purpose of an anti-short-cycling 
device?
RQ16 
Most safety components are connected in 
_____________ .
a. series
b. parallel
c. parallel-series
d. a control loop
RQ17 
What is the approximate condensing temperature 
for proper operation of a condensing unit?
a. 50 degrees F
b. 70 degrees F
c. 90 degrees F
d. 110 degrees F
Answer the following question based on Figure 17.43.
RQ18 
The control system of the unit in the diagram is 
________________ .
a. line voltage
b. low voltage
RQ19 
The indoor fan operates when _____________ .
a. the thermostat closes
b. the unit is turned on
c. the disconnect is closed
d. CFR is closed
652 
CHAPTER 17   Commercial and Industrial Air-Conditioning Control Systems
C H A P T E R  1 7  R E V I E W
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RQ20 
The compressor motor is ________________ .
a. single phase
b. three phase
RQ21 
How many safety components are in series with the 
contactor coil?
a. 2
b. 3
c. 4
d. 5
Answer the following question based on Figure 17.44.
RQ22 
What controls OFM2?
a. DLT
b. CR
c. TS2
d. TS1
RQ23 
The compressor is a ______________________ 
start.
a. across-the-line
b. part-winding
RQ24 
What initiates a call for cooling to the condensing 
unit?
a. voltage being supplied to C1
b. voltage being supplied to C2
c. voltage being supplied to CR
d. Closing of the TDR
RQ25 
What does TDR control?
 
Review Questions 
653
C H A P T E R  1 7  R E V I E W
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 17 in the Lab Manual.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you should be able to
◗ Use the proper safety procedures when troubleshooting HVAC control 
systems.
◗ Determine and use the correct electrical instrument to check the electrical 
characteristics (potential, current, and resistance) in an HVAC electrical 
system.
◗ Troubleshoot any electrical component in an HVAC electrical system.
◗ Isolate electrical circuits that are operating incorrectly by reading electrical 
wiring diagrams and using electrical meters.
◗ Troubleshoot a line voltage control system.
◗ Troubleshoot a residential packaged unit.
◗ Troubleshoot a residential gas heating and electric air-conditioning split 
system.
◗ Troubleshoot a heat pump.
Troubleshooting Modern 
Refrigeration, Heating, 
and Air-Conditioning Control 
Circuitry and Systems
C H A P T E R
654
R
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems 
655
KEY TERMS
Current-sensing lockout relay 
Installation and service instructions
Electronic self-diagnostic feature 
Troubleshooting chart
Fault isolation diagram 
Troubleshooting tree
Hopscotching 
INTRODUCTION
A large percentage of the problems that occur in refrigeration, heating, 
and air-conditioning equipment and systems are electrical problems. 
The electrical components in most control systems number from a few 
to many, depending upon the size and complexity of the equipment and 
control system. It is the job of the service technician to diagnose and 
repair the problem with the equipment in a timely manner no matter 
how simple or complex the electrical system may be.
The service technician will be required to properly diagnose prob-
lems in electrical components and electrical circuits that make up the 
electrical system. Troubleshooting procedures include diagnosing the 
condition of electrical components. Troubleshooting electrical com-
ponents individually has been covered in earlier chapters of this text. 
Common electrical loads that are found in most refrigeration, heating, 
or air-conditioning systems include motors, heaters, solenoids, signal 
lights, and others. Common electrical switches used in the industry 
include thermostats, pressure switches, manual switches, and other 
miscellaneous switches. Contactors and relays are often used to control 
loads; these contain switches or contacts that close when a solenoid 
coil is energized. Transformers are used to transform the incoming 
voltage to the desired control voltage, 24 volts in most cases. It is the 
technician’s responsibility to locate the suspected faulty component and 
determine its condition.
The two most important tools available to technicians are electrical 
meters and schematic wiring diagrams. A technician must know how 
to interpret schematics in order to know how the unit should operate. 
Schematic diagrams make the technician’s job easier because the elec-
trical system is broken down into a circuit-by-circuit arrangement. The 
technician must know how to correctly read electrical test instruments 
in order to measure the voltage being supplied to a unit, a circuit, or an 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

656 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
 electrical component. The current draw of an electrical load can determine 
if an electrical load is operating properly; the current draw is measured in 
amperes. When troubleshooting electrical components, technicians will 
often have to check the resistance to determine its condition; the resis-
tance is measured in ohms.
Technicians will in most cases develop their own troubleshoot-
ing procedures after several years’ experience. The more experience 
technicians have in troubleshooting circuits and equipment, the better 
and faster they become at doing so. As simple as it sounds, the pro-
cess of elimination is used on many service calls. Many devices can be 
 eliminated as the source of the problem by observing how the system or 
component operates.
Manufacturers’ troubleshooting charts and tables are available for 
most equipment used in the industry. Many of these troubleshooting 
charts or tables come packed with the equipment installation instruc-
tions. The troubleshooting chart or table breaks down the troubleshoot-
ing procedure step by step. Many motor manufacturers have developed 
troubleshooting tables for motors.
Technicians must develop a troubleshooting method that leads them 
to a particular circuit and to the component that is at fault. Hopscotching 
is one such method; it is used to determine which component in a circuit is 
open and preventing the load from operating properly. This method 
is especially helpful when circuits include many safety components. 
Hopscotching is discussed in more detail later in this chapter.
To sum up, technicians must diagnose what the unit is doing, isolate 
the problem circuit, and repair the problem. To do this they must know 
what the equipment should do and what the equipment is doing. Along 
with diagnosing problems and repairing the equipment, technicians must 
develop safe working habits and good customer skills.
18.1 DIAGNOSIS OF ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS
The diagnosis of electrical components is a fairly easy task for the techni-
cian who understands the device. Service technicians often assume the 
role of parts changers instead of actually diagnosing each component 
that might be faulty. A good service technician will change some elec-
trical components that are perfectly good, but this should happen only 
rarely.
Electrical problems are very common throughout the industry and are 
said to cause 80% to 90% of the reported system failures. Thus, it is impor-
tant for service technicians to be able to diagnose and correct electrical 
problems in a system.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Section 18.1   Diagnosis of Electrical Components 
657
Motors
The electric motor is the largest load used in most heating, cooling, and 
refrigeration systems. The compressor motor is the most expensive com-
ponent of the system, and care should be taken to correctly diagnose this 
component because of the expense that can be needlessly incurred with 
a faulty diagnosis. In fact, all electric motors are expensive and should 
be accurately diagnosed. For details about electric motors, refer again to 
Chapters 9 and 10.
Switches
Electrical switches are used in every piece of equipment and control 
system that is installed in the industry today. Many types of automatic 
switches are used in the industry, from simple manual switches to ther-
mostats that have several sets of contacts. It would be impossible to pro-
vide adequate safety and temperature or humidity control without some 
type of switch to determine when the equipment needs to operate and 
when it needs to cut off.
Manual switches are basic devices that are used to turn the power on 
or off to an appliance. Examples include disconnect switches and on/off 
switches on some appliances.
Thermostats and pressure switches are controlled by the tempera-
ture of the medium surrounding them or by the pressure at the point 
where they are connected to the system. Simple thermostats or pressure 
switches can easily be diagnosed because they usually have only one set 
of contacts. Before blaming a thermostat or pressure switch for a prob-
lem, the technician must be absolutely certain that the problem is not 
due to some other device malfunctioning. In other words, the technician 
must know the function of the switch in the system.
The low-voltage thermostat used on residential and light commer-
cial conditioned air systems is more difficult to diagnose because of its 
complexity and the fact that it is used for several purposes in a heating 
and cooling system. The service technician should be careful not to con-
demn as faulty a thermostat that is merely out of calibration by a few 
degrees. For details about thermostats and pressure switches, refer again 
to Chapter 12 and Sections 15.4 and 15.5 in Chapter 15.
Contactors and Relays
Electric switching devices such as contactors and relays can cause many 
electrical problems. These devices are used to control some load in the 
system. The relay and contactor are basically the same device except for 
their size and ampacity. These devices must be checked for three possible 
malfunctions. The contacts, the coil, and the mechanical linkage can all 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

658 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
malfunction, rendering the contactor or relay bad. These devices are eas-
ily diagnosed for problems if the technician understands their operation 
and construction. For details about contacts and relays, refer again to 
Chapter 11 and Section 15.2 in Chapter 15.
Other Electrical Devices
Many other electrical components used in control systems, such as trans-
formers, overloads, and others, will not be covered in this review but are 
covered in previous chapters of this book.
!CAUTION
A technician should use extreme caution when working 
around live circuits.
18.2 TROUBLESHOOTING TOOLS
Service technicians are expected to correctly diagnose and repair most 
problems to which they are assigned. No matter how good the technician 
or how hard he or she tries, there will be occasional callbacks because of a 
misdiagnosis. You can minimize the risk of such embarrassing situations 
by learning to use all the troubleshooting tools at your disposal.
Electrical Meters
The most important tools that the technician has for troubleshooting are 
electrical meters. Meters commonly used in the industry are the volt-
ohm meter and the clamp-on ammeter. The volt-ohm meter is used to 
measure the voltage and resistance of an electrical circuit and the mil-
liamperes in certain diagnostic testing of electronic controls. It can be 
used to read the voltage being supplied to a piece of equipment or load or 
to check the resistance of a circuit or component to determine its condi-
tion. Clamp-on ammeters are used to determine if an electrical load is 
operating within an acceptable current flow. The current draw of a load 
can determine if it is operating in an unsafe condition. This information 
is especially useful when troubleshooting motors. The technician should 
never attempt to check voltage when the meter scale is set on resistance.
Electrical Wiring Diagrams
The electrical wiring diagram will be the technician’s primary tool in 
electrical troubleshooting. The schematic diagram, sometimes called a 
ladder diagram, will be most useful in troubleshooting because it breaks 
down the equipment wiring or control system into a circuit-by-circuit 
 arrangement. The technician can easily determine what the unit should 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

be doing by reading the schematic diagram. A schematic diagram for a 
small residential packaged unit is shown in Figure 18.1.
The pictorial wiring diagram is a picture of the control panel and 
is sometimes called a component arrangement diagram. This type of 
diagram helps the service technician to locate and identify an electrical 
component in a control panel. A pictorial diagram is shown highlighted 
in Figure 18.2.
Most diagrams have a legend that helps the technician to interpret the 
abbreviations used in the diagram. A legend for a wiring diagram is shown 
highlighted in Figure 18.3. Along with the legend, many diagrams have 
notes that are extremely important to the installation and service of the 
equipment. The notes of a diagram are shown highlighted in Figure 18.4.
RC
C2
C1
COMP
CFM
IFM
R
System
Auto
On
Fan
G
Y
IFR
IFR
HP
LP
C
L1
L2
Legend
C:
COMP:
CFM:
IFM:
IFR:
HP:
LP:
RC:
Contactor
Compressor
Condenser fan motor
Indoor fan motor
Indoor fan relay
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Run capacitor
Thermostat (R, G, and Y are
markings on thermostat terminals)
18.1
F I G U R E
Small residential packaged unit. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
 
Section 18.2   Troubleshooting Tools 
659
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

660 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
L2
L1
L1
L2
18.2
F I G U R E
Component arrangement section of a diagram highlighted. 
(Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

L2
L1
L1
L2
18.3
F I G U R E
Legend of a diagram highlighted. (Courtesy of Carrier 
Corporation)
 
 
Section 18.2   Troubleshooting Tools 
661
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

662 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
L2
L1
L1
L2
18.4
F I G U R E
Notes of a diagram highlighted. (Courtesy of Carrier 
Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Installation and Service Instructions
A tool that is often overlooked by many technicians is the set of installa-
tion and service instructions packed with the equipment at the factory. 
This package of material is very important because it gives the installa-
tion technician the information needed to correctly install the equipment 
electrically and mechanically. This information may include trouble-
shooting charts and specific information about using and interpreting 
the built-in diagnostic test. The installation instructions that are shipped 
with equipment is shown in Figure 18.5.
Troubleshooting Charts
A troubleshooting chart is a graphical representation of a troubleshooting 
procedure for a particular unit. Some manufacturers make troubleshoot-
ing charts available to air-conditioning dealers that handle their line of 
equipment. Many manufacturers include troubleshooting charts with the 
installation and service instructions that are included with equipment at 
the time of shipment. Troubleshooting charts are intended to guide the 
service technician through a systematic approach to a correct diagnosis 
and a corrective action that will repair the problem in the system. There 
are many different types of troubleshooting charts. Figure 18.6 shows a 
troubleshooting chart of one manufacturer for a total cooling system. 
18.5
F I G U R E
Instructions shipped with 
equipment. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
 
 
Section 18.2   Troubleshooting Tools 
663
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

664 
18.6
F I G U R E
Manufacturer’s troubleshooting chart. (Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18.6
F I G U R E
(Continued)
Figure 18.7 shows another type of troubleshooting chart that is for the 
heating and cooling cycles of a heat pump. Figure 18.8 shows a different 
type of troubleshooting chart used to troubleshoot an ignition module on 
a gas furnace. Manufacturers develop troubleshooting charts for almost 
all models of equipment they produce. If troubleshooting charts are avail-
able, it is advisable for service technicians to use them, especially if they 
are just beginning their careers.
Electronic Self-Diagnostic Feature
Many newer-model appliances contain an electronic self-diagnostic fea-
ture that helps the technician to isolate  malfunctions in system opera-
tion. This type of diagnostic tool comes in the form of a light that might 
blink in a specific sequence or a specific number of times to indicate the 
possible malfunction of a component. The chart shown in Figure 18.9 is 
representative of a reference chart for the self-diagnostic check of a unit. 
This type of troubleshooting tool is becoming increasingly popular as 
electronic circuitry becomes more cost effective.
18.3 TROUBLESHOOTING WITH ELECTRICAL METERS
Electrical meters are a technician’s most important troubleshooting 
tools. With the price of electrical test equipment at an all-time low, no 
technician should be without a good volt-ohm meter and a good clamp-
on ammeter. Many volt-ohm meters are multifunction and can measure 
a multitude of electrical characteristics such as volts, ohms, milliamps, 
 
 
Section 18.3   Troubleshooting with Electrical Meters 
665
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

666 
18.7
F I G U R E
Troubleshooting chart for heating and cooling cycles of a heat pump. (Courtesy of Carrier 
Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18.7
F I G U R E
(Continued)
 
 
 
667
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

668 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
18.8
F I G U R E
Troubleshooting chart of an intermittent pilot control system. (Courtesy of Honeywell Inc.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

microfarads, and amperage with an adapter and checking diodes. The 
volt-ohm meter, the clamp-on ammeter, and the knowledge to use them 
are essential to the success of the technician when troubleshooting 
refrigeration, heating, and air-conditioning equipment and circuits.
ELECTRIC FAULT CODE
Fault Light Flashes
Fault
2
Indoor Blower
3
Indoor Thermostat
4
Induced Draft Blower
5
Insufficient Ground
6
Fault Igniter
7
No Pilot Established
8
Ignition Module
18.9
F I G U R E
Diagnostic codes for a gas furnace.
(Delmar/Cengage Learning)
!CAUTION
Use the proper electrical test equipment for the job 
being performed.
One of the most important elements to consider when troubleshoot-
ing is whether the correct voltage is available to the equipment and con-
trol system. This is the first check that a technician should make on a 
service call. In some cases, this can be accomplished by merely turning on 
an electrical device through a switch, but often the technician will have 
to use a volt-ohm meter to determine the voltage being supplied to the 
equipment as shown in Figure 18.10. If electrical energy is available to the 
equipment, the technician must proceed to a suspicious circuit or electri-
cal component. If the correct voltage is not being supplied to the equip-
ment, the technician must find out why not. If supply voltage is available, 
the next check in this procedure on a system that has a 24-volt control 
circuit would be to check the control voltage as shown in Figure 18.11. If 
no control voltage is available and electrical energy is being supplied to 
the transformer, then the transformer should be checked. If control volt-
age is available, the technician must then isolate the circuit that he or she 
thinks is at fault.
 
 
Section 18.3   Troubleshooting with Electrical Meters 
669
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

670 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
–
+
CRC
C
C
C
On
System
COMP
CFMC
CFM
IFM
IFR
IFR
TR
R
HP
LP
Y
G
Auto
C:
COMP:
CRC:
CFM:
CFMC:
IFR:
IFM:
HP:
LP:
TR:
Contactor
Compressor
Compressor running capacitor
Condenser fan motor
Condenser fan motor capacitor
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Transformer
Legend
L1
L2
Fan
230
18.10
F I G U R E
Checking voltage supply to unit. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

–
+
CRC
C
C
C
On
Fan
System
COMP
CFMC
CFM
IFM
IFR
IFR
TR
R
HP
LP
Y
G
Auto
C:
COMP:
CRC:
CFM:
CFMC:
IFR:
IFM:
HP:
LP:
TR:
Contactor
Compressor
Compressor running capacitor
Condenser fan motor
Condenser fan motor capacitor
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Transformer
Legend
L1
L2
24 Volts
18.11
F I G U R E
Checking the control voltage. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
For example, upon examination of the equipment the technician finds 
that the compressor is operating and the condenser fan motor is not. The 
schematic for this unit is shown in Figure 18.12. Upon examination of the 
wiring diagram, the technician can assume that voltage is being supplied 
to the condenser fan if the compressor is operating. Up to this point the 
technician has determined that (1) the equipment is being supplied with 
the correct voltage, (2) the control system is being supplied with 24 volts, 
 
 
Section 18.3   Troubleshooting with Electrical Meters 
671
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

672 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
(3) the compressor is being supplied with 240 volts because it is operating, 
and (4) unless there is a broken wire, the condenser fan motor is being 
supplied with the correct voltage.
Once the technician has determined that the correct voltage is being 
supplied to the circuit in question and the loads are not operating, he or 
she must continue to search for the problem. The next step would be to 
check the condition of the condenser fan motor and condenser fan motor 
capacitor. The technician should, if possible, touch the condenser fan 
–
+
CRC
C
C
C
On
Fan
System
COMP
CFMC
CFM
IFM
IFR
IFR
TR
R
HP
LP
Y
G
Auto
C:
COMP:
CRC:
CFM:
CFMC:
IFR:
IFM:
HP:
LP:
TR:
Contactor
Compressor
Compressor running capacitor
Condenser fan motor
Condenser fan motor capacitor
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Transformer
Legend
L1
L2
18.12
F I G U R E
Checking the resistance of condenser fan motor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

motor to determine how hot the motor is. If the motor is cool to the touch, 
then the windings of the condenser fan motor could be open. Chances 
are if the motor is cool to the touch, the motor windings are open. Even 
though the technician suspects that the motor is bad, he or she should 
check resistance of the condenser fan motor windings with an ohmme-
ter to be sure. The resistance of the condenser fan motor can be easily 
checked by disconnecting the leads of the motor from the contactor as 
shown in Figure 18.12. If the resistance reading of the fan motor is infinite 
ohms, the motor windings are open and the motor should be replaced. 
The resistance check of the condenser fan motor could also turn up a 
shorted motor winding, but this is not likely because a shorted motor 
would cause a circuit overload.
If the motor is warm to the touch, the technician must approach the 
problem with another procedure. The technician will have to determine 
whether the motor or the capacitor is at fault. The technician first should 
see if the condenser fan blade turns freely; if not, the motor has bad bear-
ings and should be replaced. If the blade turns freely and the fan motor 
runs, the technician should turn the condensing unit on and check the 
current draw of the condenser fan motor as shown in Figure 18.13. If the 
current draw is higher than the running amps of the motor, found on 
the motor nameplate, there is a problem with the motor or the load on 
the motor is higher than normal. If the motor checks out to be good, then 
18.13
F I G U R E
Technician reading the current draw of a 
fan motor. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
 
 
Section 18.3   Troubleshooting with Electrical Meters 
673
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

674 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
the technician must check the condenser fan motor capacitor with an 
ohmmeter, a capacitor tester, or a volt-ohm meter with a capacitor tester 
function. If the capacitor checks out faulty, then the capacitor should be 
replaced.
This procedure is only an example of the method that a technician 
would use to check a problem with an air-conditioning system. The 
importance of technicians being able to correctly use the test instruments 
that are available cannot be overemphasized.
18.4 USING TROUBLESHOOTING CHARTS
Troubleshooting charts are designed to guide the technician to the correct 
diagnosis and corrective action, but in some cases they can be mislead-
ing. There are several different types of troubleshooting tables or charts 
that are used in the industry. Figure 18.6 shows a troubleshooting table or 
chart that gives the symptoms in the left-hand column, the cause in the 
center column, and the remedy in the right-hand column. For example, 
follow the highlighted area of the troubleshooting chart in Figure 18.14. 
The technician has determined that the compressor cycles but not by 
the thermostat. One item that could cause the problem is insufficient 
line voltage; the technician determines that the line voltage supplying 
the unit is low. The remedy for the problem is found in the right-hand 
column: determine cause and correct. Figure 18.7 shows a different type 
of troubleshooting chart. A problem with a heat pump system set to 
operate in the cooling cycle is not cooling. In Figure 18.15, the highlighted 
line would be the procedure used to diagnose the problem. The call is a 
no cool or insufficient cool situation; the technician checks to determine 
if the compressor is operating. The compressor is not operating, and the 
contactor is open. The technician would then follow the “contactor open” 
column and determine that the contactor coil is receiving 24 volts but 
not closing. The technician checks the contactor coil with an ohmmeter 
and determines that it is open. The technician changes the contactor and 
starts the heat pump. The service call would not be complete until the 
operation of the system is examined by the technician.
Another type of troubleshooting chart that is used by the industry is 
a troubleshooting tree or a fault isolation diagram such as that shown in 
Figure 18.8. This type of diagram asks questions that require a response 
before the technician proceeds to the next step.
The technician closes the thermostat and follows the highlighted 
procedure on the diagram as shown in Figure 18.16. The technician 
checks and finds 24 volts to the ignition module and discovers that there 
is no spark. He or she proceeds to the next step by following the arrow 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Compressor cycles
(other than normally
satisfying thermostat).
Insufficent line voltage
Determine cause and correct.
 
 
 
675
18.14
F I G U R E
Using a manufacturer’s troubleshooting chart (Cooling). 
(Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

676 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
and pulls the ignition lead to check the spark at the ignition stud on the 
module. There is no spark, so the technician proceeds to the next step 
and finds that the module has no fuse, so the ignition module must be 
replaced. This type of troubleshooting chart is available on many of the 
more complex electrical components and on some pieces of equipment.
18.5 HOPSCOTCHING: A USEFUL TOOL FOR TROUBLESHOOTING
One frequently used procedure for troubleshooting an electric circuit is 
called hopscotching. Figure 18.17 shows an electric circuit that will be 
used as an example to follow the procedure. The contactor coil in the 
circuit closes, starting the compressor. Let’s assume that we are getting 
voltage to L1 and L2 but not to the contactor coil. If the correct voltage is 
not available to the coil, one of the switches in the contactor coil circuit 
must be open. The question is which one. First connect one lead of the 
voltmeter to L2. The other lead of the voltmeter should be placed at point 
A as shown in Figure 18.18. If line voltage is read, the switch at A is closed 
and not at fault. Then hop to points to B, C, and D with the meter leads. 
At the point where voltage is not read, that switch is open, as shown in 
Figure 18.19. The discharge line thermostat is open.
Using Figure 18.20, follow another example of hopscotching. The cus-
tomer has complained that a heat pump is not cooling. The technician 
arrives on the job and communicates with the homeowner that he or 
she is on the premises and will be checking the heat pump system. The 
technician examines the system and determines that (1) the indoor fan 
is operating, (2) the thermostat is correctly set for cooling, (3) 240 volts 
are available to the outdoor unit, (4) the reversing valve solenoid is 
being supplied with 24 volts, and (5) 24 volts are being supplied to the 
18.14
F I G U R E
(Continued)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
 
677
18.15
F I G U R E
Using a manufacturer’s troubleshooting chart (heat pump). 
(Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

678 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
18.15
F I G U R E
(Continued)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

POWER TO MODULE
(24 Vac NOMINAL)
ON OTHER MODELS, REPLACE
MODULE.
18.16
F I G U R E
Using a troubleshooting chart. (Courtesy of Honeywell, Inc.)
 
 
Section 18.5   Hopscotching: A Useful Tool for Troubleshooting 
679
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

680 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
L1
L2
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
C
C
OL
OL
HP
T
DLT
COMP
C
Legend
T:
HP:
OL:
DLT:
C:
COMP:
Thermostat
High-pressure
switch
Overload
Discharge line
thermostat
Contactor
Compressor
18.17
F I G U R E
Simple electric circuit for hopscotching. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
–
+
T:
HP:
OL:
DLT:
C:
COMP:
Thermostat
High-pressure
switch
Overload
Discharge line
thermostat
Contactor
Compressor
Legend
L1
L2
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
C
C
C
OL
COMP
T
HP
OL
DLT
240 V
18.18
F I G U R E
Hopscotching an electrical circuit. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

–
+
T:
HP:
OL:
DLT:
C:
COMP:
Thermostat
High-pressure
switch
Overload
Discharge line
thermostat
Contactor
Compressor
Legend
L1
L2
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
C
C
C
OL
COMP
T
HP
OL
DLT
0 Volt
18.19
F I G U R E
Hopscotching an electrical circuit. (Delmar/Cengage 
Learning)
Y terminal of the defrost board. The technician determines from this 
examination that the outdoor unit contactor should be closed because 
the circuit is receiving 24 volts at Y on the defrost board. However, the 
contactor is not closed. The technician determines that there is no volt-
age to the contactor coil. The circuit that is in question and must be 
checked is highlighted in Figure 18.21. The easiest way to check the cir-
cuit is by hopscotching. The technician places one lead of the voltmeter 
on the contactor coil where the brown wire is connected, as shown in 
Figure 18.22. The technician then proceeds to check the circuit, begin-
ning with the Y terminal of the defrost board, and finds that 24 volts are 
 available as shown in Figure 18.23. The technician continues in the circuit 
to T2 of the compressor time delay and finds that 24 volts are available, 
as shown in Figure 18.24. Continuing to terminal 3 of the current-sensing 
lockout relay, the technician finds that no voltage is available, as shown 
in Figure 18.25. A current-sensing lockout relay (CSLR) is an overload 
 
 
Section 18.5   Hopscotching: A Useful Tool for Troubleshooting 
681
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

682 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
18.20
F I G U R E
Schematic diagram of a heat pump. (Courtesy of Carrier 
Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

BLU
YEL
YEL
YEL
YEL
BLU
BRN
C
C
3
2
T2
T1
Y
Y
L2
L1
L1
L2
18.21
F I G U R E
Circuit at fault. (Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
 
 
Section 18.5   Hopscotching: A Useful Tool for Troubleshooting 
683
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

684 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
–
+
L2
L2
L1
L1
18.22
F I G U R E
Meter lead placement at common of contactor coil. 
(Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

–
+
L2
L2
L1
L1
24 Volts
18.23
F I G U R E
Hopscotching circuit. (Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
 
 
Section 18.5   Hopscotching: A Useful Tool for Troubleshooting 
685
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

686 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
–
+
L2
L2
L1
L1
24 Volts
18.24
F I G U R E
Hopscotching circuit. (Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

–
+
L2
L2
L1
L1
0 Volt
18.25
F I G U R E
Hopscotching circuit. (Courtesy of Carrier Corporation)
 
 
Section 18.5   Hopscotching: A Useful Tool for Troubleshooting 
687
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

688 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
device that senses the current draw of the compressor through the lock-
out loop (LL). The current-sensing lockout relay is open between termi-
nals 2 and 3. The technician has determined that the CSLR is the reason 
that the contactor coil is not receiving 24 volts. Before the technician can 
put the blame on the CSLR, however, he or she must make sure that there 
is no other reason for the compressor to be operating in a high-amperage 
condition.
This method of troubleshooting is one of many that are used in the 
industry. Good service technicians will usually develop their own proce-
dures as they gain experience with various types of equipment.
18.6 TROUBLESHOOTING CONTROL SYSTEMS
As you develop your own troubleshooting procedures, you must take a 
systematic approach. It is no easy task to diagnose problems in electric 
systems, especially the larger commercial and industrial equipment. The 
smaller residential and commercial equipment, fortunately, is built and 
designed with a simpler control system and fewer components than the 
larger equipment.
Service technicians must understand how, when, and why a certain 
piece of equipment operates as it does. Wiring diagrams are extremely 
important because they tell the technician how the equipment operates, 
what components are used, and where they are located in the system. 
The schematic diagram is usually the easiest tool to use for diagnosing 
problems. However, in many cases manufacturers will provide a pictorial 
diagram or a combination of a pictorial and schematic with the equip-
ment. No matter what type of diagram is furnished with the equipment, 
the service technician must find and repair the malfunction.
At all times the technician must be careful not to overlook the small 
things that homeowners or inexperienced service mechanics could have 
done to an electric system, such as changing wires, jumping controls out, 
and removing components they felt were unnecessary.
Diagnosis of Control Systems
In many cases, the components are at fault when the system is not oper-
ating properly. But it is sometimes difficult to identify the faulty compo-
nent unless the technician uses the wiring diagram to identify the circuit 
that is not operating properly and then goes to the load or to the device 
that controls the load. A technician can usually identify the load that is 
not operating properly. Therefore, the circuit should be checked for any 
malfunctions or faulty components.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Troubleshooting the electrical control circuits in a cooling, heating, 
or refrigeration system is basically common sense. It is essential that the 
service technician understand how the unit functions electrically. With a 
good knowledge of how the unit functions electrically and a good trouble-
shooting approach, the service technician can eliminate guesswork and 
parts changing when servicing a unit. Observing the unit in operation 
will lead the technician to the electrical circuits that can be eliminated 
as trouble sources. This process of elimination is based on a systematic 
analysis of the unit’s operation. Most service mechanics quickly perform 
this task mentally once the operation of the unit has been observed. For 
example, if an air-conditioning system has three major loads, as shown 
in Figure 18.26, and two of the three loads are operating correctly, then the 
technician only has to check the circuit that is controlling the load that is 
not operating properly, along with checking the load itself. In Figure 18.26, 
if the indoor fan motor is not operating, then the technician should con-
centrate on the indoor fan motor and its controlling circuits. The service 
technician must be able to recognize and separate the load circuits.
Residential Systems. Figure 18.27 shows a basic circuit in a residential air 
conditioner condensing unit. The circuit contains the contactor and the 
compressor, with the contactor controlling the load. If the compressor is 
not operating, it is logical to assume that the problem is with the power 
supply to the contactor or the unit. The first check should be the incom-
ing power to the contactor. If it is available, continue the voltage check 
to the compressor. If voltage is not available to the compressor, check 
the contacts and make certain of their position. If the contactor is closed 
and the compressor is being supplied with the correct power, diagnose 
the compressor, making certain to consider the overload, if it is internal. 
Check the contacts of the contactor if the contactor is closed but no volt-
age is going through its contacts. However, if the contacts are not closed, 
you will have to look at the circuit that controls the contactor coil.
Total Circuit. The total circuit schematic of a residential air-conditioning 
system is shown in Figure 18.26, including the total wiring diagram. The 
methods used in the previous paragraphs can be followed here. The low-
voltage control circuit can be checked out if the contactor is not closing, 
assuming the compressor is good and the contactor is not closed. The 
first check that should be made is the low-voltage power supply to ensure 
that voltage is available to the control circuit. The line voltage power sup-
ply has been checked and is correct.
Once it is determined that voltage is available to the control circuit, 
the only items left to check are the devices in the circuit. In the control 
circuit, there are four devices that should be checked: the low-pressure 
 
 
Section 18.6   Troubleshooting Control Systems 
689
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

690 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
COMP
CFM
CRC
CFMC
IFM
R
System
Auto
On
Fan
G
Y
IFR
IFR
C
C
C
Legend
C:
COMP:
CRC:
CFM:
CFMC:
IFR:
IFM:
HP:
LP:
TR:
Contactor
Compressor
Compressor running capacitor
Condenser fan motor
Condenser fan motor capacitor
Indoor fan relay
Indoor fan motor
High-pressure switch
Low-pressure switch
Transformer
TR
HP
LP
18.26
F I G U R E
Control circuit in a small residential system. (Delmar/Cengage Learning)
and high-pressure switches, the thermostat, and the contactor coil. The 
contactor coil can be checked by reading the voltage available to it. If 
24 volts are available but the contactor is not closed, then the coil or 
mechanical linkage of the contactor is bad and should be replaced. The 
other three components should be checked for an open circuit. This can 
be done easily with an ohmmeter or voltmeter. Do not overlook any prob-
lem that could have the high-pressure or low-pressure switches opened 
(low refrigerant charge, dirty condenser, or a bad condenser fan motor).
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Industrial Systems. Commercial and 
industrial control systems have many 
more components and are more com-
plex than the simple residential con-
trol systems. Therefore, it is more 
difficult to diagnose and correct the 
problems in these circuits. First check 
the power supply to the equipment 
and the power supply to the control 
circuit. If there is power, use the sche-
matic wiring diagram and follow a 
systematic method for troubleshoot-
ing the system. The complexity and 
number of components should not 
cause you any concern. Each circuit 
of a diagram can be and should be 
treated individually.
Service personnel soon learn 
their own methods of troubleshoot-
ing equipment that allow for faster and more efficient service calls. The 
one item that takes its toll on service technicians is a callback. A call-
back is a return trip to a piece of equipment that a technician has not 
fixed properly. This hurts the productivity of the technician as well as 
the employer because of the added expense, which cannot be charged to 
the customer. Service mechanics should try to eliminate all possibility of 
callbacks. If a technician does the right kind of job on the first call, there 
is no callback.
One procedure for troubleshooting any cooling, heating, or refrigera-
tion system is the following:
 1. Check the power supply to the equipment.
 2. If no power is available, correct the problem.
 3. Make a thorough check of the system to determine which load (or 
loads) is not working properly.
 4. Locate the loads on the wiring diagram that are not operating prop-
erly and begin checking these circuits first.
 5. Each device in that circuit is a possible cause of the problem and 
should be checked until the faulty device is found. (Do not disregard 
the load in the circuit.)
Contactor
Contactor
Com-
pressor
Con-
tactor
From thermostat
L1
L2
18.27
F I G U R E
Basic circuit in a residential 
condensing unit. (Delmar/
Cengage Learning)
 
 
Section 18.6   Troubleshooting Control Systems 
691
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

692 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
 6. It may be necessary to move to other circuits to check the coils of 
some of the devices.
 7. Never overlook the internal overload devices.
The heating, cooling, and refrigeration industry depends as much on 
the service aspects as on the selling of new equipment. Service work is a 
necessity if a company is going to be successful. No customer wants an 
air-conditioning system if he or she cannot get the proper service and 
maintenance. Remember, too, that service technicians always represent 
the employer when they are sent out on the job. They should always try 
to present themselves in a manner that will sell them as well as their 
employer. The appearance and attitude of a service technician are just 
as important as the ability to diagnose and correct the problem that the 
homeowner is having.
18.7 SERVICE CALLS
Service Call 1
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace and air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No heat, entire system is dead
Service Procedure
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order reveals that nothing about the sys-
tem is operating. The gas furnace is located in the basement.
 2. The technician informs the homeowner of his or her presence and 
obtains any additional information about the problem. The hom-
eowner states that one night the system was working and the next 
morning it was not.
 3. Upon entering the house, the technician makes certain that no dirt 
or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician also 
takes care not to mar interior walls.
 4. The technician sets the thermostat to the heat position.
 5. The technician measures the line voltage available to the furnace. 
The technician measures 120 volts, which is the correct voltage.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6. The technician measures the control voltage supplied from the ther-
mostat to the furnace and reads 0 volt, indicating that the heating 
appliance is not receiving a call for heat.
 7. The technician must now check the transformer to determine 
the available control voltage; checking at terminals C and R of the 
terminal board on the furnace shows 24 volts. The technician has 
determined that line voltage is available to the furnace and the 
transformer is good.
 8. The voltage reading from C to W on the terminal board is 0 volt, 
indicating that the thermostat is not supplying control voltage to the 
furnace. The technician jumps terminals R and W on the thermostat 
and then measures the voltage at the furnace terminal board (termi-
nals C and W), which measures 0 volt. It is apparent to the technician 
that the thermostat cable is bad.
 9. The technician now inspects the thermostat cable between the 
thermostat and the furnace. The technician locates a place in the 
thermostat cable where the insulation and wire have been cut.
10. The technician splices the thermostat cable together using good 
wiring practices.
11. The technician operates the system to make sure it is working 
properly.
12. The homeowner is informed of the problem and the corrective action 
taken by the technician.
Service Call 2
Application: Commercial refrigeration
Type of Equipment: Walk-in cooler (R-12) with pump-down cycle
Complaint: No refrigeration
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order reveals that the walk-in cooler is 
not cooling.
 2. The technician informs the manager of the meat market of his or her 
presence and obtains any additional information about the problem.
 
 
Section 18.7   Service Calls 
693
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

694 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
 3. The technician observes the system to determine which, if any, loads 
are operating. The evaporator fan motors are operating normally.
 4. The technician checks the pressures in the refrigeration system and 
finds that the discharge pressure is 100 psig and the suction pressure 
is 5 psig. The technician finds that line voltage is available to the con-
densing unit, but the contactor is not closed.
 5. The technician must determine what switches are in series with 
the contactor coil. The technician determines that the low-pressure 
switch is in series with the contactor coil. The low-pressure switch is 
open, preventing the contactor from closing.
 6. The technician knows from past experience that the system is 
charged correctly and looks further.
 7. The refrigeration system is using a pump-down system.
 8. The technician must now check the liquid line solenoid circuit. 
Within that circuit, the thermostat, defrost control contacts, and a 
manual switch are in series with the liquid line solenoid. The techni-
cian checks the circuit and finds all three switches closed.
 9. The voltage available to the liquid line solenoid valve is correct, but 
the solenoid coil is cold to the touch. The technician removes the 
solenoid from the valve and feels no magnetic pull. To be certain, the 
technician measures the resistance of the solenoid coil and finds it 
to be infinite ohms. The solenoid coil is open and must be replaced.
10. The technician replaces the liquid line solenoid coil and checks the 
operation of the system. The system is operating properly and the 
temperature is decreasing in the walk-in cooler.
11. The meat market manager is informed of the problem and the cor-
rective action taken by the technician.
Service Call 3
Application: Commercial and industrial conditioned air system.
Type of Equipment: Large fan coil unit with large air-cooled 
condensing unit
Complaint: Not enough cooling
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for 
 available information. The work order reveals that the system cools 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

adequately on mild days, but as the temperature increases, the sys-
tem cools inadequately.
 2. The technician informs the maintenance supervisor of his or her 
presence and obtains any additional information about the system. 
The maintenance supervisor states the same as in the work order. 
The maintenance staff has cleaned the evaporator and condenser 
coils in the last several weeks.
 3. The technician checks and finds the system operating properly at 
about 11:30 a.m. The technician finds that the system is operating 
normally with an ambient temperature of about 78°F.
 4. The technician stops for lunch and reports back at 1:30 p.m. and finds 
that the compressor is off.
 5. The technician installs a set of refrigeration gauges on the system and 
reads the discharge gauge at 425 psig and the suction gauge at 125 psig.
 6. The technician observes the system after it has started and finds 
that only two out of the three condenser fan motors are operat-
ing. The system operates for about 10 minutes and again cuts off. 
The technician determines that the unit is cutting off due to high 
head pressure. The technician assumes that the No. 2 condenser fan 
motor will have to run to maintain the head pressure at a level below 
the setting of the high-pressure switch.
 7. The technician uses the wiring diagram of the unit to find out what 
cycles the third condenser fan motor. The fan motor is cycled by an 
outdoor thermostat that is in series with condenser fan contactor No. 3.
 8. The technician checks the voltage available to the condenser fan 
contactor No. 3 and measures 0 volt. The technician next checks the 
condenser fan motor No. 3 thermostat to determine if it is open or 
closed. The thermostat is open; the technician checks the setting and 
determines that the condenser fan motor No. 3 thermostat is good 
but out of adjustment.
 9. The technician adjusts the condenser fan motor No. 3 thermostat so 
that it comes on and maintains the desired discharge pressure in the 
system.
10. The technician informs the maintenance supervisor of the setting 
adjustment made on the thermostat and reminds the supervisor 
that the condenser fan motor thermostats should not be adjusted by 
untrained technicians.
 
 
Section 18.7   Service Calls 
695
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

696 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
Service Call 4
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace using an intermittent pilot ignition with 
an air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No heat
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The furnace is located in a crawl space. There is an 
access opening at the west end of the house that will be unlocked. 
No one will be at home; the key to the back door is located over the 
back door frame.
 2. Upon entering the house, the technician makes certain that no dirt 
or foreign material is carried into the structure. The technician also 
takes care not to mar interior walls.
 3. The thermostat will need to be set to the heat position before the 
technician goes under the house. The technician turns the fan switch 
to the “on” position to see if the fan will operate. The fan operates, so 
the technician has already determined that line voltage is available 
to the furnace, and the transformer and indoor fan relay are in good 
condition.
 4. The technician proceeds under the house to the furnace and visu-
ally inspects the furnace and controls. Nothing out of the ordinary is 
found.
 5. The technician checks the voltage being supplied to the ignition 
module and discovers that there is no voltage to the module.
 6. The technician examines the wiring diagram to determine what is in 
series with the ignition module. Four limit switches are in series with 
the module and must be checked; of the four, two are manual reset. 
The technician locates the manual reset limit switches and finds 
that one has opened.
 7. The technician resets the open limit switch and the furnace immedi-
ately starts the ignition process. The main burner lights and in sev-
eral minutes the indoor fan starts. The technician cycles the furnace 
several times to make sure it is operating properly and that the limit 
switch does not open.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 8. The technician turns the thermostat to the position requested by 
the homeowner and makes certain that the house is left in order. 
The technician leaves a note to the homeowner explaining what the 
problem was and the action taken.
Service Call 5
Application: Commercial and industrial conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Large fan coil unit and large air-cooled condensing 
unit
Complaint: No cooling
Service Procedure:
 1. The technician reviews the work order from the dispatcher for avail-
able information. The work order reveals that the individual circuit 
breaker for the compressor is opening each time the compressor 
attempts to start.
 2. The technician reports to the maintenance mechanic of the plant. 
The maintenance mechanic informs the technician that the com-
pressor tries to start for about 2 or 3 seconds and then the breaker 
trips. The breaker has been reset several times during the last few 
hours. The indoor fan is operating properly. The three condenser fans 
are operating properly.
 3. From past experience, the technician realizes that the problem could 
be very serious. The technician examines the condensing unit, look-
ing for broken or burned wires that could be causing the problem, but 
finds nothing out of the ordinary.
 4. The technician resets the breaker and tries to start the compressor 
but with the same results; the breaker opens.
 5. The technician examines the wiring diagram to determine what 
type of three-phase motor is being used in the condensing unit. The 
three-phase compressor motor is a part winding motor.
 6. The technician decides that the best starting point is to determine 
if the motor windings are good. The technician measures the resis-
tance of the windings and finds that all six windings read 1.2 ohms, 
indicating a good compressor motor.
 
 
Section 18.7   Service Calls 
697
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

698 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
 7. The technician now needs to determine if the second contactor in the 
part winding setup is closing. The technician removes the cover from 
the contactor and closes the breaker. The compressor again tries to 
start, but the breaker opens again. The technician notices that the 
second contactor does not close, which would cause the compressor 
to overload with high current draw and open the breaker.
 8. There are two possible causes of the problem; either the time-delay 
relay or the second contactor could be at fault. The technician opens 
the compressor breaker and allows the controls to cycle through the 
compressor startup. The technician checks the voltage to the contac-
tor coil and measures no voltage. A resistance check shows that the 
second contactor coil is good.
 9. The technician must determine if the time-delay relay is at fault. The 
problem is that the time-delay relay coil is receiving 24 volts but is 
not closing.
SUMMARY
One of the most important tasks that a refrigeration, heating, and air-
conditioning technician is called on to perform in the field is to correctly 
troubleshoot and repair refrigeration, heating, and air-conditioning sys-
tems. In order to be an effective and profitable technician for the company, 
the technician must know how to (1) treat the customer, (2) work in a 
safe manner, (3) determine problems with the refrigeration cycle, (4) read 
wiring diagrams, (5) locate individual components that must be checked, 
(6) troubleshoot individual electrical components, (7) troubleshoot control 
systems, and (8) leave the work area in an orderly fashion. Technicians 
represent the company they are working for, and in many cases they are 
the only company representatives customers will see.
The first element that a technician must consider when assigned to 
a service call is personal safety. A technician will face many dangers on 
service calls and must be aware of how to safely perform the necessary 
tasks. Often it will be difficult to locate a place to interrupt the electrical 
power source in order to perform some troubleshooting task. The tech-
nician should never try to replace or repair electrical components while 
power is being supplied to the equipment or system. The technician will 
often be required to troubleshoot components while power is being sup-
plied to the unit because certain troubleshooting operations require live 
circuits. However, the technician should use extreme care not to become 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

part of an electrical circuit, which would put him or her in danger of elec-
trocution. The technician should make certain that all extension cords 
and electrical tools are in good condition and all grounding connections 
are in good condition and properly connected. Technicians will come in 
contact with many hazards, such as equipment that rotates, and they 
must avoid getting tangled with the shafts of motors and other devices. 
When sizing electrical wire, the technician should always follow the 
National Electrical Code®, local codes, and the manufacturer’s installation 
instructions. Probably the two most important words as far as safety is 
concerned are “respect” and “caution”. At least one person on a service 
vehicle should know how to correctly perform CPR.
The technician will have to troubleshoot at one time or another all 
the electrical components in a refrigeration, heating, and air-conditioning 
system. These components include electric motors, transformers, ther-
mostats, pressure switches, capacitors, overloads, and others. The tech-
nician must be able to select the correct meter and scale with which to 
determine the condition of these components.
The technician will have to be able to read wiring diagrams in order 
to be an effective troubleshooter. The schematic diagram breaks each 
control system down into a circuit-by-circuit arrangement, making the 
control system simpler and easier to understand.
Many tools are available to make the technician’s job easier, such as 
troubleshooting charts, manufacturer’s service information, wiring dia-
grams, and electrical test equipment. The technician should use every 
available aid.
Technicians are expected to correctly diagnose and repair all the 
problems they are assigned, but seldom does this happen. On occasion, 
there will be callbacks about malfunctions that the service technician 
thought were repaired but were not. This is a delicate situation, and the 
technician must also be a customer service agent when this happens. 
The service technician is often the link between the company and the 
customer.
!CAUTION
When servicing electrical devices, the electrical power 
supply should be shut off at the distribution or main 
electrical panel. The electrical circuit should be locked 
out in an approved manner.
 
 
Summary 
699
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RQ1 
What is the most common switch used in air-
conditioning control systems?
a. pressure
b. thermostat
c. push button
d. humidistat
RQ2 
The __________ is the most important load in a 
refrigeration system.
RQ3 
Why is it important for a service technician to be 
able to use volt-ohm meters?
RQ4 
A pictorial or a component arrangement diagram 
shows ____________.
a.  the components in a circuit-by-circuit 
arrangement
b. the installation connections only
c. the control panel layout
d. all of the above
Answer questions 5–7 using the troubleshooting chart in 
Figure 18.6.
RQ5 
Which of the following could be problems if the 
compressor will not start?
a. blown fuse
b. contactor
c. thermostat
d. all of the above
RQ6 
Which of the following could be the problem if 
the compressor will not run but the condenser fan 
motor will operate?
a. bad run capacitor
b. bad condenser fan motor capacitor
c. bad contactor
d. none of the above
RQ7 
What would be the remedy for the problem 
described in question 6?
a. replace compressor
b. replace condenser fan motor
c. replace condensing unit
d. replace compressor running capacitor
Answer questions 8 and 9 using the troubleshooting chart in 
Figure 18.7.
RQ8 
Which of the following could be the cause of the 
compressor cycling on overload on heating?
a. bad contactor coil
b. defective outdoor thermostat
c. damage reversing valve
d. none of the above
RQ9 
Which of the following could be a reason for the 
compressor not to run?
a. loose electrical connections
b. compressor internal overload open
c. locked-down compressor
d. all of the above
Answer questions 10 and 11 using the troubleshooting chart 
in Figure 18.8.
RQ10 
What could be the problem if the pilot does not 
stop when the pilot lights?
a. pilot not covering electrode
b. thermostat not calling for heat
c. no spark
d. none of the above
C H A P T E R  1 8  R E V I E W
RQ R E V I E W  Q U E S T I O N S
700 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R  1 8  R E V I E W
RQ11 
What could be the problem if the main burner does 
not light and the pilot is operating correctly and 
the voltage across the MV-MV/PV is 0 volt?
a. check ignition cable
b. bad thermostat
c. change ignition module
d. change gas control
RQ12 
Why is it important for a technician to be able to 
use a clamp-on ammeter?
Use the diagram in Figure 18.1 to answer questions 13–16.
RQ13 
If a technician turns the fan switch to the “on” 
position and the indoor fan runs, which of the 
following conditions can he or she eliminate as 
problems?
a. transformer
b. indoor fan motor
c. indoor fan relay
d. all of the above
RQ14 
If the compressor and condenser fan motor will 
not operate but the indoor fan motor is operating, 
what would be the probable cause of the 
malfunction?
a. bad contactor coil
b. bad thermostat
c. bad condenser fan motor
d. bad compressor
RQ15 
If a technician read 0 volt across the indoor fan 
relay contacts and the indoor fan motor is not 
operating but supply voltage is available to the 
equipment, which of the following would be the 
problem?
a. bad indoor fan relay contacts
b. bad transformer
c. bad indoor fan relay coil
d. bad indoor fan motor
RQ16 
If the thermostat is closed, the compressor and 
condenser fan motor are not operating, and all 
other loads are operating properly, which of the 
following conditions could be the problem?
a. a bad high-pressure switch
b. a bad low-pressure switch
c. both a and b
d. a bad thermostat
RQ17 
How does the process of elimination play a part in 
troubleshooting an air-conditioning system?
Answer questions 18–23 using the diagram in Figure 18.2.
RQ18 
Which of the following components are not located 
in the control box of the unit?
a. the defrost board
b. the start thermistor
c. the reversing-valve solenoid
d. the start relay
RQ19 
True or False: It is acceptable to use aluminum 
conductors when installing the unit.
RQ20 
Which of the following conditions occurs when the 
defrost relay is energized if the defrost thermostat 
is closed?
a. the reversing-valve solenoid is energized
b.  a connection is made between R and W2 in the 
defrost board
c. the outdoor fan motor is de-energized
d. all of the above
RQ21 
If the unit in the diagram does nothing when the 
thermostat is closed, which of the following condi-
tions could exist?
a. FU 2 is bad
b. the indoor fan relay is bad
c. the start relay is bad
d. the high-pressure switch is open
 
 
Review Questions 
701
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RQ22 
If the unit is operating in cooling mode, the out-
door fan motor is not operating, and all other 
loads are operating properly, what could be the 
problem?
a. bad defrost relay contacts
b. bad contactor
c. blown fuse
d. bad transformer
RQ23 
The unit is heating when it should be cooling. 
Which of the following could be the problem?
a. the reversing-valve solenoid
b. the compressor
c. the defrost board
d. none of the above
RQ24 
Why is hopscotching an important tool when 
troubleshooting?
RQ25 
Why are wiring diagrams an important tool when 
troubleshooting air-conditioning systems?
C H A P T E R  1 8  R E V I E W
L A B  M A N U A L  R E F E R E N C E
For experiments and activities dealing with material covered in 
this chapter, refer to Chapter 18 in the Lab Manual.
702 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Practice Service Calls 
703
PRACTICE SERVICE CALLS
Determine the problem and recommend a solution for the following 
service calls. (Be specific; do not list components as good or bad.)
Practice Service Call 1
Application: Commercial and industrial conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Water chiller with air handlers
Complaint: No chilled water
Symptoms:
1. Compressor is not operating.
2. Chilled water thermostat, high-pressure switch, low-pressure 
switch, compressor thermostat, and freeze protector are closed.
3. Chilled water pump is operating.
Practice Service Call 2
Application: Commercial and industrial conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Water chiller with air handlers
Complaint: No chilled water
Symptoms:
1. Compressor is not operating.
2. Thermostat is closed.
3. Hopscotching through compressor contactor circuit between L2 
side of contactor coil and load side of freeze protector, there is no 
voltage; voltage is available at the line side of the freeze protector.
Practice Service Call 3
Application: Commercial and industrial conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Large fan coil unit controlled by a system switch 
and time clock with large air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No cooling
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

704 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
Symptoms:
1. Line voltage is available to the magnetic starter controlling the 
blower motor and to the air-cooled condensing unit.
2. System switch is closed.
3. Blower motor is not operating.
4. Condenser unit is not operating/interlock contacts of magnetic 
starter are open.
Practice Service Call 4
Application: Commercial and industrial conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Pneumatic controls (use Figure 18.14)
Complaint: No cooling
Symptoms:
1. Supply air  20 psig.
2. Receiver controller is operating properly.
3. Discharge air temperature is showing 85°F.
4. Return air temperature is showing 85°F.
5. Air solenoid SV-1 is closed because of high outdoor ambient 
temperature.
6. Air-cooled condensing unit is not receiving signal to start.
Practice Service Call 5
Application: Light commercial conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Rooftop unit with two compressors (first compressor/
first-stage cool and second compressor/second-stage cool)
Complaint: Not enough cooling
Symptoms:
1. Ambient temperature is 100°F.
2. Evaporator fan motor is operating.
3. First-stage compressor is operating.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4. All safety components in second-stage compressor contactor 
circuit are closed.
5. Second-stage compressor contactor is being supplied with 0 volt.
Practice Service Call 6
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Electric furnace with four 5-kW electric resistance 
heaters
Complaint: Not enough heat
Symptoms:
1. Electric furnace is supplied with correct line voltage.
2. Control voltage supplied to furnace is 24 volts.
3. Blower motor is operating.
4. Resistance heaters 1, 3, and 4 are operating.
5. Resistance heater 2 not operating.
6. Sequencer is good.
7. All line voltage safety controls in heater 2 line voltage circuit are good.
Practice Service Call 7
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Gas furnace with air-cooled condensing unit
Complaint: No heat
Symptoms:
1. Correct line voltage is being supplied to furnace and condensing 
unit.
2. 24 volts are being supplied to control system of furnace.
3. Spark is being supplied to igniter/sensor.
4. Pilot is igniting.
5. Main burner is not igniting.
6. 24 volts are being supplied to gas valve.
 
 
Practice Service Calls 
705
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

706 
CHAPTER 18   Troubleshooting Modern Refrigeration, HVAC Control Systems
Practice Service Call 8
Application: Residential conditioned air system
Type of Equipment: Split system heat pump (Figure 18.20)
Complaint: Heats instead of cools
Symptoms:
1. Correct line voltage is being supplied to indoor and outdoor 
sections of heat pump.
2. 24 volts are being supplied to C & O terminals on indoor unit 
terminal board.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
GLOSSARY 
707
707
Appendix A
MOTOR REVIEW TABLE
Type 
Motor
Text 
Section
Phase
Starting 
Torque
Running 
Torque
Capacitors
Starting 
Devices
Motor 
Protection
Hermetic or 
Open
Multi-
speed
Reversible
Shaded 
Pole
9.4
1
Low
Low
None
None
Open
Yes
Split 
Phase
9.6
1
Moderate
Good
None
Centrifugal 
Switch or 
Starting Relay
Internal or 
External
Both
No
Open/Yes 
Hermetic/No
Capacitor 
Start
9.6
1
High
Good
Start 
Capacitor
Centrifugal 
Switch or 
Starting Relay
Internal or 
External
Both
No
Open/Yes 
Hermetic/No
PSC
9.7
1
Low
Good
Run 
Capacitor
None
Internal
Both
Yes
Open/Yes 
Hermetic/No
Cap Start 
Cap Run
9.8
1
High
High
Run & Start 
Capacitor
Potential 
Relay
Internal or 
External
Hermetic
No
No
ECM
9.10
1
Low
Moderate
None/Uses 
Rectifier to 
Convert AC 
to DC
None
External
Open
Variable 
Speed
No
Three 
Phase
9.9
3
High
High
No
No
Internal or 
External
Both
No
Yes
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

708 
GLOSSARY
708
Appendix B
Heater
Crankcase heater
Defrost heater
Hot-gas solenoid
Relay coil    
Red signal light   
Compressor (single phase)
Compressor (three phase)
Fuse
Circuit breaker
In-line thermal overload
Magnetic overload
Pilot duty thermal overload
Relay or contactor with 
two NO contacts
Relay with one NO and one
NC contact
Single-pole–single-throw switch
Single-pole–double-throw switch
Double-pole–single-throw switch
Double-pole–double-throw switch
Thermostat opens on rise
(heating)
Thermostat closes on rise
(cooling)
Pressure switch opens on rise
Pressure switch closes on rise
Normally closed push button
Normally open push button
Humidistat
Time-delay relay
Relay contacts
Compressor
Evaporator fan motor
Condenser fan motor
Reversing valve solenoid
Three-pole contactor
H
Comp
EFM
Comp
Comp
AGS 
CFM
RVS
Transformer
CH
Htr 
R
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a) Symbols for switches (b) Symbols for loads (c) Symbols for safety controls (d) Symbols  for contactors and 
relays (e) symbols for transformer.
ELECTRICAL SYMBOLS
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Glossary 
709
709
Glossary
A
air-cooled packaged unit A unit that is made in one com-
plete unit with an air-cooled condenser mounted with 
the unit or remotely.
air to air heat pump A heat pump that uses air for 
the heat transfer medium in both the heating and 
cooling cycles.
alternating current Electron flow that flows in one direc-
tion and then reverses at regular intervals; produced 
by cutting a magnetic field with a conductor. The most 
common type of power supply used in the heating, 
cooling, and refrigeration industry.
alternator An electrical generator that is used to produce 
alternating current.
ambient air temperature The temperature of the air sur-
rounding any device.
American Wire Gauge Standard unit of measurement 
for wire.
ammeter An electric meter used to measure the amperes 
that are present in a circuit. Ammeters are made as 
in-line ammeters or clamp-on meters.
ampere The amount of current required to flow through 
a resistance of one ohm with a pressure of one volt, 
measured with an ammeter.
analog meter A device that uses a meter movement to 
indicate an electrical characteristic.
anticipator A component of a thermostat that anticipates 
the temperature of an area and will stop or start the 
cooling or heating equipment to prevent the thermo-
stat from overshooting the desired temperature.
anti-short-cycling device (anti-short-cycling timer) A 
device that prevents a load from stopping and starting 
in rapid succession. This device is used mainly to pre-
vent compressors from stopping and starting rapidly.
apparent wattage The power that is calculated by mul-
tiplying the voltage times the amperage of a circuit.
armature The portion of a contactor that moves; con-
nected to a set of contacts that causes a completed 
circuit when the armature is pulled into the magnetic 
field produced by the coil.
atom The smallest particle of an element that can exist 
and maintain any identification; can combine with 
other atoms to form new substances.
B
back electromotive force The amount of voltage produced 
across the starting and common terminals or connec-
tions of a single-phase motor.
balance point The point at which the capacity of a heat 
pump equals the heating load of the structure. At this 
point additional heat will be needed to meet the load 
of the building.
ball bearing An antifriction device that is used to allow 
free turning and support of the rotating member of 
the device. It consists of an outer ring and inner ring 
with races and has steel balls sandwiched between 
the rings.
bearing The part of a rotating machine or motor that allows 
free turning of its rotating parts with little friction.
bimetal overload A simple thermal overload that breaks 
the power supplying a small motor directly. When it 
reaches a high enough temperature, the bimetal opens 
by warping; when the overload cools, the bimetal will 
warp back and close the circuit.
bimetal relay An overload device that opens a set of con-
tacts by a temperature that corresponds to the current 
draw of a load.
breaker A device usually used in a breaker panel that 
is capable of being used as a disconnect switch and 
an overload protection for the circuit it is supplying 
power to.
breaker panel An electric panel that houses breakers 
used to distribute power to circuits in the structure.
C
cad cell A light-sensitive cell that changes its resistance 
in the presence of light. In most cases, the resistance 
decreases as the cell views the light. The cad cell is 
used to detect the ignition of an oil burner.
callback A return trip to a piece of equipment that was 
not properly serviced the first trip.
capacitive reactance A resistance caused by using capaci-
tors with motors; when a capacitor is put in a circuit, 
it resists the voltage change, causing the amperage to 
lead the voltage.
capacitor A device that consists of two aluminum plates 
with an insulator between the plates; used to boost 
the starting torque of single-phase motors. The two 
types of capacitors are electrolytic or starting, and 
running or oil filled.
capacitor-start–capacitor-run motor A high starting 
torque and good running efficiency motor; it uses a 
starting capacitor to increase starting torque and a 
running capacitor to increase running efficiency.
capacitor-start motor A motor that uses a starting capaci-
tor to increase the starting torque.
capacity control The action of limiting the capacity of 
a piece of equipment to meet the needs of the load. 
Capacity control is used in light commercial and larger 
commercial and industrial applications.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

710 
Glossary
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) The action taken 
by others after a cardiac arrest has occurred in which 
breathing and massage of the heart are attempted for 
the victim.
charge A condition in which an imbalance of protons and 
electrons exists in an atom.
check, test, and start procedure The procedure used by 
the heating and air-conditioning technician used on 
the initial start-up of a heating and air-conditioning 
system to ensure proper operation.
circuit breaker See breaker.
circuit lockout A method used to lock out a circuit that 
a technician is working on to prevent someone from 
restoring electrical energy to the circuit.
clamp-on ammeter A type of ammeter with jaws that 
clamp around one of the conductors supplying power 
to the load.
clock thermostat A thermostat that is used to control 
the temperature of a structure with a time function 
that can be set or programmed by the occupant of the 
structure. Clock thermostats can have multiple pro-
grams adding to their flexibility.
closed circuit A complete path for electrons to follow.
coil An electrical device that is used to convert electrical 
energy into a magnetic field.
combustion chamber The part of a fossil fuel appliance 
where the combustion occurs.
compound A substance that is a combination of atoms 
from at least two different elements.
compressor A device that is used in a mechanical refrig-
eration system to compress the refrigerant. Most 
compressors are rotated by an electric motor. The 
motor may be external or be an integral part of the 
compressor.
condensing unit A portion of a split air-conditioning 
or refrigeration system that is mounted outside and 
contains the compressor, condenser, condenser fan 
motor, and controls for these components; most used 
today are air cooled. It takes the cool suction gas from 
the evaporator, compresses it, condenses it to a liquid, 
and forces it back to the evaporator.
conductor A wire that is used for the path of electric flow. 
Most electric conductors are copper or aluminum.
constant discharge pressure Maintaining the discharge 
pressure at a constant pressure; this is accomplished 
by controlling the amount of heat rejected by the con-
denser by controlling the condenser fan motors.
contactor A device that opens and closes a set of electric 
contacts by the action of a solenoid coil; composed of 
a solenoid and the contacts.
contacts The part of a relay that opens and closes to allow 
for the flow of electrical energy.
continuity A complete path for electrons to follow in a 
circuit or component.
control circuit A circuit that controls some load in the 
entire control system, whether it be a relay or contac-
tor coil or a major load.
control loop A sensor, a controller, and a controlled device.
control relay A relay that is used to control a circuit or 
circuits in an air-conditioning system.
current Electrons flowing in an electric circuit, measured 
in amperes.
current electricity Electricity that results from the elec-
tron being displaced and moving back to the atom.
current overload An overload that opens a set of contacts 
on high current draw and allows them to close when 
the current draw has decreased. It usually is a pilot 
duty device.
current relay A relay that is opened or closed by the start-
ing current of an electric motor. The relay allows a 
starting capacitor and starting winding to drop out or 
drop in the starting circuit.
current-sensing lockout relay A relay that will lock out a 
control system in the event of high current.
customer relations The interaction between the  customer 
and the heating and air-conditioning technician.
cut-in pressure The pressure at which a pressure control 
will close, starting the device it is controlling.
cut-out pressure The pressure at which a pressure con-
trol will open, stopping the device it is controlling.
cycle One complete cycle of alternating current is the 
production of a positive and negative peak.
D
damper motor A device that is used to open and close a 
damper that is used to control the air flow to a section 
of a structure.
de-energize To stop the electron flow to an electric 
device.
defrost control A control that is used to initiate the 
defrost cycle of a heat pump or initiate the defrost 
cycle in a commercial refrigeration freezer.
defrost cycle A cycle of operation of a heat pump that is 
designed to defrost the outside coil during the heating 
operation.
defrost module A solid-state module that is responsible 
for controlling the defrost of a heat pump. Defrost 
modules come in many different forms, such as the 
time/temperature module, which only considers one 
condition, or a demand module, which considers sev-
eral conditions.
dehumidifier An appliance that is used to remove humid-
ity from the air.
delta system A three-phase electrical supply system that 
is determined by transformer hookup. The delta system 
due to the transformer hookup gives two usable low-
voltage legs plus a high leg. The delta system is used 
when a large number of three-phase loads are used.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Glossary 
711
delta transformer A three-phase transformer that has 
the ends of each of its windings connected together to 
form a triangle. The delta transformer produces a high 
leg on one of its power legs.
delta winding A winding layout of some three-phase 
motors, where the beginning of the windings is con-
nected to the ending of the windings.
dielectric The substance that is between the plates and 
fills the case of a capacitor. The substance is a non-
conductor of electricity.
differential The difference between the cut-in and  cut-out 
point of a control. This can be applied to thermostats, 
pressure switches, and most controls.
digital meter A meter that uses a digital display to indi-
cate an electrical characteristic.
diode A semiconductor that allows voltage to pass in only 
one direction.
direct current An electron flow in only one direction; used 
in the industry only for special applications such as 
solid-state modules and electronic air filters.
direct digital control A control system which uses low-
voltage control signals to control devices to maintain 
a desired condition.
direct drive A method of transferring the rotating motion 
of a motor to a device that must be turned. This type 
of hookup connects the motor directly to the device 
that must be turned and rotates at the same revolu-
tions per minute as the motor.
disconnect switch A switch that is used to disconnect the 
power supply to a piece of equipment; it is sometimes 
referred to as a safety switch.
distribution center An electric panel used to distribute 
electric supply to several places in a large structure; 
can be of fusible or circuit breaker design.
double insulated A method used by appliance manufac-
turers that places a double insulating shield between 
the user and the appliance.
E
effective voltage Alternating current, with its many reversals 
and peaks, never peaks at a constant value. The effective 
voltage is the working voltage of alternating current. The 
effective voltage is 0.707 times the peak voltage.
electric circuit A path for electrons to follow; the circuit 
may be open or closed, depending on the position of 
its switches.
electric control system A control system that is operated 
by an electrical source. An example of an electric con-
trol system is the control of a window unit.
electric energy Energy that is produced by a movement 
of electrons. The energy can be produced by chemical, 
light, thermal, or mechanical means.
electrical resistance heater A designed piece of wire that 
produces heat when supplied with electrical energy 
and usually manufactured to be inserted into an air 
flow. Many times resistance heaters are used as sup-
plementary heaters in a heat pump system.
electric meter A device used to measure some electrical 
characteristics of a circuit such as the voltage, amper-
age, resistance, or wattage.
electric power The rate at which electricity is being used, 
measured in watts.
electric pressure Another term used to refer to electro-
motive force, potential difference, and voltage.
electric switch A device that opens or closes to control 
some load in an electric circuit. It can be opened or 
closed by temperature, pressure, humidity, flow, and 
manual means.
electrical shock A condition in which a person becomes 
part of an electrical circuit. Many times this condition 
causes serious injury or death.
electricity Energy that is capable of producing an electron 
flow. An unbalanced condition that results when an 
electron can be easily displaced from an atom.
electrodes The dissimilar metal conductors in a battery 
that produce a small difference of potential.
electrolyte The chemical paste between the electrodes of 
a battery and some capacitors.
electromagnet A magnet produced by coiling wire around 
a metal core.
electromechanical clock thermostat A thermostat that 
can be used to set back the temperature at specific 
times.
electromechanical control system A control system that 
uses electromechanical controls to maintain the tem-
perature of the conditioned space.
electromotive force (emf) The difference of potential that 
forces electrons through a resistance.
electronic control system A control system that uses 
electronics to control the temperature of a structure.
electronic furnace control module A solid-state device 
that supervises the operation of a gas furnace.
electronic module A solid-state module that controls the 
operation of a system, equipment, or single function 
of a conditioned air system.
electronic motor overloads An electronic device that pro-
tects electric motors from current unbalance, phase 
loss, phase reversal, short cycling, and overload.
electronic self-diagnostic feature A feature in a control 
system that automatically diagnoses problems in the 
heating and air-conditioning system.
electronic timer Electronic timers are solid-state devices 
that functions on the desired time element in an elec-
trical circuit.
electronically commutated motor A variable speed motor 
that is driven by an inverter and is interfaced with the 
heating and air-conditioning controls. The ECM is a 
three-phase DC motor with a permanent magnet rotor.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

712 
Glossary
electrons Particles that orbit around the nucleus of an 
atom and have a negative charge.
element A substance that has weight, takes up space, and 
cannot be broken down by chemical means.
energize To apply voltage to an electric device.
energy efficiency ratio (EER) The means of measuring an 
air conditioner for its efficiency by stating how many 
Btu’s of cooling are available from one watt.
F
factory-installed wiring The wiring installed in a piece 
of equipment at the factory; usually the connections 
between the components in the control panel and the 
system components in the unit itself.
factual diagram A wiring diagram that is a combination 
of the pictorial and schematic diagrams.
fan switch A temperature-controlled switch that starts 
and stops a fan motor on a gas furnace depending on 
the temperature.
fault isolation diagram A type of troubleshooting chart 
that isolates problems in a control system.
field of force The area around a magnet that is affected by 
the strength of the magnet.
field wiring The wiring that must be installed in the field 
by the installation mechanic.
flow diagram A block diagram that outlines the operation 
of a heating and air-conditioning unit.
flux The magnetic lines of force of a magnet that connect 
the north and south poles of the magnet.
free electron Electrons that are easily removed from the 
outer orbits of atoms.
frequency The number of complete cycles per second of 
alternating current.
full-load amperage The amp draw of a load when operat-
ing at full-load conditions.
furnace terminal board A board in a furnace that is used 
for the connection of the control wires from the ther-
mostat and air-conditioning condensing unit.
fuse A device that breaks a circuit when its ampere rating 
is exceeded: constructed of two ends or conductors 
with a piece of wire that will melt and break the circuit 
on an overload.
fusible disconnect switch A disconnect switch used to 
interrupt the power supply to a load and also to pro-
vide fuse protection.
fusible load center An electric panel that supplies circuits 
with power and protects them with fuses.
G
gas furnace A fossil fuel appliance that is designed to 
heat air and supply it to the structure.
gas pack A unit that heats in the winter by using gas 
as its fuel and cools in the summer by using electric 
power.
gas valve A valve that opens and closes upon a call for 
heat from the thermostat. Some gas valves have more 
than one valve built into the body. These additional 
valves are used for safety.
ground A conducting connection between an electrical 
circuit or equipment and the earth.
ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) An electrical device 
that will open a circuit, preventing current flow to 
the circuit when a small electrical leak to ground is 
detected.
grounded The electrical condition that exists when a 
current-carrying conductor comes in contact with a 
ground.
grounding adapter An adapter used between a grounded 
appliance and a nongrounded receptacle. This prac-
tice is not recommended.
H
head pressure The discharge pressure of a refrigeration 
system, sometimes called high-side pressure.
heat pump A refrigeration system that reverses the flow 
of refrigerant in the normal refrigeration cycle, which 
allows the unit to cool in the summer and heat in the 
winter.
heat pump control module An electronic module that 
supervises the operation of a heat pump.
heat pump electronic modules An electronic module that 
supervises the operation of a heat pump.
heater An electric load that converts electric energy to 
heat.
hermetic compressor motor A motor that is designed 
for single- and three-phase operation and is totally 
enclosed in a shell with refrigerant and oil.
hertz The number of complete cycles per second of alter-
nating current; more widely accepted than the term 
“frequency.”
high-pressure switch A pressure-operated switch that 
opens or closes on a rise or fall in pressure on the high 
side of a refrigeration system. This type of switch can 
be used as a safety control that would open on when 
the pressure reached an unsafe condition or operate 
some electrical component by closing on an increase 
of pressure.
hopscotching A troubleshooting procedure for electric 
circuits that is accomplished by jumping from one 
component to another.
hot surface ignition A method of lighting a main gas 
burner with a hot surface igniter.
hot water boiler A device that is used to heat water that 
is supplied to a structure for heating or industrial pro-
cesses and is usually used in commercial and indus-
trial applications.
hot-wire relay A relay that is opened or closed by a ther-
mal element that senses the starting current of the 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Glossary 
713
motor. The relay allows a starting capacitor or start-
ing winding to drop out or drop in the starting circuit. 
This type of relay also has a built-in means of overload 
protection.
humidistat A device that is used to control humid-
ity; it uses a moisture-sensitive element to control a 
mechanical linkage that opens and closes an electric 
switch.
hybrid heat pump A heat pump that uses fossil fuel 
as the supplementary heat. A heat pump that uses 
some type of solar energy to assist to improve the heat 
transfer capabilities of the heat pump.
I
ignition module An electronic module that is designed to 
supervise the lighting of a pilot or main burner.
impedance The sum of the resistance and reactance in an 
alternating current circuit.
indoor fan relay An electric relay that starts and stops 
an indoor fan on cooling, electric-heating, and heat 
pump systems.
indoor fan relay package A package that incorporates a 
control transformer, indoor fan relay, and low-voltage 
control terminal board.
induced magnetism The magnetism induced around a 
current-carrying conductor.
inductance A property of an alternating current circuit 
by which an electromotive force is produced in it by a 
variance in current.
inductive load A load that starts with a larger ampere 
draw and reduces it as the load starts normal opera-
tion. The increase in the ampere draw initially is due 
to inductance.
inductive reactance The opposition to the change in 
alternating current flow that produces an out-of-
phase condition between voltage and amperage.
installation and service instructions A written set of 
instructions that explains the proper installation pro-
cedures and service procedures for a specific model of 
equipment. This set of instructions are usually packed 
with the equipment when shipped from the factory.
installation diagram A diagram that shows little internal 
wiring but gives specific information as to terminals, 
wire sizes, color coding, and breaker or fuse sizes.
insulator A material that retards the flow of electrons or 
electricity.
interlock The action of stopping and starting a compo-
nent only when another component has started. A 
good example of an interlock control is not allowing a 
water chiller to operate until the chilled water pump 
has begun operation.
internal compressor overload An overload that is embed-
ded in the windings of a motor. Some internal over-
loads break the power to the motor directly, while 
others merely open a set of contacts that is wired into 
an electric control circuit.
internal pressure relief valve A valve placed in the dis-
charge side of a hermetic compressor that would open 
and relieve the pressure if it exceeded a certain point.
K
kilowatthour The rate at which electric energy is being 
used at a specific time. Most electric utilities bill their 
customers in this method.
L
law of electric charges Like charges repel and unlike 
charges attract.
light 
commercial 
air-conditioning 
system 
Air-
conditioning equipment that is used in the light com-
mercial phase of the industry, usually 25 tons or less.
light-emitting diode A diode that will produce light with 
electrical energy flows through it.
limit switch A safety that is designed to open in the event 
of excessive temperature in an appliance.
line break overload An overload that breaks the power 
going to the motor and is most commonly used on 
small motors.
line voltage The voltage being supplied to the equipment 
at the power supply.
line voltage control system A control system that uses 
line voltage to control an air-conditioning system or 
equipment.
line voltage thermostat A thermostat that is used pri-
marily to break line voltage to a load to control the 
temperature.
“live” electrical circuit A circuit that is being supplied 
with electrical energy.
load Electric devices that consume electricity to do useful 
work, such as motors, solenoids, heaters, and lights.
load analyzer A device that analyzes the load of a struc-
ture and determines the correct action of a heating 
and cooling unit.
locked rotor amperes The current a motor uses the instant 
it starts while the rotor is in a stationary  position.
lockout relay A high-impedance relay that has a normally 
closed set of contacts and is used to lock a control sys-
tem out when a safety control opens. A lockout relay 
must be reset in order for the equipment to operate.
low-pressure switch A pressure-operated switch that 
opens or closes on a rise or fall of pressure on the low 
side of the refrigeration system. This type of switch 
can be used as a safety control, to stop loads in the 
event of low pressure or operating control, to operate 
loads to maintain a certain temperature.
low-voltage control system A control system that uses 
low voltage, usually 24 volts, to operate the controls of 
an air-conditioning or control system.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

714 
Glossary
low-voltage thermostat A thermostat that is designed 
to interrupt a 24-volt power supply to electrical loads 
depending on the temperature.
M
magnetic field The area around a magnet in which the 
effect of the magnet can be felt.
magnetic overload An overload device that senses the 
current draw of a load by the magnetic field produced, 
which is proportional to the current draw. The device 
will open a set of contacts on high current draws and 
allow them to close when the ampere draw returns 
to normal.
magnetic starter A device that opens and closes its 
contacts when a solenoid is energized. A means of 
overload protection is provided. It is the same as a 
contactor except for the overload protection.
magnetism The ability of two pieces of iron to be 
attracted to each other by physical means or electri-
cal means.
matter The substance of which all physical objects con-
sist.
measurable resistance The actual resistance of a circuit 
or component measured with an ohmmeter.
mechanical linkage The linkage that connects the con-
tacts to the armature, enabling the contacts to close 
or open when the coil is energized.
microfarad The unit of measurement used to measure 
the strength of a capacitor.
module An electrical device that is used to control one or 
more functions of a control system.
molecule The smallest particle into which a substance 
can be divided and still maintain the properties of that 
substance.
molten-alloy relay An overload device that opens a set of 
contacts by thermal energy. This type of device allows 
the temperature produced by the starting current of a 
load to be transferred to a molten-alloy device. When 
it reaches a certain temperature, it will melt the solder 
around the device, causing it to slip and open the con-
tacts; when it cools it will harden again and the relay 
must be manually reset.
motor A device used to create a rotating motion and drive 
components that require rotating motion. Electric 
energy is changed to mechanical energy by magne-
tism, which causes the motor to turn.
motor protection module A solid-state module that is 
responsible for the protection of a large electric motor. 
This type of control usually has sensors mounted in 
the motor windings.
multistage control system A control system that is 
used to control heating or cooling elements of 
an air-conditioning or heating system at different 
temperatures.
multistage thermostat A thermostat that is used to 
control different stages of a heating and cooling 
 system.
multizone A heating and cooling unit that is equipped to 
condition more than one zone in a structure.
N
National Electrical Code® A set of standards published by 
the National Fire Protection Association that specifies 
the minimum standards that must be met for the safe 
installation of electrical systems.
negative charge The result of electrons joining atoms.
neutron The neutral particle in the nucleus of an atom.
nonfusible disconnect switch A disconnect switch used 
only to interrupt the power supply to a load.
noninductive load A load that has only resistive quali-
ties with no inductive qualities. An electric heater 
and incandescent lighting are two common types of 
noninductive loads.
normally A term that refers to the position of a set of 
contacts when the device is de-energized.
normally closed The position of a set of contacts or other 
electric devices that are closed when the device is 
 de-energized.
normally open The position of a set of contacts or other 
electric devices that are open when the device is 
 de-energized.
nucleus The central part of an atom composed of protons 
and neutrons.
O
ohm The amount of resistance that will allow one 
ampere to flow with a pressure of 1 volt.
ohmmeter An electrical meter used to measure the resis-
tance of a circuit or electric component.
Ohm’s law The relationship between current, electromo-
tive force, and resistance in an electric circuit: I  E/R.
oil safety switch A switch that is used to open the circuit 
when the oil pressure in a compressor is below an 
acceptable level.
one-function solid-state device An electronic device that 
performs only one function such as an electronic 
time-delay module, defrost module, and anti-short-
cycling module.
open The condition that exists in an electrical circuit 
when there is no complete path.
open circuit A circuit without a complete path for elec-
trons to follow.
out of phase A condition in which the voltage and current 
are not working together.
overload A device that is used to detect a high ampere 
draw of some electric load and break the controlling 
circuit, stopping the load.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Glossary 
715
overshoot The additional heating or cooling that has been 
delivered to the conditioned space after the thermo-
stat contacts have opened.
P
packaged air-conditioning unit A system built with all 
components in one unit except for the field wiring.
parallel circuit An electric circuit that has more than one 
path for current flow.
peak voltage When the voltage reaches its peak in an 
alternating current circuit.
permanent magnet A piece of material that is magnetic 
by physical means. Iron, nickel, cobalt, and chromium 
are materials that can easily be magnetized and will 
maintain their magnetism for a period of time.
permanent split-capacitor motor An electric motor, wide-
ly used in the industry, that has a moderate starting 
torque and good running efficiency.
phase The number of currents alternating at different 
times in an alternating current circuit.
pictorial diagram A wiring diagram that shows the actual 
internal wiring of a unit, much like a picture taken of 
a control panel. It is also called a line or label diagram.
pilot A flame that is standing or established to light the 
main burner of a gas valve.
pilot assembly An assembly that holds the pilot burner 
and the method of ignition.
pilot duty A term used to refer to an electric device that 
indirectly controls a major load because of its large 
ampere draw but controls it directly through a device 
that is capable of carrying the load.
pilot duty overload An overload that senses the load of 
the circuit or power-consuming device and breaks 
a set of contacts that is isolated from the sensing 
 element.
pneumatic control system A control system that uses air 
to control the temperature of a structure.
pole One set of electric contacts either in an automatic 
device or a manual switch. Electric devices such as 
relays, contactors, switches, and breakers can be pur-
chased with one or many poles.
positive charge The result of electrons leaving an atom.
potential coil A coil energized by a voltage being applied 
to it. It can be designed to operate on 24, 110, 208/240, 
or 480 volts. These coils are used on relays, contactors, 
and magnetic starters.
potential difference Two points that have a difference in 
electric charge; the electric difference between two 
points in an electric circuit.
potential relay A relay that uses the back electromotive 
force of a motor to drop out the starting apparatus 
when the motor reaches 75% of full speed.
power circuit An electrical circuit that supplies electrical 
energy to a load or equipment.
power factor The ratio of true power to apparent power, 
usually expressed as a percentage.
pressure switch A device that opens or closes a set of 
contacts when a certain pressure is applied to the 
diaphragm of the switch.
primary control An electrical control used to supervise 
the operation of an oil burner.
programmable thermostat A thermostat that can be pro-
grammed to set up and set back the temperature of 
the structure for certain periods of the day or week.
proton A positively charged particle in the nucleus of 
an atom.
pump-down control system A control system that closes 
a solenoid to allow the compressor to pump all the 
refrigerant from the low side of the system into the 
high side. This system is used on large air-conditioning 
systems and some commercial refrigeration systems.
push-button switch A switch that can be opened or 
closed by pressing buttons on the switch. Push-button 
switches come with a wide variety of purposes and 
labeling.
R
range The operating ranges or limits of a control.
reactance The resistance that alternating current encoun-
ters when it changes flow.
rectifier A device that will allow electrical current to pass 
in one direction but stops electrical current from flow-
ing in the opposite direction. This device is commonly 
used to rectify AC voltage to DC voltage.
relay A device that opens and closes a set of contacts 
when its coil is energized. The relay is much like the 
contactor except for its smaller size.
relief valve A device that will open on a rise in pressure 
and release pressure to return a closed system to a 
safe operating condition and close when the pressure 
has decreased.
reset point The point at which an electrical control will 
close its contacts after an unsafe condition has cor-
rected itself.
resistance The opposition to the flow of electrons.
resistive load See noninductive load.
reversing valve A valve used to reverse the refrigerant 
flow in a heat pump.
rooftop unit A heating and cooling unit that conditions 
a structure; it is mounted on the roof after adequate 
reinforcement has been built into the roof.
rotor The rotating part of an electric motor.
running (oil-filled) capacitor An electric device that is 
used to momentarily store electrons and create a 
second phase in the starting winding circuits of single-
phase motors. This type of capacitor is designed to 
stay in the circuit whenever the motor is running as a 
means of heat dissipation.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

716 
Glossary
S
safety device Any device that is in a control system for 
the purpose of making the operation of a major load 
safer.
schematic diagram A diagram that lays out the control 
system circuit by circuit and is composed of symbols 
representing components and lines representing their 
interconnecting wiring.
seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER) An equipment 
efficiency rating that takes into account the startup 
and shut-down for each cycle.
semiconductor A conductor whose electrical conductivity 
is between that of an insulator and a metal.
sensor A device that produces a signal that changes with 
a temperature change.
sequencer An electrical device that is used to control 
electric resistance heaters. Sequencers can have up to 
five sets of contacts that open and close at different 
time intervals. In most cases, sequencers are 24 volts.
series circuit An electric circuit that has only one path for 
electron flow.
series-parallel circuit A combination of series and paral-
lel circuits.
set point The point at which a control will open and close.
shaded-pole motor An induction type of motor that does 
not incorporate an ordinary type of starting winding. It 
uses a band on one side to obtain a short-circuit effect 
that produces a rotating magnetic field. This motor 
has a low starting torque.
short The condition that exists in an electrical circuit 
when there is no resistance.
short circuit An electric circuit that has no resistance.
short-cycling A term used to refer to a condition that 
occurs when a load is stopping and starting too 
 frequently.
signal light A light that is used to show when some elec-
tric component or circuit is energized by illuminating 
the light.
sine wave A graphical representation of alternating cur-
rent; a graph showing the sine function of all angles 
from 0 to 360 degrees.
single phase An electrical power supply that supplies two 
hot legs of electrical energy to a circuit.
sleeve bearing An antifriction device that allows free turn-
ing and support of the rotating member of a device. 
It consists of a solid piece of bronze or babbitt that is 
round and drilled to the diameter of the shaft. The 
bearing is sometimes called a plain bearing or bushing.
sliding armature An armature that mounts between two 
slots in a contactor frame and moves up and down the 
slots when the contactor is energized.
snap action of a thermostat The closing of a set of con-
tacts of a thermostat with a snapping motion rather 
than with a light contact.
solenoid A device that, when energized, will create a 
magnetic field and cause some action to an electric 
component. It opens and closes to control some ele-
ment of a heating, cooling, and refrigeration control 
system.
solenoid valve A valve that opens or closes by a solenoid 
coil being energized to pull a steel core into the mag-
netic field of the solenoid.
solid-state relay An electronic device constructed from 
semiconductor material, used to control electrical loads.
spark ignition A method of creating a spark, igniting a gas 
pilot or main gas burner.
split-phase motor An electric motor that has a running and 
starting winding. This is an induction type of motor.
squirrel cage rotor The rotating part of an electric motor; 
its name is derived from the similarity of its appear-
ance to a squirrel cage. This type of rotor is used in 
split-phase, capacitor-start, shaded-pole, and three-
phase motors.
stack switch A primary control that supervises the opera-
tion of an oil burner by sensing heat in the stack after 
the oil burner has ignited.
staged system A system that has more than one mode of 
heating or cooling operation.
staging thermostat A thermostat that is designed to open 
and close more than one set of contacts to control sev-
eral modes of heating or cooling operation.
star transformer A three-phase transformer that has the 
ends of each winding connected to a common point. 
The star transformer produces a balance of all hot legs 
to ground.
star winding A winding layout of some three-phase motors 
in which the ends of the windings are  connected.
starting capacitor An electric device that is used to 
momentarily store electrons, creating a second phase 
in the starting windings of single-phase motors. This 
type of capacitor is designed to stay in the circuit only 
a short period of time.
starting relay A relay that is used to energize or de- 
energize the starting components of a single-phase 
motor.
static electricity Electricity that results from the electron 
being displaced and not returning to the original atom; 
usually results from friction.
stator The stationary part of an electric motor.
supplementary heat A source of heat that is used with a 
heat pump when the heat pump cannot adequately 
heat a structure when the temperature drops below 
the balance point.
swinging armature An armature used in a contactor that 
is mounted on a line and moves up and down in a 
swinging motion.
switch A device for making, breaking, or changing the 
connection in an electric circuit.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Glossary 
717
system lag The difference in temperature between the 
point at which the thermostat closes and the point at 
which the thermostat starts to rise or fall.
T
thermal overload An overload device that senses the 
current draw of a load by the heat produced, which is 
proportional to the current draw.
thermal relay An overload device that determines cur-
rent flow and opens a set of pilot duty contacts when 
an overload is indicated.
thermistor A semiconductor that has a temperature 
coefficient of resistance that corresponds with a des-
ignated temperature. This device is widely used as a 
signal device in a control circuit.
thermocouple A device that is made of two dissimilar 
metals that produce a small voltage when heated.
thermostat A device that responds to a temperature 
change by opening or closing a set of electric contacts.
thermostat controlling element The portion of a thermo-
stat that reacts to temperature change by opening or 
closing the contacts through a mechanical linkage. 
The two types of elements are bimetal and bulb.
three phase An electrical power supply that supplies 
three hot legs of electrical energy to a circuit.
three-phase motor An induction type of motor that has 
a very high starting torque and requires no special 
starting apparatus. The motor must be operated on a 
three-phase current.
three-prong plug An electrical plug on an appliance that 
has a ground. The round or oval prong on the plug is 
the ground.
throw This refers to the number of positions of the mov-
able contacts that will complete a circuit.
time clock A clock that opens and closes contacts at 
specific time(s). Time clocks can be 24-hour or 7-day 
clocks.
time-delay relay A relay that delays its closing for a cer-
tain period of time.
torque The starting power of an electric motor.
transformer A device that decreases or increases the 
incoming voltage to the desired voltage.
transistor A semiconductor device used for the control 
and amplification of a signal from one circuit to 
another circuit.
triac A bidirectional electronic component that has an on 
or off and is used to control AC voltage.
trip-out point The point at which an electrical control will 
open its contacts in the event of an unsafe condition.
troubleshooting chart A chart furnished by equipment 
manufacturers to guide the technician in trouble-
shooting a specific type of equipment.
troubleshooting tree A type of troubleshooting chart that 
follows a sequence to troubleshoot a control system.
V
varistor A semiconductor with a voltage-sensitive resis-
tance.
V-belt The belt that connects the pulleys of a motor and 
the device that must be rotated and transfers the 
rotating motion from the motor to the device. V-belts 
can be purchased in several widths and almost any 
length.
volt The amount of electric pressure required to force one 
ampere through a resistance of one ohm.
voltage The difference in electric potential between two 
points.
voltage drop The amount of voltage lost through any type 
of switching device or conductor.
voltage spike A sudden and temporary increase of volt-
age that can damage electronic circuits.
voltmeter An electric meter used to measure voltage.
W
water chiller A refrigeration system that cools water that 
is pumped into other parts of the system to maintain 
the desired condition in a specific area.
water-cooled packaged unit A unit that is made in one 
complete unit with a water-cooled condenser as an 
integral part.
water source heat pump A heat pump that uses water 
as the heat transfer medium for the condenser in the 
cooling mode of operation and for the evaporator in 
the heating mode of operation.
watt One ampere flowing with a pressure of one volt. The 
unit measurement of power.
wiring diagram A systematic method of laying out the 
wiring that is interconnecting the control components 
within the control system; three types are schematic, 
pictorial or line, and installation.
wye system A three-phase electrical supply system 
that is determined by transformer hookup. The wye 
system due to the transformer hookup gives three 
usable low-voltage legs. The wye system is used when 
a large number of low-voltage, single-phase circuits 
are needed.
wye transformer A three-phase transformer that has a 
common junction point and forms a Y. This trans-
former hookup allows for a completely balanced load 
when using all hot legs and ground.
Z
zone A section of a structure that has a heating and cool-
ing load.
zone control panel An electronic control module that 
controls the operation of the heating and cooling 
equipment and the dampers in a zone control system.
zone control system A heating and cooling system that 
uses a method to control zones in a structure.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

718 
Index
718
A
Across-the-line compressor motor 
 controls, 616
Adjustable heating anticipators, 373
Adjustable pressure switches, 385
Air conditioners
compressors in, 86, 322
light commercial system with  control 
relay, 134–136
packaged units, 128–133
requirements for electrical  connection 
of, 217
simple window, 116, 117, 118–119, 120
system with lockout relay, 134, 137, 
138–140
Air-conditioning control systems. See 
Com mercial and industrial air-
conditioning control systems; 
Residential air-conditioning control 
systems
Air-cooled condensing unit, 542, 543, 566, 
567, 568, 569
service calls for, 276–277, 348–350, 393, 
395–397, 524–525, 
692–693, 694–698
Air-cooled packaged units
explanation of, 541
with remote condenser, 627–631
Air-handling units, 397
Air supply sources, for split-system resi-
dential systems, 569, 572
Air-to-air packaged heat pump, 563, 564
Alternating current (AC)
alternators and, 179
basic concepts of, 176–182
cycles and frequency and, 177–178
effective voltage and, 178
explanation of, 29
inductance and reactance and, 179–181
phase of, 179
power and, 181–182
power supply of, 42
use of, 176
voltage-current systems and, 178
Alternators, 26, 179
American Wire Gauge (AWG), 195, 197
Ammeters
clamp-on, 58, 60, 61, 64–68
explanation of, 29, 64–68
use of, 66, 67
Amperage
full-load, 289
locked rotor, 289
in parallel circuits, 49
in series circuits, 46
Ampere
explanation of, 27
measurement of, 29, 67
Analog meters, 60, 62, 63
Anticipators
cooling, 374–375
explanation of, 371
heating, 371–374
Anti-short-cycling device circuits, 417, 
619–621
Aquastats, 471
Atomic theory, 20–22
Atomizing oil burners, 436
Atoms
explanation of, 20–21
positive and negative charges and, 
22–23
B
Back electromotive force, 288
Balance point, 144
Ball bearings, 303, 304
Batteries, dry cell, 24–25
Bearings
ball, 303, 304
explanation of, 303
sleeve, 304, 305
Bell Telephone Laboratories, 409
Bimetal thermostats, 365–367, 368
Black box approach, 428
Blower motor circuitry, 426, 617, 619
Blower units, 612
Breaker panels
construction of, 209, 210
explanation of, 207, 208
function of, 208, 213
installation of, 209–211
Breakers, 208
Btu output, 33
Burns, 3, 5
C
Cad cell primary controls, 428, 429, 
517–518
Cad cell sensors
explanation of, 462, 463
function of, 463–466
service call for, 477–478
Capacitive reactance, 180, 181
Capacitors
explanation of, 235
running, 236
starting, 235, 236
troubleshooting, 236–239
types of, 235–236
Capacitor-start–induction-run motors, 
244–246
Capacitor-start motors, 244
Capacitor-start motors–capacitor-run 
motors (CSRs)
explanation of, 249
operation of, 249, 250
troubleshooting, 249–251
Capacity control, 615, 616
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), 7
Centrifugal pump, 83
Check, test, and start procedures, 
598–599, 600
Circuit breakers
explanation of, 12–13, 14
troubleshooting, 491–492
use of, 335
Circuit lockout, 13, 15
Circuit protection, 11–13
Circuit safety controls, 624, 625
Circuits. See Electric circuits
Clamp-on ammeters, 58, 60, 61, 64–68
Clock and Programmable thermostats. 
See Programmable thermostats
Closed circuits, 41, 42
Coils
explanation of, 325
troubleshooting, 326, 490
Combustion chamber, 126, 128
Commercial and industrial air- 
conditioning control systems
air-cooled packaged unit with remote 
condenser, 627–631
condensing unit, 621–624
control circuitry, 614–621
electronic control systems, 636, 
643–647
equipment uses in, 609–614
mechanical/electrical control systems, 
634, 635
packaged units, 624, 626–627
pneumatic control systems, 635–642
types of, 632–647
water-cooled packaged units, 631–632
Commercial conditioned air system 
 service calls, 275–276, 351–352, 
397, 694–695, 697–698
Commercial control systems, 
 troubleshooting, 691–692
Index
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Index 
719
Commercial freezers, 122–125
Commercial refrigeration service calls, 
273–274, 309–311, 313–314, 350, 
396–397, 521–522, 693–694
Compact pressure switch, 385, 386
Compounds, 21
Compressor circuits, explanation of, 
544–545, 621, 623
Compressor motor controls, 616–617
Compressors, 82
in air-conditioning and refrigeration 
systems, 86, 322
hermetic, 259–269
Condenser fan motor control circuits, 82, 
544, 545–546, 619, 620, 624, 625
Condensing units
circuit safety controls, 624, 625
compressor circuits, 621, 623
condenser fan motor circuits, 624, 625
explanation of, 539, 565–569, 570, 571, 
610, 611, 621, 622
service calls for, 276–277, 309–311, 
313–314
Conditioned air systems
service calls for commercial, 275–276, 
351–352, 397, 
694–695, 697–698
service calls for industrial, 351–352, 
397, 694–695, 697–698
service calls for residential, 272–278, 
312–313, 347–349, 393, 395, 696–697
Conductors
applications and insulation, 198–200
explanation of, 4, 11, 22, 26
voltage drop in, 196, 202, 204
Contactors
applications for, 323–324
coils for, 325
contacts of, 326
explanation of, 85–86, 323, 488
function of, 86–87, 502–505
magnetism and, 225
normally open and normally closed 
contacts and, 87
operation of, 324–325
relays vs., 86–87
repair of, 327–328
symbols for, 87–88, 100, 110
troubleshooting, 326–328, 488–490, 57–658
Contacts
explanation of, 326
troubleshooting, 326–327, 488–489
Continuity, 72
Continuous ignition system, 447
Control circuitry, commercial and 
 industrial
anti-short cycling circuitry, 619–621
blower motor circuitry, 617, 619
compressor motor controls, 616–617
condenser fan motor circuitry, 
619, 620
explanation of, 43–44, 614–615
water chiller control circuitry, 
617, 618
water-cooled condenser interlocks, 619
Control loop, 633, 634
Control relays, 134–136
Control systems. See also Commercial and 
industrial air-conditioning  control 
systems; Direct digital control 
 systems; Intermittent pilot control 
systems; Residential air- conditioning 
control systems; Split-system air-
conditioning control systems
pneumatic, 635–642
residential unit, 689, 691
total commercial and industrial, 
632–635, 636
troubleshooting, 688–692
Control wiring, 594–598
Coolers, walk-in, 119–122
Cooling anticipators, 374–375
Cooling cycle, of heat pumps, 146, 148, 
149–152
Current
alternating, 176–182
direct, 29, 176
explanation of, 28–29, 176
overload, 340
in parallel circuits, 48–49
in series circuit, 45–47
single-phase, 179
three-phase, 179
Current relays
explanation of, 289, 329–330
operation of, 289, 290–291
troubleshooting, 289, 291
Current-sensing lockout relay (CSLR), 
681, 688
Customer relations, 599–603
Cycles, 177–178
D
Damper motor, 588, 611
De-energized contactors/relays, 87, 88
Defrost controls for heat pumps, 407, 414, 
576–578, 579
Defrost cycle, 144, 153, 157, 159
Defrost timers, 144
Dehumidifiers, 113, 116, 117
Delay-on-break timer, 415–416
Delay-on-make timer, 415–416
Delta system, 185–187
Delta winding, 252
Diagnostic function
electronic furnace control module 
with, 426
heat pump electronic module 
with, 423
Diagrams. See also Schematic diagrams
factual, 97
installation, 97, 100
pictorial, 97, 99, 659, 660
wiring, 80, 106, 655, 658–662
Differential, of pressure switch, 388
Digital meters, 60, 61, 62, 63
Digital thermostats, 369–370, 371
Diodes, 409–410
Direct current, 29
Direct digital control systems, 643–647
Direct drives, 306
Direct ignition burner control systems
diagrams of, 458, 459, 460
explanation of, 455
operational sequence of, 455–456, 457
troubleshooting, 510, 513, 514–515
Disconnect switches
enclosures for, 205–206
explanation of, 89, 91, 204, 205
fusible and nonfusible, 206–207
illustrations of, 205
types of, 214
Distribution centers, explanation of, 
211–212
Distribution panels, 213
Domestic chest-type freezers, 350–351
Domestic refrigeration service calls, 
311–312, 350–351, 394, 520–521
Double insulated, 10
Dual-pressure switches, 385, 386
E
Effective voltage, 178
Electric charges, 23
Electric circuits
basic concepts of, 41–43
closed, 41, 42
control, 43–44
explanation of, 41–42
for hopscotching, 676, 680, 681
installation of, 213–218
live, 2
open, 42
parallel, 41, 47–51
of schematic diagram, 109
series, 41, 43–47
series-parallel, 41, 51–53
Electric energy, 31
Electric heating controls
explanation of, 469–470
troubleshooting, 502–505
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

720 
Index
Electronic gas furnace control module, 
414, 423–427
Electronic modules, heat pump, 420–423
Electronic motor overloads, 418
Electronic motor protection devices
multifunction electronic motor 
 protectors, 420, 421
overload protection, 418–419
phase reversal protector, 420
single-phase protection, 419–420
Electronic programmable thermostats, 407
Electronic self-diagnostic feature, 665, 669
Electronic temperature control, 414–415
Electronic timers
anti-short-cycling device, 417
delay-on-make and break timers, 
415–416
explanation of, 415
Electronically commutated motors (ECMs)
construction of, 254, 255, 256
explanation of, 253–254
operation of, 256–257
savings, 258
troubleshooting, 257–258
use of, 254, 255
Electrons
electric circuits and, 42
explanation of, 22–23
flow of, 23–26, 60
Elements, 20
Enclosed capacitor-start motors, 245–246
Enclosed motors, 230
Energized contactors/relays, 87, 88
Energy efficient motors, 230
Energy Policy Act, of 1992, 230
Evaporator fan motor control circuits, 546, 
547, 548, 572
Exhaust fan service call, 314
F
Factory-installed wiring, 590
Factual diagrams, 97
Fan-coil unit
explanation of, 543, 567, 569, 611
service calls for, 275–276, 694–695, 
697–698
Fan controls
explanation of, 439
switches for, 439–443, 444
Fan switches
explanation of, 439
temperature-controlled, 439–440, 
441, 442
time-controlled, 441–442
time/temperature-controlled, 442, 444
Fault isolation diagrams, 674
Field of force, 27
electric motors and, 486, 487
electrical grounding and, 8–11
electrical shock and, 3–7
guidelines for, 15–16, 215, 218
for hermetic compressors, 259, 262, 
265, 266, 269
National Electrical Code® and, 7–8
symbols for controls for, 109, 110
Electrical shocks
burns from, 3, 5
current flow path and, 4–6
dealing with victims of, 7
explanation of, 3
from grounded wire, 8, 9
reaction to, 6
Electrical switches. See Switches
Electricity
atomic theory and, 20–22
calculating electric power and, 35–36
conductors and insulators and, 26–27
current flow and, 28–29
electric potential and, 27–28
electric power and energy and, 30–33
electron flow and, 24
explanation of, 23, 57
Ohm’s law and, 33–35
positive and negative charges and, 23
resistance and, 29–30
role of, 2
static, 24
through chemical means, 24–25
through magnetism, 26
Electrodes, 24, 25
Electrolytes, 24
Electromagnets, 224, 225
Electromotive force, 3, 27, 28
Electronic board for safety controls, 424, 426
Electronic control devices
basic fundamentals, 413–414
cad cell, 428, 429
electronic motor protection  devices, 
418–420, 421
electronic system components, 408–412
electronic timers, 415–417
for electric motors, 418
for residential gas furnaces, 423–427
heat pump electronic modules, 
420–423
oil furnaces, 428, 429
one-function electronic controls, 415
overview of, 406–407
simple electronic temperature control, 
414–415
troubleshooting, 428, 430
Electronic control systems, 636, 643–647
Electronic digital programmable 
 thermostats, 382, 383, 384
Electric motor components
ball bearings, 303, 304
current or amperage relays, 289–291
direct-drive couplings, 306
explanation of, 288
potential relays, 291–296
service calls for, 309–314
sleeve bearings, 304, 305
solid-state starting relays and devices, 
297–303
starting relays for single-phase, 
288–289
V-belt, 307–309
Electric motors
capacitor-start–capacitor-run, 249–251
capacitors and, 235–239
dimensions of, 231
electronically commutated, 253–258
explanation of, 82–83, 226–228
hermetic compressor, 259–269
magnetism and, 225
open and enclosed, 230, 487
permanent split-capacitor, 246–249
replacement of, 487–488
safety features for, 93
service calls for, 270–278
shaded-pole, 231–235
speed of, 229
split-phase, 240–246
strength of, 229
symbols for, 83
three-phase, 251–252
troubleshooting, 486–488, 657
types of, 228–231
Electric power
calculation of, 35–36
explanation of, 30–31
Electric pressure, 27–28
Electrical grounding, 8–11
Electrical meters
ammeter, 64–68
basic principles of, 58–59
explanation of, 57–58
importance of, 655
ohmmeter, 72–75
troubleshooting with, 658, 665, 669–674
types of, 60–63
voltmeter, 68–71
Electrical resistance heaters
explanation of, 437–438
troubleshooting, 503, 505
Electrical safety. See also Safety devices
with capacitors, 237
circuit lockout procedures and, 13, 15
circuit protection and, 11–13
dealing with shock victims and, 7
devices for, 93–95
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Index 
721
Heating cycle, of heat pumps, 153, 154–156
Hermetic compressors
explanation of, 259
internal overload and, 494–496
operation of, 259
terminal identification in, 260–261
troubleshooting, 261–269
Hertz (Hz), 177
High-pressure switches, 387
Higher-voltage systems, 188–190
Hopscotching, 656, 676, 680–688
Hot surface ignition, 455
Hot water boilers, 438, 613
HSPF (Heating Seasonal Performance 
Factor), 539
Humidistats, 389
Hybrid heat pump system, 574
Hydronic heating systems, 470–474
I
Ignition module, 451, 452
for gas furnaces, 407, 423, 424, 425
Impedance, 180
Induced magnetism, 224–225
Inductance, 179–180
Inductive loads, 326, 334
Inductive reactance, 180
Industrial conditioned air system. See also 
Commercial and industrial air- 
conditioning control systems
service calls for, 351–352, 397, 694–695, 
697–698
Industrial control systems, 
 troubleshooting, 691–692
Injuries. See also Electrical safety
electrical, 3–7
Installation and service instructions, 663
Installation diagrams, 97, 100
Insulators, 26
Interlocks, 617
Intermittent pilot control systems
explanation of, 449–454
operational sequence of, 452–453
service calls for, 475–476, 696–697
troubleshooting, 509–510, 511–512, 668
Internal compressor overload, 338–339
Internal overloads, 494–496
K
Kilowatthours, 31
L
Ladder diagrams. See Schematic diagrams
Law of electric charges, 23
Light commercial air-conditioning 
 systems, 134–136
Light-emitting diode (LED), 411, 412
Germanium, 409
Ground, 8
Ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI), 
10–11, 12
Ground wires, 8–9
Grounding adapter, 9–10
H
Hard-start kit, 293, 294
Heat pumps
control module, 420–421, 576, 578
cooling cycle of, 146, 148, 149–152
defrost controls, 407, 414, 576–578, 579
defrost cycle of, 144, 153, 157, 159
with defrost timer, 144, 146–158, 
159–160
electrical components, 574, 575
electronic modules, 420–423
explanation of, 144, 380, 381, 551, 
554–555, 571–574
heating cycle of, 153, 154–156
packaged air-conditioning unit, 540
requirements for electrical connection 
of, 217
resistance heating cycle of, 158, 159–160
reversing valves, 572, 574, 576
schematic diagrams of, 147, 149–151, 
152–157, 159–160, 162–164, 166, 
168, 682
sequence of operation, 580–584, 585
service calls for, 274–275, 278, 312–313, 
519–520
with solid-state defrost board, 158, 
161–167, 168
staging thermostats used with, 380, 381
supplementary heat, 578, 580
troubleshooting, 666–667
Heaters
explanation of, 84–85
safety features for, 94
symbols for, 85
Heating anticipators, 371–374
Heating control devices
electric, 469–470
fan controls as, 439–443, 444
fundamentals of, 436–438, 439
furnace control boards as, 458–461
gas heating controls as, 447–461 
(See also Gas heating 
controls)
hydronic and steam, 470–474
illustrations of, 437, 438, 439
limit switches as, 126, 444, 445, 446
oil heating controls as, 461–468
overview of, 435–436
pressure switches as, 445, 447
service calls for, 474–479
Field wiring
control wiring, 594–598
explanation of, 590
power wiring, 590–592
sizing of wire and fuse, 592–594
Fixed heating anticipators, 373
Flux, 223
Forced convection units, 473
Free electrons, 22
Freezers
commercial, 122–125
domestic chest-type, 350–351
Frequency, of alternating current, 177–178
Friction, 24
Full-load amperage (FLA), 289
Furnace control boards, 458–461
Furnace terminal board, 594, 596
Furnaces
controls, 435, 550–551, 552, 553, 554
pressure switches for, 445, 447
Fuses
explanation of, 12–13, 14, 93
troubleshooting, 491
types of, 13
use of, 335
Fusible disconnect switches, 206–207
Fusible load centers, 207–208, 213
G
Gas furnace
diagnostic codes for, 669
electronic control modules for, 414, 
423–427
with evaporator, 567
explanation of, 125–126
service calls for, 272–273, 348–349, 
393, 395, 474–477, 523–524, 692–693, 
696–697
with standing pilot, 125–128
Gas heating controls
direct ignition burner control system 
and, 455–456, 457, 458, 459, 460
and electric air-conditioning packaged 
unit, 559–563
explanation of, 447
furnace control boards and, 458–461
intermittent pilot burner control 
 system and, 449–454
standing pilot burner control system 
and, 447–449, 450, 451
troubleshooting, 505–513, 514, 515
Gas packs, 540
Gas valves
explanation of, 447, 448, 449, 450
function of, 506
troubleshooting, 506–509
Generators, 26
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

722 
Index
Oil burners, 435–436
Oil-filled capacitor, 235, 236
Oil furnaces
electronic controls, 428, 429
explanation of, 550–551, 553, 554
service call for, 477–479
Oil heating controls
cad cell, 463–466, 517–518
explanation of, 461–463
stack switch, 466–468, 516–517
troubleshooting, 513, 516–518
Oil pumps, 436
Oil safety switches, 389–391
One-function electronic controls, 415
Open capacitor-start motors, 245
Open circuits
checking for, 72
explanation of, 42
Open motors
explanation of, 230
troubleshooting, 487
Overloads
circuit breaker, 491–492
current, 340
electronic motor, 418–419
explanation of, 322, 334
fuses and, 335, 491
internal, 494–496
internal compressor, 338–339
line break, 336–339
line voltage, 492
magnetic, 93, 94–95, 340, 341, 342
in magnetic starters, 343–345
pilot duty, 339–342, 343, 493–494
thermal, 93–94
troubleshooting, 342–343, 490–496
Overshoot, 371, 372
P
P-(positive) type semiconductor, 409
Packaged air-conditioning units
commercial and industrial, 611, 612, 
624, 626–627
example of, 128
explanation of, 128, 129, 539, 540–541, 
542, 556–559
gas-electric, 559–563
low-voltage control portion of, 130, 
131–132
operation of, 133
packaged heat pump control  systems, 
563–565
schematic diagrams for, 129–131
service call for, 347–348
voltage circuits and, 132
Packaged heat pump control systems, 
563–565
Mercury bulb thermostats, 366–367, 368
Meters. See Electrical meters
Microfarads, 235, 238
Microhms, 30
Molecules, 21
Motor controls
compressor, 616–617
electronic, 414
Motor drives
direct, 306
explanation of, 305
V-belt, 307–309
Motor protection devices, electronic, 418–420
Multifunction electronic motor protectors, 
420, 421
Multistage equipment, 378
Multistage thermostat, air-conditioning sys-
tem controlled by, 137, 141–144, 145
Multi-zone roof top packaged unit, 
611, 612, 626
N
N-(negative) type semiconductor, 409
National Electrical Code® (NEC®)
circuit breakers and fuses and, 13
circuit protection and, 11
electric circuit installation and, 213, 215
explanation of, 7–8
fuses and, 206
wire and, 195, 196, 201
National Electrical Manufacturers’ 
Association (NEMA), motor dimen-
sions and, 231
National Fire Protection Association, 7
Natural convection units, 473
Negative charges, 22–23
Neutrons, 21
Non-adjustable pressure switch, 385
Nonfusible disconnect switches, 206
Noninductive loads, 334
Normally open/closed contacts, 87
NPN transistors, 411
Nucleus, 21
O
Off-cycle anticipators, 374
Ohm, 27, 29–30
Ohm, George, 33
Ohmmeters
checking capacitors with, 237
explanation of, 72
types of, 75
use of, 72–75
Ohm’s law
explanation of, 33–35
parallel circuits and, 48–49
series circuits and, 46
Limit switches, 126, 444, 445, 446
Line break overload
explanation of, 336–337, 338
types of, 338–339
Line voltage control system, 113
Line voltage overloads, 492
Line-voltage thermostats
explanation of, 367–368, 369
troubleshooting, 497, 498
Live electrical circuits, 2
Loads
explanation of, 81–82
heater, 84–85
inductive, 326, 334
motor, 82–83
noninductive, 334
resistive, 326, 334
solenoid, 84
signal light, 85
symbols for, 100, 109, 110
Locked rotor amperage (LRA), 289
Lockout function, of gas furnace, 424, 426
Lockout relays, air conditioning system 
with, 134, 137, 138–140
Low-pressure boilers, 438
Low-pressure switches, 387–388
Low-voltage control system, 109
Low-voltage limit switches, 444, 446
Low-voltage thermostats
explanation of, 363, 364, 368–369, 
370, 371
troubleshooting, 497–499
M
Magnetic field
explanation of, 58–59, 222–223, 224
of iron core, 225
Magnetic overload, 93, 94–95, 340, 341, 342
Magnetic relays, 289. See also Current relays
Magnetic starters
explanation of, 88, 343–345
troubleshooting, 345–346
types of, 345, 346
Magnetism
electricity through, 26
explanation of, 222–225
induced, 224–225
magnetic field, 223, 224
Matter, 20
Measurable resistance, 72, 73
Mechanical/electrical control systems, 
634, 635
Mechanical linkage
explanation of, 326, 327
troubleshooting, 490
Megohms, 30
Mercury, 377
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Index 
723
Remote bulb thermostats, 365, 366
Residential air-conditioning control 
 systems
advanced, 584, 586–589
basic residential control circuitry, 
544–555
check, test, and start procedures, 
598–599, 600
customer relations, 599–603
field wiring, 590–598
heat pump control systems, 571–580
heat pump sequence of operation, 
580–584, 585
overview of, 537–539
packaged air-conditioning control 
 systems, 556–565
to protecting equipment, 539–543
split-system air-conditioning control 
systems, 565–571, 572
troubleshooting, 689
Residential conditioned air systems
service calls for, 272–278, 312–313, 
347–349, 393, 395, 474–479, 519–520, 
522–525, 692–693, 696–697
Resistance
explanation of, 29–30
heating cycle, of heat pumps, 158, 
159–160
in parallel circuit, 48–51
in series circuit, 45–46
Resistance-start–induction-run motor
explanation of, 240–242
operation of, 242–243
troubleshooting, 243–244
Resistive loads, 326, 334
Reversing valve, 144, 572, 574, 576
illustration of, 577
Rotors
explanation of, 179, 226
squirrel cage, 228
Running capacitors, 236
S
Safety. See Electrical safety
Safety control circuits, 547, 549–550
Safety devices. See also Electrical safety
explanation of, 93
types of, 93–95
Schematic diagrams
of air-cooled packaged unit with 
remote condenser, 629, 630
of air-conditioning system with 
 lockout relay, 134, 137, 138–140
of air-conditioning system with multi-
stage thermostat, 137, 141–144, 145
of air-conditioning unit highlighting 
high- and low-pressure switch, 549
in furnaces, 445, 447
high-pressure, 387
low-pressure, 387–388
notation and terms for, 388
troubleshooting, 389, 500–501, 657
types of, 385–386
Primary controls
cad cell, 517–518
explanation of, 461
stack switch, 516–517
Programmable thermostats
applications for, 382–383
explanation of, 381–382, 384
installation of, 383–384, 385
method for programming, 384
use of, 381–382
Protons, 21
Pump-down control systems
commercial refrigeration system with, 
167, 169–171
explanation of, 167
Push-button stations, 346–347
Push-button switch, 89–90, 91
Q
Quicksilver. See Mercury
R
Reactance, 180
Rectifiers, 409–410
Refrigerant 22 (R-22), 21
Refrigeration systems
commercial with pump-down cycle, 
167, 169–171
compressors in, 322
service calls for commercial, 273–274, 
309–311, 313–314, 350, 396–397
service calls for domestic, 311–312, 
350–351, 394, 520–521
Relays
applications of, 328–330, 331, 332
construction of, 330, 333, 334
contractors vs., 86–87
control, 134–136
current, 289–291, 329–330
explanation of, 85–86, 328, 488
magnetism and, 225
normally open and normally closed 
contacts and, 87
operation of, 328, 329
potential, 291–296, 329
solid-state, 297–303, 330
starting, 288–289
symbols for, 87–88, 100, 110
time-delay, 391
troubleshooting, 289, 291, 334, 488–490, 
657–658
Parallel circuits
applications of, 47–48
calculations for, 48–51
characteristics of, 48
explanation of, 41, 47
path of, 43
in schematic diagram, 109, 111
Part winding compressor motor 
controls, 616
PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls), 240
Peak voltage, 178
Permanent magnets, 224
Permanent split-capacitor 
motors (PSCs)
explanation of, 246–247
operation of, 247–248
solid-state starting relays and, 297, 299
troubleshooting, 248–249
Phase, of alternating current, 179
Phase reversal protector, 420
Pictorial diagrams. See also Schematic 
 diagrams; Wiring diagrams
example of, 660
explanation of, 97, 99, 659
Pilot
explanation of, 435
standing, 447–449, 450, 451
Pilot assembly, 451
Pilot duty device, 93
Pilot duty overload
explanation of, 339
troubleshooting, 493–494
types of, 340–342, 343
use of, 340
Pilot relight control (PRC), 561–562
Pilot safety mode, 424
Pneumatic control systems, 635–642
PNP transistors, 411
Pole, 87
Polychlorinated biphenyls. See PCBs 
(polychlorinated biphenyls)
Positive charges, 22, 23
Postpurge function, of gas furnace, 426
Potential difference, 27
Potential relays
explanation of, 291, 329
operation of, 292–293, 294
troubleshooting, 293, 295–296
Power circuits, 47
Power distribution, 182–183
Power factor, 31, 181–182
Power supply, 109
Power wiring, 590–592
Prepurge function, of gas furnace, 426
Pressure switches
explanation of, 92, 93, 359, 360, 
384–386, 500
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

724 
Index
Solenoid valves, 84, 392
Solenoids, 84
Solid state, 406, 408
Solid-state defrost boards, 158, 161–167, 168
Solid-state relays
explanation of, 297–299, 300, 301, 
302, 330
operation of, 299, 301, 302
troubleshooting, 301–303
Solid-state timer, 407
Spark ignition, 455
Speed, of electric motor, 229
Split air-conditioning system, 539, 540, 
541–543
Split-phase motors
capacitor-start-induction-run, 244–246
explanation of, 240
resistance-start-induction-run, 240–244
Split-system air-conditioning control 
 systems
air supply sources for, 569, 572
condensing units, 565–569, 570, 571
explanation of, 565
illustration of, 566
Squirrel cage rotors, 228
Stack switches
explanation of, 462, 463, 466–468
service call for, 478–479
troubleshooting, 516–517
Staged systems, 378
Staging thermostats
explanation of, 378
heat pumps using, 380, 381
types of, 379, 380
Standing pilot burner control system
explanation of, 447–449, 450
operation of, 451
service call for, 474–475
Star winding, 252
Starting capacitors
explanation of, 235, 236
use of, 238
Starting relays, 288–289
Static electricity, 24
Stator, 226
Steam heating systems, 470–474
Step-down transformers, 360–361
Step-up transformers, 361
Strength, motor, 229
Supplementary heat, 578, 580
Switches
disconnect, 89, 204–207, 214
dual-pressure, 385, 386
explanation of, 89
fan, 439–443, 444
fusible disconnect, 206
high-pressure, 387
of water-cooled packaged unit, 632
of water source heat pump, 565
of window air conditioners, 116, 117, 
118–119, 120
of zone control system, 589
Seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER), 33
SEER (Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio), 539
Semiconductors, 408–409
Sensors, 412
Sequencers
explanation of, 469–470, 471
function of, 502–505
Series circuits
applications for, 43–45
calculations for, 46–47
characteristics of, 45–46
explanation of, 41, 43
path of, 43
schematic diagrams and, 111
Series-parallel circuits
applications for, 53
explanation of, 41, 51–52
Service calls
commercial conditioned air  systems, 
275–276, 351–352, 397, 694–695, 
697–698
commercial refrigeration, 273–274, 
309–311, 313–314, 350, 396–397, 
521–522, 693–694
domestic refrigeration, 311–312, 
350–351, 394, 520–521
heat pumps, 274–275, 278, 312–313
industrial conditioned air systems, 
351–352, 397, 694–695, 697–698
protocols for, 270–271
residential conditioned air systems, 
272–278, 312–313, 347–349, 393, 395, 
474–479, 519–520, 522–525, 692–693, 
696–697
Shaded-pole motors
explanation of, 231
operation of, 232, 233
reversing, 233–235
troubleshooting, 235
Short circuits, 72
Short cycles, 137
Signal lights, 85
Silicon, 409
Sine wave
explanation of, 176
of three-phase current, 180
Single-phase current, 179
Single-phase motors, 288–289
Single-phase protection, 419–420
Sleeve bearings, 304, 305
Snap action, 366
Solenoid coils, 84
of air-to-air heat pump, 575
of capacitor-start motors-capacitor-run 
motor, 250
circuit-by-circuit arrangement of, 111
circuits of, 109
of commercial and industrial 
 condensing unit, 622
of commercial freezers, 122–125
of commercial refrigeration system 
with pump-down cycle, 167, 169–171
of compressor with internal 
overload, 550
of condenser fan motor connection, 545
of condensing unit with operating 
 circuits, 570
of cooling-only packaged air 
 conditioning, 557, 558
of dehumidifiers, 113, 116, 117
design of, 108–112
of evaporator fan circuits in packaged 
air conditioner, 548
examples of, 98, 108, 114, 115, 659
explanation of, 96–97
of gas furnace with hot surface 
 ignition, 552
of gas furnace with pressure switch, 427
of gas furnace with ignition  module, 425
of gas furnace with standing pilot, 
125–128
of gas heat electric air-conditioning 
packaged unit, 560, 561, 562, 563
guidelines for reading advanced, 133
of heat pump, 582
of heat pump using electronic  control 
module, 422
of heat pump with cooling cycle, 583
of heat pump with defrost circuits, 579
of heat pump with defrost timer, 144, 
146–158, 159–160
of heat pump with heating cycle, 585
of heat pump with solid-state defrost 
board, 158, 161–167, 168
importance of, 106–107, 655
of indoor fan motor circuit, 547
of light commercial air-conditioning 
control system with  control relay, 
134–136
of oil furnace, 553
of mechanical electrical control 
 system, 635
of packaged air-conditioning units, 
128–133
power supply of, 109
of simple electronic control system, 636
troubleshooting using, 658–659
of walk-in coolers, 119–122
Schematic diagrams (Continued)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 
 
Index 
725
electrical meters as, 658, 665, 669–674
electrical wiring diagrams as, 658–662
electronic self-diagnostic feature as, 
665, 669
hopscotching as, 656, 676, 680–688
installation and service instructions 
as, 663
Troubleshooting trees, 674
208-volt–three-phase–60-hertz wye 
 system, 187–188
240-volt–single-phase–60-hertz systems, 
183–185
240-volt–three-phase–60-hertz delta 
 system, 185–187
277/480-volt system, 189–190
V
Vaporizing oil burners, 435–436
Variable-speed compressors, 260
Varistor, 409
V-belt, 307–309
Ventilation systems, 314
Volt, 27
Voltage
alternating currents and, 178
calculating drop in, 202, 204
effective, 178
explanation of, 27, 109
in parallel circuits, 49
peak, 178
in series circuit, 45–46
troubleshooting, 669–672
Voltage-current systems, 178
Voltage drop, 45
Voltage spikes, 413
Voltage systems
higher, 188–190
three-phase, 185
240-volt–single-phase–60-hertz, 183–185
240-volt–three-phase–60-hertz delta, 
185–187
208-volt–three-phase–60-hertz wye, 
187–188
277/480, 189–190
Voltmeters
explanation of, 60, 68–69
function of, 70–71
types of, 69
Volt-ohm meters, 60, 61, 69
Volt-ohm-milliammeters, 58, 63
W
Walk-in coolers
explanation of, 119–122
service calls for, 350, 396–397, 
521–522, 693–694
Warm-air furnaces, 437
Touch screen programmable thermostat, 382
Transformers
explanation of, 26, 95–96, 360, 361, 
501–502
operation of, 360–361
sizing, 361–362
step-down, 360–361
step-up, 361
symbols for, 110
troubleshooting, 362, 501–502
use of, 109
Transistors, 409, 411
Triacs, 411, 412
Troubleshooting
air conditioning control systems, 689
cad cell primary controls, 517–518
capacitors, 236–239
coils, 326
contactors, 326–328, 488–490, 657–658
contacts, 326–327
control systems, 688–692
direct ignition control systems, 510, 
513, 514–515
electric heating controls, 502–505
electric motors, 486–488, 657
electronic controls, 428, 430
electronically commutated motors, 
257–258
gas heating controls, 505–513, 514, 515
gas valves, 506–509
heat pumps, 666–667
hermetic compressors, 261–269
intermittent pilot control systems, 
509–510, 511–512, 668
magnetic starters, 345–346
oil heating controls, 513, 516–518
overloads, 342–343, 490–496
overview of, 486, 655–656
permanent split-capacitor motors, 
248–249
pressure switches, 389, 500–501, 657
relays, 289, 291, 293, 295–296, 301–303, 
334, 488–490, 657–658
resistance-start-induction-run motor, 
243–244
shaded-pole motors, 235
stack switches, 516–517
switches, 389, 500–501, 516–517, 657
thermostats, 376–377, 496–499
three-phase motors, 252
transformers, 362, 501–502
Troubleshooting charts
explanation of, 656, 663, 665
guidelines for using, 674–676, 677–679
illustrations of, 664–665, 666–668, 
675–676, 677–679
Troubleshooting tools
limit, 126, 127, 444, 445, 446
low-pressure, 387–388
manual, 89–90, 109, 110
oil safety, 389–391
pressure, 92, 93, 359, 360, 384–389, 445, 
447, 500–501
stack, 462, 463, 466–468, 478–479, 516–517
symbols for, 89–92, 109, 110, 112
troubleshooting, 389, 500–501, 
516–517, 657
System lag, 371, 372
T
Temperature-controlled fan switches, 
439–440, 441, 442
Temperature controls, electronic, 414
Thermal overload, 93–94
Thermistors, 409, 412
Thermocouple, 448
Thermostats
anticipators and, 371–375
applications for, 362–363, 364
bimetal, 365–367, 368
clock, 381–384, 385
controlling elements of, 363, 365
digital, 369–370, 371
electronic digital programmable, 382, 
383, 384
explanation of, 90, 92, 359, 362, 496–497
heat pump, 580, 581
installation of, 375–376
line-voltage, 367–368, 369, 497
low-voltage, 363, 364, 368–369, 370, 
371, 497–499
multistage, 137, 141–144, 145
programmable, 381–384, 385
remote bulb, 365, 366
snap acting, 366
staging, 378–380, 381
troubleshooting, 376–377, 496–499
Three-phase current, 179, 180
Three-phase motors
explanation of, 251
operation of, 251–252
troubleshooting, 252
Three-phase voltage systems, 185
Three-prong plug, 9–10
Throw, 89
Time clocks, 391–392
Time-controlled fan switches, 441–442
Time-delay module (TCD), 619–621
Time-delay relays, 391
Timers, solid-state, 407
Time/temperature-controlled fan 
 switches, 442, 444
Timing devices, 414
Torque, 222
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

726 
Index
legend for, 661
troubleshooting using, 655, 658–662
types of, 106
use of, 80
Wye system, 187–188
Z
Zone control panel, 588
Zone control systems, 587–590
Watthours, 31
Watts, 30–31
Window air conditioners, 116, 117, 
118–119, 120
Wires
copper, 195, 197
factors to consider for, 196, 198–200
size of, 195–196, 197, 201, 202, 203
voltage drop and, 196, 202, 204
Wiring diagrams. See also Field wiring; 
Schematic diagrams
Water chillers
explanation of, 614, 615
control circuitry, 617, 618
interlocks for, 617
service call for, 397
Water-cooled condenser interlocks, 619
Water-cooled packaged units
explanation of, 541, 631–632
Water source heat pump, 563, 565
Water-to-air packaged heat pump, 
563–565
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

