ELECTRIC MOTORS
AND DRIVES
Fundamentals, Types, and Applications
Fourth Edition
AUSTIN HUGHES AND BILL DRURY
Amsterdam • Boston • Heidelberg • London • New York
Oxford • Paris • San Diego • San Francisco • Singapore
Sydney • Tokyo
Newnes is an imprint of Elsevier

Newnes is an imprint of Elsevier
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford, OX5 1GB
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
First edition 1990
Second edition 1993
Third edition 2006
Reprinted 2006, 2007, 2008 (twice), 2009
Fourth edition 2013
Copyright  2013 Austin Hughes and William Drury. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the
Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangement with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance
Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other
than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this ﬁeld are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our
understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using
any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or methods
they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have
a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any
liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or
otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the
material herein.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN: 978-0-08-098332-5
For information on all Newnes publications
visit our website at store.elsevier.com
Printed and bound in the United Kingdom
13 14 15 16
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

PREFACE
This fourth edition is again intended primarily for nonspecialist users or students of
electric motors and drives. From the outset the aim has been to bridge the gap
between specialist textbooks (which are pitched at a level which is too academic for
the average user) and the more prosaic handbooks which are full of detailed
information but provide little opportunity for the development of any real insight.
We intend to continue what has been a successful formula by providing the reader
with an understanding of how each motor and drive system works, in the belief that
it is only by knowing what should happen (and why) that informed judgements and
sound comparisons can be made.
The fact that the book now has joint authors resulted directly from the
publisher’s successful reviewing process, which canvassed expert opinions about
a prospective fourth edition. It identiﬁed several new topics needed to bring the
work up to date, but these areas were not ones that the original author (AH) was
equipped to address, having long since retired. Fortunately, one of the reviewers
(WD) turned out to be a willing co-author: he is not only an industrialist (and
author) with vast experience in the ﬁeld, but, at least as importantly, shares the
philosophy that guided the ﬁrst three versions. We enjoy collaborating and hope
and believe that our synergy will prove of beneﬁt to our readers.
Given that the book is aimed at readers from a range of disciplines, sections of
the book are of necessity devoted to introductory material. The ﬁrst two chapters
therefore provide a gentle introduction to electromagnetic energy conversion and
power electronics. Many of the basic ideas introduced here crop up frequently
throughout the book (and indeed are deliberately repeated to emphasize their
importance), so unless the reader is already well versed in the fundamentals it would
be wise to absorb the ﬁrst two chapters before tackling the later material. At various
points later in the book we include more tutorial material, e.g. in Chapter 7 where
we prepare the ground for unraveling the mysteries of ﬁeld-oriented control. A
grasp of basic closed-loop principles is also required in order to understand the
operation of the various drives, so further introductory material is included in
Appendix 1.
The book covers all of the most important types of motor and drive, including
conventional and brushless d.c., induction motor, synchronous motors of all types,
switched reluctance, and stepping motors (but not highly customized or applica-
tion-speciﬁc systems, e.g. digital hard disk drives). The induction motor and
induction motor drives are given most weight, reﬂecting their dominant market
position in terms of numbers. Conventional d.c. machines are deliberately intro-
duced early on, despite their declining importance: this is partly because under-
standing is relatively easy, but primarily because the fundamental principles that
ixj

emerge carry forward to other motors. Similarly, d.c. drives are tackled ﬁrst, because
experience shows that readers who manage to grasp the principles of the d.c. drive
will ﬁnd this knowhow invaluable in dealing with other more challenging types.
The third edition has been completely revised and updated. Major additions
include an extensive (but largely non-mathematical) treatment of both ﬁeld-
oriented and direct torque control in both induction and synchronous motor drives;
a new chapter on permanent magnet brushless machines; new material dealing with
self-excited machines, including wind-power generation; and increased emphasis
throughout on the inherent ability of electrical machines to act either as a motor or
a generator.
Younger readers may be unaware of the radical changes that have taken place
over the past 50 years, so a couple of paragraphs are appropriate to put the current
scene into perspective. For more than a century, many different types of motor were
developed, and each became closely associated with a particular application.
Traction, for example, was seen as the exclusive preserve of the series d.c. motor,
whereas the shunt d.c. motor, though outwardly indistinguishable, was seen as
being quite unsuited to traction applications. The cage induction motor was (and
still is) the most numerous type but was judged as being suited only to applications
which called for constant speed. The reason for the plethora of motor types was that
there was no easy way of varying the supply voltage and/or frequency to obtain
speed control, and designers were therefore forced to seek ways of providing for
control of speed within the motor itself. All sorts of ingenious arrangements and
interconnections of motor windings were invented, but even the best motors had
a limited operating range, and they all required bulky electromechanical control
gear.
All this changed from the early 1960s, when power electronics began to make
an impact. The ﬁrst major breakthrough came with the thyristor, which provided
a relatively cheap, compact, and easily controlled variablespeed drive using the d.c.
motor. In the 1970s the second major breakthrough resulted from the development
of power electronic inverters, providing a 3phase variable-frequency supply for the
cage induction motor and thereby enabling its speed to be controlled. These major
developments resulted in the demise of many of the special motors, leaving the
majority of applications in the hands of comparatively few types. The switch from
analogue to digital control also represented signiﬁcant progress, but it was the
availability of cheap digital processors that sparked the most recent leap forward.
Real time modeling and simulation are now incorporated as standard into induction
and synchronous motor drives, thereby allowing them to achieve levels of dynamic
performance that had long been considered impossible.
The informal style of the book reﬂects our belief that the difﬁculty of coming to
grips with new ideas should not be disguised. The level at which to pitch the
material was based on feedback from previous editions which supported our view
that a mainly descriptive approach with physical explanations would be most
x
Preface

appropriate, with mathematics kept to a minimum to assist digestion. The most
important concepts (such as the inherent e.m.f. feedback in motors, the need for
a switching strategy in converters, and the importance of stored energy) are
deliberately reiterated to reinforce understanding, but should not prove too tire-
some for readers who have already ‘got the message’. We have deliberately not
included any computed magnetic ﬁeld plots, nor any results from the excellent
motor simulation packages that are now available because experience suggests that
simpliﬁed diagrams are actually better as learning vehicles.
Finally, we welcome feedback, either via the publisher, or using the e-mail
addresses below.
Austin Hughes (a.hughes@leeds.ac.uk)
Bill Drury (w.drury@btinternet.com)
14 October 2012
Preface
xi

CHAPTER ONE
Electric Motors – The Basics
1. INTRODUCTION
Electric motors are so much a part of everyday life that we seldom give them
a second thought. When we switch on an ancient electric drill, for example, we
conﬁdently expect it to run rapidly up to the correct speed, and we don’t question
how it knows what speed to run at, or how it is that once enough energy has been
drawn from the supply to bring it up to speed, the power drawn falls to a very low
level. When we put the drill to work it draws more power, and, when we ﬁnish, the
power drawn from the mains reduces automatically, without intervention on our
part.
The humble motor, consisting of nothing more than an arrangement of copper
coils and steel laminations, is clearly rather a clever energy converter, which
warrants serious consideration. By gaining a basic understanding of how the motor
works, we will be able to appreciate its potential and its limitations, and (in later
chapters) see how its already remarkable performance is dramatically enhanced by
the addition of external electronic controls.
This chapter deals with the basic mechanisms of motor operation, so readers
who are already familiar with such matters as magnetic ﬂux, magnetic and
electric circuits, torque, and motional e.m.f. can probably afford to skim over
much of it. In the course of the discussion, however, several very important
general principles and guidelines emerge. These apply to all types of motor and
are summarized in section 9. Experience shows that anyone who has a good
grasp of these basic principles will be well equipped to weigh the pros and cons
of the different types of motor, so all readers are urged to absorb them before
tackling other parts of the book.
2. PRODUCING ROTATION
Nearly all motors exploit the force which is exerted on a current-carrying
conductor placed in a magnetic ﬁeld. The force can be demonstrated by placing
a bar magnet near a wire carrying current (Figure 1.1), but anyone trying the
experiment will probably be disappointed to discover how feeble the force is, and
will doubtless be left wondering how such an unpromising effect can be used to
make effective motors.
Electric Motors and Drives
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-098332-5.00001-2
 2013 Austin Hughes and William Drury.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
1j

We will see that in order to make the most of the mechanism, we need to
arrange for there to be a very strong magnetic ﬁeld, and for it to interact with many
conductors, each carrying as much current as possible. We will also see later that
although the magnetic ﬁeld (or ‘excitation’) is essential to the working of the motor,
it acts only as a catalyst, and all of the mechanical output power comes from the
electrical supply to the conductors on which the force is developed.
It will emerge later that in some motors the parts of the machine responsible for
the excitation and for the energy-converting functions are distinct and self-evident.
In the d.c. motor, for example, the excitation is provided either by permanent
magnets or by ﬁeld coils wrapped around clearly deﬁned projecting ﬁeld poles on
the stationary part, while the conductors on which force is developed are on the
rotor and supplied with current via sliding brushes. In many motors, however, there
is no such clear-cut physical distinction between the ‘excitation’ and the ‘energy-
converting’ parts of the machine, and a single stationary winding serves both
purposes. Nevertheless, we will ﬁnd that identifying and separating the excitation
and energy-converting functions is always helpful in understanding how motors of
all types operate.
Returning to the matter of force on a single conductor, we will look ﬁrst at
what determines the magnitude and direction of the force, before turning to ways in
which the mechanism is exploited to produce rotation. The concept of the
magnetic circuit will have to be explored, since this is central to understanding why
motors have the shapes they do. Before that, a brief introduction to the magnetic
ﬁeld and magnetic ﬂux and ﬂux density is included for those who are not already
familiar with the ideas involved.
2.1 Magnetic ﬁeld and magnetic ﬂux
When a current-carrying conductor is placed in a magnetic ﬁeld, it experiences
a force. Experiment shows that the magnitude of the force depends directly on the
current in the wire and the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld, and that the force is
greatest when the magnetic ﬁeld is perpendicular to the conductor.
Figure 1.1 Mechanical force produced on a current-carrying wire in a magnetic ﬁeld.
2
Electric Motors and Drives

In the set-up shown in Figure 1.1, the source of the magnetic ﬁeld is a bar
magnet, which produces a magnetic ﬁeld as shown in Figure 1.2.
The notion of a ‘magnetic ﬁeld’ surrounding a magnet is an abstract idea that
helps us to come to grips with the mysterious phenomenon of magnetism: it not
only provides us with a convenient pictorial way of visualizing the directional
effects, but it also allows us to quantify the ‘strength’ of the magnetism and hence
permits us to predict the various effects produced by it.
The dotted lines in Figure 1.2 are referred to as magnetic ﬂux lines, or simply
ﬂux lines. They indicate the direction along which iron ﬁlings (or small steel pins)
would align themselves when placed in the ﬁeld of the bar magnet. Steel pins have
no initial magnetic ﬁeld of their own, so there is no reason why one end or the other
of the pins should point to a particular pole of the bar magnet.
However, when we put a compass needle (which is itself a permanent magnet)
in the ﬁeld we ﬁnd that it aligns itself as shown in Figure 1.2. In the upper half of
the ﬁgure, the S end of the diamond-shaped compass settles closest to the N pole
of the magnet, while in the lower half of the ﬁgure, the N end of the compass
seeks the S of the magnet. This immediately suggests that there is a direction
associated with the lines of ﬂux, as shown by the arrows on the ﬂux lines, which
conventionally are taken as positively directed from the N to the S pole of the bar
magnet.
The sketch in Figure 1.2 might suggest that there is a ‘source’ near the top of
the bar magnet, from which ﬂux lines emanate before making their way to a
corresponding ‘sink’ at the bottom. However, if we were to look at the ﬂux lines
inside the magnet, we would ﬁnd that they were continuous, with no ‘start’ or
Figure 1.2 Magnetic ﬂux lines produced by a permanent magnet.
Electric Motors – The Basics
3

‘ﬁnish’. (In Figure 1.2 the internal ﬂux lines have been omitted for the sake of
clarity, but a very similar ﬁeld pattern is produced by a circular coil of wire carrying
a direct current – see Figure 1.7 where the continuity of the ﬂux lines is clear.)
Magnetic ﬂux lines always form closed paths, as we will see when we look at the
‘magnetic circuit’, and we draw a parallel with the electric circuit, in which the
current is also a continuous quantity. (There must be a ‘cause’ of the magnetic ﬂux,
of course, and in a permanent magnet this is usually pictured in terms of atomic-
level circulating currents within the magnet material. Fortunately, discussion at this
physical level is not necessary for our purposes.)
2.2 Magnetic ﬂux density
As well as showing direction, ﬂux plots convey information about the intensity
of the magnetic ﬁeld. To achieve this, we introduce the idea that between every
pair of ﬂux lines (and for a given depth into the paper) there is the same
‘quantity’ of magnetic ﬂux. Some people have no difﬁculty with such a concept,
while others ﬁnd that the notion of quantifying something so abstract represents
a serious intellectual challenge. But whether the approach seems obvious or not,
there is no denying the practical utility of quantifying the mysterious stuff we call
magnetic ﬂux, and it leads us next to the very important idea of magnetic ﬂux
density (B).
When the ﬂux lines are close together, the ‘tube’ of ﬂux is squashed into
a smaller space, whereas when the lines are further apart the same tube of ﬂux has
more breathing space. The ﬂux density (B) is simply the ﬂux in the ‘tube’ (F)
divided by the cross-sectional area (A) of the tube, i.e.
B ¼ F
A
(1.1)
The ﬂux density is a vector quantity, and is therefore often written in bold type: its
magnitude is given by equation (1.1), and its direction is that of the prevailing ﬂux
lines at each point. Near the top of the magnet in Figure 1.2, for example, the ﬂux
density will be large (because the ﬂux is squashed into a small area), and pointing
upwards, whereas on the equator and far out from the body of the magnet the ﬂux
density will be small and directed downwards.
We will see later that in order to create high ﬂux densities in motors, the ﬂux
spends most of its life inside well-deﬁned ‘magnetic circuits’ made of iron or steel,
within which the ﬂux lines spread out uniformly to take full advantage of the
available area. In the case shown in Figure 1.3, for example, the cross-sectional area
of the iron at bb0 is twice that at aa0, but the ﬂux is constant so the ﬂux density at bb0
is half that at aa0.
It remains to specify units for quantity of ﬂux, and ﬂux density. In the SI system,
the unit of magnetic ﬂux is the weber (Wb). If one weber of ﬂux is distributed
uniformly across an area of one square meter perpendicular to the ﬂux, the ﬂux
4
Electric Motors and Drives

density is clearly one weber per square meter (Wb/m2). This was the unit of B until
about 50 years ago, when it was decided that one weber per square meter would
henceforth be known as one tesla (T), in honor of Nikola Tesla, who is generally
credited with inventing the induction motor. The widespread use of B (measured in
Tesla) in the design stage of all types of electromagnetic apparatus means that we are
constantly reminded of the importance of Tesla; but at the same time one has to
acknowledge that the outdated unit did have the advantage of conveying directly
what ﬂux density is, i.e. ﬂux divided by area.
The ﬂux in a 1 kW motor will be perhaps a few tens of milliwebers, and a small
bar magnet would probably only produce a few microwebers. On the other hand,
values of ﬂux density are typically around 1 tesla in most motors, which is
a reﬂection of the fact that although the quantity of ﬂux in the 1 kW motor is small,
it is also spread over a small area.
2.3 Force on a conductor
We now return to the production of force on a current-carrying wire placed in
a magnetic ﬁeld, as revealed by the set-up shown in Figure 1.1.
The force is shown in Figure 1.1: it is at right angles to both the current and the
magnetic ﬂux density, and its direction can be found using Fleming’s left-hand rule.
If we picture the thumb and the ﬁrst and middle ﬁngers held mutually perpen-
dicular, then the first ﬁnger represents the field or flux density (B), the mIddle ﬁnger
represents the current (I), and the thumb then indicates the direction of motion, as
shown in Figure 1.4.
Clearly, if either the ﬁeld or the current is reversed, the force acts downwards,
and if both are reversed, the direction of the force remains the same.
We ﬁnd by experiment that if we double either the current or the ﬂux density,
we double the force, while doubling both causes the force to increase by a factor of
four. But how about quantifying the force? We need to express the force in terms of
the product of the current and the magnetic ﬂux density, and this turns out to be
very straightforward when we work in SI units.
Figure 1.3 Magnetic ﬂux lines inside part of an iron magnetic circuit.
Electric Motors – The Basics
5

The force F on a wire of length l, carrying a current I and exposed to a uniform
magnetic ﬂux density B throughout its length is given by the simple expression
F ¼ BIl
(1.2)
In equation (1.2), F is in newtons when B is in tesla, I in amps, and l in meters.
This is a delightfully simple formula, and it may come as a surprise to some
readers that there are no constants of proportionality involved in equation (1.2).
The simplicity is not a coincidence, but stems from the fact that the unit of current
(the ampere) is actually deﬁned in terms of force.
Equation (1.2) only applies when the current is perpendicular to the ﬁeld. If
this condition is not met, the force on the conductor will be less; and in the
extreme case where the current was in the same direction as the ﬁeld, the force
would fall to zero. However, every sensible motor designer knows that to get the
best out of the magnetic ﬁeld it has to be perpendicular to the conductors, and so
it is safe to assume in the subsequent discussion that B and I are always perpen-
dicular. In the remainder of this book, it will be assumed that the ﬂux density and
current are mutually perpendicular, and this is why, although B is a vector
quantity (and would usually be denoted by bold type), we can drop the bold
notation because the direction is implicit and we are only interested in the
magnitude.
The reason for the very low force detected in the experiment with the bar
magnet is revealed by equation (1.2). To obtain a high force, we must have a high
ﬂux density, and a lot of current. The ﬂux density at the ends of a bar magnet is low,
perhaps 0.1 tesla, so a wire carrying 1 amp will experience a force of only 0.1 N/m
(approximately 100 gm wt per meter). Since the ﬂux density will be conﬁned to
perhaps 1 cm across the end face of the magnet, the total force on the wire will be
only 1 gm wt. This would be barely detectable, and is too low to be of any use in
a decent motor. So how is more force obtained?
Figure 1.4 Fleming’s LH rule for ﬁnding direction of force.
6
Electric Motors and Drives

The ﬁrst step is to obtain the highest possible ﬂux density. This is achieved by
designing a ‘good’ magnetic circuit, and is discussed next. Secondly, as many
conductors as possible must be packed in the space where the magnetic ﬁeld exists,
and each conductor must carry as much current as it can without heating up to
a dangerous temperature. In this way, impressive forces can be obtained from
modestly sized devices, as anyone who has tried to stop an electric drill by grasping
the chuck will testify.
3. MAGNETIC CIRCUITS
So far we have assumed that the source of the magnetic ﬁeld is a permanent
magnet. This is a convenient starting point as all of us are familiar with magnets. But
in the majority of motors, the magnetic ﬁeld is produced by coils of wire carrying
current, so it is appropriate that we look at how we arrange the coils and their
associated ‘magnetic circuit’ so as to produce high magnetic ﬁelds which then
interact with other current-carrying conductors to produce force, and hence
rotation.
First, we look at the simplest possible case of the magnetic ﬁeld surrounding an
isolated long straight wire carrying a steady current (Figure 1.5). (In the ﬁgure, the
þ sign indicates that current is ﬂowing into the paper, while a dot is used to signify
current out of the paper: these symbols can perhaps be remembered by picturing
an arrow or dart, with the cross being the rear view of the ﬂetch, and the dot being
the approaching point.) The ﬂux lines form circles concentric with the wire, the
ﬁeld strength being greatest close to the wire. As might be expected, the ﬁeld
strength at any point is directly proportional to the current. The convention for
determining the direction of the ﬁeld is that the positive direction is taken to be
the direction that a right-handed corkscrew must be rotated to move in the
direction of the current.
Figure 1.5 is somewhat artiﬁcial as current can only ﬂow in a complete circuit,
so there must always be a return path. If we imagine a parallel ‘go’ and ‘return’
circuit, for example, the ﬁeld can be obtained by superimposing the ﬁeld produced
by the positive current in the go side with the ﬁeld produced by the negative
current in the return side, as shown in Figure 1.6.
We note how the ﬁeld is increased in the region between the conductors, and
reduced in the regions outside. Although Figure 1.6 strictly only applies to an
inﬁnitely long pair of straight conductors, it will probably not come as a surprise to
learn that the ﬁeld produced by a single turn of wire of rectangular, square or
round form is very much the same as that shown in Figure 1.6. This enables us to
build up a picture of the ﬁeld that would be produced – in air – by the sort of coils
used in motors, which typically have many turns, as shown, for example, in
Figure 1.7.
Electric Motors – The Basics
7

Figure 1.5 Magnetic ﬂux lines produced by a straight, current-carrying wire.
Figure 1.7 Multi-turn cylindrical coil and pattern of magnetic ﬂux produced by current
in the coil. (For the sake of clarity, only the outline of the coil is shown on the right.)
Figure 1.6 Magnetic ﬂux lines produced by current in a parallel go and return circuit.
8
Electric Motors and Drives

The coil itself is shown on the left in Figure 1.7 while the ﬂux pattern produced
is shown on the right. Each turn in the coil produces a ﬁeld pattern, and when all
the individual ﬁeld components are superimposed we see that the ﬁeld inside the
coil is substantially increased and that the closed ﬂux paths closely resemble those of
the bar magnet we looked at earlier. The air surrounding the sources of the ﬁeld
offers a homogeneous path for the ﬂux, so once the tubes of ﬂux escape from the
concentrating inﬂuence of the source, they are free to spread out into the whole of
the surrounding space. Recalling that between each pair of ﬂux lines there is an
equal amount of ﬂux, we see that because the ﬂux lines spread out as they leave the
conﬁnes of the coil, the ﬂux density is much lower outside than inside: for example,
if the distance ‘b’ is say four times ‘a’, the ﬂux density Bb is a quarter of Ba.
Although the ﬂux density inside the coil is higher than outside, we would ﬁnd
that the ﬂux densities which we could achieve are still too low to be of use in
a motor. What is needed ﬁrst is a way of increasing the ﬂux density, and secondly
a means for concentrating the ﬂux and preventing it from spreading out into the
surrounding space.
3.1 Magnetomotive force (MMF)
One obvious way to increase the ﬂux density is to increase the current in the coil, or
to add more turns. We ﬁnd that if we double the current, or the number of turns,
we double the total ﬂux, thereby doubling the ﬂux density everywhere.
We quantify the ability of the coil to produce ﬂux in terms of its magneto-
motive force (m.m.f.). The m.m.f. of the coil is simply the product of the number of
turns (N) and the current (I), and is thus expressed in ampere-turns. A given m.m.f.
can be obtained with a large number of turns of thin wire carrying a low current, or
a few turns of thick wire carrying a high current: as long as the product NI is
constant, the m.m.f. is the same.
3.2 Electric circuit analogy
We have seen that the magnetic ﬂux which is set up is proportional to the m.m.f.
driving it. This points to a parallel with the electric circuit, where the current (amps)
which ﬂows is proportional to the electromotive force (e.m.f. volts) driving it.
In the electric circuit, current and e.m.f. are related by Ohm’s law, which is
Current ¼
e:m:f:
Resistance; i:e: I ¼ V
R
(1.3)
For a given source e.m.f. (volts), the current depends inversely on the resistance of
the circuit, so to obtain more current, the resistance of the circuit has to be reduced.
We can make use of an equivalent ‘magnetic Ohm’s law’ by introducing the
idea of reluctance (R ). The reluctance gives a measure of how difﬁcult it is for the
magnetic ﬂux to complete its circuit, in the same way that resistance indicates how
much opposition the current encounters in the electric circuit.
Electric Motors – The Basics
9

The magnetic Ohm’s law is then
Flux ¼
m:m:f:
Reluctance; i:e: F ¼ NI
R
(1.4)
We see from equation (1.4) that, to increase the ﬂux for a given m.m.f., we need to
reduce the reluctance of the magnetic circuit. In the case of the example
(Figure 1.7), this means we must replace as much as possible of the air path (which
is a ‘poor’ magnetic material, and therefore constitutes a high reluctance) with
a ‘good’ magnetic material, thereby reducing the reluctance and resulting in
a higher ﬂux for a given m.m.f.
The material which we choose is good quality magnetic steel, which for
historical reasons is often referred to as ‘iron’. This brings several very dramatic and
desirable beneﬁts, as shown in Figure 1.8.
First, the reluctance of the iron paths is very much less than that of the air paths
which they have replaced, so the total ﬂux produced for a given m.m.f. is very much
greater. (Strictly speaking therefore, if the m.m.f.s and cross-sections of the coils in
Figures 1.7 and 1.8 are the same, many more ﬂux lines should be shown in
Figure 1.8 than in Figure 1.7, but for the sake of clarity a similar number are
indicated.) Secondly, almost all the ﬂux is conﬁned within the iron, rather than
spreading out into the surrounding air. We can therefore shape the iron parts of the
magnetic circuit, as shown in Figure 1.8, in order to guide the ﬂux to wherever it is
needed. And ﬁnally, we see that inside the iron, the ﬂux density remains uniform
over the whole cross-section, there being so little reluctance that there is no
noticeable tendency for the ﬂux to crowd to one side or another.
Before moving on to the matter of the air-gap, a question which is often asked is
whether it is important for the coils to be wound tightly onto the magnetic circuit,
and whether, if there is a multi-layer winding, the outer turns are as effective as the
inner ones. The answer, happily, is that the total m.m.f. is determined solely by the
number of turns and the current, and therefore every complete turn makes the same
contribution to the total m.m.f., regardless of whether it happens to be tightly or
loosely wound. Of course it does make sense for the coils to be wound as tightly as is
Figure 1.8 Flux lines inside low-reluctance magnetic circuit with air-gap.
10
Electric Motors and Drives

practicable, since this not only minimizes the resistance of the coil (and thereby
reduces the heat loss) but also makes it easier for the heat generated to be conducted
away to the frame of the machine.
3.3 The air-gap
In motors, we intend to use the high ﬂux density to develop force on current-
carrying conductors. We have now seen how to create a high ﬂux density in
a magnetic circuit, but, of course, it is physically impossible to put current-carrying
conductors inside the iron. We therefore arrange for an air-gap in the magnetic
circuit, as shown in Figure 1.8. We will see shortly that the conductors on which the
force is to be produced will be placed in this air-gap region.
If the air-gap is relatively small, as in motors, we ﬁnd that the ﬂux jumps across
the air-gap as shown in Figure 1.8, with very little tendency to balloon out into the
surrounding air. With most of the ﬂux lines going straight across the air-gap, the
ﬂux density in the gap region has the same high value as it does inside the iron.
In the majority of magnetic circuits with one or more air-gaps, the reluctance
of the iron parts is very much less than the reluctance of the gaps. At ﬁrst sight this
can seem surprising, since the distance across the gap is so much less than the rest of
the path through the iron. The fact that the air-gap dominates the reluctance is
simply a reﬂection of how poor air is as a magnetic medium, compared with iron.
To put the comparison in perspective, if we calculate the reluctances of two paths
of equal length and cross-sectional area, one being in iron and the other in air, the
reluctance of the air path will typically be 1000 times greater than the reluctance
of the iron path.
Returning to the analogy with the electric circuit, the role of the iron parts of
the magnetic circuit can be likened to that of the copper wires in the electric circuit.
Both offer little opposition to ﬂow (so that a negligible fraction of the driving force
(m.m.f. or e.m.f.) is wasted in conveying the ﬂow to where it is usefully exploited)
and both can be shaped to guide the ﬂow to its destination. There is one important
difference, however. In the electric circuit, no current will ﬂow until the circuit is
completed, after which all the current is conﬁned inside the wires. With an iron
magnetic circuit, some ﬂux can ﬂow (in the surrounding air) even before the iron is
installed. And although most of the ﬂux will subsequently take the easy route
through the iron, some will still leak into the air, as shown in Figure 1.8. We will
not pursue leakage ﬂux here, though it is sometimes important, as will be seen later.
3.4 Reluctance and air-gap ﬂux densities
If we neglect the reluctance of the iron parts of a magnetic circuit, it is easy to
estimate the ﬂux density in the air-gap. Since the iron parts are then in effect ‘perfect
conductors’ of ﬂux, none of the source m.m.f. (NI) is used in driving the ﬂux
through the iron parts, and all of it is available to push the ﬂux across the air-gap.
Electric Motors – The Basics
11

The situation depicted in Figure 1.8 therefore reduces to that shown in Figure 1.9,
where an m.m.f. of NI is applied directly across an air-gap of length g.
To determine how much ﬂux will cross the gap, we need to know its reluc-
tance. As might be expected the reluctance of any part of the magnetic circuit
depends on its dimensions and on its magnetic properties, and the reluctance of
a rectangular ‘prism’ of air, of cross-sectional area A and length g, is given by
R g ¼
g
Am0
(1.5)
where m0 is the so-called ‘primary magnetic constant’ or ‘permeability of free space’.
Strictly, as its name implies, m0 quantiﬁes the magnetic properties of a vacuum, but
for all engineering purposes the permeability of air is also m0. The value of the
primary magnetic constant (m0) in the SI system is 4p  107 henry/m: rather
surprisingly, there is no name for the unit of reluctance.
(In passing, we should note that if we want to include the reluctance of the iron
part of the magnetic circuit in our calculation, its reluctance would be given by
R iron ¼
liron
Amiron
and we would have to add this to the reluctance of the air-gap to obtain the total
reluctance. However, because the permeability of iron (miron) is so much higher
than m0, its reluctance will be very much less than the gap reluctance, despite the
path length liron being considerably longer than the path length (g) in the air.)
Equation (1.5) reveals the expected result that doubling the air-gap would
double the reluctance (because the ﬂux has twice as far to go), while doubling the
area would halve the reluctance (because the ﬂux has two equally appealing paths in
parallel). To calculate the ﬂux, F, we use the magnetic Ohm’s law (equation (1.4)),
which gives
F ¼ m:m:f:
R
; i:e: F ¼ NIAm0
g
(1.6)
Figure 1.9 Air-gap region, with m.m.f. acting across opposing pole faces.
12
Electric Motors and Drives

We are usually interested in the ﬂux density in the gap, rather than the total ﬂux, so
we use equation (1.1) to yield
B ¼ F
A ¼ m0NI
g
(1.7)
Equation (1.7) is delightfully simple, and from it we can calculate the air-gap ﬂux
density once we know the m.m.f. of the coil (NI) and the length of the gap (g). We
do not need to know the details of the coil winding as long as we know the product
of the turns and the current, and neither do we need to know the cross-sectional
area of the magnetic circuit in order to obtain the ﬂux density (though we do if we
want to know the total ﬂux; see equation (1.6)).
For example, suppose the magnetizing coil has 250 turns, the current is 2 A, and
the gap is 1 mm. The ﬂux density is then given by
B ¼ 4p  107  250  2
1  103
¼ 0:63 tesla
(We could of course create the same ﬂux density with a coil of 50 turns carrying
a current of 10 A, or any other combination of turns and current giving an m.m.f. of
500 ampere-turns.)
If the cross-sectional area of the iron was constant at all points, the ﬂux density
would be 0.63 T everywhere. Sometimes, as has already been mentioned, the cross-
section of the iron reduces at points away from the air-gap, as shown for example in
Figure 1.3. Because the ﬂux is compressed in the narrower sections, the ﬂux density
is higher, and in Figure 1.3 if the ﬂux density at the air-gap and in the adjacent pole
faces is once again taken to be 0.63 T, then at the section aa0 (where the area is only
half that at the air-gap) the ﬂux density will be 2  0.63 ¼ 1.26 T.
3.5 Saturation
It would be reasonable to ask whether there is any limit to the ﬂux density at which
the iron can be operated. We can anticipate that there must be a limit, or else it would
be possible to squash the ﬂux into a vanishingly small cross-section, which we know is
not the case. In fact there is a limit, though not a very sharply deﬁned one.
Earlier we noted that the ‘iron’ has very little reluctance, at least not in
comparison with air. Unfortunately this happy state of affairs is only true as long as
the ﬂux density remains below about 1.6–1.8 T, depending on the particular
magnetic steel in question: if we try to work at higher ﬂux densities, it begins to
exhibit signiﬁcant reluctance, and no longer behaves like an ideal conductor of ﬂux.
At these higher ﬂux densities a signiﬁcant proportion of the source m.m.f. is used in
driving the ﬂux through the iron. This situation is obviously undesirable, since less
m.m.f. remains to drive the ﬂux across the air-gap. So, just as we would not
recommend the use of high-resistance supply leads to the load in an electric circuit,
we must avoid overloading the iron parts of the magnetic circuit.
Electric Motors – The Basics
13

The emergence of signiﬁcant reluctance as the ﬂux density is raised is illustrated
qualitatively in Figure 1.10. When the reluctance begins to be appreciable, the iron
is said to be beginning to ‘saturate’. The term is apt, because if we continue
increasing the m.m.f. or reducing the area of the iron, we will eventually reach an
almost constant ﬂux density, typically around 2 T. To avoid the undesirable effects
of saturation, the sizes of the iron parts of the magnetic circuit are usually chosen so
that the ﬂux density does not exceed about 1.5 T. At this level of ﬂux density, the
reluctance of the iron parts will be small in comparison with the air-gap.
3.6 Magnetic circuits in motors
The reader may be wondering why so much attention has been focused on the
gapped C-core magnetic circuit, when it appears to bear little resemblance to the
magnetic circuits found in motors. We will now see that it is actually a short step
from the C-core to a typical motor magnetic circuit, and that no fundamentally new
ideas are involved.
The evolution from C-core to motor geometry is shown in Figure 1.11, which
should be largely self-explanatory, and relates to the ﬁeld system of a traditional
d.c. motor.
We note that the ﬁrst stage of evolution (Figure 1.11, left) results in the original
single gap of length g being split into two gaps of length g/2, reﬂecting the
requirement for the rotor to be able to turn. At the same time the single magne-
tizing coil is split into two to preserve symmetry. (Relocating the magnetizing coil
at a different position around the magnetic circuit is of course in order, just as
a battery can be placed anywhere in an electric circuit.) Next (Figure 1.11, center),
the single magnetic path is split into two parallel paths of half the original cross-
section, each of which carries half of the ﬂux; and ﬁnally (Figure 1.11, right), the
ﬂux paths and pole faces are curved to match the rotor. The coil now has several
layers in order to ﬁt the available space, but as discussed earlier this has no adverse
effect on the m.m.f. The air-gap is still small, so the ﬂux crosses radially to the rotor.
Figure 1.10 Sketch showing how the effective reluctance of iron increases rapidly as
the ﬂux density approaches saturation.
14
Electric Motors and Drives

4. TORQUE PRODUCTION
Having designed the magnetic circuit to give a high ﬂux density under the poles, we
must obtain maximum beneﬁt from it. We therefore need to arrange a set of
conductors, ﬁxed to the rotor, as shown in Figure 1.12, and to ensure that
conductors under an N-pole (on the left) carry positive current (into the paper),
while those under the S-pole carry negative current. The tangential electromag-
netic (‘BIl’) force (see equation (1.2)) on all the positive conductors will be
downwards, while the force on the negative ones will be upwards: a torque will
therefore be exerted on the rotor, which will be caused to rotate. (The observant
reader spotting that some of the conductors appear to have no current in them will
ﬁnd the explanation later, in Chapter 3.)
At this point we should pause and address three questions that often crop up
when these ideas are being developed. The ﬁrst is to ask why we have made no
reference to the magnetic ﬁeld produced by the current-carrying conductors on the
rotor. Surely they too will produce a magnetic ﬁeld, which will presumably
interfere with the original ﬁeld in the air-gap – in which case perhaps the expression
used to calculate the force on the conductor will no longer be valid.
The answer to this very perceptive question is that the ﬁeld produced by
the current-carrying conductors on the rotor certainly will modify the original
Figure 1.11 Evolution of d.c. motor magnetic circuit from gapped C-core.
Figure 1.12 Current-carrying conductors on rotor, positioned to maximize torque. (The
source of the magnetic ﬂux lines (arrowed) is not shown.)
Electric Motors – The Basics
15

ﬁeld (i.e. the ﬁeld that was present when there was no current in the rotor
conductors). But in the majority of motors, the force on the conductor can be
calculated correctly from the product of the current and the ‘original’ ﬁeld.
This is very fortunate from the point of view of calculating the force, but also
has a logical feel to it. For example, in Figure 1.1, we would not expect any
force on the current-carrying conductor if there was no externally applied ﬁeld,
even though the current in the conductor will produce its own ﬁeld (upwards
on one side of the conductor and downwards on the other). So it seems right
that since we only obtain a force when there is an external ﬁeld, all of the force
must be due to that ﬁeld alone. (In Chapter 3 we will discover that the ﬁeld
produced by the rotor conductors is known as ‘armature reaction’, and that,
especially when the magnetic circuit becomes saturated, its undesirable effects
may be combated by ﬁtting additional windings designed to nullify the
armature ﬁeld.)
The second question arises when we think about the action and reaction
principle. When there is a torque on the rotor, there is presumably an equal and
opposite torque on the stator; and therefore we might wonder if the mechanism of
torque production could be pictured using the same ideas as we used for obtaining
the rotor torque. The answer is yes, there is always an equal and opposite torque on
the stator, which is why it is usually important to bolt a motor down securely. In
some machines (e.g. the induction motor) it is easy to see that torque is produced on
the stator by the interaction of the air-gap ﬂux density and the stator currents, in
exactly the same way that the ﬂux density interacts with the rotor currents to
produce torque on the rotor. In other motors (e.g. the d.c. motor we have been
looking at), there is no simple physical argument which can be advanced to derive
the torque on the stator, but nevertheless it is equal and opposite to the torque on
the rotor.
The ﬁnal question relates to the similarity between the set-up shown in
Figure 1.11 and the ﬁeld patterns produced, for example, by the electromagnets
used to lift car bodies in a scrap yard. From what we know of the large force of
attraction that lifting magnets can produce, might we not expect there to be a large
radial force between the stator pole and the iron body of the rotor? And if there is,
what is to prevent the rotor from being pulled across to the stator?
Again the afﬁrmative answer is that there is indeed a radial force due to magnetic
attraction, exactly as in a lifting magnet or relay, although the mechanism whereby
the magnetic ﬁeld exerts a pull as it enters iron or steel is entirely different from the
‘BIl’ force we have been looking at so far.
It turns out that the force of attraction per unit area of pole face is
proportional to the square of the radial ﬂux density, and with typical air-gap ﬂux
densities of up to 1 T in motors, the force per unit area of rotor surface works
out to be about 40 N/cm2. This indicates that the total radial force can be very
large; for example, the force of attraction on a small pole face of only
16
Electric Motors and Drives

5 cm  10 cm is 2000 N, or about 200 kgf. This force contributes nothing to the
torque of the motor, and is merely an unwelcome by-product of the ‘BIl’
mechanism we employ to produce tangential force on the rotor conductors.
In most machines the radial magnetic force under each pole is actually a good
deal bigger than the tangential electromagnetic force on the rotor conductors, and
as the question implies, it tends to pull the rotor onto the pole. However, the
majority of motors are constructed with an even number of poles equally spaced
around the rotor, and the ﬂux density in each pole is the same, so that – in theory at
least – the resultant force on the complete rotor is zero. In practice, even a small
eccentricity will cause the ﬁeld to be stronger under the poles where the air-gap is
smaller, and this will give rise to an unbalanced pull, resulting in noisy running and
rapid bearing wear.
In 99% of motors we can picture how torque is produced via the ‘BIl’ approach.
The source of the magnetic ﬂux density B may be a winding, as in Figure 1.11, or
a permanent magnet. The source (or ‘excitation’) may be located on the stator (as
implied in Figure 1.12) or on the rotor. If the source of B is on the stator, the current
carrying conductors on which the force is developed are located on the rotor,
whereas if the excitation is on the rotor, the active conductors are on the stator. In
all of these ‘BIl’ machines, the large radial magnetic forces discussed above are an
unwanted by-product.
However, we will see later in the book that in some circumstances the rotor
geometry can be arranged so that some of the ﬂux crossing the air-gap to the rotor
produces tangential forces (and thus torque) directly on the rotor iron. In these
‘reluctance’ machines, there are no current-carrying conductors on the rotor,
and we have to employ an alternative to the ‘BIl’ method to obtain the turning
forces.
4.1 Magnitude of torque
Returning to our original discussion, the force on each conductor is given by
equation (1.2), and it follows that the total tangential force F depends on the ﬂux
density produced by the ﬁeld winding, the number of conductors on the rotor, the
current in each, and the length of the rotor. The resultant torque (T ) depends on
the radius of the rotor (r), and is given by
T ¼ Fr
(1.8)
We will return to this after we examine the remarkable beneﬁts gained by putting
the rotor conductors into slots.
4.2 The beauty of slotting
If the conductors were mounted on the surface of the rotor iron, as in Figure 1.12,
the air-gap would have to be at least equal to the wire diameter, and the conductors
Electric Motors – The Basics
17

would have to be secured to the rotor in order to transmit their turning force to it.
The earliest motors were made like this, with string or tape to bind the conductors
to the rotor.
Unfortunately, a large air-gap results in an unwelcome high reluctance in the
magnetic circuit, and the ﬁeld winding therefore needs many turns and a high
current to produce the desired ﬂux density in the air-gap. This means that the ﬁeld
winding becomes very bulky and consumes a lot of power. The early (nineteenth-
century) pioneers soon hit upon the idea of partially sinking the conductors on the
rotor into grooves machined parallel to the shaft, the intention being to allow the
air-gap to be reduced so that the exciting windings could be smaller. This worked
extremely well as it also provided a more positive location for the rotor conductors,
and thus allowed the force on them to be transmitted to the body of the rotor.
Before long the conductors began to be recessed into ever deeper slots until ﬁnally
(see Figure 1.13) they no longer stood proud of the rotor surface and the air-gap
could be made as small as was consistent with the need for mechanical clearances
between the rotor and the stator. The new ‘slotted’ machines worked very well, and
their pragmatic makers were unconcerned by rumblings of discontent from sceptical
theorists.
The theorists of the time accepted that sinking conductors into slots allowed the
air-gap to be made small, but argued that, as can be seen from Figure 1.13, almost all
the ﬂux would now pass down the attractive low-reluctance path through the teeth,
leaving the conductors exposed to the very low leakage ﬂux density in the slots.
Surely, they argued, little or no ‘BIl’ force would be developed on the conductors,
since they would only be exposed to a very low ﬂux density.
The sceptics were right in that the ﬂux does indeed ﬂow down the teeth; but
there was no denying that motors with slotted rotors produced the same torque as
those with the conductors in the air-gap, provided that the average ﬂux densities at
the rotor surface were the same. So what could explain this seemingly too good to
be true situation?
Figure 1.13 Inﬂuence on ﬂux paths when the rotor is slotted to accommodate
conductors.
18
Electric Motors and Drives

The search for an explanation preoccupied some of the leading thinkers long
after slotting became the norm, but ﬁnally it became possible to show that what
happens is that the total force remains the same as it would have been if the
conductors were actually in the ﬂux, but almost all of the tangential force now acts
on the rotor teeth, rather than on the conductors themselves.
This is remarkably good news. By putting the conductors in slots, we simul-
taneously enable the reluctance of the magnetic circuit to be reduced, and transfer
the force from the conductors themselves to the sides of the iron teeth, which are
robust and well able to transfer the resulting torque to the shaft. A further beneﬁt is
that the insulation around the conductors no longer has to transmit the tangential
forces to the rotor, and its mechanical properties are thus less critical. Seldom can
tentative experiments with one aim have yielded rewarding outcomes in almost
every other relevant direction.
There are some snags, however. To maximize the torque, we will want as
much current as possible in the rotor conductors. Naturally we will work the
copper at the highest practicable current density (typically between 2 and 8 A/
mm2), but we will also want to maximize the cross-sectional area of the slots to
accommodate as much copper as possible. This will push us in the direction of
wide slots, and hence narrow teeth. But we recall that the ﬂux has to pass radially
down the teeth, so if we make the teeth too narrow, the iron in the teeth will
saturate, and lead to a poor magnetic circuit. There is also the possibility of
increasing the depth of the slots, but this cannot be taken too far or the center
region of the rotor iron – which has to carry the ﬂux from one pole to another –
will become so depleted that it too will saturate. Finally, an unwelcome
mechanical effect of slotting is that it increases the frictional drag and acoustic
noise, effects which are often minimized by ﬁlling the tops of the slot openings so
that the rotor becomes smooth.
5. TORQUE AND MOTOR VOLUME
In this section we look at what determines the torque that can be obtained from
a rotor of a given size, and see how speed plays a key role in determining the power
output.
The universal adoption of slotting to accommodate conductors means that
a compromise is inevitable in the crucial air-gap region, and designers constantly
have to exercise their skills to achieve the best balance between the conﬂicting
demands on space made by the ﬂux (radial) and the current (axial).
As in most engineering design, guidelines emerge as to what can be achieved in
relation to particular sizes and types of machine, and motor designers usually work
in terms of two parameters, the speciﬁc magnetic loading and the speciﬁc electric
loading. These parameters will seldom be made available to the user, but, together
Electric Motors – The Basics
19

with the volume of the rotor, they deﬁne the torque that can be produced, and are
therefore of fundamental importance. An awareness of the existence and signiﬁ-
cance of these parameters therefore helps the user to challenge any seemingly
extravagant claims that may be encountered.
5.1 Speciﬁc loadings
The speciﬁc magnetic loading (B) is the average of the magnitude of the radial ﬂux
density over the entire cylindrical surface of the rotor. Because of the slotting, the
average ﬂux density is always less than the ﬂux density in the teeth, but in order to
calculate the magnetic loading we picture the rotor as being smooth, and calculate
the average ﬂux density by dividing the total radial ﬂux from each ‘pole’ by the
surface area under the pole.
The speciﬁc electric loading (usually denoted by the symbol (A), the A standing
for amperes) is the axial current per meter of circumference on the rotor. In a slotted
rotor, the axial current is concentrated in the conductors within each slot, but to
calculate A we picture the total current to be spread uniformly over the
circumference (in a manner similar to that shown in Figure 1.13, but with the
individual conductors under each pole being represented by a uniformly distributed
‘current sheet’). For example, if under a pole with a circumferential width of 10 cm
we ﬁnd that there are ﬁve slots, each carrying a current of 40 A, the electric
loading is
5  40
0:1
¼ 2000 A=m
The discussion in section 4 referred to the conﬂicting demands of ﬂux and current,
so it should be clear that if we seek to increase the electric loading, for example by
widening the slots to accommodate more copper, we must be aware that the
magnetic loading may have to be reduced because the narrower teeth will mean
there is less area for the ﬂux, and therefore a danger of saturating the iron.
Many factors inﬂuence the values which can be employed in motor design, but
in essence the speciﬁc magnetic and electric loadings are limited by the properties of
the materials (iron for the ﬂux and copper for the current), and by the cooling
system employed to remove heat losses.
The speciﬁc magnetic loading does not vary greatly from one machine to
another, because the saturation properties of most core steels are similar, so there is
an upper limit to the ﬂux density that can be achieved. On the other hand, quite
wide variations occur in the speciﬁc electric loadings, depending on the type of
cooling used.
Despite the low resistivity of the copper conductors, heat is generated by the
ﬂow of current, and the current must therefore be limited to a value such that the
insulation is not damaged by an excessive temperature rise. The more effective the
20
Electric Motors and Drives

cooling system, the higher the electric loading can be. For example, if the motor is
totally enclosed and has no internal fan, the current density in the copper has to be
much lower than in a similar motor which has a fan to provide a continuous ﬂow of
ventilating air. Similarly, windings which are fully impregnated with varnish can be
worked much harder than those which are surrounded by air, because the solid
body of encapsulating varnish provides a much better thermal path along which the
heat can ﬂow to the stator body. Overall size also plays a part in determining
permissible electric loading, with larger motors generally having higher values than
small ones.
In practice, the important point to be borne in mind is that unless an exotic
cooling system is employed, most motors (induction, d.c., etc.) of a particular
size have more or less the same speciﬁc loadings, regardless of type. As we will
now see, this in turn means that motors of similar size have similar torque
capabilities. This fact is not widely appreciated by users, but is always worth
bearing in mind.
5.2 Torque and rotor volume
In the light of the earlier discussion, we can obtain the total tangential force by ﬁrst
considering an area of the rotor surface of width w and length L. The axial current
ﬂowing in the width w is given by I ¼ wA, and on average all of this current is
exposed to radial ﬂux density B so the tangential force is given (from equation (1.2))
by B  wA  L. The area of the surface is wL so the force per unit area is B  A.
We see that the product of the two speciﬁc loadings expresses the average tangential
stress over the rotor surface.
To obtain the total tangential force we must multiply by the area of the curved
surface of the rotor, and to obtain the total torque we multiply the total force by the
radius of the rotor. Hence for a rotor of diameter D and length L, the total torque is
given by
T ¼ ðB AÞ  ðpDLÞ  D
2 ¼ p
2 ðB AÞD2L
(1.9)
What this equation tells us is extremely important. The term D2L is proportional to
the rotor volume, so we see that for given values of the speciﬁc magnetic and electric
loadings, the torque from any motor is proportional to the rotor volume. We are at
liberty to choose a long thin rotor or a short fat one, but once the rotor volume and
speciﬁc loadings are speciﬁed, we have effectively determined the torque.
It is worth stressing that we have not focused on any particular type of motor,
but have approached the question of torque production from a completely general
viewpoint. In essence our conclusions reﬂect the fact that all motors are made from
iron and copper, and differ only in the way these materials are disposed, and how
hard they are worked.
Electric Motors – The Basics
21

We should also acknowledge that in practice it is the overall volume of the
motor which is important, rather than the volume of the rotor. But again we ﬁnd
that, regardless of the type of motor, there is a fairly close relationship between the
overall volume and the rotor volume, for motors of similar torque. We can
therefore make the bold but generally accurate statement that the overall volume of
a motor is determined by the torque it has to produce. There are of course
exceptions to this rule, but as a general guideline for motor selection, it is extremely
useful.
Having seen that torque depends on rotor volume, we must now turn our
attention to the question of power output.
5.3 Output power – importance of speed
Before deriving an expression for power a brief digression may be helpful for those
who are more familiar with linear rather than rotary systems.
In the SI system, the unit of work or energy is the joule ( J). One joule represents
the work done by a force of 1 newton moving 1 meter in its own direction. Hence
the work done (W ) by a force F which moves a distance d is given by
W ¼ F  d
With F in newtons and d in meters, W is clearly in newton-meters (Nm), from
which we see that a newton-meter is the same as a joule.
In rotary systems, it is more convenient to work in terms of torque and angular
distance, rather than force and linear distance, but these are closely linked as we can
see by considering what happens when a tangential force F is applied at a radius r
from the center of rotation. The torque is simply given by
T ¼ F  r
Now suppose that the arm turns through an angle q, so that the circumferential
distance traveled by the force is r  q. The work done by the force is then given by
W ¼ F  ðr  qÞ ¼ ðF  rÞ  q ¼ T  q
(1.10)
We note that whereas in a linear system work is force times distance, in rotary terms
work is torque times angle. The units of torque are newton-meters, and the angle is
measured in radians (which is dimensionless), so the units of work done are Nm, or
joules, as expected. (The fact that torque and work (or energy) are measured in the
same units does not seem self-evident to the authors!)
To ﬁnd the power, or the rate of working, we divide the work done by the time
taken. In a linear system, and assuming that the velocity remains constant, power is
therefore given by
P ¼ W
t
¼ F  d
t
¼ F  v;
(1.11)
22
Electric Motors and Drives

where v is the linear velocity. The angular equivalent of this is
P ¼ W
t
¼ T  q
t
¼ T  u;
(1.12)
where u is the (constant) angular velocity, in radians per second.
We can now express the power output in terms of the rotor dimensions and the
speciﬁc loadings using equation (1.9), which yields
P ¼ Tu ¼ p
2 ðB AÞD2Lu
(1.13)
Equation (1.13) emphasizes the importance of speed (u) in determining power
output. For given speciﬁc and magnetic loadings, if we want a motor of a given
power we can choose between a large (and therefore expensive) low-speed
motor or a small (and cheaper) high-speed one. The latter choice is preferred for
most applications, even if some form of speed reduction (using belts or gears, for
example) is needed, because the smaller motor is cheaper. Familiar examples
include portable electric tools, where rotor speeds of 12,000 rev/min or more
allow powers of hundreds of watts to be obtained, and electric traction: in both
the high motor speed is geared down for the ﬁnal drive. In these examples, where
volume and weight are at a premium, a direct drive would be out of the
question.
5.4 Power density (speciﬁc output power)
By dividing equation (1.13) by the rotor volume, we obtain an expression for the
speciﬁc power output (power per unit rotor volume), Q, given by
Q ¼ B A u
2
(1.14)
The importance of this simple equation cannot be overemphasized. It is the
fundamental design equation that governs the output of any ‘BIl’ machine, and thus
applies to almost all motors.
To obtain the highest possible power from a given volume for given values of
the speciﬁc magnetic and electric loadings, we must clearly operate the motor at the
highest practicable speed. The one obvious disadvantage of a small high-speed
motor and gearbox is that the acoustic noise (both from the motor itself and from
the power transmission) is higher than it would be from a larger direct drive motor.
When noise must be minimized (for example, in ceiling fans), a direct drive motor is
therefore preferred, despite its larger size.
In section 5, we began by exploring and quantifying the mechanism of torque
production, so not surprisingly it was tacitly assumed that the rotor was at rest, with
no work being done. We then moved on to assume that the torque was maintained
when the speed was constant and useful power was delivered, i.e. that electrical
energy was being converted into mechanical energy. The aim was to establish what
Electric Motors – The Basics
23

factors determine the output of a rotor of given dimensions, and this was possible
without reference to any particular type of motor.
In complete contrast, the approach in the next section focuses on a generic
‘primitive’ motor, and we begin to look in detail at what we have to do at the
terminals in order to control the speed and torque.
6. ENERGY CONVERSION – MOTIONAL E.M.F.
We now examine the behavior of a primitive linear machine which, despite its
obvious simplicity, encapsulates all the key electromagnetic energy conversion
processes that take place in electric motors. We will see how the process of
conversion of energy from electrical to mechanical form is elegantly represented in
an ‘equivalent circuit’ from which all the key aspects of motor behavior can be
predicted. This circuit will provide answers to such questions as ‘How does the
motor automatically draw in more power when it is required to work?’ and ‘What
determines the steady speed and current?’ Central to such questions is the matter of
motional e.m.f., which is explored next.
We have already seen that force (and hence torque) is produced on current-
carrying conductors exposed to a magnetic ﬁeld. The force is given by equation
(1.2), which shows that as long as the ﬂux density and current remain constant, the
force will be constant. In particular we see that the force does not depend on
whether the conductor is stationary or moving. On the other hand, relative
movement is an essential requirement in the production of mechanical output
power (as distinct from torque), and we have seen that output power is given by the
equation P ¼ Tu. We will now see that the presence of relative motion between
the conductors and the ﬁeld always brings ‘motional e.m.f.’ into play; and we will
ﬁnd that this motional e.m.f. plays a key role in quantifying the energy conversion
process.
6.1 Elementary motor – stationary conditions
The primitive linear machine is shown pictorially in Figure 1.14 and in diagram-
matic form in Figure 1.15. It consists of a conductor of active1 length l which can
move horizontally perpendicular to a magnetic ﬂux density B.
It is assumed that the conductor has a resistance (R), that it carries a d.c. current
(I), and that it moves with a velocity (v) in a direction perpendicular to the ﬁeld and
the current (see Figure 1.15). Attached to the conductor is a string which passes over
a pulley and supports a weight, the tension in the string acting as a mechanical ‘load’
on the rod. Friction is assumed to be zero.
1 The active length is that part of the conductor exposed to the magnetic ﬂux density – in most motors
this corresponds to the length of the rotor and stator iron cores.
24
Electric Motors and Drives

We need not worry about the many difﬁcult practicalities of making such
a machine, for example how we maintain electrical connections to a moving
conductor. The important point is that although this is a hypothetical set-up, it
represents what happens in a real motor, and it allows us to gain a clear under-
standing of how real machines behave before we come to grips with much more
complex structures.
We begin by considering the electrical input power with the conductor
stationary (i.e. v ¼ 0). For the purpose of this discussion we can suppose that the
magnetic ﬁeld (B) is provided by permanent magnets. Once the ﬁeld has been
established (when the magnet was ﬁrst magnetized and placed in position), no
further energy will be needed to sustain the ﬁeld, which is just as well since it is
obvious that an inert magnet is incapable of continuously supplying energy. It
follows that when we obtain mechanical output from this primitive ‘motor’, none
of the energy involved comes from the magnet. This is an extremely important
point: the ﬁeld system, whether provided from permanent magnets or ‘exciting’
windings, acts only as a catalyst in the energy conversion process, and contributes
nothing to the mechanical output power.
When the conductor is held stationary the force produced on it (BIl)
does no work, so there is no mechanical output power, and the only electrical
input power required is that needed to drive the current through the
conductor.
The resistance of the conductor is R, the current through it I, so the voltage
which must be applied to the ends of the rod from an external source will be given
by V1 ¼ IR and the electrical input power will be V1I or I2R. Under these
Figure 1.14 Primitive linear d.c. motor.
Figure 1.15 Diagrammatic sketch of primitive linear d.c. motor.
Electric Motors – The Basics
25

conditions, all the electrical input power will appear as heat inside the conductor,
and the power balance can be expressed by the equation
electrical input power ðV1IÞ ¼ rate of production of heat in conductor ðI2RÞ
(1.15)
Although no work is being done because there is no movement, the stationary
condition can only be sustained if there is equilibrium of forces. The tension in the
string (T ) must equal the gravitational force on the mass (mg), and this in turn must
be balanced by the electromagnetic force on the conductor (BIl ). Hence under
stationary conditions the current must be given by
T ¼ mg ¼ BIl; or I ¼ mg
Bl
(1.16)
This is our ﬁrst indication of the essential link that always exists (in the steady state)
between the mechanical and electric worlds, because we see that in order to
maintain the stationary condition, the current in the conductor is determined by the
mass of the mechanical load. We will return to this interdependence later.
6.2 Power relationships – conductor moving at
constant speed
Now let us imagine the situation where the conductor is moving at a constant
velocity (v) in the direction of the electromagnetic driving force that is propelling it.
What current must there be in the conductor, and what voltage will have to be
applied across its ends?
We start by recognizing that constant velocity of the conductor means that the
mass (m) is moving upwards at a constant speed, i.e. it is not accelerating. Hence
from Newton’s law, there must be no resultant force acting on the mass, so the
tension in the string (T ) must equal the weight (mg).
Similarly, the conductor is not accelerating, so its net force must also be zero.
The string is exerting a braking force (T ), so the electromagnetic force (BIl) must be
equal to T. Combining these conditions yields
T ¼ mg ¼ BIl; or I ¼ mg
Bl
(1.17)
This is exactly the same equation that we obtained under stationary conditions, and
it underlines the fact that the steady-state current is determined by the mechanical
load. When we develop the equivalent circuit, we will have to get used to the idea
that, in the steady-state, one of the electrical variables (the current) is determined by
the mechanical load.
With the mass rising at a constant rate, mechanical work is being done because
the potential energy of the mass is increasing. This work is coming from the moving
conductor. The mechanical output power is equal to the rate of work, i.e. the force
26
Electric Motors and Drives

(T ¼ BIl) times the velocity (v). The power lost as heat in the conductor is the same
as it was when stationary, since it has the same resistance and the same current. The
electrical input power supplied to the conductor must continue to furnish this heat
loss, but in addition it must now supply the mechanical output power. As yet we do
not know what voltage will have to be applied, so we will denote it by V2. The
power balance equation now becomes
electrical input power ¼ rate of production of heat in conductor
þ mechanical output power
i.e.
V2I ¼ I2R þ ðBIlÞv
(1.18)
We note that the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of equation (1.18) represents the
heating effect, which is the same as when the conductor was stationary, while the
second term corresponds to the additional power that must be supplied to provide
the mechanical output. Since the current is the same but the input power is now
greater, the new voltage V2 must be higher than V1.
By subtracting equation (1.15) from equation (1.18) we obtain
V2I  V1I ¼ ðBIlÞv;
and thus
V2  V1 ¼ Blv ¼ E
(1.19)
Equation (1.19) quantiﬁes the extra voltage to be provided by the source to keep
the current constant when the conductor is moving. This increase in source voltage
is a reﬂection of the fact that whenever a conductor moves through a magnetic ﬁeld,
an electromotive force or voltage (E) is induced in it.
We see from equation (1.19) that the e.m.f. is directly proportional to the ﬂux
density, to the velocity of the conductor relative to the ﬂux, and to the active length
of the conductor. The source voltage has to overcome this additional voltage in
order to keep the same current ﬂowing: if the source voltage was not increased, the
current would fall as soon as the conductor began to move because of the opposing
effect of the induced e.m.f.
We have deduced that there must be an e.m.f. caused by the motion, and have
derived an expression for it by using the principle of the conservation of energy, but
the result we have obtained, i.e.
E ¼ Blv
(1.20)
is often introduced as the ‘ﬂux-cutting’ form of Faraday’s law, which states that
when a conductor moves through a magnetic ﬁeld an e.m.f. given by equation
(1.20) is induced in it. Because motion is an essential part of this mechanism, the
e.m.f. induced is referred to as a ‘motional e.m.f.’. The ‘ﬂux-cutting’ terminology
Electric Motors – The Basics
27

arises from attributing the origin of the e.m.f. to the cutting or slicing of the lines of
ﬂux by the passage of the conductor. This is a useful mental picture, though it must
not be pushed too far: after all, the ﬂux lines are merely inventions which we ﬁnd
helpful in coming to grips with magnet matters.
Before turning to the equivalent circuit of the primitive motor two general
points are worth noting. First, whenever energy is being converted from electrical
to mechanical form, as here, the induced e.m.f. always acts in opposition to the
applied (source) voltage. This is reﬂected in the use of the term ‘back e.m.f.’ to
describe motional e.m.f. in motors. Secondly, although we have discussed
a particular situation in which the conductor carries current, it is certainly not
necessary for any current to be ﬂowing in order to produce an e.m.f.: all that is
needed is relative motion between the conductor and the magnetic ﬁeld.
7. EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT
We can represent the electrical relationships in the primitive machine in an
equivalent circuit as shown in Figure 1.16.
The resistance of the conductor and the motional e.m.f. together represent in
circuit terms what is happening in the conductor (though in reality the e.m.f. and
the resistance are distributed, not lumped as separate items). The externally applied
source that drives the current is represented by the voltage V on the left (the old-
fashioned battery symbol being deliberately used to differentiate the applied voltage
V from the induced e.m.f. E). We note that the induced motional e.m.f. is shown as
opposing the applied voltage, which applies in the ‘motoring’ condition we have
been discussing. Applying Kirchhoff’s law we obtain the voltage equation as
V ¼ E þ IR; or I ¼ V  E
R
(1.21)
Multiplying equation (1.21) by the current gives the power equation as
electrical input power ðVIÞ ¼ mechanical output power ðEIÞ
þ copper loss ðI2RÞ
(1.22)
Figure 1.16 Equivalent circuit of primitive d.c. motor.
28
Electric Motors and Drives

(Note that the term ‘copper loss’ used in equation (1.22) refers to the heat generated
by the current in the windings: all such losses in electric motors are referred to in this
way, even when the conductors are made of aluminium or bronze!)
It is worth seeing what can be learned from these equations because, as noted
earlier, this simple elementary ‘motor’ encapsulates all the essential features of real
motors. Lessons which emerge at this stage will be invaluable later, when we look at
the way actual motors behave.
7.1 Motoring and generating
If the e.m.f. E is less than the applied voltage V, the current will be positive, and
electrical power will ﬂow from the source, resulting in motoring action in which
energy is converted from electrical to mechanical form. The ﬁrst term on the right-
hand side of equation (1.22), which is the product of the motional e.m.f. and the
current, represents the mechanical output power developed by the primitive linear
motor, but the same simple and elegant result applies to real motors. We may
sometimes have to be a bit careful if the e.m.f. and the current are not simple d.c.
quantities, but the basic idea will always hold good.
Now let us imagine that we push the conductor along at a steady speed that
makes the motional e.m.f. greater than the applied voltage. We can see from the
equivalent circuit that the current will now be negative (i.e. anticlockwise), ﬂowing
back into the supply and thus returning energy to the supply. And if we look at
equation (1.22), we see that with a negative current, the ﬁrst term (VI) represents
the power being returned to the source, the second term (EI) corresponds to the
mechanical power being supplied by us pushing the rod along, and the third term is
the heat loss in the conductor.
For readers who prefer to argue from the mechanical standpoint, rather than the
equivalent circuit, we can say that when we are generating a negative current (I),
the electromagnetic force on the conductor is (BIl), i.e. it is directed in the
opposite direction to the motion. The mechanical power is given by the product of
force and velocity, i.e. (BIlv), or EI, as above.
The fact that exactly the same kit has the inherent ability to switch from
motoring to generating without any interference by the user is an extremely
desirable property of all electromagnetic energy converters. Our primitive set-up is
simply a machine which is equally at home acting as motor or generator.
Finally, it is obvious that in a motor we want as much as possible of the electrical
input power to be converted to mechanical output power, and as little as possible to
be converted to heat in the conductor. Since the output power is EI, and the heat loss
is I2R, we see that ideally we want EI to be much greater than I2R, or in other words E
shouldbe much greater than IR. In the equivalentcircuit(Figure 1.16)this means that
the majority of the applied voltage V is accounted for by the motional e.m.f. (E), and
only a little of the applied voltage is used in overcoming the resistance.
Electric Motors – The Basics
29

8. CONSTANT VOLTAGE OPERATION
Up to now, we have studied behavior under ‘steady-state’ conditions, which in the
context of motors means that the load is constant and conditions have settled to
a steady speed. We saw that with a constant load, the current was the same at all
steady speeds, the voltage being increased with speed to take account of the rising
motional e.m.f. This was a helpful approach to take in order to illuminate the
energy conversion process, but is seldom typical of normal operation. We therefore
turn to how the moving conductor will behave under conditions where the applied
voltage V is constant, since this corresponds more closely with normal operation of
a real motor.
Matters inevitably become more complicated because we consider how the
motor gets from one speed to another, as well as what happens under steady-state
conditions. As in all areas of dynamics, study of the transient behavior of our
primitive linear motor brings into play additional parameters, such as the mass of the
conductor (equivalent to the inertia of a rotary motor), which are absent from
steady-state considerations.
8.1 Behavior with no mechanical load
In this section we assume that the hanging weight has been removed, and that the
only force on the conductor is its own electromagnetically generated one. Our
primary interest will be in what determines the steady speed of the primitive
motor, but we begin by considering what happens when we ﬁrst apply the
voltage.
With the conductor stationary when the voltage V is applied, there is no
motional e.m.f. and the current will immediately rise to a value of V/R, since the
only thing which limits the current is the resistance. (Strictly we should allow for the
effect of inductance in delaying the rise of current, but we choose to ignore it here
in the interests of simplicity.) The resistance will be small, so the current will be
large, and a high ‘BIl’ force will therefore be developed on the conductor. The
conductor will therefore accelerate at a rate equal to the force on it divided by
its mass.
As the speed (v) increases, the motional e.m.f. (equation (1.20)) will grow in
proportion to the speed. Since the motional e.m.f. opposes the applied voltage, the
current will fall (equation (1.21)), so the force and hence the acceleration will
reduce, though the speed will continue to rise. The speed will increase as long as
there is an accelerating force, i.e. as long as there is a current in the conductor. We
can see from equation (1.21) that the current will ﬁnally fall to zero when the speed
reaches a level at which the motional e.m.f. is equal to the applied voltage. The
speed and current therefore vary as shown in Figure 1.17, both curves having the
exponential shape which characterizes the response of systems governed by a ﬁrst-
30
Electric Motors and Drives

order differential equation. The fact that the steady-state current is zero is in line
with our earlier observation that the mechanical load (in this case zero) determines
the steady-state current.
We note that in this idealized situation (in which there is no load applied, and
where no friction forces exist), the conductor will continue to travel at a constant
speed, because with no net force acting on it there is no acceleration. Of course, no
mechanical power is being produced, since we have assumed that there is no
opposing force on the conductor, and there is no input power because the current is
zero. This hypothetical situation nevertheless corresponds closely to the so-called
‘no-load’ condition in a motor, the only difference being that a motor will have
some friction (and therefore it will draw a small current), whereas we have assumed
no friction in order to simplify the discussion.
An elegant self-regulating mechanism is evidently at work here. When the
conductor is stationary, it has a high force acting on it, but this force tapers off as the
speed rises to its target value, which corresponds to the back e.m.f. being equal to
the applied voltage. Looking back at the expression for motional e.m.f. (equation
(1.18)), we can obtain an expression for the no-load speed v0 by equating the
applied voltage and the back e.m.f., which gives
E ¼ V ¼ Blv0; i:e: v0 ¼ V
Bl
(1.23)
Equation (1.23) shows that the steady-state no-load speed is directly proportional to
the applied voltage, which indicates that speed control can be achieved by means of
the applied voltage. We will see later that one of the main reasons why d.c. motors
held sway in the speed-control arena for so long is that their speed can be controlled
via the applied voltage.
Rather more surprisingly, equation (1.23) reveals that the speed is inversely
proportional to the magnetic ﬂux density, which means that the weaker the ﬁeld,
the higher the steady-state speed. This result can cause raised eyebrows, and with
good reason. Surely, it is argued, since the force is produced by the action of the
ﬁeld, the conductor will not go as fast if the ﬁeld is weaker. This view is wrong, but
understandable.
Figure 1.17 Dynamic (run-up) behavior of primitive d.c. motor with no mechanical
load.
Electric Motors – The Basics
31

The ﬂaw in the argument is to equate force with speed. When the voltage is ﬁrst
applied, the force on the conductor certainly will be less if the ﬁeld is weaker, and
the initial acceleration will be lower. But in both cases the acceleration will continue
until the current has fallen to zero, and this will only happen when the induced
e.m.f. has risen to equal the applied voltage. With a weaker ﬁeld, the speed needed
to generate this e.m.f. will be higher than with a strong ﬁeld: there is ‘less ﬂux’, so
what there is has to be cut at a higher speed to generate a given e.m.f. The matter is
summarized in Figure 1.18, which shows how the speed will rise for a given applied
voltage, for ‘full’ and ‘half’ ﬁelds, respectively. Note that the initial acceleration (i.e.
the slope of the speed–time curve) in the half-ﬂux case is half that of the full ﬂux
case, but the ﬁnal steady speed is twice as high. In motors the technique of reducing
the ﬂux density in order to increase speed is known as ‘ﬁeld weakening’.
8.2 Behavior with a mechanical load
Suppose that, with the primitive linear motor up to its no-load speed, we suddenly
attach the string carrying the weight, so that we now have a steady force T (¼ mg)
opposing the motion of the conductor. At this stage there is no current in the
conductor and thus the only force on it will be T. The conductor will therefore
begin to decelerate. But as soon as the speed falls, the back e.m.f. will become less
than V, and current will begin to ﬂow into the conductor, producing an electro-
magnetic driving force. The more the speed drops, the bigger the current, and
hence the larger the force developed by the conductor. When the force developed
by the conductor becomes equal to the load (T ), the deceleration will cease, and
a new equilibrium condition will be reached. The speed will be lower than at no-
load, and the conductor will now be producing continuous mechanical output
power, i.e. acting as a motor.
We recall that the electromagnetic force on the conductor is directly propor-
tional to the current, so it follows that the steady-state current is directly propor-
tional to the load which is applied, as we saw earlier. If we were to explore the
transient behavior mathematically, we would ﬁnd that the drop in speed followed
Figure 1.18 Effect of ﬂux density on the acceleration and steady running speed of
primitive d.c. motor with no mechanical load.
32
Electric Motors and Drives

the same ﬁrst-order exponential response that we saw in the run-up period. Once
again the self-regulating property is evident, in that when load is applied the speed
drops just enough to allow sufﬁcient current to ﬂow to produce the force required
to balance the load. We could hardly wish for anything better in terms of perfor-
mance, yet the conductor does it without any external intervention on our part.
(Readers who are familiar with closed-loop control systems will probably
recognize that the reason for this excellent performance is that the primitive motor
possesses inherent negative-speed feedback via the motional e.m.f. This matter is
explored more fully in Appendix 1.)
Returning to equation (1.21), we note that the current depends directly on the
difference between V and E, and inversely on the resistance. Hence for a given
resistance, the larger the load (and hence the steady-state current), the greater the
required difference between V and E, and hence the lower the steady running
speed, as shown in Figure 1.19.
We can also see from equation (1.21) that the higher the resistance of the
conductor, the more it slows down when a given load is applied. Conversely, the
lower the resistance, the more the conductor is able to hold its no-load speed in
the face of applied load, as also shown in Figure 1.19. We can deduce that the only
way we could obtain an absolutely constant speed with this type of motor is for the
resistance of the conductor to be zero, which is of course not possible. Nevertheless,
real d.c. motors generally have resistances which are small, and their speed does not
fall much when load is applied – a characteristic which is highly desirable for most
applications.
We complete our exploration of the performance when a load is applied by
asking how the ﬂux density inﬂuences behavior. Recalling that the electromagnetic
force is proportional to the ﬂux density as well as the current, we can deduce that to
develop a given force, the current required will be higher with a weak ﬂux than
with a strong one. Hence in view of the fact that there will always be an upper limit
to the current which the conductor can safely carry, the maximum force which can
be developed will vary in direct proportion to the ﬂux density, with a weak ﬂux
leading to a low maximum force and vice versa. This underlines the importance of
operating with maximum ﬂux density whenever possible.
Figure 1.19 Inﬂuence of resistance on the ability of the motor to maintain speed when
load is applied.
Electric Motors – The Basics
33

We can also see another disadvantage of having a low ﬂux density by noting that
to achieve a given force, the drop in speed will be disproportionately high when we
go to a lower ﬂux density. We can see this by imagining that we want a particular
force, and considering how we achieve it ﬁrst with full ﬂux, and secondly with half
ﬂux. With full ﬂux, there will be a certain drop in speed which causes the motional
e.m.f. to fall enough to admit the required current. But with half the ﬂux, for
example, twice as much current will be needed to develop the same force. Hence
the motional e.m.f. must fall by twice as much as it did with full ﬂux. However,
since the ﬂux density is now only half, the drop in speed will have to be four times as
great as it was with full ﬂux. The half-ﬂux ‘motor’ therefore has a load characteristic
with a load/speed gradient four times more droopy than the full-ﬂux one. This is
shown in Figure 1.20, the applied voltages having been adjusted so that in both cases
the no-load speed is the same. The half-ﬂux motor is clearly inferior in terms of its
ability to hold the set speed when the load is applied.
We may have been tempted to think that the higher speed which we can obtain
by reducing the ﬂux somehow makes for better performance, but we can now see
that this is not so. By halving the ﬂux, for example, the no-load speed for a given
voltage is doubled, but when the load is raised until rated current is ﬂowing in the
conductor, the force developed is only half, so the mechanical power is the same.
We are in effect trading speed against force, and there is no suggestion of getting
something for nothing.
8.3 Relative magnitudes of V and E, and efﬁciency
Invariably we want machines which have high efﬁciency. From equation (1.20), we
see that to achieve high efﬁciency, the copper loss (I2R) must be small compared
with the mechanical power (EI), which means that the resistive volt-drop in the
conductor (IR) must be small compared with either the induced e.m.f. (E) or the
applied voltage (V). In other words we want most of the applied voltage to be
accounted for by the ‘useful’ motional e.m.f., rather than the wasteful volt-drop in
the wire. Since the motional e.m.f. is proportional to speed, and the resistive volt-
drop depends on the conductor resistance, we see that a good energy converter
requires the conductor resistance to be as low as possible, and the speed to be as high
as possible.
Figure 1.20 Inﬂuence of ﬂux on the drop in steady running speed when load is applied.
34
Electric Motors and Drives

To provide a feel for the sorts of numbers likely to be encountered, we can
consider a conductor with resistance of 0.5 U, capable of carrying a current of 4 A
without overheating, and moving at a speed such that the motional e.m.f. is 8 V.
From equation (1.19), the supply voltage is given by
V ¼ E þ IR ¼ 8 þ ð4  0:5Þ ¼ 10 volts
Hence the electrical input power (VI) is 40 watts, the mechanical output power
(EI) is 32 watts, and the copper loss (I2R) is 8 watts, giving an efﬁciency of 80%.
If the supply voltage was doubled (i.e. V ¼ 20 volts), however, and the resisting
force is assumed to remain the same (so that the steady-state current is still 4 A), the
motional e.m.f. is given by equation (1.21) as
E ¼ 20  ð4  0:5Þ ¼ 18 volts
which shows that the speed will have rather more than doubled, as expected. The
electrical input power is now 80 watts, the mechanical output power is 72 watts,
and the copper loss is still 8 watts. The efﬁciency has now risen to 90%, underlining
the fact that the energy conversion process gets better at higher speeds.
When we operate the machine as a generator, we again beneﬁt from the higher
speeds. For example, with the battery voltage at a maintained 10 V, and the
conductor being propelled by an external force so that its e.m.f. is 12 V, the
allowable current of 4 A would now be ﬂowing into the battery, with energy being
converted from mechanical to electrical form. The power into the battery (VI) is
40 W, the mechanical input power (EI) is 48 W and the heat loss is 8 W. In this case
efﬁciency is deﬁned as the ratio of useful electrical power divided by mechanical
input power, i.e. 40/48, or 83.3%.
If we double the battery voltage to 20 V and increase the driven speed so that
the motional e.m.f. rises to 22 V, we will again supply the battery with 4 A, but the
efﬁciency will now be 80/88, or 90.9%.
The ideal situation is clearly one where the term IR in equation (1.22) is
negligible, so that the back e.m.f. is equal to the applied voltage. We would then
have an ideal machine with an efﬁciency of 100%, in which the steady-state speed
would be directly proportional to the applied voltage and independent of the load.
In practice the extent to which we can approach the ideal situation discussed
above depends on the size of the machine. Tiny motors, such as those used in wrist-
watches, are awful, in that most of the applied voltage is used up in overcoming the
resistance of the conductors, and the motional e.m.f. is very small: these motors are
much better at producing heat than they are at producing mechanical output
power! Small machines, such as those used in hand tools, are a good deal better with
the motional e.m.f. accounting for perhaps 70–80% of the applied voltage.
Industrial machines are very much better: the largest ones (of many hundreds of
kW) use only 1 or 2% of the applied voltage in overcoming resistance, and therefore
have very high efﬁciencies.
Electric Motors – The Basics
35

8.4 Analysis of primitive machine – conclusions
All of the lessons learned from looking at the primitive machine will ﬁnd direct
parallels in almost all of the motors we look at in the rest of this book, so it is worth
reminding ourselves of the key points.
Although this book is primarily about motors, perhaps the most important
conclusion so far is that electrical machines are inherently bi-directional energy
converters, and any motor can be made to generate, or vice versa. We also saw that
the efﬁciency of the energy-conversion process improves at high speeds, which
explains why direct-drive low-speed motors are not widely used.
In terms of the theoretical underpinning, we will make frequent reference to
the formula for the force on a conductor in a magnetic ﬁeld, i.e.
Force; F ¼ BIl
(1.24)
and to the formula for the motional induced e.m.f., i.e.
Motional e:m:f:; E ¼ Blv
(1.25)
where B is the magnetic ﬂux density, I is the current, l is the length of conductor and
v is the velocity perpendicular to the ﬁeld.
Speciﬁcally in relation to d.c. machines, we have seen that the speed at which the
primitive motor runs unloaded is determined by the applied voltage, while the steady-
state current that the motor draws is determined by the mechanical load. Exactly the
same results will hold when we examine real d.c. motors, and very similar rela-
tionships will also emerge when we look at the most important type – the induction
motor.
9. GENERAL PROPERTIES OF ELECTRIC MOTORS
All electric motors are governed by the laws of electromagnetism, and are subject to
essentially the same constraints imposed by the materials (copper, iron and insu-
lation) from which they are made. We should therefore not be surprised to ﬁnd that
at the fundamental level all motors – regardless of type – have a great deal in
common.
These common properties, most of which have been touched on in this chapter,
are not usually given prominence. Books tend to concentrate on the differences
between types of motor, and manufacturers are usually interested in promoting the
virtues of their particular motor at the expense of the competition. This divisive
emphasis can cause the underlying unity to be obscured, leaving users with little
opportunity to absorb the sort of knowledge which will equip them to make
informed judgments.
The most useful ideas worth bearing in mind are therefore given below, with
brief notes accompanying each. Experience indicates that users who have these basic
36
Electric Motors and Drives

ideas ﬁrmly in mind will ﬁnd themselves better able to understand why one motor is
better than another, and will feel more conﬁdent when faced with the difﬁcult task
of weighing the pros and cons of competing types.
9.1 Operating temperature and cooling
The cooling arrangement is the single most important factor in determining the
permissible output from any given motor.
Any motor will give out more power if its electric circuit is worked harder (i.e. if
the current is allowed to increase). The limiting factor is normally the allowable
temperature rise of the windings, which depends on the class of insulation.
For class F insulation (the most widely used) the permissible temperature rise
is 100 K, whereas for class H it is 125 K. Thus if the cooling remains the same,
more output can be obtained simply by using the higher-grade insulation.
Alternatively, with a given insulation the output can be increased if the cooling
system is improved. A through-ventilated motor, for example, might give
perhaps twice the output power of an otherwise identical but totally enclosed
machine.
9.2 Torque per unit volume
For motors with similar cooling systems, the rated torque is approximately
proportional to the rotor volume, which in turn is roughly proportional to the
overall motor volume.
This stems from the fact that for a given cooling arrangement, the speciﬁc and
magnetic loadings of machines of different types will be more or less the same. The
torque per unit length therefore depends ﬁrst and foremost on the square of the
diameter, so motors of roughly the same diameter and length can be expected to
produce roughly the same torque.
9.3 Power per unit volume and efﬁciency – importance
of speed
Output power per unit volume is directly proportional to speed.
Low-speed motors are unattractive for most applications because they are large
and therefore expensive. It is usually better to use a high-speed motor with
a mechanical speed reduction. For example, a direct drive motor for a portable
electric screwdriver would be an absurd proposition. On the other hand, the reli-
ability and inefﬁciency of gearboxes may sometimes outweigh the size argument,
especially in high-power applications.
The efﬁciency of a motor improves with speed.
For a given torque, power output usually rises in direct proportion to speed,
while electrical losses tend to rise less rapidly, so that efﬁciency rises with speed.
Electric Motors – The Basics
37

9.4 Size effects – speciﬁc torque and efﬁciency
Large motors have a higher speciﬁc torque (torque per unit volume) and are more
efﬁcient than small ones.
In large motors the speciﬁc electric loading is normally much higher than in
small ones, and the speciﬁc magnetic loading is somewhat higher. These two factors
combine to give the higher speciﬁc torque.
Very small motors are inherently very inefﬁcient (e.g. 1% in a wrist-watch),
whereas motors of over say 100 kW have efﬁciencies above 96%. The reasons for
this scale effect are complex, but stem from the fact that the resistance volt-drop
term can be made relatively small in large electromagnetic devices, whereas in small
ones the resistance becomes the dominant term.
9.5 Rated voltage
A motor can be provided to suit any voltage.
Within limits it is possible to rewind a motor for a different voltage without
affecting its performance. A 200 V, 10 A motor could be rewound for 100 V, 20 A
simply by using half as many turns per coil of wire having twice the cross-sectional
area. The total amounts of active material, and hence the performance, would be
the same. This argument breaks down if pushed too far of course: a very small motor
originally wound for 100 V would almost certainly require a larger frame if required
to operate at 690 V, because of the additional space required for insulation.
9.6 Short-term overload
Most motors can be overloaded for short periods without damage.
The continuous electric loading (i.e. the current) cannot be exceeded without
overheating and damaging the insulation, but if the motor has been running with
reduced current for some time, it is permissible for the current (and hence the
torque) to be much greater than normal for a short period of time. The principal
factors which inﬂuence the magnitude and duration of the permissible overload are
the thermal time constant (which governs the rate of rise of temperature) and the
previous pattern of operation. Thermal time constants range from a few seconds for
small motors to many minutes or even hours for large ones. Operating patterns are
obviously very variable, so rather than rely on a particular pattern being followed, it
is usual for motors to be provided with over-temperature protective devices (e.g.
thermistors) which trigger an alarm and/or trip the supply if the safe temperature is
exceeded.
38
Electric Motors and Drives

CHAPTER TWO
Introduction to Power Electronic
Converters for Motor Drives
1. INTRODUCTION
In this chapter we look at examples of the power converter circuits which are
widely used with motor drives, providing either d.c. or a.c. outputs, and working
from either a d.c. (battery) supply, or from the conventional (50 or 60 Hz) utility
supply. The coverage is not intended to be exhaustive, but rather to highlight the
most important features and aspects of behavior which recur in many types of drive
converter.
Although there are many different types of converter, all except very low-
power ones are based on electronic switching. The need to adopt a switching
strategy is emphasized in the ﬁrst example, where the consequences are explored in
some depth. We will see that switching is essential in order to achieve high-
efﬁciency power conversion, but that the resulting waveforms are inevitably less
than ideal from the point of view of the motor and the power supply.
The examples have been chosen to illustrate typical practice, so for each the
most commonly used switching devices (e.g. thyristor, transistor) are shown. In
many cases, several different switching devices may be suitable (see later), so we
should not identify a particular circuit as being the exclusive preserve of a particular
device.
Before discussing particular circuits it will be useful to take an overall look at
a typical drive system, so that the role of the converter can be seen in its proper
context.
1.1 General arrangement of drive
A complete drive system is shown in block diagram form in Figure 2.1.
The job of the converter is to draw electrical energy from the utility supply
(at constant voltage and frequency) and supply electrical energy to the motor at
whatever voltage and frequency are necessary to achieve the desired mechanical
output. In Figure 2.1, the ‘demanded’ output is the speed of the motor, but equally
it could be the torque, the position of the motor shaft, or some other system
variable.
Except in the very simplest converter (such as a basic diode rectiﬁer), there are
two distinct parts to the converter. The ﬁrst is the power stage, through which the
Electric Motors and Drives
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-098332-5.00002-4
 2013 Austin Hughes and William Drury.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
39j

energy ﬂows to the motor, and the second is the control section, which regulates
the power ﬂow. Low-power control signals tell the converter what it is supposed to
be doing, while other low-power feedback signals are used to measure what is
actually happening. By comparing the demand and feedback signals, and adjusting
the output accordingly, the target output is maintained.
The basic arrangement shown in Figure 2.1 is clearly a speed control system,
because the signal representing the demand or reference quantity is speed, and we
note that it is a ‘closed-loop’ system because the quantity that is to be controlled is
measured and fed back to the controller so that action can be taken if the two signals
do not correspond. All drives employ some form of closed-loop (feedback) control,
so readers who are unfamiliar with the basic principles might ﬁnd it helpful to read
the introduction in Appendix 1.
In later chapters we will explore the internal workings and control arrange-
ments at greater length, but it is worth mentioning that all drives employ current
feedback in order to control the motor torque, and that in all except high-
performance drives it is unusual to ﬁnd external transducers, which can account for
a signiﬁcant fraction of the total cost of the drive system. Instead of measuring the
actual speed using, for example, a shaft-mounted tachogenerator as shown in
Figure 2.1, speed is more likely to be derived from sampled measurements of motor
voltages, currents, and frequency, used in conjunction with a stored mathematical
model of the motor.
A characteristic of power electronic converters which is shared with most
electrical systems is that they have very little capacity for storing energy. This
means that any sudden change in the power supplied by the converter to the
motor must be reﬂected in a sudden increase in the power drawn from the
supply. In most cases this is not a serious problem, but it does have two draw-
backs. First, sudden increases in the current drawn from the supply will cause
momentary drops in the supply voltage, because of the effect of the supply
impedance. These voltage ‘spikes’ will appear as unwelcome distortion to other
users on the same supply. And secondly, there may be an enforced delay before
the supply can furnish extra power. For example, with a single-phase utility
Figure 2.1 General arrangement of speed-controlled drive.
40
Electric Motors and Drives

supply, there can be no sudden increase in the power supply at the instant where
the utility voltage is zero, because instantaneous power is necessarily zero at this
point in the cycle since the voltage is itself zero.
It would be ideal if the converter could store at least enough energy to supply
the motor for several cycles of the 50/60 Hz supply, so that short-term energy
demands could be met instantly, thereby reducing rapid ﬂuctuations in the power
drawn from the mains. But unfortunately this is just not economic: most converters
do have a small store of energy in their smoothing inductors and capacitors, but the
amount is not sufﬁcient to buffer the supply sufﬁciently to shield it from anything
more than very-short-term ﬂuctuations.
2. VOLTAGE CONTROL – D.C. OUTPUT FROM D.C. SUPPLY
In Chapter 1 we saw that control of the basic d.c. machine is achieved by
controlling the current in the conductor, which is readily done by variation of the
voltage. A controllable voltage source is therefore a key element of a motor drive, as
we will see in later chapters.
However, for the sake of simplicity we will begin by exploring the problem of
controlling the voltage across a 2 U resistive load, fed from a 12 V constant-voltage
source such as a battery. Three different methods are shown in Figure 2.2, in
which the circle on the left represents an ideal 12 V d.c. source, the tip of the
arrow indicating the positive terminal. Although this set-up is not quite the same
as if the load was a d.c. motor, the conclusions which we draw are more or less the
same.
Figure 2.2 Methods of obtaining a variable-voltage output from a constant-voltage
source.
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
41

Method (a) uses a variable resistor (R) to absorb whatever fraction of the battery
voltage is not required at the load. It provides smooth (albeit manual) control over
the full range from 0 to 12 V, but the snag is that power is wasted in the control
resistor. For example, if the load voltage is to be reduced to 6 V, the resistor R must
be set to 2 U, so that half of the battery voltage is dropped across R. The current will
be 3 A, the load power will be 18 W, and the power dissipated in R will also be
18 W. In terms of overall power conversion efﬁciency (i.e. useful power delivered
to the load divided by total power from the source), the efﬁciency is a very poor
50%. If R is increased further, the efﬁciency falls still lower, approaching zero as the
load voltage tends to zero. This method of control is therefore unacceptable for
motor control, except perhaps in applications such as toy racing cars.
Method (b) is much the same as (a) except that a transistor is used instead of
a manually operated variable resistor. The transistor in Figure 2.2(b) is connected
with its collector and emitter terminals in series with the voltage source and the load
resistor. The transistor is a variable resistor, of course, but a rather special one in
which the effective collector–emitter resistance can be controlled over a wide range
by means of the base–emitter current. The base–emitter current is usually very
small, so it can be varied by means of a low-power electronic circuit (not shown in
Figure 2.2) whose losses are negligible in comparison with the power in the main
(collector–emitter) circuit.
Method (b) shares the drawback of method (a) above, i.e. the efﬁciency is very
low. But even more seriously, the ‘wasted’ power (up to a maximum of 18 W in this
case) is burned off inside the transistor, which therefore has to be large, well-cooled,
and hence expensive. Transistors are never operated in this ‘linear’ way when used
in power electronics, but are widely used as switches, as discussed below.
2.1 Switching control
The basic ideas underlying a switching power regulator are shown by the
arrangement in Figure 2.2(c), which uses a mechanical switch. By operating the
switch repetitively and varying the ratio of ‘on’ to ‘off’ time, the average load
voltage can be varied continuously between 0 V (switch off all the time)
through 6 V (switch on and off for half of each cycle) to 12 V (switch on all the
time).
The circuit shown in Figure 2.2(c) is often referred to as a ‘chopper’, because the
battery supply is ‘chopped’ on and off. A constant repetition frequency is normally
used, and the width of the on pulse is varied to control the mean output voltage (see
the waveform in Figure 2.2): this is known as ‘pulse-width modulation’ (PWM).
The main advantage of the chopper circuit is that no power is wasted, and the
efﬁciency is thus 100%. When the switch is on, current ﬂows through it, but the
voltage across it is zero because its resistance is negligible. The power dissipated in
the switch is therefore zero. Likewise, when ‘off’, the current through it is zero, so
42
Electric Motors and Drives

although the voltage across the switch is 12 V, the power dissipated in it is again
zero.
The obvious disadvantage is that by no stretch of the imagination could the
load voltage be seen as ‘good’ d.c.: instead it consists of a mean or ‘d.c.’ level,
with a superimposed ‘a.c.’ component. Bearing in mind that we really want the
load to be a d.c. motor, rather than a resistor, we are bound to ask whether the
pulsating voltage will be acceptable. Fortunately, the answer is yes, provided that
the chopping frequency is high enough. We will see later that the inductance of
the motor causes the current to be much smoother than the voltage, which means
that the motor torque ﬂuctuates much less than we might suppose; and the
mechanical inertia of the motor ﬁlters the torque ripples so that the speed remains
almost constant, at a value governed by the mean (or d.c.) level of the chopped
waveform.
Obviously a mechanical switch would be unsuitable, and could not be expected
to last long when pulsed at high frequency. So an electronic power switch is used
instead. The ﬁrst of many devices to be used for switching was the bipolar junction
transistor (BJT), so we will begin by examining how such devices are employed in
chopper circuits. If we choose a different device, such as a metal oxide semi-
conductor ﬁeld effect transistor (MOSFET) or an insulated gate bipolar transistor
(IGBT), the detailed arrangements for turning the device on and off will be
different, but the main conclusions we draw will be much the same.
2.2 Transistor chopper
As noted earlier, a transistor is effectively a controllable resistor, i.e. the resistance
between collector and emitter depends on the current in the base–emitter junction.
In order to mimic the operation of a mechanical switch, the transistor would have to
be able to provide inﬁnite resistance (corresponding to an open switch) or zero
resistance (corresponding to a closed switch). Neither of these ideal states can be
reached with a real transistor, but both can be approximated closely.
The typical relationship between the collector–emitter voltage and the collector
current for a range of base currents rising from zero is shown in Figure 2.3. The bulk
of the diagram represents the so-called ‘linear’ region, where the transistor exhibits
the remarkable property of the collector current remaining more or less constant for
a wide range of collector–emitter voltages: when the transistor operates in this
region there will be signiﬁcant power loss. For power electronic applications, we
want the device to behave like a switch, so we operate on the margins of the
diagram, where either the voltage or the current is close to zero, and the heat
released inside the device is therefore very low.
The transistor will be ‘off’ when the base–emitter current (Ib) is zero. Viewed
from the main (collector–emitter) circuit, its resistance will be very high, as shown
by the region Oa in Figure 2.3.
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
43

Under this ‘cut-off ’ condition, only a tiny current (Ic) can ﬂow from the
collector to the emitter, regardless of the voltage (Vce) between the collector and
emitter. The power dissipated in the device will therefore be negligible, giving an
excellent approximation to an open switch.
To turn the transistor fully ‘on’, a base–emitter current must be provided. The
base current required will depend on the prospective collector–emitter current, i.e.
the current in the load. The aim is to keep the transistor ‘saturated’ so that it has
a very low resistance, corresponding to the region Ob in Figure 2.3. In the example
shown in Figure 2.2, if the resistance of the transistor is very low, the current in the
circuit will be almost 6 A, so we must make sure that the base–emitter current is
sufﬁciently large to ensure that the transistor remains in the saturated condition
when Ic ¼ 6 A.
Typically in a bipolar transistor (BJT) the base current will need to be around
5–10% of the collector current to keep the transistor in the saturation region: in the
example (Figure 2.2), with the full load current of 6 A ﬂowing, the base current
might be 400 mA, and the collector–emitter voltage might be say 0.33 V, giving an
on-state dissipation of 2 W in the transistor when the load power is 72 W. The
power conversion efﬁciency is not 100%, as it would be with an ideal switch, but it
is acceptable.
We should note that the on-state base–emitter voltage is very low, which,
coupled with the small base current, means that the power required to drive the
transistor is very much less than the power being switched in the collector–emitter
circuit. Nevertheless, to switch the transistor in the regular pattern shown in
Figure 2.2, we obviously need a base current waveform which goes on and off
periodically, and we might wonder how we obtain this ‘control’ signal. In most
modern drives the signal originates from a microprocessor, many of which are
designed with PWM auxiliary functions which can be used for this purpose.
Depending on the base circuit power requirements of the main switching transistor,
Figure 2.3 Transistor characteristics showing high-resistance (cut-off) region Oa and
low-resistance (saturation) region Ob. Typical ‘off’ and ‘on’ operating states are shown
by the shaded areas a and b, respectively.
44
Electric Motors and Drives

it may be possible to feed it directly from the microprocessor, but it is more usual to
see additional transistors interposed between the signal source and the main device
to provide the required power ampliﬁcation.
Just as we have to select mechanical switches with regard to their duty, we must
be careful to use the right power transistor for the job in hand. In particular, we
need to ensure that when the transistor is ‘on’, we don’t exceed the safe current, or
else the active semiconductor region of the device will be destroyed by overheating.
And we must make sure that the transistor is able to withstand whatever voltage
appears across the collector–emitter junction when it is in the ‘off’ condition. If the
safe voltage is exceeded, the transistor will break down, and be permanently ‘on’.
A suitable heatsink will be a necessity. We have already seen that some heat is
generated when the transistor is on, and at low switching rates this is the main source
of unwanted heat. But at high switching rates, ‘switching loss’ can also be very
important.
Switching loss is the heat generated in the ﬁnite time it takes for the transistor to
go from on to off or vice versa. The base-drive circuitry will be arranged so that the
switching takes place as fast as possible, but in practice it will seldom take less than
a few microseconds. During the switch-on period, for example, the current will be
building up, while the collector–emitter voltage will be falling towards zero. The
peak power reached can therefore be large, before falling to the relatively low on-
state value. Of course the total energy released as heat each time the device switches
is modest because the whole process happens so quickly. Hence if the switching rate
is low (say once every second) the switching power loss will be insigniﬁcant in
comparison with the on-state power. But at high switching rates, when the time
taken to complete the switching becomes comparable with the on time, the
switching power loss can easily become dominant. In drives, switching rates from
hundreds of hertz to tens of kilohertz are used: higher frequencies would be
desirable from the point of view of smoothness of supply, but cannot be used
because the resultant high switching loss becomes unacceptable.
2.3 Chopper with inductive load – overvoltage protection
So far we have looked at chopper control of a resistive load, but in a drives context
the load will usually mean the winding of a machine, which will invariably be
inductive.
Chopper control of inductive loads is much the same as for resistive loads, but
we have to be careful to prevent the appearance of dangerously high voltages each
time the inductive load is switched ‘off’. The root of the problem lies with the
energy stored in the magnetic ﬁeld of the inductor. When an inductance L carries
a current I, the energy stored in the magnetic ﬁeld (W ) is given by
W ¼ 1
2LI2
(2.1)
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
45

If the inductor is supplied via a mechanical switch, and we open the switch with the
intention of reducing the current to zero instantaneously, we are in effect seeking to
destroy the stored energy. This is not possible, and what happens is that the energy is
dissipated in the form of a spark across the contacts of the switch.
The appearance of a spark indicates that there is a very high voltage which is
sufﬁcient to break down the surrounding air. We can anticipate this by
remembering that the voltage and current in an inductance are related by the
equation
VL ¼ L di
dt
(2.2)
which shows that the self-induced voltage is proportional to the rate of change of
current, so when we open the switch in order to force the current to zero quickly,
a very large voltage is created in the inductance. This voltage appears across the
terminals of the switch and, if sufﬁcient to break down the air, the resulting arc
allows the current to continue to ﬂow until the stored magnetic energy is dissipated
as heat in the arc.
Sparking across a mechanical switch is unlikely to cause immediate destruction,
but when a transistor is used sudden death is certain unless steps are taken to tame
the stored energy. The usual remedy lies in the use of a ‘freewheel diode’ (some-
times called a ﬂywheel diode), as shown in Figure 2.4.
A diode is a one-way valve as far as current is concerned: it offers very little
resistance to current ﬂowing from anode to cathode (i.e. in the direction of the
broad arrow in the symbol for a diode), but blocks current ﬂow from cathode to
Figure 2.4 Operation of chopper-type voltage regulator.
46
Electric Motors and Drives

anode. Actually, when a power diode conducts in the forward direction, the voltage
drop across it is usually not all that dependent on the current ﬂowing through it, so
the reference above to the diode ‘offering little resistance’ is not strictly accurate
because it does not obey Ohm’s law. In practice the volt-drop of power diodes
(most of which are made from silicon) is around 0.7 V, regardless of the current
rating.
In the circuit of Figure 2.4(a), when the transistor is on, current (I ) ﬂows
through the load, but not through the diode, which is said to be reverse-biased (i.e.
the applied voltage is trying – unsuccessfully – to push current down through the
diode). During this period the voltage across the inductance is positive, so the
current increases, thereby increasing the stored energy.
When the transistor is turned off, the current through it and the battery drops
very quickly to zero. But the stored energy in the inductance means that its current
cannot suddenly disappear. So since there is no longer a path through the transistor,
the current diverts into the only other route available, and ﬂows upwards through
the low-resistance path offered by the diode, as shown in Figure 2.4(b).
Obviously the current no longer has a battery to drive it, so it cannot continue
to ﬂow indeﬁnitely. During this period the voltage across the inductance is negative,
and the current reduces. If the transistor were left ‘off ’ for a long period, the current
would continue to ‘freewheel’ only until the energy originally stored in the
inductance is dissipated as heat, mainly in the load resistance but also in the diode’s
own (low) resistance. In normal chopping, however, the cycle restarts long before
the current has fallen to zero, giving a current waveform as shown in Figure 2.4(c).
Note that the current rises and falls exponentially with a time-constant of L/R,
though it never reaches anywhere near its steady-state value in Figure 2.4. The
sketch corresponds to the case where the time-constant is much longer than one
switching period, in which case the current becomes almost smooth, with only
a small ripple. In a d.c. motor drive this is just what we want, since any ﬂuctuation in
the current gives rise to torque pulsations and consequent mechanical vibrations.
(The current waveform that would be obtained with no inductance is also shown in
Figure 2.4: the mean current is the same but the rectangular current waveform is
clearly much less desirable, given that ideally we would like constant d.c.)
The freewheel (or ﬂywheel) diode was introduced to prevent dangerously high
voltages from appearing across the transistor when it switches off an inductive load,
so we should check that this has been achieved. When the diode conducts, the
volt-drop across it is small – typically 0.7 volts. Hence while the current is free-
wheeling, the voltage at the collector of the transistor is only 0.7 volts above the
battery voltage. This ‘clamping’ action therefore limits the voltage across the
transistor to a safe value, and allows inductive loads to be switched without damage
to the switching element.
We should acknowledge that in this example the discussion has focused on
steady-state operation, when the current at the end of every cycle is the same, and it
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
47

never falls to zero. We have therefore sidestepped the more complex matter of how
we get from start-up to the steady state, and we have also ignored the so-called
‘discontinuous current’ mode. We will touch on the signiﬁcant consequences of
discontinuous operation in drives in later chapters.
We can draw some important conclusions which are valid for all power elec-
tronic converters from this simple example. First, efﬁcient control of voltage (and
hence power) is only feasible if a switching strategy is adopted. The load is alter-
nately connected and disconnected from the supply by means of an electronic
switch, and any average voltage up to the supply voltage can be obtained by varying
the mark/space ratio. Secondly, the output voltage is not smooth d.c., but contains
unwanted a.c. components which, though undesirable, are tolerable in motor
drives. And ﬁnally, the load current waveform will be smoother than the voltage
waveform if – as is the case with motor windings – the load is inductive.
2.4 Boost converter
The previous section dealt with the so-called step-down or buck converter, which
provides an output voltage less than the input. However, if the motor voltage is
higher than the supply (for example, in an electric vehicle driven by a 240 V motor
from a battery of 48 V), a step-up or boost converter is required. Intuitively this
seems a tougher challenge altogether, and we might expect ﬁrst to have to convert
the d.c. to a.c. so that a transformer could be used, but in fact the basic principle of
transferring ‘packets’ of energy to a higher voltage is very simple and elegant, using
the circuit shown in Figure 2.5. Operation of this circuit is worth discussing because
it again illustrates features common to power-electronic converters.
As is usual, the converter operates repetitively at a rate determined by the
frequency of switching on and off the transistor (T). During the ‘on’ period
Figure 2.5 Boost converter. The transistor is switched on in (a) and off in (b).
48
Electric Motors and Drives

(Figure 2.5(a)), the input voltage (Vin) is applied across the inductor (L), causing the
current in the inductor to rise linearly, thereby increasing the energy stored in its
magnetic ﬁeld. Meanwhile, the motor current is supplied by the storage capacitor
(C), the voltage of which falls only a little during this discharge period. In
Figure 2.5(a), the input current is drawn to appear larger than the output (motor)
current, for reasons that will soon become apparent. Recalling that the aim is to
produce an output voltage greater than the input, it should be clear that the voltage
across the diode (D) is negative (i.e. the potential is higher on the right than on the
left in Figure 2.5), so the diode does not conduct and the input and output circuits
are effectively isolated from each other.
When the transistor turns off, the current through it falls rapidly to zero, and
the situation is much the same as in the step-down converter where we saw that,
because of the stored energy in the inductor, any attempt to reduce its current
results in a self-induced voltage trying to keep the current going. So during the
‘off’ period, the inductor voltage rises extremely rapidly until the potential at the
left side of the diode is slightly greater than Vout, the diode then conducts and
the inductor current ﬂows into the parallel circuit consisting of the capacitor (C)
and the motor, the latter continuing to draw a steady current, while the major
share of the inductor current goes to recharge the capacitor. The resulting voltage
across the inductor is negative, and of magnitude Vout  Vin, so the inductor
current begins to reduce and the extra energy that was stored in the inductor
during the ‘on’ time is transferred into the capacitor. Assuming that we are in the
steady state (i.e. power is being supplied to the motor at a constant voltage and
current), the capacitor voltage will return to its starting value at the start of the
next ‘on’ time.
If the losses in the transistor and the storage elements are neglected, it is easy to
show that the converter functions like an ideal transformer, with output power
equal to input power, i.e.
Vin  Iin ¼ Vout  Iout; or Vout
Vin
¼ Iin
Iout
We know that the motor voltage Vout is higher than Vin, so not surprisingly the
quid pro quo is that the motor current is less than the input current, as indicated by
line thickness in Figure 2.5.
Also if the capacitor is large enough to hold the output voltage very nearly
constant throughout, it is easy to show that the step-up ratio is given by
Vout
Vin
¼
1
1  D
where D is the duty ratio, i.e. the proportion of each cycle for which the transistor is
on. Thus for the example at the beginning of this section, where Vout/Vin ¼ 240/
48 ¼ 5, the duty ratio is 0.8, i.e. the transistor has to be on for 80% of each cycle.
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
49

The advantage of switching at a high frequency becomes clear when we recall
that the capacitor has to store enough energy to supply the output during the ‘on’
period, so if, as is often the case, we want the output voltage to remain almost
constant, it should be clear that the capacitor must store a good deal more energy
than it gives out each cycle. Given that the size and cost of capacitors depends on the
energy they have to store, it is clearly better to supply small packets of energy at
a high rate, rather than use a lower frequency that requires more energy to be
stored. Conversely, the switching and other losses increase with frequency, so
a compromise is inevitable.
3. D.C. FROM A.C. – CONTROLLED RECTIFICATION
The vast majority of drives of all types draw their power from a constant-voltage 50
or 60 Hz utility supply, and in nearly all converters the ﬁrst stage consists of
a rectiﬁer which converts the a.c. to a crude form of d.c. Where a constant-voltage
(i.e. unvarying average) ‘d.c.’ output is required, a simple (uncontrolled) diode
rectiﬁer is sufﬁcient. But where the mean d.c. voltage has to be controllable (as in
a d.c. motor drive to obtain varying speeds), a controlled rectiﬁer is used.
Many different converter conﬁgurations based on combinations of diodes and
thyristors are possible, but we will focus on ‘fully controlled’ converters in which all
the rectifying devices are thyristors, because they are predominant in modern motor
drives. Half-controlled converters are used less frequently, so will not be covered
here.
From the user’s viewpoint, interest centers on the following questions:
•
How is the output voltage controlled?
•
What does the converter output voltage look like? Will there be any problems if
the voltage is not pure d.c.?
•
How does the range of the output voltage relate to the utility supply voltage?
•
How is the converter and motor drive ‘seen’ by the supply system? What is the
power-factor, and is there waveform distortion and interference to other users?
We can answer these questions without going too thoroughly into the detailed
workings of the converter. This is just as well, because understanding all the ins and
outs of converter operation is beyond our scope. On the other hand, it is well worth
trying to understand the essence of the controlled rectiﬁcation process, because it
assists in understanding the limitations which the converter puts on drive perfor-
mance (see Chapter 4, etc.). Before tackling the questions posed above, however, it
is obviously necessary to introduce the thyristor.
3.1 The thyristor
The thyristor is an electronic switch, with two main terminals (anode and cathode)
and a ‘switch-on’ terminal (gate), as shown in Figure 2.6. Like in a diode, current
50
Electric Motors and Drives

can only ﬂow in the forward direction, from anode to cathode. But unlike a diode,
which will conduct in the forward direction as soon as forward voltage is applied,
the thyristor will continue to block forward current until a small current pulse is
injected into the gate-cathode circuit, to turn it on or ‘ﬁre’ it. After the gate pulse is
applied, the main anode–cathode current builds up rapidly, and as soon as it reaches
the ‘latching’ level, the gate pulse can be removed and the device will remain ‘on’.
Once established, the anode–cathode current cannot be interrupted by any gate
signal. The non-conducting state can only be restored after the anode–cathode
current has reduced to zero, and has remained at zero for the turn-off time (typically
100–200 ms).
When a thyristor is conducting it approximates to a closed switch, with
a forward drop of only one or two volts over a wide range of current. Despite the
low volt-drop in the ‘on’ state, heat is dissipated, and heatsinks must usually be
provided, perhaps with fan cooling. Devices must be selected with regard to the
voltages to be blocked and the r.m.s. and peak currents to be carried. Their
overcurrent capability is very limited, and it is usual in drives for devices to have to
withstand perhaps twice full-load current for a few seconds only. Special fuses must
be ﬁtted to protect against heavy fault currents.
The reader may be wondering why we need the thyristor, since in the previous
section we discussed how a transistor could be used as an electronic switch. On the
face of it the transistor appears even better than the thyristor because it can be
switched off while the current is ﬂowing, whereas the thyristor will remain on until
the current through it has been reduced to zero by external means. The primary
reason for the use of thyristors is that they are cheaper and their voltage and current
ratings extend to higher levels than in power transistors. In addition, the circuit
conﬁguration in rectiﬁers is such that there is no need for the thyristor to be able to
interrupt the ﬂow of current, so its inability to do so is no disadvantage. Of course
there are other circuits (see, for example, the next section dealing with inverters)
where the devices need to be able to switch off on demand, in which case the
transistor then has the edge over the thyristor.
3.2 Single pulse rectiﬁer
The simplest phase-controlled rectiﬁer circuit is shown in Figure 2.7. When the
supply voltage is positive, the thyristor blocks forward current until the gate pulse
arrives, and up to this point the voltage across the resistive load is zero. As soon as
a ﬁring pulse is delivered to the gate-cathode circuit (not shown in Figure 2.7) the
device turns on, the voltage across it falls to near zero, and the load voltage becomes
Figure 2.6 Circuit diagram of thyristor.
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
51

equal to the supply voltage. When the supply voltage reaches zero, so does the
current. At this point the thyristor regains its blocking ability, and no current ﬂows
during the negative half-cycle.
If we neglect the small on-state volt-drop across the thyristor, the load voltage
(Figure 2.7) will consist of part of the positive half-cycles of the a.c. supply voltage.
It is obviously not smooth, but is ‘d.c.’ in the sense that it has a positive mean value;
and by varying the delay angle (a) of the ﬁring pulses the mean voltage can be
controlled. With a purely resistive load, the current waveform will simply be
a scaled version of the voltage.
This arrangement gives only one peak in the rectiﬁed output for each complete
cycle of the supply, and is therefore known as a ‘single-pulse’ or half-wave circuit.
The output voltage (which ideally we would like to be steady d.c.) is so poor that
this circuit is never used in drives. Instead, drive converters use four or six thyristors,
and produce much superior output waveforms with two or six pulses per cycle, as
will be seen in the following sections.
3.3 Single-phase fully controlled converter – output voltage
and control
The main elements of the converter circuit are shown in Figure 2.8. It comprises
four thyristors, connected in bridge formation. (The term bridge stems from early
four-arm measuring circuits which presumably suggested a bridge-like structure to
their inventors.)
The conventional way of drawing the circuit is shown in Figure 2.8(a), while in
Figure 2.8(b) it has been redrawn to assist understanding. The top of the load can be
connected (via T1) to terminal A of the supply, or (via T2) to terminal B of the
supply, and likewise the bottom of the load can be connected either to A or to B via
T3 or T4, respectively.
We are naturally interested to ﬁnd what the output voltage waveform on the
d.c. side will look like, and in particular to discover how the mean d.c. level can be
controlled by varying the ﬁring delay angle a. The angle a is measured from the
point on the waveform when a diode in the same circuit position would start to
conduct, i.e. when the anode becomes positive with respect to the cathode.
Figure 2.7 Simple single-pulse thyristor-controlled rectiﬁer, with resistive load and
ﬁring angle delay a.
52
Electric Motors and Drives

This is not such a simple matter as we might have expected, because it turns out
that the mean voltage for a given a depends on the nature of the load. We will
therefore look ﬁrst at the case where the load is resistive, and explore the basic
mechanism of phase control. Later, we will see how the converter behaves with
a typical motor load.
3.3.1 Resistive load
Thyristors T1 and T4 are ﬁred together when terminal A of the supply is positive,
while on the other half-cycle, when B is positive, thyristors T2 and T3 are ﬁred
simultaneously. The output voltage and current waveform are shown in
Figure 2.9(a) and (b), respectively, the current simply being a replica of the
voltage. There are two pulses per mains cycle, hence the description ‘2-pulse’ or
full-wave.
At every instant the load is either connected to the mains by the pair of switches
T1 and T4, or it is connected the other way up by the pair of switches T2 and T3, or
it is disconnected. The load voltage therefore consists of rectiﬁed chunks of the
incoming supply voltage. It is much smoother than in the single-pulse circuit,
though again it is far from pure d.c.
Figure 2.8 Single-phase 2-pulse (full-wave) fully controlled rectiﬁer.
Figure 2.9 Output voltage waveform (a) and current (b) of single-phase fully controlled
rectiﬁer with resistive load, for ﬁring angle delays of 45 and 135.
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
53

The waveforms in Figure 2.9 correspond to a ¼ 45 and a ¼ 135, respectively.
The mean value, Vdc, is shown in each case. It is clear that the larger the delay angle,
the lower the output voltage. The maximum output voltage (Vdo) is obtained with
a ¼ 0: this is the same as would be obtained if the thyristors were replaced by
diodes, and is given by
Vdo ¼ 2
p
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
Vrms
(2.3)
where Vrms is the r.m.s. voltage of the incoming supply. The variation of the mean
d.c. voltage with a is given by
Vdc ¼
1 þ cos a
2

Vdo
(2.4)
from which we see that with a resistive load the d.c. voltage can be varied from
a maximum of Vdo down to zero by varying a from 0 to 180.
3.3.2 Inductive (motor) load
As mentioned above, motor loads are inductive, and we have seen earlier that
the current cannot change instantaneously in an inductive load. We must
therefore expect the behavior of the converter with an inductive load to differ
from that with a resistive load, in which the current was seen to change
instantaneously.
The realization that the mean voltage for a given ﬁring angle might depend on
the nature of the load is a most unwelcome prospect. What we would like is to be
able to say that, regardless of the load, we can specify the output voltage waveform
once we have ﬁxed the delay angle a. We would then know what value of a to
select to achieve any desired mean output voltage. What we ﬁnd in practice is that
once we have ﬁxed a, the mean output voltage with a resistive–inductive load is not
the same as with a purely resistive load, and therefore we cannot give a simple
general formula for the mean output voltage in terms of a. This is of course very
undesirable: if, for example, we had set the speed of our unloaded d.c. motor to the
target value by adjusting the ﬁring angle of the converter to produce the correct
mean voltage, the last thing we would want is for the voltage to fall when the load
current drawn by the motor increased, as this would cause the speed to fall below
the target.
Fortunately, however, it turns out that the output voltage waveform for a given
a does become independent of the load inductance once there is sufﬁcient
inductance to prevent the load current from ever falling to zero. This condition is
known as ‘continuous current’, and, happily, many motor circuits do have sufﬁcient
self-inductance to ensure that we achieve continuous current. Under continuous
current conditions, the output voltage waveform only depends on the ﬁring angle,
and not on the actual inductance present. This makes things much more
54
Electric Motors and Drives

straightforward, and typical output voltage waveforms for this continuous current
condition are shown in Figure 2.10.
The waveforms in Figure 2.10 show that, as with the resistive load, the larger
the delay angle the lower the mean output voltage. However, with the resistive load
the output voltage was never negative, whereas we see that, although the mean
voltage is positive for values of a below 90, there are brief periods when the output
voltage becomes negative. This is because the inductance smoothes out the current
(see Figure 4.2, for example) so that at no time does it fall to zero. As a result, one or
other pair of thyristors is always conducting, so at every instant the load is connected
directly to the supply, and therefore the load voltage always consists of chunks of the
supply voltage.
Rather surprisingly, we see that when a is greater than 90, the average voltage
is negative (though, of course, the current is still positive). The fact that we can
obtain a net negative output voltage with an inductive load contrasts sharply with
the resistive load case, where the output voltage could never be negative. The
combination of negative voltage and positive current means that the power ﬂow is
reversed, and energy is fed back to the supply system. We will see later that this
facility allows the converter to return energy from the load to the supply, and this
is important when we want to use the converter with a d.c. motor in the regen-
erating mode.
It is not immediately obvious why the current switches over (or ‘commu-
tates’) from the ﬁrst pair of thyristors to the second pair when the latter are ﬁred,
Figure 2.10 Output voltage waveforms of single-phase fully controlled rectiﬁer
supplying an inductive (motor) load, for various ﬁring angles.
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
55

so a brief look at the behavior of diodes in a similar circuit conﬁguration may be
helpful at this point. Consider the set-up shown in Figure 2.11, with two
voltage sources (each time-varying) supplying a load via two diodes. The
question is, what determines which diode conducts, and how does this inﬂuence
the load voltage?
We can consider two instants as shown in the diagram. On the left, V1 is 250 V,
V2 is 240 V, and D1 is conducting, as shown by the heavy line. If we ignore the
volt-drop across the diode, the load voltage will be 250 V, and the voltage across
diode D2 will be 240  250 ¼ 10 V, i.e. it is reverse-biased and hence in the non-
conducting state. At some other instant (on the right of the diagram), V1 has fallen
to 220 V while V2 has increased to 260 V: now D2 is conducting instead of D1,
again shown by the heavy line, and D1 is reverse-biased by 40 V. The simple
pattern is that the diode with the highest anode potential will conduct, and as soon
as it does so it automatically reverse-biases its predecessor. In a single-phase diode
bridge, for example, the commutation occurs at the point where the supply voltage
passes through zero: at this instant the anode voltage on one pair goes from positive
to negative, while on the other pair the anode voltage goes from negative to
positive.
The situation in controlled thyristor bridges is very similar, except that before
a new device can take over conduction, it must not only have a higher anode
potential, but it must also receive a ﬁring pulse. This allows the changeover to be
delayed beyond the point of natural (diode) commutation by the angle a, as shown
in Figure 2.10. Note that the maximum mean voltage (Vdo) is again obtained when
a is zero, and is the same as for the resistive load (equation (2.3)). It is easy to show
that the mean d.c. voltage is now related to a by
Vdc ¼ Vdocosa
(2.5)
This equation indicates that we can control the mean output voltage by controlling
a, though equation (2.5) shows that the variation of mean voltage with a is different
from that for a resistive load (equation (2.4)), not least because when a is greater
than 90 the mean output voltage is negative.
It is sometimes suggested (particularly by those with a light-current background)
that a capacitor could be used to smooth the output voltage, this being common
Figure 2.11 Diagram illustrating commutation between diodes: the current ﬂows
through the diode with the higher anode potential.
56
Electric Motors and Drives

practice in cheap low-power d.c. supplies. However, the power levels in most
drives are such that in order to store enough energy to smooth the voltage wave-
form over the half-cycle of the utility supply (20 ms at 50 Hz), very bulky and
expensive capacitors would be required. Fortunately, as will be seen later, it is not
necessary for the voltage to be smooth as it is the current which directly determines
the torque, and as already pointed out the current is always much smoother than the
voltage because of inductance.
3.4 Three-phase fully controlled converter
The main power elements are shown in Figure 2.12. The 3-phase bridge has only
two more thyristors than the single-phase bridge, but the output voltage waveform
is vastly better, as shown in Figure 2.13. There are now six pulses of the output
voltage per cycle, hence the description ‘6-pulse’. The thyristors are again ﬁred in
Figure 2.12 Three-phase fully controlled thyristor converter. (The alternative diagram
(right) is intended to assist understanding.)
Figure 2.13 Output voltage waveforms for 3-phase fully controlled thyristor converter
supplying an inductive (motor) load, for various ﬁring angles from 0 to 120. The mean
d.c. voltage is shown by the horizontal line, except for a ¼ 90 where the mean d.c.
voltage is zero.
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
57

pairs (one in the top half of the bridge and one – from a different leg – in the bottom
half ), and each thyristor carries the output current for one-third of the time. As in
the single-phase converter, the delay angle controls the output voltage, but now
a ¼ 0 corresponds to the point at which the phase voltages are equal (see
Figure 2.13).
The enormous improvement in the smoothness of the output voltage
waveform is clear when we compare Figures 2.13 and 2.10, and it underlines the
beneﬁt of choosing a 3-phase converter whenever possible. The very much better
voltage waveform also means that the desirable ‘continuous current’ condition is
much more likely to be met, and the waveforms in Figure 2.13 have therefore
been drawn with the assumption that the load current is in fact continuous.
Occasionally, even a 6-pulse waveform is not sufﬁciently smooth, and some very
large drive converters therefore consist of two 6-pulse converters with their
outputs in series. A phase-shifting transformer is used to insert a 30 shift between
the a.c. supplies to the two 3-phase bridges. The resultant ripple voltage is then
12-pulse.
Returning to the 6-pulse converter, the mean output voltage can be shown to
be given by
Vdc ¼ Vdocosa ¼ 3
p
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
Vrmscosa
(2.6)
We note that we can obtain the full range of output voltages from þVdo to close
to Vdo, so that, as with the single-phase converter, regenerative operation will
be possible.
It is probably a good idea at this point to remind the reader that, in the
context of this book, our ﬁrst application of the controlled rectiﬁer will be to
supply a d.c. motor. When we examine the d.c. motor drive in Chapter 4, we
will see that it is the average or mean value of the output voltage from the
controlled rectiﬁer that determines the speed, and it is this mean voltage that we
refer to when we talk of ‘the’ voltage from the converter. We must not forget
the unwanted a.c. or ripple element, however, as this can be large. For example,
we see from Figure 2.13 that to obtain a very low d.c. voltage (to make the
motor run very slowly) a will be close to 90; but if we were to connect an a.c.
voltmeter to the output terminals it could register several hundred volts,
depending on the incoming supply voltage!
3.5 Output voltage range
In Chapter 4 we will discuss the use of the fully controlled converter to drive
a d.c. motor, so it is appropriate at this stage to look brieﬂy at the typical voltages
we can expect. Utility supply voltages vary, but single-phase supplies are usually
220–240 V, and we see from equation (2.3) that the maximum mean d.c. voltage
available from a single-phase 240 V supply is 216 V. This is suitable for 180–200 V
58
Electric Motors and Drives

motors. If a higher voltage is needed (for say a 300 V motor), a transformer must be
used to step up the incoming supply.
Turning now to typical 3-phase supplies, the lowest 3-phase industrial voltages
are usually around 380–440 V. (Higher voltages of up to 11 kV are used for large
drives, but these will not be discussed here.) So with Vrms ¼ 400 V, for example, the
maximum d.c. output voltage (equation (2.6)) is 540 volts. After allowances have
been made for supply variations and impedance drops, we are not able to rely on
obtaining much more than 500–520 V, and it is usual for the motors used with
6-pulse drives fed from 400 V, 3-phase supplies to be rated in the range 430–500 V.
(Often the motor’s ﬁeld winding will be supplied from single-phase 230 V, and ﬁeld
voltage ratings are then around 180–200 V, to allow a margin in hand from the
theoretical maximum of 207 V referred to earlier.)
3.6 Firing circuits
Since the gate pulses are only of low power, the gate drive circuitry is simple and
cheap. Often a single chip contains all the circuitry for generating the gate pulses,
and for synchronizing them with the appropriate delay angle a with respect to the
supply voltage. To avoid direct electrical connection between the high voltages in
the main power circuit and the low voltages used in the control circuits, the gate
pulses are coupled to the thyristor either by small pulse transformers or opto-
couplers.
4. A.C. FROM D.C. – INVERSION
The business of getting a.c. from d.c. is known as inversion, and nine times out of
ten we would ideally like to be able to produce sinusoidal output voltages of
whatever frequency and amplitude we choose, to achieve speed control of a.c.
motors. Unfortunately the constraints imposed by the necessity to use a switching
strategy mean that we always have to settle for a voltage waveform which is
composed of rectangular chunks, and is thus far from ideal. Nevertheless it turns out
that a.c. motors are remarkably tolerant, and will operate satisfactorily despite the
inferior waveforms produced by the inverter.
4.1 Single-phase inverter
We can illustrate the basis of inverter operation by considering the single-phase
example shown in Figure 2.14. This inverter uses IGBTs (see later) as the switching
devices, with diodes to provide the freewheel paths needed when the load is
inductive.
The input or d.c. side of the inverter (on the left in Figure 2.14) is usually
referred to as the ‘d.c. link’, reﬂecting the fact that in the majority of cases the d.c. is
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
59

obtained by rectifying the incoming constant-frequency utility supply. The output
or a.c. side is taken from terminals A and B in Figure 2.14.
When transistors 1 and 4 are switched on, the load voltage is positive, and equal
to the d.c. link voltage, while when 2 and 3 are on it is negative. If no devices are
switched on, the output voltage is zero. Typical output voltage waveforms at low
and high switching frequencies are shown in Figures 2.15(a) and (b), respectively.
Here each pair of devices is on for one-third of a cycle, and all the devices are
off for two periods of one-sixth of a cycle. The output waveform is clearly not
a sinewave, but at least it is alternating and symmetrical. The fundamental
component is shown dotted in Figure 2.15.
Within each cycle the pattern of switching is regular, and easily generated in
software or programmed using appropriate logic circuitry. Frequency variation is
obtained by altering the clock frequency controlling the 4-step switching pattern.
The effect of varying the switching frequency is shown in Figure 2.15, from which
we can see that the amplitude of the fundamental component of voltage remains
constant, regardless of frequency. Unfortunately (as explained in Chapter 7) this is
not what we want for supplying an induction motor: to prevent the air-gap ﬂux in
the motor from falling as the frequency is raised we need to be able to increase the
voltage in proportion to the frequency. We will look at voltage control shortly, after
a brief digression to discuss the problem of ‘shoot-through’.
Inverters with the conﬁgurations shown in Figures 2.14 and 2.17 are subject to
a potentially damaging condition which can arise if both transistors in one ‘leg’ of
the inverter inadvertently turn on simultaneously. This should never happen if the
devices are switched correctly, but if something goes wrong and both devices are on
together – even for a very short time – they form a short-circuit across the d.c. link.
This fault condition is referred to as ‘shoot-through’ because a high current is
established very rapidly, destroying the devices. A good inverter therefore includes
Figure 2.14 Single-phase inverter.
Figure 2.15 Inverter output voltage waveforms – resistive load.
60
Electric Motors and Drives

provision for protecting against the possibility of shoot-through, usually by
imposing a minimum time-delay, or ‘dead time’ between one device in the leg
going off and the other coming on.
4.2 Output voltage control
There are two ways in which the amplitude of the output voltage can be
controlled. First, if the d.c. link is provided from the utility supply via a controlled
rectiﬁer or from a battery via a chopper, the d.c. link voltage can be varied. We can
then set the amplitude of the output voltage to any value within the range of the
link. For a.c. motor drives (see Chapter 7) we can arrange for the link voltage to
track the output frequency of the inverter, so that at high output frequency we
obtain a high output voltage and vice versa. This method of voltage control results
in a simple inverter, but requires a controlled (and thus relatively expensive)
rectiﬁer for the d.c. link.
The second method, which predominates in all sizes, achieves voltage control
by PWM within the inverter itself. A cheaper uncontrolled rectiﬁer can then be
used to provide a constant-voltage d.c. link. The principle of voltage control by
PWM is illustrated in Figure 2.16.
At low output frequencies, a low output voltage is usually required, so one of
each pair of devices is used to chop the voltage, the mark/space ratio being varied to
achieve the desired voltage at the output. The low fundamental voltage component
at low frequency is shown as a broken line in Figure 2.16(a). At a higher frequency
a higher voltage is needed, so the chopping device is allowed to conduct for
a longer fraction of each cycle, giving the higher fundamental output shown in
Figure 2.16(b). As the frequency is raised still higher, the separate ‘on’ periods
eventually merge, giving the waveform shown in Figure 2.16(c). Any further
increase in frequency takes place without further increase in the output voltage, as
shown in Figure 2.16(d).
Figure
2.16 Inverter output voltage and frequency control with pulse-width
modulation.
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
61

When we study a.c. drives later, we will see that the range of frequencies over
which the voltage/frequency ratio can be kept constant is sometimes known as the
‘constant-torque’ region, and the upper limit of the range is usually taken to deﬁne
the ‘base speed’ of the motor. Above this frequency, the inverter can no longer
match voltage to frequency, the inverter effectively having run out of steam as far as
voltage is concerned. The maximum voltage is thus governed by the link voltage,
which must therefore be sufﬁciently high to provide whatever fundamental voltage
the motor needs at its base speed.
Beyond the PWM region the voltage waveform is as shown in Figure 2.16(d):
this waveform is usually referred to as ‘quasi-square’, though in the light of the
overall object of the exercise (to approximate to a sinewave) a better description
might be ‘quasi-sine’.
When supplying an inductive motor load, fast recovery freewheel diodes are
needed in parallel with each device. These may be discrete devices, or ﬁtted in
a common package with the transistor, or integrated to form a single transistor/
diode device.
As mentioned earlier, the switching nature of these converter circuits results in
waveforms which contain not only the required fundamental component but also
unwanted harmonic voltages. It is particularly important to limit the magnitude of
the low-order harmonics because these are most likely to provoke an unwanted
torque response from the motor, but the high-order harmonics can lead to acoustic
noise if they happen to excite a mechanical resonance.
The number, width and spacing of the pulses are therefore optimized to keep
the harmonic content as low as possible. There is an obvious advantage in using
a high switching frequency since there are more pulses to play with. Ultrasonic
frequencies are now widely used, and, as devices improve, frequencies continue to
rise. Most manufacturers claim their particular system is better than the competi-
tion, but it is not clear which, if any, is best for motor operation. Some early
schemes used comparatively few pulses per cycle, and changed the number of
pulses in discrete steps rather than smoothly, which earned them the nickname
‘gear-changers’: their sometimes irritating sound can still be heard in older traction
applications.
4.3 Three-phase inverter
Single-phase inverters are seldom used for drives, the vast majority of which use
3-phase motors because of their superior characteristics. A 3-phase output can be
obtained by adding only two more switches to the four needed for a single-phase
inverter, giving the typical power-circuit conﬁguration shown in Figure 2.17. As
usual, a freewheel diode is required in parallel with each transistor to protect against
overvoltages caused by an inductive (motor) load. We note that the circuit
conﬁguration in Figure 2.17 is the same as for the 3-phase controlled rectiﬁer
discussed earlier. We mentioned then that the controlled rectiﬁer could be used to
62
Electric Motors and Drives

regenerate, i.e. to convert power from d.c. to a.c., and this is of course ‘inversion’ as
we now understand it.
This circuit forms the basis of the majority of converters for motor drives, and
will be explored more fully in Chapter 7. In essence, the output voltage and
frequency are controlled in much the same way as for the single-phase inverter
discussed in the previous section, but of course the output consists of three identical
waveforms displaced by 120 from each other, typically as shown in Figure 2.18.
There are more constraints on switching with this set-up than in the single-
phase case. For example, consider the upper and middle waveforms in
Figure 2.18: the upper shows the potential of line U with respect to line V
(VUV), while the middle shows the potential of line V with respect to line W
(VVW). So whenever VUV is positive, the upper right switch and the lower
middle switch must be ‘on’. If at this instant VVW is also required to be positive
we have a problem because this would require the upper middle switch and the
lower left switches to be on, which would lead to a short-circuit through the
middle leg. Fortunately, these potential problems are limited to well-deﬁned
regions of the cycle and switching patterns include built-in delays to prevent such
‘shoot-through’ faults from occurring.
Vuv
120º
240º
Vvw
Vwu
Figure 2.18 Three-phase PWM output voltage waveforms.
U
3-phase
output
V
Vdc
W
Figure 2.17 Three-phase inverter power circuit.
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
63

5. A.C. FROM A.C.
The converters we have looked at so far have involved a d.c. stage, but the ideal
power-electronic converter would allow power conversion in either direction
between two systems of any voltage and frequency (including d.c.), and would not
involve any intermediate stage, such as a d.c. link. In principle this can be achieved
by means of an array of switches that allow any one of a set of input terminals to be
connected to any one of a set of output terminals, at any desired instant. The
comparatively recent name for such converters is ‘matrix converter’ (see Chapter 8),
but here we will take a brief look at a much older embodiment of the principle – the
cycloconverter.
5.1 Cycloconverter
The cycloconverter variable-frequency drive has never become very widespread
but is still suitable for very large (e.g. 1 MW and above) low-speed induction
motor or synchronous motor drives. The cycloconverter is only capable of
producing acceptable output waveforms at frequencies well below the utility
frequency, but this, coupled with the fact that it is feasible to make large motors
with high pole-numbers (e.g. 20), means that a very low-speed direct (gearless)
drive becomes practicable. A 20-pole motor, for example, will have a synchro-
nous speed of only 30 rev/min at 5 Hz, making it suitable for mine winders, kilns,
crushers, etc.
The principal advantage of the cycloconverter is that naturally commutated
devices (thyristors) can be used instead of self-commutating devices, which means
that the cost of each device is lower and higher powers can be achieved.
The power conversion circuit for each of the three output phases is the same, so
we can consider the simpler question of how to obtain a single variable-frequency
supply from a 3-phase supply of ﬁxed frequency and constant voltage. We will see
that in essence, the output voltage is synthesized by switching the load directly
across whichever phase of the utility supply gives the best approximation to the
desired load voltage at each instant of time.
Assuming that the load is an induction motor, we will discover later in the book
that the power-factor varies with load but never reaches unity, i.e. that the current is
never in phase with the stator voltage. So during the positive half-cycle of the
voltage waveform the current will be positive for some of the time, but negative for
the remainder, while during the negative voltage half-cycle the current will be
negative for some of the time and positive for the rest of the time. This means that
the supply to each phase has to be able to handle any combination of both positive
and negative voltage and current.
We have already explored how to achieve a variable-voltage d.c. supply using
a thyristor converter, which can handle positive currents, but here we need to
64
Electric Motors and Drives

handle negative current as well, so for each of the three motor windings we will
need two converters connected in parallel, as shown in Figure 2.19, making a total
of 36 thyristors. To avoid short-circuits, isolating transformers are used, again as
shown in Figure 2.19.
Previously the discussion focused on the mean or d.c. level of the output
voltages, but here we want to provide a low-frequency (preferably sinusoidal)
output voltage for an induction motor, and the means for doing this should
now be becoming clear. Once we have a double thyristor converter, we can
generate a low-frequency sinusoidal output voltage simply by varying the ﬁr-
ing angle of the positive-current bridge so that its output voltage increases from
zero in a sinusoidal manner with respect to time. Then, when we have
completed the positive half-cycle and arrived back at zero voltage, we bring
the negative bridge into play and use it to generate the negative half-cycle, and
so on.
Hence the output voltage consists of chunks of the incoming supply voltage,
and it offers a reasonable approximation to the fundamental-frequency sinewave
shown by the dashed line in Figure 2.20.
The output voltage waveform is certainly no worse than the voltage waveform
from a d.c. link inverter, and, as we saw in that context, the current waveform in the
motor will be much smoother than the voltage waveform, because of the ﬁltering
action of the stator leakage inductance. The motor performance will therefore be
acceptable, despite the extra losses which arise from the unwanted harmonic
components. We should note that, because each phase is supplied from a double
converter, the motor can regenerate when required (e.g. to restrain an overhauling
load, or to return kinetic energy to the supply when the frequency is lowered to
reduce speed).
M
Figure 2.19 Cycloconverter power circuit.
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
65

6. INVERTER SWITCHING DEVICES
As far as the user is concerned, it does not really matter what type of switching
device is used inside the inverter, but it is probably helpful to mention the three
most important1 families of devices in current use so that the terminology is familiar
and the symbols used for each device can be recognized. The common feature of all
three devices is that they can be switched on and off by means of a low-power
control signal, i.e. they are self-commutating. We have seen earlier that this ability
to be turned on or off on demand is essential in any inverter which feeds a passive
load, such as an induction motor.
Each device is discussed brieﬂy below, with a broad indication of its most likely
range of application. Because there is considerable overlap between competing
devices, it is not possible to be dogmatic and specify which device is best, and the
reader should not be surprised to ﬁnd that one manufacturer may offer a 5 kW
inverter which uses MOSFETs while another chooses to use IGBTs.
Figure 2.20 Typical output voltage waveform for one phase of 6-pulse cycloconverter
supplying an inductive (motor) load. (The output frequency shown in the ﬁgure is one-
third of the utility frequency, and the amplitude of the fundamental component of the
output voltage (shown by the dashed line) is about 75% of the maximum that could be
obtained. The fundamental component of the load current is shown in order to deﬁne
the modes of operation of the converters.)
1 The gate turn-off thyristor is now seldom used, so is not discussed here.
66
Electric Motors and Drives

Power electronics is still developing, and there are other devices (such as those
based on silicon carbide) which have yet to emerge onto the drives scene. Trends
which continue include the integration of the drive and protection circuitry in the
same package as the switching device (or devices); major reductions in device losses;
and improved cooling techniques, all of which have already contributed to
impressive reductions in product size.
6.1 Bipolar junction transistor (BJT)
Historically the bipolar junction transistor was the ﬁrst to be used for power
switching. Of the two versions (npn and pnp) only the npn has been widely used in
inverters for drives, mainly in applications ranging up to a few kW and several
hundred volts.
The npn version is shown in Figure 2.21: the main (load) current ﬂows into the
collector (C) and out of the emitter (E), as shown by the arrow on the device
symbol. To switch the device on (i.e. to make the resistance of the collector–emitter
circuit low, so that load current can ﬂow) a small current must be caused to ﬂow
from the base (B) to the emitter. When the base–emitter current is zero, the
resistance of the collector–emitter circuit is very high, and the device is switched off.
The advantage of the bipolar transistor is that when it is turned on, the
collector–emitter voltage is low (see point b in Figure 2.3) and hence the power
dissipation is small in comparison with the load power, i.e. the device is an efﬁcient
power switch. The disadvantage is that although the power required in the base–
emitter circuit is tiny in comparison with the load power, it is not insigniﬁcant and
in the largest power transistors can amount to several tens of watts.
6.2 Metal oxide semiconductor ﬁeld effect transistor
(MOSFET)
In the 1980s the power MOSFET superseded the BJT in inverters for drives. Like
the BJT, the MOSFET is a three-terminal device and is available in two versions,
the n-channel and the p-channel. The n-channel is the most widely used, and is
shown in Figure 2.21. The main (load) current ﬂows into the drain (D) and out of
the source (S). (Confusingly, the load current in this case ﬂows in the opposite
Figure 2.21 Circuit symbols for switching devices.
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
67

direction to the arrow on the symbol.) Unlike the BJT, which is controlled by the
base current, the MOSFET is controlled by the gate-source voltage.
To turn the device on, the gate-source voltage must be comfortably above
a threshold of a few volts. When the voltage is ﬁrst applied to the gate, currents ﬂow
in the parasitic gate-source and gate-drain capacitances, but once these capacitances
have been charged the input current to the gate is negligible, so the steady-state gate
drive power is minimal. To turn the device off, the parasitic capacitances must be
discharged and the gate-source voltage must be held below the threshold level.
The principal advantage of the MOSFET is that it is a voltage-controlled device
which requires negligible power to hold it in the on state. The gate drive circuitry is
thus less complex and costly than the base drive circuitry of an equivalent bipolar
device. The disadvantage of the MOSFET is that in the ‘on’ state the effective
resistance of the drain-source is higher than for an equivalent bipolar device, so the
power dissipation is higher and the device is rather less efﬁcient as a power switch.
MOSFETs are used in low and medium power inverters up to a few kW, with
voltages generally not exceeding 700 V.
6.3 Insulated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT)
The IGBT (Figure 2.21) is a hybrid device which combines the best features of the
MOSFET (i.e. ease of gate turn-on and turn-off from low-power logic circuits) and
the BJT (relatively low power dissipation in the main collector–emitter circuit).
These obvious advantages give the IGBT the edge over the MOSFET and BJT, and
account for its dominance in all but small drives. It is particularly well suited to the
medium power, medium voltage range (up to several hundred kW). The path for
the main (load) current is from collector to emitter, as in the npn bipolar device.
7. CONVERTER WAVEFORMS, ACOUSTIC NOISE,
AND COOLING
In common with most textbooks, the waveforms shown in this chapter (and later in
the book) are what we would hope to see under ideal conditions. It makes sense to
concentrate on these ideal waveforms from the point of view of gaining a basic
understanding, but we ought to be warned that what we see on an oscilloscope may
well look rather different, and is often not easy to interpret.
We have seen that the essence of power electronics is the switching process,
so it should not come as much of a surprise to learn that in practice the switching
is seldom achieved in such a clear-cut fashion as we have assumed. Usually, there
will be some sort of high-frequency oscillation or ‘ringing’ evident, particularly
on the voltage waveforms following each transition due to switching. This is due
to the effects of stray capacitance and inductance: it will have been anticipated at
68
Electric Motors and Drives

the design stage, and steps will have been taken to minimize it by ﬁtting
‘snubbing’ circuits at the appropriate places in the converter. However, complete
suppression of all these transient phenomena is seldom economically worthwhile
so the user should not be too alarmed to see remnants of the transient
phenomena in the output waveforms.
Acoustic noise is also a matter that can worry newcomers. Most power
electronic converters emit whining or humming sounds at frequencies corre-
sponding to the fundamental and harmonics of the switching frequency, though
when the converter is used to feed a motor, the sound from the motor is usually
a good deal louder than the sound from the converter itself. These sounds are
very difﬁcult to describe in words, but typically range from a high-pitched hum
through a whine to a piercing whistle. In a.c. drives it is often possible to vary the
switching frequency, which may allow speciﬁc mechanical resonances to be
avoided. If taken above the audible range (which is inversely proportional to age)
the sound clearly disappears, but at the expense of increased switching losses, so
a compromise has to be sought.
7.1 Cooling of switching devices – thermal resistance
We have seen that by adopting a switching strategy the power loss in the switching
devices is small in comparison with the power throughput, so the converter has
a high efﬁciency. Nevertheless almost all the heat which is produced in the
switching devices is released in the active region of the semiconductor, which is
itself very small and will overheat and break down unless it is adequately cooled. It is
therefore essential to ensure that even under the most onerous operating conditions,
the temperature of the active junction inside the device does not exceed the safe
value.
Consider what happens to the temperature of the junction region of the device
when we start from cold (i.e. ambient) temperature and operate the device so that
its average power dissipation remains constant. At ﬁrst, the junction temperature
begins to rise, so some of the heat generated is conducted to the metal case, which
stores some heat as its temperature rises. Heat then ﬂows into the heatsink (if ﬁtted),
which begins to warm up, and heat begins to ﬂow to the surrounding air, at
ambient temperature. The temperatures of the junction, case and heatsink
continue to rise until eventually an equilibrium is reached when the total rate of
loss of heat to ambient temperature is equal to the power dissipation inside the
device.
The ﬁnal steady-state junction temperature thus depends on how difﬁcult it is
for the power loss to escape down the temperature gradient to ambient, or in other
words on the total ‘thermal resistance’ between the junction inside the device and
the surrounding medium (usually air). Thermal resistance is usually expressed in C/
watt, which directly indicates how much temperature rise will occur in the steady
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
69

state for every watt of dissipated power. It follows that for a given power dissipation,
the higher the thermal resistance, the higher the temperature rise, so in order to
minimize the temperature rise of the device, the total thermal resistance between it
and the surrounding air must be made as small as possible.
The device designer aims to minimize the thermal resistance between the
semiconductor junction and the case of the device, and provides a large and ﬂat
metal mounting surface to minimize the thermal resistance between the case and the
heatsink. The converter designer must ensure good thermal contact between the
device and the heatsink, usually by a bolted joint smeared with heat-conducting
compound to ﬁll any microscopic voids, and must design the heatsink to minimize
the thermal resistance to air (or in some cases oil or water). Heatsink design offers
the only real scope for appreciably reducing the total resistance, and involves careful
selection of the material, size, shape and orientation of the heatsink, and the asso-
ciated air-moving system (see below).
One drawback of the good thermal path between the junction and case of the
device is that the metal mounting surface (or surfaces in the case of the popular
hockey-puck package) can be electrically ‘live’. This poses a difﬁculty for the
converter designer, because mounting the device directly on the heatsink causes the
latter to be dangerous. In addition, several separate isolated heatsinks may be
required in order to avoid short-circuits. The alternative is for the devices to be
electrically isolated from the heatsink using thin mica spacers, but then the thermal
resistance is increased appreciably.
Increasingly devices come in packaged ‘modules’ with an electrically isolated
metal to get round the ‘live’ problem. The packages contain combinations of
transistors, diodes or thyristors, from which various converter circuits can be built
up. Several modules can be mounted on a single heatsink, which does not have to
be isolated from the enclosure or cabinet. They are available in ratings suitable for
converters up to hundreds of kW, and the range is expanding.
7.2 Arrangement of heatsinks and forced-air cooling
The principal factors which govern the thermal resistance of a heatsink are the total
surface area, the condition of the surface and the air ﬂow. Many converters use
extruded aluminium heatsinks, with multiple ﬁns to increase the effective cooling
surface area and lower the resistance, and with a machined face or faces for
mounting the devices. Heatsinks are usually mounted vertically to improve natural
air convection. Surface ﬁnish is important, with black anodized aluminium being
typically 30% better than bright. The cooling performance of heatsinks is, however,
a complex technical area, with turbulence being very beneﬁcial in forced air-cooled
heatsinks.
A typical layout for a medium-power (say 200 kW) converter is shown in
Figure 2.22.
70
Electric Motors and Drives

The fan(s) are positioned at either the top or bottom of the heatsink, and draw
external air upwards, assisting natural convection. Even a modest airﬂow is very
beneﬁcial: with an air velocity of only 2 m/s, for example, the thermal resistance is
halved as compared with the naturally cooled set-up, which means that for a given
temperature rise the heatsink can be half the size of the naturally cooled one.
However, large increases in the air velocity bring diminishing returns and also
introduce additional noise, which is generally undesirable.
Figure 2.22 Layout of converter showing heatsink and cooling fans.
Introduction to Power Electronic Converters for Motor Drives
71

CHAPTER THREE
Conventional D.C. Motors
1. INTRODUCTION
Until the 1980s the conventional (brushed) d.c. machine was the automatic choice
where speed or torque control is called for, and large numbers remain in service
despite a declining market share that reﬂects the general move to inverter-fed a.c.
motors. D.C. motor drives do remain competitive in some larger ratings (several
hundred kW) particularly where drip-proof motors are acceptable, with applica-
tions ranging from steel rolling mills, railway traction, through a very wide range of
industrial drives.
Given the reduced importance of the d.c. motor, the reader may wonder why
a whole chapter is devoted to it. The answer is that, despite its relatively complex
construction, the d.c. machine is relatively simple to understand, not least because of
the clear physical distinction between its separate ‘ﬂux’ and ‘torque producing’ parts.
We will ﬁnd that its performance can be predicted with the aid of a simple
equivalent circuit, and that many aspects of its behavior are reﬂected in other types
of motor, where it may be more difﬁcult to identify the sources of ﬂux and torque.
The d.c. motor is therefore an ideal learning vehicle, and time spent assimilating the
material in this chapter should therefore be richly rewarded later.
Over a very wide power range from several megawatts at the top end down to
only a few watts, all d.c. machines have the same basic structure, as shown in
Figure 3.1.
The motor has two separate electrical circuits. The smaller pair of terminals
(usually designated E1, E2) connect to the ﬁeld windings, which surround each pole
and are normally in series: these windings provide the m.m.f. to set up the ﬂux in
the air-gap under the poles. In the steady state all the input power to the ﬁeld
windings is dissipated as heat – none of it is converted to mechanical output power.
The main terminals (usually designated A1, A2) convey the ‘torque-producing’
or ‘work’ current to the brushes which make sliding contact to the armature
winding on the rotor. The supply to the ﬁeld (the ﬂux-producing part of the motor)
is separate from that for the armature, hence the description ‘separately excited’.
As in any electrical machine it is possible to design a d.c. motor for any desired
supply voltage, but for several reasons it is unusual to ﬁnd rated voltages lower than
about 6 V or much higher than 700 V. The lower limit arises because the brushes
(see below) give rise to an unavoidable volt-drop of perhaps 0.5–1 V, and it is clearly
not good practice to let this ‘wasted’ voltage became a large fraction of the supply
voltage. At the other end of the scale it becomes prohibitively expensive to insulate
Electric Motors and Drives
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-098332-5.00003-6
 2013 Austin Hughes and William Drury.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
73j

the commutator segments to withstand higher voltages. The function and operation
of the commutator is discussed later, but it is appropriate to mention here that
brushes and commutators are troublesome at very high speeds. Small d.c. motors,
say up to hundreds of watts output, can run at perhaps 12,000 rev/min, but the
majority of medium and large motors are usually designed for speeds below
3000 rev/min.
Motors are usually supplied with power-electronic drives, which draw power
from the a.c. utility supply and convert it to d.c. for the motor. Since the utility
voltages tend to be standardized (e.g. 110 V, 220–240 V, or 380–440 V, 50 or
60 Hz), motors are made with rated voltages which match the range of d.c. outputs
from the converter (see Chapter 2).
As mentioned above, it is quite normal for a motor of a given power, speed and
size to be available in a range of different voltages. In principle all that has to be done
is to alter the number of turns and the size of wire making up the coils in the
machine. A 12 V, 4 A motor, for example, could easily be made to operate from
24 V instead, by winding its coils with twice as many turns of wire having only half
the cross-sectional area of the original. The full speed would be the same at 24 V as
the original was at 12 V, and the rated current would be 2 A, rather than 4 A. The
input power and output power would be unchanged, and externally there would be
no change in appearance, except that the terminals might be a bit smaller.
Traditionally, d.c. motors were classiﬁed as shunt, series, or separately excited.
In addition it was common to see motors referred to as ‘compound-wound’. These
descriptions date from the period before the advent of power electronics: they
reﬂect the way in which the ﬁeld and armature circuits are interconnected, which in
turn determines the operating characteristics. For example, the series motor has
a high starting torque when switched directly on line, so it became the natural
Figure 3.1 Conventional (brushed) d.c. motor.
74
Electric Motors and Drives

choice for traction applications, while applications requiring constant speed would
use the shunt connected motor.
However, at the fundamental level there is really no difference between the
various types, so we focus attention on the separately excited machine, before taking
a brief look at shunt and series motors. Later, in Chapter 4, we will see how the
operating characteristics of the separately excited machine with power-electronic
supplies equip it to suit any application, and thereby displace the various historic
predecessors.
We should make clear at this point that whereas in an a.c. machine the number
of poles is of prime importance in determining the speed, the pole-number in a d.c.
machine is of little consequence as far as the user is concerned. It turns out to be
more economical to use two or four poles (perhaps with a square stator frame) in
small or medium size d.c. motors, and more (e.g. ten or 12 or even more) in large
ones, but the only difference to the user is that the 2-pole type will have two brushes
at 180, the 4-pole will have four brushes at 90, and so on. Most of our discussion
centers on the 2-pole version in the interests of simplicity, but there is no essential
difference as far as operating characteristics are concerned.
2. TORQUE PRODUCTION
Torque is produced by interaction between the axial current-carrying conductors
on the rotor and the radial magnetic ﬂux produced by the stator. The ﬂux or
‘excitation’ can be furnished by permanent magnets (Figure 3.2(a)) or by means of
ﬁeld windings (Figures 3.1 and 3.2(b)).
Permanent magnet versions are available in motors with outputs from a few
watts up to a few kilowatts, while wound-ﬁeld machines begin at about 100 watts
and extend to the largest (MW) outputs. The advantages of the permanent magnet
type are that no electrical supply is required for the ﬁeld, and the overall size of the
Figure 3.2 Excitation (ﬁeld) systems for d.c. motors: (a) 2-pole permanent magnet;
(b) 4-pole wound ﬁeld.
Conventional D.C. Motors
75

motor can be smaller. On the other hand, the strength of the ﬁeld cannot be varied
so one possible option for control is ruled out.
Ferrite magnets have been used for many years. They are relatively cheap and
easy to manufacture but their energy product (a measure of their effectiveness as
a source of excitation) is poor. Rare earth magnets (e.g. neodymium–iron–boron or
samarium–cobalt) provide much higher energy products, and yield high torque/
volume ratios: they are used in high-performance servo motors, but are relatively
expensive and difﬁcult to manufacture and handle. Nd–Fe–B magnets have the
highest energy product but can only be operated at temperatures below about
150C, which is not sufﬁcient for some high-performance motors.
Although the magnetic ﬁeld is essential to the operation of the motor, we
should recall that in Chapter 1 we saw that none of the mechanical output power
actually comes from the ﬁeld system. The excitation acts like a catalyst in
a chemical reaction, making the energy conversion possible but not contributing
to the output.
The main (power) circuit consists of a set of identical coils wound in slots on
the rotor, and known as the armature. Current is fed into and out of the rotor via
carbon ‘brushes’ which make sliding contact with the ‘commutator’, which
consists of insulated copper segments mounted on a cylindrical former. (The term
‘brush’ stems from the early attempts to make sliding contacts using bundles of
wires bound together in much the same way as the willow twigs in a witch’s
broomstick. Not surprisingly these primitive brushes soon wore grooves in the
commutator.)
The function of the commutator is discussed below, but it is worth stressing
here that all the electrical energy which is to be converted into mechanical output
has to be fed into the motor through the brushes and commutator. Given that
a high-speed sliding electrical contact is involved, it is not surprising that to ensure
trouble-free operation the commutator needs to be kept clean, and the brushes and
their associated springs need to be regularly serviced. Brushes wear away, of course,
though if properly set they can last for thousands of hours. All being well the brush
debris (in the form of graphite particles) will be carried out of harm’s way by the
ventilating air: any build-up of dust on the insulation of the windings of a high-
voltage motor risks the danger of short-circuits, while debris on the commutator
itself is dangerous and can lead to disastrous ‘ﬂashover’ faults.
The axial length of the commutator depends on the current it has to handle.
Small motors usually have one brush on each side of the commutator, so the
commutator is quite short, but larger heavy-current motors may well have many
brushes mounted on a common arm, each with its own brushbox (in which it is free
to slide) and with all the brushes on one arm connected in parallel via their ﬂexible
copper leads or ‘pigtails’. The length of the commutator can then be comparable
with the ‘active’ length of the armature (i.e. the part carrying the conductors
exposed to the radial ﬂux). (See Plate 3.1.)
76
Electric Motors and Drives

2.1 Function of the commutator
Many different winding arrangements are used for d.c. armatures, and it is neither
helpful nor necessary for us to delve into the nitty-gritty of winding and
commutator design. These are matters which are best left to motor designers and
repairers. What we need to do is to focus on what a well-designed commutator-
winding actually achieves, and despite the apparent complexity, this can be stated
quite simply.
The purpose of the commutator is to ensure that regardless of the position of the
rotor, the pattern of current ﬂow in the rotor is always as shown in Figure 3.3.
Current enters the rotor via one brush, ﬂows through all the rotor coils in the
directions shown in Figure 3.3, and leaves via the other brush. The ﬁrst point of
contact with the armature is via the commutator segment or segments on which the
brush is pressing at the time (the brush is usually wider than a single segment), but
since the interconnections between the individual coils are made at each
commutator segment, the current actually passes through all the coils via all the
commutator segments in its path through the armature.
We can see from Figure 3.3 that all the conductors lying under the N pole carry
current in one direction, while all those under the S pole carry current in the
opposite direction. All the conductors under the N pole will therefore experience
a downward force (which is proportional to the radial ﬂux density B and the
armature current I) while all the conductors under the S pole will experience an
equal upward force. A torque is thus produced on the rotor, the magnitude of the
torque being proportional to the product of the ﬂux density and the current. In
practice the ﬂux density will not be completely uniform under the pole, so the force
on some of the armature conductors will be greater than on others. However, it is
straightforward to show that the total torque developed is given by
T ¼ KTFI
(3.1)
where F is the total ﬂux produced by the ﬁeld, and KT is constant for a given motor.
In the majority of motors the ﬂux remains constant, so we see that the motor torque
is directly proportional to the armature current. This extremely simple result means
that if a motor is required to produce constant torque at all speeds, we simply have
to arrange to keep the armature current constant. Standard drive packages usually
include provision for doing this, as will be seen later. We can also see from equation
Figure 3.3 Pattern of rotor (armature) currents in 2-pole d.c. motor.
Conventional D.C. Motors
77

(3.1) that the direction of the torque can be reversed by reversing either the
armature current (I) or the ﬂux (F). We obviously make use of this when we want
the motor to run in reverse, and sometimes when we want regenerative braking.
The alert reader might rightly challenge the claim – made above – that the
torque will be constant regardless of rotor position. Looking at Figure 3.3, it should
be clear that if the rotor turned just a few degrees, one of the ﬁve conductors shown
as being under the pole will move out into the region where there is no radial ﬂux,
before the next one moves under the pole. Instead of ﬁve conductors producing
force, there will then be only four, so won’t the torque be reduced accordingly?
The answer to this question is yes, and it is to limit this unwelcome variation of
torque that most motors have many more coils than are shown in Figure 3.3.
Smooth torque is of course desirable in most applications in order to avoid vibra-
tions and resonances in the transmission and load, and is essential in machine tool
drives where the quality of ﬁnish can be marred by uneven cutting if the torque and
speed are not steady.
Broadly speaking the higher the number of coils (and commutator segments)
the better, because the ideal armature would be one in which the pattern of current
on the rotor corresponded to a ‘current sheet’, rather than a series of discrete packets
of current. If the number of coils was inﬁnite, the rotor would look identical at
every position, and the torque would therefore be absolutely smooth. Obviously
this is not practicable, but it is closely approximated in most d.c. motors. For
practical and economic reasons the number of slots is higher in large motors, which
may well have a hundred or more coils and hence very little ripple in their output
torque.
2.2 Operation of the commutator – interpoles
Returning now to the operation of the commutator, and focusing on a particular
coil (e.g. the one shown as ab in Figure 3.3) we note that for half a revolution –
while side a is under the N pole and side b is under the S pole – the current needs to
be positive in side a and negative in side b in order to produce a positive torque. For
the other half revolution, while side a is under the S pole and side b is under the N
pole, the current must ﬂow in the opposite direction through the coil for it to
continue to produce positive torque. This reversal of current takes place in each coil
as it passes through the interpolar axis, the coil being ‘switched-round’ by the action
of the commutator sliding under the brush. Each time a coil reaches this position it is
said to be undergoing commutation, and the relevant coil in Figure 3.3 has
therefore been shown as having no current to indicate that its current is in the
process of changing from positive to negative.
The essence of the current-reversal mechanism is revealed by the simpliﬁed
sketch shown in Figure 3.4. This diagram shows a single coil fed via the commutator
and brushes with current that always ﬂows in at the top brush.
78
Electric Motors and Drives

In the left-hand sketch, coil-side a is under the N pole and carries positive
current because it is connected to the shaded commutator segment which in turn is
fed from the top brush. Side a is therefore exposed to a ﬂux density directed from
left (N) to right (S) in the sketch, and will therefore experience a downward force.
This force will remain constant while the coil-side remains under the N pole.
Conversely, side b has negative current but it also lies in a ﬂux density directed from
right to left, so it experiences an upward force. There is thus an anticlockwise torque
on the rotor.
When the rotor turns to the position shown in the sketch on the right, the
current in both sides is reversed, because side b is now fed with positive current
via the unshaded commutator segment. The direction of force on each coil-side
is reversed, which is exactly what we want in order for the torque to remain
clockwise. Apart from the short period when the coil is outside the inﬂuence
of the ﬂux, and undergoing commutation (current-reversal) the torque is
constant.
It should be stressed that the discussion above is intended to illustrate the
principle involved, and the sketch should not be taken too literally. In a real multi-
coil armature, the commutator arc is much smaller than that shown in Figure 3.4
and only one of the many coils is reversed at a time, so the torque remains very
nearly constant regardless of the position of the rotor.
The main difﬁculty in achieving good commutation arises because of the self
inductance of the armature coils, and the associated stored energy. As we have seen
earlier, inductive circuits tend to resist change of current, and if the current reversal
has not been fully completed by the time the brush slides off the commutator
segment in question there will be a spark at the trailing edge of the brush.
In small motors some sparking is considered tolerable, but in medium and large
wound-ﬁeld motors small additional stator poles known as interpoles (or compoles)
are provided to improve commutation and hence minimize sparking. These extra
poles are located midway between the main ﬁeld poles, as shown in Figure 3.5.
Interpoles are not normally required in permanent magnet motors because the
absence of stator iron close to the rotor coils results in much lower armature coil
inductance.
Figure 3.4 Simpliﬁed diagram of single-coil motor to illustrate the current-reversing
function of the commutator.
Conventional D.C. Motors
79

The purpose of the interpoles is to induce a motional e.m.f. in the coil
undergoing commutation, in such a direction as to speed up the desired reversal
of current, and thereby prevent sparking. The e.m.f. needed is proportional to
the current which has to be commutated, i.e. the armature current, and to the
speed of rotation. The correct e.m.f. is therefore achieved by passing the
armature current through the coils on the interpoles, thereby making the ﬂux
from the interpoles proportional to the armature current. The interpole coils
therefore consist of a few turns of thick conductor, connected permanently in
series with the armature.
3. MOTIONAL E.M.F.
Readers who have skipped Chapter 1 are advised to check that they are
familiar with the material covered in section 7 of that chapter before reading the rest
of this chapter, as not all of the lessons drawn in Chapter 1 are repeated explicitly
here.
When the armature is stationary, no motional e.m.f. is induced in it. But when
the rotor turns, the armature conductors cut the radial magnetic ﬂux and an e.m.f. is
induced in them.
As far as each individual coil on the armature is concerned, an alternating e.m.f.
will be induced in it when the rotor rotates. For the coil ab in Figure 3.3, for
example, side a will be moving upward through the ﬂux if the rotation is clockwise,
and an e.m.f. directed out of the plane of the paper will be generated. At the same
time the ‘return’ side of the coil (b) will be moving downwards, so the same
magnitude of e.m.f. will be generated, but directed into the paper. The resultant
e.m.f. in the coil will therefore be twice that in the coil-side, and this e.m.f. will
remain constant for almost half a revolution, during which time the coil-sides are
cutting a constant ﬂux density. For the comparatively short time when the coil is
not cutting any ﬂux the e.m.f. will be zero, and then the coil will begin to cut
through the ﬂux again, but now each side is under the other pole, so the e.m.f. is in
Figure 3.5 Sketch showing location of interpole and interpole winding. (The main ﬁeld
windings have been omitted for the sake of clarity.)
80
Electric Motors and Drives

the opposite direction. The resultant e.m.f. waveform in each coil is therefore
a rectangular alternating wave, with magnitude and frequency proportional to the
speed of rotation.
The coils on the rotor are connected in series, so if we were to look at the e.m.f.
across any given pair of diametrically opposite commutator segments, we would see
a large alternating e.m.f. (We would have to station ourselves on the rotor to do this,
or else make sliding contacts using slip-rings.)
The fact that the induced voltage in the rotor is alternating may come as
a surprise, since we are talking about a d.c. motor rather than an a.c. one. But any
worries we may have should be dispelled when we ask what we will see by way of
induced e.m.f. when we ‘look in’ at the brushes. We will see that the brushes and
commutator effect a remarkable transformation, bringing us back into the reassuring
world of d.c.
The ﬁrst point to note is that the brushes are stationary. This means that
although a particular segment under each brush is continually being replaced by its
neighbor, the circuit lying between the two brushes always consists of the same
number of coils, with the same orientation with respect to the poles. As a result the
e.m.f. at the brushes is direct (i.e. constant), rather than alternating.
The magnitude of the e.m.f. depends on the position of the brushes around the
commutator, but they are invariably placed at the point where they continually ‘see’
the peak value of the alternating e.m.f. induced in the armature. In effect, the
commutator and brushes can be regarded as a mechanical rectiﬁer which converts
the alternating e.m.f. in the rotating reference frame to a direct e.m.f. in the
stationary reference frame. It is a remarkably clever and effective device, its only real
drawback being that it is a mechanical system, and therefore subject to wear
and tear.
We saw earlier that to obtain smooth torque it was necessary for there to be
a large number of coils and commutator segments, and we ﬁnd that much
the same considerations apply to the smoothness of the generated e.m.f. If there
are only a few armature coils the e.m.f. will have a noticeable ripple super-
imposed on the mean d.c. level. The higher we make the number of coils, the
smaller the ripple, and the better the d.c. we produce. The small ripple we
inevitably get with a ﬁnite number of segments is seldom any problem with
motors used in drives, but can sometimes give rise to difﬁculties when a d.c.
machine is used to provide a speed feedback signal in a closed-loop system (see
Chapter 4).
In Chapter 1 we saw that when a conductor of length l moves at velocity v
through a ﬂux density B, the motional e.m.f. induced is given by e ¼ Blv. In the
complete machine we have many series-connected conductors; the linear velocity
(v) of the primitive machine examined in Chapter 1 is replaced by the tangential
velocity of the rotor conductors, which is clearly proportional to the speed of
rotation (n); and the average ﬂux density cut by each conductor (B) is directly
Conventional D.C. Motors
81

related to the total ﬂux (F). If we roll together the other inﬂuential factors (number
of conductors, radius, active length of rotor) into a single constant (KE), it follows
that the magnitude of the resultant e.m.f. (E) which is generated at the brushes is
given by
E ¼ KEFn
(3.2)
This equation reminds us of the key role of the ﬂux, in that until we switch on the
ﬁeld no voltage will be generated, no matter how fast the rotor turns. Once the
ﬁeld is energized, the generated voltage is directly proportional to the speed of
rotation, so if we reverse the direction of rotation, we will also reverse the polarity
of the generated e.m.f. We should also remember that the e.m.f. depends only on
the ﬂux and the speed, and is the same regardless of whether the rotation is
provided by some external source (i.e. when the machine is being driven as
a generator) or when the rotation is produced by the machine itself (i.e. when it is
acting as a motor).
It has already been mentioned that the ﬂux is usually constant at its full value, in
which case equations (3.1) and (3.2) can be written in the form
T ¼ ktI
(3.3)
E ¼ keu
(3.4)
where kt is the motor torque constant, ke is the e.m.f. constant, and u is the angular
speed in rad/s.
In this book the international standard (SI) system of units is used throughout. In
the SI system, the units for kt are the units of torque (newton-meter) divided by the
unit of current (ampere), i.e. Nm/A; and the units of ke units are volts/rad/s. (Note,
however, that ke is more often given in volts/1000 rev/min.)
It is not at all clear that the units for the torque constant (Nm/A) and the e.m.f.
constant (V/rad/s), which on the face of it measure very different physical
phenomena, are in fact the same, i.e. 1 Nm/A ¼ 1 volt/rad/s. Some readers will be
content simply to accept it, others may be puzzled, a few may even ﬁnd it obvious.
Those who are surprised and puzzled may feel more comfortable by progressively
replacing one set of units by their equivalent, to lead us in the direction of the
other, e.g.
ðnewtonÞðmeterÞ
amp
¼ joule
amp ¼ ðwattÞðsecondÞ
amp
¼ ðvoltÞðampÞðsecondÞ
amp
¼ ðvoltÞðsecondÞ
This still leaves us to ponder what happened to the ‘radians’ in ke, but at least the
underlying unity is demonstrated, and, after all, a radian is a dimensionless quantity.
Delving deeper, we note that 1 volt  1 second ¼ 1 weber, the unit of magnetic
ﬂux. This is hardly surprising because the production of torque and the generation
of motional e.m.f. are both brought about by the catalytic action of the magnetic
ﬂux.
82
Electric Motors and Drives

Returning to more pragmatic issues, we have now discovered the extremely
convenient fact that in SI units, the torque and e.m.f. constants are equal, i.e.
kt ¼ ke ¼ k. The torque and e.m.f. equations can thus be further simpliﬁed as
T ¼ kI
(3.5)
E ¼ ku
(3.6)
We will make use of these two delightfully simple equations time and again in
the subsequent discussion. Together with the armature voltage equation (see
below), they allow us to predict all aspects of behavior of a d.c. motor. There can
be few such versatile machines for which the fundamentals can be expressed so
simply.
Though attention has been focused on the motional e.m.f. in the conductors,
we must not overlook the fact that motional e.m.f.s are also induced in the body of
the rotor. If we consider a rotor tooth, for example, it should be clear that it will
have an alternating e.m.f. induced in it as the rotor turns, in just the same way as the
e.m.f. induced in the adjacent conductor. In the machine shown in Figure 3.1, for
example, when the e.m.f. in a tooth under an N pole is positive, the e.m.f. in the
diametrically opposite tooth (under an S pole) will be negative. Given that the rotor
steel conducts electricity, these e.m.f.s will tend to set up circulating currents in the
body of the rotor, so to prevent this happening, the rotor is made not from a solid
piece but from thin steel laminations (typically less than 1 mm thick) which have an
insulated coating to prevent the ﬂow of unwanted currents. If the rotor was not
laminated the induced current would not only produce large quantities of waste
heat, but also exert a substantial braking torque.
3.1 Equivalent circuit
The equivalent circuit can now be drawn on the same basis as we used for the
primitive machine in Chapter 1, and is shown in Figure 3.6.
The voltage V is the voltage applied to the armature terminals (i.e. across the
brushes), and E is the internally developed motional e.m.f. The resistance and
Figure 3.6 Equivalent circuit of a d.c. motor.
Conventional D.C. Motors
83

inductance of the complete armature are represented by R and L in Figure 3.6. The
sign convention adopted is the usual one when the machine is operating as a motor.
Under motoring conditions, the motional e.m.f. E always opposes the applied
voltage V, and for this reason it is referred to as ‘back e.m.f.’. For current to be
forced into the motor, V must be greater than E, the armature circuit voltage
equation being given by
V ¼ E þ IR þ L dI
dt
(3.7)
The last term in equation (3.7) represents the inductive volt-drop due to the
armature self inductance. This voltage is proportional to the rate of change of
current, so under steady-state conditions (when the current is constant), the term
will be zero and can be ignored. We will see later that the armature inductance has
an unwelcome effect under transient conditions, but is also very beneﬁcial in
smoothing the current waveform when the motor is supplied by a controlled
rectiﬁer.
4. D.C. MOTOR – STEADY-STATE CHARACTERISTICS
From the user’s viewpoint the extent to which speed falls when load is applied,
and the variation in speed with applied voltage, are usually the ﬁrst questions
which need to be answered in order to assess the suitability of the motor for
the job in hand. The information is usually conveyed in the form of the steady-
state characteristics, which indicate how the motor behaves when any transient
effects (caused, for example, by a sudden change in the load) have died away
and conditions have once again become steady. Steady-state characteristics are
usually much easier to predict than transient characteristics, and for the d.c.
machine they can all be deduced from the simple equivalent circuit in
Figure 3.6.
Under steady conditions, the armature current I is constant and equation (3.7)
simpliﬁes to
V ¼ E þ IR; or I ¼ V  E
R
(3.8)
This equation allows us to ﬁnd the current if we know the applied voltage, the
speed (from which we get E via equation (3.6)) and the armature resistance, and we
can then obtain the torque from equation (3.5). Alternatively, we may begin with
torque and speed, and work out what voltage will be needed.
We will derive the steady-state torque–speed characteristics for any given
armature voltage V shortly, but ﬁrst we begin by establishing the relationship
between the no-load speed and the armature voltage, since this is the foundation on
which the speed control philosophy is based.
84
Electric Motors and Drives

4.1 No-load speed
By ‘no-load’ we mean that the motor is running light, so that the only mechanical
resistance is that due to its own friction. In any sensible motor the frictional torque
will be small, and only a small driving torque will therefore be needed to keep the
motor running. Since motor torque is proportional to current (equation (3.5)), the
no-load current will also be small. If we assume that the no-load current is in fact
zero, the calculation of no-load speed becomes very simple. We note from equation
(3.8) that zero current implies that the back e.m.f. is equal to the applied voltage,
while equation (3.2) shows that the back e.m.f. is proportional to speed. Hence
under true no-load (zero torque) conditions, we obtain
V ¼ E ¼ KEFn; or n ¼
V
KEF
(3.9)
where n is the speed. (We have used equation (3.2) for the e.m.f., rather than the
simpler equation (3.4) because the latter only applies when the ﬂux is at its full value,
and in the present context it is important for us to see what happens when the ﬂux is
reduced.)
At this stage we are concentrating on the steady-state running speeds, but we are
bound to wonder how it is that the motor reaches speed from rest. We will return to
this when we look at transient behavior, so for the moment it is sufﬁcient to recall
that we came across an equation identical to equation (3.9) when we looked at the
primitive linear motor in Chapter 1. We saw that if there was no resisting force
opposing the motion, the speed would rise until the back e.m.f. equaled the supply
voltage. The same result clearly applies to the frictionless and unloaded d.c. motor
here.
We see from equation (3.9) that the no-load speed is directly proportional to
armature voltage, and inversely proportional to ﬁeld ﬂux. For the moment we will
continue to consider the case where the ﬂux is constant, and demonstrate by means
of an example that the approximations used in arriving at equation (3.9) are justiﬁed
in practice. Later, we can use the same example to study the torque–speed
characteristic.
4.2 Performance calculation – example
Consider a 500 V, 9.1 kW, 20 A, permanent-magnet motor with an armature
resistance of 1 U. (These values tell us that the normal operating voltage is 500 V,
the current when the motor is fully loaded is 20 A, and the mechanical output
power under these full-load conditions is 9.1 kW.) When supplied at 500 V, the
unloaded motor is found to run at 1040 rev/min, drawing a current of 0.8 A.
Whenever the motor is running at a steady speed, the torque it produces must
be equal (and opposite) to the total opposing or load torque: if the motor torque was
less than the load torque, it would decelerate, and if the motor torque was higher
Conventional D.C. Motors
85

than the load torque it would accelerate. From equation (3.3), we see that the motor
torque is determined by its current, so we can make the important statement that, in
the steady state, the motor current will be determined by the mechanical load
torque. When we make use of the equivalent circuit (Figure 3.6) under steady-state
conditions we will need to get used to the idea that the current is determined by the
load torque – i.e. one of the principal ‘inputs’ which will allow us to solve the circuit
equations is the mechanical load torque, which is not even shown on the diagram.
For those who are not used to electromechanical interactions this can be a source of
difﬁculty.
Returning to our example, we note that because the motor is a real motor, it
draws a small current (and therefore produces some torque) even when unloaded.
The fact that it needs to produce torque, even though no load torque has been
applied and it is not accelerating, is attributable to the inevitable friction in the
cooling fan, bearings and brushgear.
If we want to estimate the no-load speed at a different armature voltage (say
250 V), we would ignore the small no-load current and use equation (3.9), giving
no-load speed at 250 V ¼ ð250=500Þ  1040 ¼ 520 rev=min
Since equation (3.9) is based on the assumption that the no-load current is zero, this
result is only approximate.
If we insist on being more precise, we must ﬁrst calculate the original value of
the back e.m.f., using equation (3.8), which gives
E ¼ 500  0:8  1 ¼ 499:2 volts
As expected the back e.m.f. is almost equal to the applied voltage. The corre-
sponding speed is 1040 rev/min, so the e.m.f. constant must be 499.2/1040, or
480 volts/1000 rev/min. To calculate the no-load speed for V ¼ 250 volts, we ﬁrst
need to know the current. We are not told anything about how the friction torque
varies with speed so all we can do is to assume that the friction torque is constant, in
which case the motor current will be 0.8 A regardless of speed. With this
assumption, the back e.m.f. will be given by
E ¼ 250  0:8  1 ¼ 249:2 V
And hence the speed will be given by
no-load speed at 250 V ¼ 249:2
480  1000 ¼ 519:2 rev=min
The difference between the approximate and true no-load speeds is very small, and
is unlikely to be signiﬁcant. Hence we can safely use equation (3.9) to predict the
no-load speed at any armature voltage, and obtain the set of no-load speeds shown
in Figure 3.7.
This diagram illustrates the very simple linear relationship between the speed of
an unloaded d.c. motor and the armature voltage.
86
Electric Motors and Drives

4.3 Behavior when loaded
Having seen that the no-load speed of the motor is directly proportional to the
armature voltage, we need to explore how the speed will vary when we change the
load on the shaft.
The usual way we quantify ‘load’ is to specify the torque needed to drive the
load at a particular speed. Some loads, such as a simple drum-type hoist with
a constant weight on the hook, require the same torque regardless of speed, but for
most loads the torque needed varies with the speed. For a fan, for example, the
torque needed varies roughly with the square of the speed. If we know the torque–
speed characteristic of the load, and the torque–speed characteristic of the motor
(see below), we can ﬁnd the steady-state speed simply by ﬁnding the intersection of
the two curves in the torque–speed plane. An example (not speciﬁc to a d.c. motor)
is shown in Figure 3.8.
At point X the torque produced by the motor is exactly equal to the torque
needed to keep the load turning, so the motor and load are in equilibrium and
the speed remains steady. At all lower speeds, the motor torque will be higher than
the load torque, so the net torque will be positive, leading to an acceleration of the
Figure 3.7 No-load speed of d.c. motor as a function of armature voltage.
Figure 3.8 Steady-state torque–speed curves for motor and load showing location (X)
of steady-state operating condition.
Conventional D.C. Motors
87

motor. As the speed rises towards X the acceleration reduces until the speed
stabilizes at X. Conversely, at speeds above X the motor’s driving torque is less than
the braking torque exerted by the load, so the net torque is negative and the system
will decelerate until it reaches equilibrium at X. This example is one which is
inherently stable, so that if the speed is disturbed for some reason from the point X,
it will always return there when the disturbance is removed.
Turning now to the derivation of the torque–speed characteristics of the d.c.
motor, we can proﬁtably extend the previous example to illustrate matters. We can
obtain the full-load speed for V ¼ 500 volts by ﬁrst calculating the back e.m.f. at
full-load (i.e. when the current is 20 A). From equation (3.8) we obtain
E ¼ 500  20  1 ¼ 480 volts
We have already seen that the e.m.f. constant is 480 volts/1000 rev/min, so the full-
load speed is clearly 1000 rev/min. From no-load to full-load the speed falls linearly,
giving the torque–speed curve for V ¼ 500 volts shown in Figure 3.9. Note that
from no-load to full-load the speed falls from 1040 rev/min to 1000 rev/min,
a drop of only 4%. Over the same range the back e.m.f. falls from very nearly 500 to
480 volts, which of course also represents a drop of 4%.
We can check the power balance using the same approach as in section 7
of Chapter 1. At full-load the electrical input power is given by VI, i.e.
500 V  20 A ¼ 10 kW. The power loss in the armature resistance is I2R ¼
400  1 ¼ 400 W. The power converted from electrical to mechanical form is
given by EI, i.e. 480 V  20 A ¼ 9600 W. We can see from the no-load data that
the power required to overcome friction and iron losses (eddy currents and
hysteresis, mainly in the rotor) at no-load is approximately 500 V  0.8 A ¼ 400 W,
so this leaves about 9.2 kW. The rated output power of 9.1 kW indicates that
100 W of additional losses (which we will not attempt to explore here) can be
expected under full-load conditions.
Figure 3.9 Family of steady-state torque–speed curves for a range of armature
voltages.
88
Electric Motors and Drives

Two important observations follow from these calculations. First, the drop in
speed when load is applied (the ‘droop’) is very small. This is very desirable for most
applications, since all we have to do to maintain almost constant speed is to set the
appropriate armature voltage and keep it constant. Secondly, a delicate balance
between V and E is revealed. The current is in fact proportional to the difference
between V and E (equation (3.8)), so that quite small changes in either V or E give
rise to disproportionately large changes in the current. In the example, a 4%
reduction in E causes the current to rise to its rated value. Hence to avoid excessive
currents (which cannot be tolerated in a thyristor supply, for example), the
difference between V and E must be limited. This point will be taken up again
when transient performance is explored.
A representative family of torque–speed characteristics for the motor discussed
above is shown in Figure 3.9. As already explained, the no-load speeds are directly
proportional to the applied voltage, while the slope of each curve is the same, being
determined by the armature resistance: the smaller the resistance the less the speed
falls with load. These operating characteristics are very attractive because the speed
can be set simply by applying the correct voltage.
The upper region of each characteristic in Figure 3.9 is shown dashed because in
this region the armature current is above its rated value, and therefore the motor
cannot be operated continuously without overheating. Motors can and do operate
for short periods above rated current, and the fact that the d.c. machine can
continue to provide torque in proportion to current well into the overload region
makes it particularly well suited to applications requiring the occasional boost of
excess torque.
A cooling problem might be expected when motors are run continuously at full
current (i.e. full torque) even at very low speed, where the natural ventilation is poor.
This operating condition is considered quite normal in converter-fed motor drive
systems, and motors are accordingly ﬁtted with a small air-blower motor as standard.
This book is about motors, which convert electrical power into mechanical
power. But, in common with all electrical machines, the d.c. motor is inherently
capable of operating as a generator, converting mechanical power into electrical
power. And although the overwhelming majority of d.c. machines will spend most
of their time in motoring mode, there are applications such as rolling mills where
frequent reversal is called for, and others where rapid braking is required. In the
former, the motor is controlled so that it returns the stored kinetic energy to the
supply system each time the rolls have to be reversed, while in the latter case
the energy may also be returned to the supply, or dumped as heat in a resistor. These
transient modes of operation during which the machine acts as a generator may
better be described as ‘regeneration’ since they only involve recovery of mechanical
energy that was originally provided by the motor.
Continuous generation is of course possible using a d.c. machine provided we
have a source of mechanical power, such as an internal combustion (IC) engine. In
Conventional D.C. Motors
89

the example discussed above we saw that when connected to a 500 V supply, the
unloaded machine ran at 1040 rev/min, at which point the back e.m.f was very
nearly 500 V and only a tiny positive current was ﬂowing. As we applied mechanical
load to the shaft the steady-state speed fell, thereby reducing the back e.m.f. and
increasing the armature current until the motor toque was equal to the opposing
load torque and equilibrium returned.
Conversely, if instead of applying an opposing (load) torque, we use the IC
engine to supply torque in the opposite direction, i.e. trying to increase the speed
of the motor, the increase in speed will cause the motional e.m.f. to be greater than
the supply voltage (500 V). This means that the current will ﬂow from the d.c.
machine to the supply, resulting in a negative torque and reversal of electrical
power ﬂow back into the supply. Stable generating conditions will be achieved
when the motor torque (current) is equal and opposite to the torque provided by
the IC engine. In the example, the full-load current is 20 A, so in order to drive this
current through its own resistance and overcome the supply voltage the e.m.f.
must be given by
E ¼ IR þ V ¼ 20  1 þ 500 ¼ 520 volts
The corresponding speed can be calculated by reference to the no-load e.m.f.
(499.2 volts at 1040 rev/min) from which the steady generating speed is given by
Ngen
1040 ¼
520
499:2;
i:e: Ngen ¼ 1083 rev=min
On the torque–speed plot (Figure 3.9) this condition lies on the downward
projection of the 500 V characteristic at a current of 20 A. We note that the full
range of operation, from full-load motoring to full-load generating, is accomplished
with only a modest change in speed from 1000 to 1083 rev/min.
It is worth emphasizing that in order to make the unloaded motor move into
the generating mode, all that we had to do was to start supplying mechanical
power to the motor shaft. No physical changes had to be made to the motor to
make it into a generator – the hardware is equally at home functioning as
a motor or as a generator – which is why it is best referred to as a ‘machine’. An
electric vehicle takes full advantage of this inherent reversibility, recharging the
battery when we decelerate or descend a hill. (How pleasant it would be if the
IC engine could do the same; whenever we slowed down, we could watch
the rising gauge as our kinetic energy was converted back into hydrocarbon fuel
in the tank!)
To complete this section we will derive the analytical expression for the steady-
state speed as a function of the two variables that we can control, i.e. the applied
voltage (V ), and the load torque (TL). Under steady-state conditions the armature
current is constant and we can therefore ignore the armature inductance term in
equation (3.7); and because there is no acceleration, the motor torque is equal to the
90
Electric Motors and Drives

load torque. Hence by eliminating the current I between equations (3.5) and (3.7),
and substituting for E from equation (3.6), the speed is given by
u ¼ V
k  R
k2 TL
(3.10)
This equation represents a straight line in the speed–torque plane, as we saw with
our previous worked example. The ﬁrst term shows that the no-load speed is
directly proportional to the armature voltage, while the second term gives the drop
in speed for a given load torque. The gradient or slope of the torque–speed curve is
R/k2, showing again that the smaller the armature resistance, the smaller the drop
in speed when load is applied.
4.4 Base speed and ﬁeld weakening
Returning to our consideration of motor operating characteristics, when the ﬁeld
ﬂux is at its full value the speed corresponding to full armature voltage and full
current (i.e. the rated full-load condition) is known as base speed (see Figure 3.10).
The upper part of the ﬁgure shows the regions of the torque–speed plane within
which the motor can operate without exceeding its maximum or rated current. The
lower diagram shows the maximum output power as a function of speed.
The motor can operate at any speed up to base speed, and any torque (current)
up to rated value by appropriate choice of armature voltage. This full ﬂux region of
operation is indicated by the shaded area 0abc in Figure 3.10, and is often referred to
Figure 3.10 Regions of continuous operation in the torque–speed and power–speed
planes.
Conventional D.C. Motors
91

as the ‘constant torque’ region of the torque–speed characteristic. In this context
‘constant torque’ signiﬁes that at any speed below base speed the motor is capable of
producing its full rated torque. Note that the term constant torque does not mean
that the motor will produce constant torque, but rather it signiﬁes that the motor can
produce constant torque if required: as we have already seen, it is the mechanical
load we apply to the shaft that determines the steady-state torque produced by the
motor.
When the current is at maximum (i.e. along the line ab in Figure 3.10), the
torque is at its maximum (rated) value. Since mechanical power is given by torque
times speed, the power output along ab is proportional to the speed, as shown in
the lower part of the ﬁgure, and the maximum power thus corresponds to the
point b in Figure 3.10. At point b both the voltage and current have their full rated
values.
To run faster than base speed the ﬁeld ﬂux must be reduced, as indicated by
equation (3.9). Operation with reduced ﬂux is known as ‘ﬁeld weakening’, and we
have already discussed this perhaps surprising mode in connection with the prim-
itive linear motor in Chapter 1. For example, by halving the ﬂux (and keeping the
armature voltage at its full value), the no-load speed is doubled (point d in
Figure 3.10). The increase in speed is, however, obtained at the expense of available
torque, which is proportional to ﬂux times current (see equation (3.1)). The current
is limited to rated value, so if the ﬂux is halved, the speed will double but the
maximum torque which can be developed is only half the rated value (point e in
Figure 3.10). Note that at the point e both the armature voltage and the armature
current again have their full rated values, so the power is at maximum, as it was at
point b. The power is constant along the curve through b and e, and for this reason
the shaded area to the right of the line bc is referred to as the ‘constant power’ region.
Obviously, ﬁeld weakening is only satisfactory for applications which do not
demand full torque at high speeds, such as electric traction.
The maximum allowable speed under weak ﬁeld conditions must be limited (to
avoid excessive sparking at the commutator), and is usually indicated on the motor
rating plate. A marking of 1200/1750 rev/min, for example, would indicate a base
speed of 1200 rev/min, and a maximum speed with ﬁeld weakening of 1750 rev/min.
The ﬁeld weakening range varies widely depending on the motor design, but
maximum speed rarely exceeds three or four times base speed.
To sum up, the speed is controlled as follows:
•
Below base speed, the ﬂux is maximum, and the speed is set by the armature
voltage. Full torque is available at any speed.
•
Above base speed the armature voltage is at (or close to) maximum, and the ﬂux
is reduced in order to raise the speed. The maximum torque available reduces in
proportion to the ﬂux.
To judge the suitability of a motor for a particular application we need to compare
the torque–speed characteristic of the prospective load with the operating diagram
92
Electric Motors and Drives

for the motor: if the load torque calls for operation outside the shaded areas of
Figure 3.10, a larger motor is clearly called for.
Finally, we should note that according to equation (3.9), the no-load speed will
become inﬁnite if the ﬂux is reduced to zero. This seems an unlikely state of affairs;
after all, we have seen that the ﬁeld is essential for the motor to operate, so it seems
unreasonable to imagine that if we removed the ﬁeld altogether, the speed would
rise to inﬁnity. In fact, the explanation lies in the assumption that ‘no-load’ for a real
motor means zero torque. If we could make a motor which had no friction torque
whatsoever, the speed would indeed continue to rise as we reduced the ﬁeld ﬂux
towards zero. But as we reduced the ﬂux, the torque per ampere of armature
current would become smaller and smaller, so in a real machine with friction, there
will come a point where the torque being produced by the motor is equal to the
friction torque, and the speed will therefore be limited. Nevertheless, it is quite
dangerous to open-circuit the ﬁeld winding, especially in a large unloaded motor.
There may be sufﬁcient ‘residual’ magnetism left in the poles to produce signiﬁcant
accelerating torque to lead to a run-away situation. Usually, ﬁeld and armature
circuits are interlocked so that if the ﬁeld is lost, the armature circuit is switched off
automatically.
4.5 Armature reaction
In addition to deliberate ﬁeld weakening, as discussed above, the ﬂux in a d.c.
machine can be weakened by an effect known as ‘armature reaction’. As its name
implies, armature reaction relates to the inﬂuence that the armature m.m.f. has on
the ﬂux in the machine: in small machines it is negligible, but in large machines
the unwelcome ﬁeld weakening caused by armature reaction is sufﬁcient to
warrant extra design features to combat it. A full discussion would be well beyond
the needs of most users, but a brief explanation is included for the sake of
completeness.
The way armature reaction occurs can best be appreciated by looking at
Figure 3.1 and noting that the m.m.f. of the armature conductors acts along the axis
deﬁned by the brushes, i.e. the armature m.m.f. acts in quadrature to the main ﬂux
axis which lies along the stator poles. The reluctance in the quadrature direction is
high because of the large air spaces that the ﬂux has to cross, so despite the fact that
the rotor m.m.f. at full current can be very large, the quadrature ﬂux is relatively
small; and because it is perpendicular to the main ﬂux, the average value of the latter
would not be expected to be affected by the quadrature ﬂux, even though part of
the path of the reaction ﬂux is shared with the main ﬂux as it passes (horizontally in
Figure 3.1) through the main pole-pieces.
A similar matter was addressed in relation to the primitive machine in
Chapter 1. There it was explained that it was not necessary to take account of the
ﬂux produced by the conductor itself when calculating the electromagnetic force
Conventional D.C. Motors
93

on it. And if it were not for the non-linear phenomenon of magnetic saturation, the
armature reaction ﬂux would have no effect on the average value of the main ﬂux in
the machine shown in Figure 3.1: the ﬂux density on one edge of the pole-pieces
would be increased by the presence of the reaction ﬂux, but decreased by the same
amount on the other edge, leaving the average of the main ﬂux unchanged.
However, if the iron in the main magnetic circuit is already some way into satu-
ration, the presence of the rotor m.m.f. will cause less of an increase on the one edge
than it causes by way of decrease on the other, and there will be a net reduction in
main ﬂux.
We know that reducing the ﬂux leads to an increase in speed, so we can now see
that in a machine with pronounced armature reaction, when the load on the shaft is
increased and the armature current increases to produce more torque, the ﬁeld is
simultaneously reduced and the motor speeds up. Though this behavior is not a true
case of instability, it is not generally regarded as desirable!
Large motors often carry additional windings ﬁtted into slots in the pole-faces
and connected in series with the armature. These ‘compensating’ windings produce
an m.m.f. in opposition to the armature m.m.f., thereby reducing or eliminating the
armature reaction effect.
4.6 Maximum output power
We have seen that if the mechanical load on the shaft of the motor increases, the
speed falls and the armature current automatically increases until equilibrium of
torque is reached and the speed again becomes steady. If the armature voltage is at its
maximum (rated) value, and we increase the mechanical load until the current
reaches its rated value, we are clearly at full-load, i.e. we are operating at the full
speed (determined by voltage) and the full torque (determined by current). The
maximum current is set at the design stage, and reﬂects the tolerable level of heating
of the armature conductors.
Clearly if we increase the load on the shaft still more, the current will exceed the
safe value, and the motor will begin to overheat. But the question which this
prompts is: If it were not for the problem of overheating, could the motor deliver
more and more power output, or is there a limit?
We can see straightaway that there will be a maximum by looking at the tor-
que–speed curves in Figure 3.9. The mechanical output power is the product of
torque and speed, and we see that the power will be zero when either the load
torque is zero (i.e. the motor is running light) or the speed is zero (i.e. the motor is
stationary). There must be maximum between these two zeroes, and it is easy to
show that the peak mechanical power occurs when the speed is half of the no-load
speed. However, this operating condition is only practicable in very small motors: in
the majority of motors, the supply would simply not be able to provide the very
high current required.
94
Electric Motors and Drives

Turning to the question of what determines the theoretical maximum power,
we can apply the maximum power transfer theorem (from circuit theory) to the
equivalent circuit in Figure 3.6. The inductance can be ignored because we assume
d.c. conditions. If we regard the armature resistance R as if it were the resistance of
the source V, the theorem tells us that in order to transfer maximum power to the
load (represented by the motional e.m.f. on the right-hand side of Figure 3.6) we
must make the load ‘look like’ a resistance equal to the source resistance R. This
condition is obtained when the applied voltage V divides equally so that half of it is
dropped across R and the other half is equal to the e.m.f. E. (We note that the
condition E ¼ V/2 corresponds to the motor running at half the no-load speed, as
stated above.) At the maximum power point, the current is V/2R, and the
mechanical output power (EI) is given by V2/4R.
The expression for the maximum output power is delightfully simple. We
might have expected the maximum power to depend on other motor parameters,
but in fact it is determined solely by the armature voltage and the armature resis-
tance. For example, we can say immediately that a 12 V motor with an armature
resistance of 1 U cannot possibly produce more than 36 W of mechanical output
power.
We should of course observe that under maximum power conditions the overall
efﬁciency is only 50% (because an equal power is burned off as heat in the armature
resistance); and we emphasize again that only very small motors can ever be operated
continuously in this condition. For the vast majority of motors, it is of academic
interest only, because the current (V/2R) will be far too high for the supply.
5. TRANSIENT BEHAVIOR – CURRENT SURGES
It has already been pointed out that the steady-state armature current depends on the
small difference between the back e.m.f. E and the applied voltage V. In a converter-
fed drive it is vital that the current is kept within safe bounds, otherwise the thyristors
or transistors (which have very limited overcurrent capacity) will be destroyed, and it
follows from equation (3.8) that in order to prevent the current from exceeding its
rated value we cannot afford to let V and E differ by more than IR, where I is the rated
current.
It would be unacceptable, for example, to attempt to bring all but the smallest of
d.c. motors up to speed simply by switching on rated voltage. In the example
studied earlier, rated voltage is 500 V, and the armature resistance is 1 U. At standstill
the back e.m.f. is zero, and hence the initial current would be 500/1 ¼ 500 A, or 25
times rated current! This would destroy the thyristors in the supply converter (and/
or blow the fuses). Clearly the initial voltage we must apply is much less than 500 V;
and if we want to limit the current to rated value (20 A in the example) the voltage
needed will be 20  1, i.e. only 20 volts. As the speed picks up, the back e.m.f. rises,
Conventional D.C. Motors
95

and to maintain the full current, V must also be ramped up so that the difference
between V and E remains constant at 20 V. Of course, the motor will not accelerate
nearly so rapidly when the current is kept in check as it would if we had switched on
full voltage, and allowed the current to do as it pleased. But this is the price we must
pay in order to protect the converter.
Similar current-surge difﬁculties occur if the load on the motor is suddenly
increased, because this will result in the motor slowing down, with a consequent fall
in E. In a sense we welcome the fall in E because this is what brings about the
increase in current needed to supply the extra load, but of course we only want the
current to rise to its rated value: beyond that point we must be ready to reduce V, to
prevent an excessive current.
The solution to the problem of overcurrents lies in providing closed-loop
current-limiting as an integral feature of the motor/drive package. The motor
current is sensed, and the voltage V is automatically adjusted so that rated current is
not exceeded continuously, although typically it is allowed to reach 1.5 times rated
current for 60 seconds. We will discuss the current control loop in Chapter 4.
5.1 Dynamic behavior and time-constants
The use of the terms ‘surge’ and ‘sudden’ in the discussion above will doubtless have
created the impression that changes in the motor current or speed can take place
instantaneously, whereas in fact a ﬁnite time is always necessary to effect changes in
either. (If the current changes, then so does the stored energy in the armature
inductance; and if speed changes, so does the rotary kinetic energy stored in the
inertia. For either of these changes to take place in zero time it would be necessary
for there to be a pulse of inﬁnite power, which is clearly impossible.)
The theoretical treatment of the transient dynamics of the d.c. machine is easier
than for any other type of electric motor but is nevertheless beyond our scope.
However, it is worth summarizing the principal features of the dynamic behavior,
and highlighting the fact that all the transient changes that occur are determined by
only two time-constants. The ﬁrst (and most important from the user’s viewpoint) is
the electromechanical time-constant, which governs the way the speed settles to
a new level following a disturbance such as a change in armature voltage or load
torque. The second is the electrical (or armature) time-constant, which is usually
much shorter and governs the rate of change of armature current immediately
following a change in armature voltage.
When the motor is running, there are two ‘inputs’ that we can change suddenly,
namely the applied voltage and the load torque. When either of these is changed,
the motor enters a transient period before settling to its new steady state. It turns out
that if we ignore the armature inductance (i.e. we take the armature time-constant
to be zero), the transient period is characterized by ﬁrst-order exponential responses
in the speed and current. This assumption is valid for all but the very largest motors.
96
Electric Motors and Drives

We obtained a similar result when we looked at the primitive linear motor in
Chapter 1 (see Figure 1.16).
For example, if we suddenly increased the armature voltage of a frictionless and
unloaded motor from V1 to V2, its speed and current would vary as shown in
Figure 3.11.
There is an immediate increase in the current (because we have ignored the
inductance), reﬂecting the fact that the applied voltage is suddenly more than the
back e.m.f.; the increased current produces more torque and hence the motor
accelerates; the rising speed is accompanied by an increase in back e.m.f., so the
current begins to fall; and the process continues until a new steady speed is reached
corresponding to the new voltage. In this particular case the steady-state current is
zero because we have assumed that there is no friction or load torque, but the shape
of the dynamic response would be the same if there had been an initial load, or if we
had suddenly changed the load.
The expression describing the current as a function of time (t) is:
i ¼
V2  V1
R

et=s
(3.11)
The expression for the change in speed is similar, the time dependence again
featuring the exponential transient term et/s. The signiﬁcance of the time-constant
(s) is shown in Figure 3.11. If the initial gradient of the current–time graph is
projected it intersects the ﬁnal value after one time-constant. In theory, it takes an
inﬁnite time for the response to settle, but in practice the transient is usually
regarded as over after about four or ﬁve time-constants. We note that the transient
response is very satisfactory: as soon as the voltage is increased the current imme-
diately increases to provide more torque and begin the acceleration, but the
accelerating torque is reduced progressively to ensure that the new target speed is
approached smoothly. Happily, because the system is ﬁrst-order, there is no
suggestion of an oscillatory response with overshoots.
Figure 3.11 Response of d.c. motor to step increase in armature voltage.
Conventional D.C. Motors
97

Analysis yields the relationship between the time-constant and the motor/
system parameters as
s ¼ RJ
k2
(3.12)
where R is the armature resistance, J is the total rotary inertia of motor plus load, and
k is the motor constant (equations (3.3) and (3.4)). The appropriateness of the term
‘electromechanical time-constant’ should be clear from equation (3.12), because s
depends on the electrical parameters (R and k) and the mechanical parameter J. The
fact that if the inertia was doubled, the time-constant would double and transients
would take twice as long is perhaps to be expected, but the inﬂuence of the motor
parameters R and k is probably not so obvious.
The electrical or armature time-constant is deﬁned in the usual way for a series
L, R circuit, i.e.
sa ¼ L
R
(3.13)
If we were to hold the rotor of a d.c. motor stationary and apply a step voltage V to
the armature, the current would climb exponentially to a ﬁnal value of V/R with
a time-constant sa.
If we always applied pure d.c. voltage to the motor we would probably want sa
to be as short as possible, so that there was no delay in the build-up of current when
the voltage is changed.
But given that most motors are fed with voltage waveforms which are far from
smooth (see Chapter 2), we are actually rather pleased to ﬁnd that because of the
inductance and associated time-constant, the current waveform (and hence the
torque) is smoother than the voltage waveform. So the unavoidable presence of
armature inductance turns out (in most cases) to be a blessing in disguise.
So far we have looked at the two time-constants as if they were unrelated in the
inﬂuence they have on the current. We began with the electromechanical time-
constant, assuming that the armature time-constant was zero, and saw that the
dominant inﬂuence on the current during the transient was the motional e.m.f. We
then examined the current when the rotor was stationary (so that the motional
e.m.f. is zero), and saw that the growth or decay of current is governed by the
armature inductance, manifested via the armature time-constant.
In reality, both time-constants inﬂuence the current simultaneously, and the
picture is more complicated than we have implied, as the system is in fact a second-
order one. However, the good news is that for most motors, and most purposes, we
can take advantage of the fact that the armature time-constant is much shorter than
the electromechanical time-constant. This allows us to approximate the behavior by
decoupling the relatively fast ‘electrical transients’ in the armature circuit from the
much slower ‘electromechanical transients’ which are apparent to the user. From
98
Electric Motors and Drives

the latter’s point of view, only the electromechanical transient is likely to be of
interest.
6. FOUR QUADRANT OPERATION AND REGENERATIVE
BRAKING
We have seen that the great beauty of the separately excited d.c. motor is the ease
with which it can be controlled. The steady-state speed is determined by the applied
voltage, so we can make the motor run at any desired speed in either direction
simply by applying the appropriate magnitude and polarity of the armature voltage;
and the torque is directly proportional to the armature current, which in turn
depends on the difference between the applied voltage V and the back e.m.f. E. We
can therefore make the machine develop positive (motoring) or negative (gener-
ating) torque simply by controlling the extent to which the applied voltage is greater
or less than the back e.m.f. An armature voltage controlled d.c. machine is therefore
inherently capable of what is known as ‘four-quadrant’ operation, by reference to
the numbered quadrants of the torque–speed plane shown in Figure 3.12.
Figure 3.12 looks straightforward but experience shows that to draw the
diagram correctly calls for a clear head, so it is worth spelling out the key points in
detail. A proper understanding of this diagram is invaluable as an aid to under-
standing how controlled-speed drives operate.
Figure 3.12 Operation of d.c. motor in the four quadrants of the torque–speed plane.
Conventional D.C. Motors
99

First, one of the motor terminals is shown with a dot, and in all four quadrants
the dot is uppermost. The purpose of this convention is to indicate the sign of the
torque: if current ﬂows into the dot, the machine produces positive torque, and if
current ﬂows out of the dot, the torque is negative.
Secondly, the supply voltage is shown by the old-fashioned battery symbol, as
use of the more modern circle symbol for a voltage source would make it more
difﬁcult to differentiate between the source and the circle representing the machine
armature. The relative magnitudes of applied voltage and motional e.m.f. are
emphasized by the use of two battery cells when V > E and one when V < E.
We have seen that in a d.c. machine speed is determined by applied voltage and
torque is determined by current. Hence on the right-hand side of the diagram the
supply voltage is positive (upwards), while on the left-hand side the supply voltage is
negative (downwards). And in the upper half of the diagram current is positive (into
the dot), while in the lower half it is negative (out of the dot). For the sake of
convenience, each of the four operating conditions (A, B, C, D) have the same
magnitude of speed and the same magnitude of torque: these translate to equal
magnitudes of motional e.m.f. and current for each condition.
When the machine is operating as a motor and running in the forward direction,
it is operating in quadrant 1. The applied voltage VA is positive and greater than the
back e.m.f. E, and positive current therefore ﬂows into the motor; in Figure 3.12,
the arrow representing VA has accordingly been drawn larger than E. The power
drawn from the supply VAI is positive in this quadrant, as shown by the shaded
arrow labeled M to represent motoring. The power converted to mechanical form is
given by EI, and an amount I2R is lost as heat in the armature. If E is much greater
than IR (which is true in all but small motors), most of the input power is converted
to mechanical power, i.e. the conversion process is efﬁcient.
If, with the motor running at position A, we suddenly reduce the supply voltage
to a value VB which is less than the back e.m.f., the current (and hence torque) will
reverse direction, shifting the operating point to B in Figure 3.12. There can be no
sudden change in speed, so the e.m.f. will remain the same. If the new voltage is
chosen so that E  VB ¼ VA  E the new current will have the same amplitude as at
position A, so the new (negative) torque will be the same as the original positive
torque, as shown in Figure 3.12. But now power is supplied from the machine to
the supply, i.e. the machine is acting as a generator, as shown by the shaded arrow.
We should be quite clear that all that was necessary to accomplish this
remarkable reversal of power ﬂow was a modest reduction of the voltage applied to
the machine. At position A, the applied voltage was E þ IR, while at position B it is
E  IR. Since IR will be small compared with E, the change (2IR) is also small.
Needless to say the motor will not remain at point B if left to its own devices.
The combined effect of the load torque and the negative machine torque will cause
the speed to fall, so that the back e.m.f. again falls below the applied voltage VB,
the current and torque become positive again, and the motor settles back into
100
Electric Motors and Drives

quadrant 1, at a lower speed corresponding to the new (lower) supply voltage.
During the deceleration phase, kinetic energy from the motor and load inertias is
returned to the supply. This is therefore an example of regenerative braking, and it
occurs naturally every time we reduce the voltage in order to lower the speed.
If we want to operate continuously at position B, the machine will have to be
driven by a mechanical source. We have seen above that the natural tendency of the
machine is to run at a lower speed than that corresponding to point B, so we must
force it to run faster, and create an e.m.f greater than VB, if we wish it to generate
continuously.
It should be obvious that similar arguments to those set out above apply when
the motor is running in reverse (i.e. V is negative). Motoring then takes place in
quadrant 3 (point C), with brief excursions into quadrant 4 (point D, accompanied
by regenerative braking) whenever the voltage is reduced in order to lower the
speed.
6.1 Full-speed regenerative reversal
To illustrate more fully how the voltage has to be varied during sustained regen-
erative braking, we can consider how to change the speed of an unloaded motor
from full speed in one direction to full speed in the other, in the shortest possible
time.
At full forward speed the applied armature voltage is taken to be þV (shown as
100% in Figure 3.13), and since the motor is unloaded the no-load current will be
very small and the back e.m.f. will be almost equal to V. Ultimately, we will clearly
need an armature voltage of V to make the motor run at full speed in reverse. But
we cannot simply reverse the applied voltage: if we did, the armature current
immediately afterwards would be given by (V  E)/R, which would be disas-
trously high. (The motor might tolerate it for the short period for which it would
last, but the supply certainly could not!)
What we need to do is adjust the voltage so that the current is always limited to
rated value, and in the right direction. Since we want to decelerate as fast as possible,
we must aim to keep the current negative, and at rated value (i.e. 100%)
throughout the period of deceleration and for the run-up to full speed in reverse.
This will give us constant torque throughout, so the deceleration (and subsequent
acceleration) will be constant and the speed will change at a uniform rate, as shown
in Figure 3.13.
We note that to begin with the applied voltage has to be reduced to less than the
back e.m.f., and then ramped down linearly with time so that the difference between
V and E is kept constant, thereby keeping the current constant at its rated value.
During the reverse run-up, V has to be numerically greater than E, as shown in
Figure 3.13. (The difference between V and E has been exaggerated in Figure 3.13
for clarity: in a large motor, the difference may only be 1or 2% at full speed.)
Conventional D.C. Motors
101

The power to and from the supply is shown in the bottom plot in Figure 3.13,
the energy being represented by the shaded areas. During the deceleration period
most of the kinetic energy of the motor (lower shaded area) is progressively returned
to the supply, the motor acting as a generator for the whole of this time. The total
energy recovered in this way can be appreciable in the case of a large drive such as
a steel rolling mill. A similar quantity of energy (upper shaded area) is supplied and
stored as kinetic energy as the motor picks up speed in the reverse sense.
Three ﬁnal points need to be emphasized. First, we have assumed throughout
the discussion that the supply can provide positive or negative voltages, and can
accept positive or negative currents. A note of caution is therefore appropriate,
because many simple power electronic converters do not have this ﬂexibility. Users
need to be aware that if full four-quadrant operation (or even two-quadrant
Figure 3.13 Regenerative reversal of d.c. motor from full-speed forward to full-speed
reverse, at maximum allowable torque (current).
102
Electric Motors and Drives

regeneration) is called for, a basic converter will probably not be adequate. This
point is taken up again in Chapter 4. Secondly, we should not run away with the
idea that in order to carry out the reversal in Figure 3.13 we would have to work
out in advance how to proﬁle the applied voltage as a function of time. Our drive
system will normally have the facility for automatically operating the motor in
constant-current mode, and all we will have to do is to tell it the new target speed.
This is also taken up in Chapter 4.
6.2 Dynamic braking
A simpler and cheaper but less effective method of braking can be achieved by
dissipating the kinetic energy of the motor and load in a resistor, rather than
returning it to the supply. A version of this technique is employed in the cheaper
power electronic converter drives, which have no facility for returning power to the
utility supply.
When the motor is to be stopped, the supply to the armature is removed and
a resistor is switched across the armature brushes. The motor e.m.f. drives a (nega-
tive) current through the resistor, and the negative torque results in deceleration. As
the speed falls, so does the e.m.f., the current, and the braking torque. At low speeds
the braking torque is therefore very small. Ultimately, all the kinetic energy is
converted to heat in the motor’s own armature resistance and the external resis-
tance. Very rapid initial braking is obtained by using a low resistance (or even simply
short-circuiting the armature).
7. SHUNT AND SERIES MOTORS
Before variable-voltage supplies became readily available, most d.c. motors were
obliged to operate from a single d.c. supply, usually of constant voltage. The
armature and ﬁeld circuits were therefore designed either for connection in parallel
(shunt), or in series. The operating characteristics of shunt and series machines differ
widely, and hence each type tended to claim its particular niche: shunt motors were
judged to be good for constant-speed applications, while series motors were widely
used for traction applications.
In a way it is unfortunate that these historical patterns of association became so
deep-rooted. The fact is that a converter-fed separately excited motor, freed of any
constraint between ﬁeld and armature, can do everything that a shunt or series
motor can, and more; and it is doubtful if shunt and series motors would ever have
become widespread if variable-voltage supplies had always been around.
For a given continuous output power rating at a given speed, shunt and series
motors are the same size, with the same rotor diameter, the same poles, and the same
quantities of copper in the armature and ﬁeld windings. This is to be expected when
we recall that the power output depends on the speciﬁc magnetic and electric
Conventional D.C. Motors
103

loadings, so we anticipate that to do a given job, we will need the same amounts of
active material. However, differences emerge when we look at the details of the
windings, especially the ﬁeld system, and they can best be illustrated by means of an
example which contrasts shunt and series motors for the same output power.
Suppose that for the shunt version the supply voltage is 500 V, the rated
armature (work) current is 50 A, and the ﬁeld coils are required to provide an m.m.f.
of 500 ampere-turns (AT). The ﬁeld might typically consist of say 200 turns of wire
with a total resistance of 200 U. When connected across the supply (500 V), the ﬁeld
current will be 2.5 A, and the m.m.f. will be 500 AT, as required. The power
dissipated as heat in the ﬁeld will be 500 V  2.5 A ¼ 1.25 kW, and the total power
input at rated load will be 500 V  52.5 A ¼ 26.25 kW.
To convert the machine into the equivalent series version, the ﬁeld coils need to
be made from much thicker conductor, since they have to carry the armature
current of 50 A, rather than the 2.5 A of the shunt motor. So, working at the same
current density, the cross-section of each turn of the series ﬁeld winding needs to be
20 times that of the shunt ﬁeld wires, but conversely only one-twentieth of the
turns (i.e. 10) are required for the same ampere-turns. The resistance of a wire of
length l and cross-sectional area A, made from material of resistivity r is given by
R ¼ rl/A, so we can use this formula to show that the resistance of the new ﬁeld
winding will be much lower, at 0.5 U.
We can now calculate the power dissipated as heat in the series ﬁeld. The
current is 50 A, the resistance is 0.5 U, so the volt-drop across the series ﬁeld is 25 V,
and the power wasted as heat is 1.25 kW. This is the same as for the shunt machine,
which is to be expected since both sets of ﬁeld coils are intended to do the same job.
In order to allow for the 25 V dropped across the series ﬁeld, and still meet the
requirement for 500 V at the armature, the supply voltage must now be 525 V. The
rated current is 50 A, so the total power input is 525 V  50 A ¼ 26.25 kW, the
same as for the shunt machine.
This example illustrates that in terms of their energy-converting capabilities,
shunt and series motors are fundamentally no different. Shunt machines usually
have ﬁeld windings with a large number of turns of ﬁne wire, while series machines
have a few turns of thick conductor. But the total amount and disposition of copper
is the same, so the energy-converting abilities of both types are identical. In terms of
their operating characteristics, however, the two types differ widely, as we will
now see.
7.1 Shunt motor – steady-state operating characteristics
A basic shunt-connected motor has its armature and ﬁeld in parallel across a single
d.c. supply, as shown in Figure 3.14(a). Normally, the voltage will be constant and
at the rated value for the motor, in which case the steady-state torque–speed curve
will be similar to that of a separately excited motor at rated ﬁeld ﬂux, i.e. the speed
104
Electric Motors and Drives

will drop slightly with load, as shown by the line ab in Figure 3.14(b). Over the
normal operating region the torque–speed characteristic is similar to that of the
induction motor (see Chapter 6), so shunt motors are suited to the same duties, i.e.
what are usually referred to as ‘constant speed’ applications.
Except for small motors (say less than about 1 kW), it will be necessary to
provide an external ‘starting resistance’ (RS in Figure 3.14) in series with the
armature, to limit the heavy current which would ﬂow if the motor was simply
switched directly onto the supply. This starting resistance is progressively reduced as
the motor picks up speed, the current falling as the back e.m.f. rises from its initial
value of zero.
We should ask what happens if the supply voltage varies for any reason, and as
usual the easiest thing to look at is the case where the motor is running light, in
which case the back e.m.f. will almost equal the supply voltage. If we reduce the
supply voltage, intuition might lead us to anticipate a fall in speed, but in fact two
contrary effects occur which leave the speed almost unchanged.
If the voltage is halved, for example, both the ﬁeld current and the armature
voltage will be halved, and if the magnetic circuit is not saturated the ﬂux will also
halve. The new steady value of back e.m.f. will have to be half its original value, but
since we now have only half as much ﬂux, the speed will be the same. The
maximum output power will of course be reduced, since at full-load (i.e. full
current) the power available is proportional to the armature voltage. Of course if the
magnetic circuit is saturated, a modest reduction in applied voltage may cause very
little drop in ﬂux, in which case the speed will fall in proportion to the drop in
voltage. We can see from this discussion why, broadly speaking, the shunt motor is
not suitable for operation below base speed.
Some measure of speed control is possible by weakening the ﬁeld (by means of
the resistance (Rf) in series with the ﬁeld winding), and this allows the speed to be
raised above base value, but only at the expense of torque. A typical torque–speed
characteristic in the ﬁeld-weakening region is shown by the line cd in
Figure 3.14(b).
Figure 3.14 Shunt-connected d.c. motor and steady-state torque–speed curve.
Conventional D.C. Motors
105

Reverse rotation is achieved by reversing the connections to either the ﬁeld or
the armature. The ﬁeld is usually preferred since the current rating of the switch or
contactor will be lower than for the armature.
7.2 Series motor – steady-state operating characteristics
The series connection of armature and ﬁeld windings (Figure 3.15(a)) means that
the ﬁeld ﬂux is directly proportional to the armature current, and the torque is
therefore proportional to the square of the current. Reversing the direction of the
applied voltage (and hence current) therefore leaves the direction of torque
unchanged. This unusual property is put to good use in the universal motor, but is
a handicap when negative (braking) torque is required, since either the ﬁeld or
armature connections must then be reversed.
If the armature and ﬁeld resistance volt-drops are neglected, and the applied
voltage (V ) is constant, the current varies inversely with the speed; hence the torque
(T ) and speed (n) are related by
Tf
V
n
2
(3.14)
A typical torque–speed characteristic is shown in Figure 3.15(b). The torque at zero
speed is not inﬁnite of course, because of the effects of saturation and resistance,
both of which are ignored in equation (3.14).
As with the shunt motor, under starting conditions the back e.m.f. is zero, and if
the full voltage was applied the current would be excessive, being limited only by
the armature and ﬁeld resistances. Hence for all but small motors a starting resistance
is required to limit the current to a safe value.
Returning to Figure 3.15(b), we note that the series motor differs from most
other motors in having no clearly deﬁned no-load speed, i.e. no speed (other than
inﬁnity) at which the torque produced by the motor falls to zero. This means that
when running light, the speed of the motor depends on the windage and friction
Figure 3.15 Series-connected d.c. motor and steady-state torque–speed curve.
106
Electric Motors and Drives

torques, equilibrium being reached when the motor torque equals the total
mechanical resisting torque. In large motors, the windage and friction torque is
often relatively small, and the no-load speed is then too high for mechanical safety.
Large series motors should therefore never be run uncoupled from their loads. As
with shunt motors, the connections to either the ﬁeld or armature must be reversed
in order to reverse the direction of rotation.
The reason for the historic use of series motors for traction is that under the
simplest possible supply arrangement (i.e. constant voltage) the overall shape of the
torque–speed curve ﬁts well with what is needed in traction applications, i.e. high
starting torque to provide acceleration from rest and an acceptable reduction in
acceleration as the target speed is approached. Early systems achieved coarse speed
control via resistors switched in parallel with either the ﬁeld or the armature in order
to divert some of the current and thereby alter the torque–speed curve, but this
inherently inefﬁcient approach became obsolete when power electronic converters
became available to provide an efﬁcient variable-voltage supply.
7.3 Universal motors
In terms of numbers the main application area for the series commutator motor is in
portable power tools, food mixers, vacuum cleaners, etc., where paradoxically the
supply is a.c. rather than d.c. Such motors are often referred to as ‘universal’ motors
because they can run from either a d.c. or an a.c. supply.
At ﬁrst sight the fact that a d.c. machine will work on a.c. is hard to believe. But
when we recall that in a series motor the ﬁeld ﬂux is set up by the current which also
ﬂows in the armature, it can be seen that reversal of the current will be accompanied
by reversal of the direction of the magnetic ﬂux, thereby ensuring that the torque
remains positive. When the motor is connected to a 50 Hz supply, for example, the
(sinusoidal) current will change direction every 10 ms, and there will be a peak in
the torque 100 times per second. But the torque will always remain unidirectional,
and the speed ﬂuctuations will not be noticeable because of the smoothing effect of
the armature inertia.
Series motors for use on a.c. supplies are always designed with fully laminated
construction (to limit eddy current losses produced by the pulsating ﬂux in the
magnetic circuit), and are intended to run at high speeds, say 8–12,000 rev/min at
rated voltage. Commutation and sparking are worse than when operating from d.c.,
and output powers are seldom greater than 1 kW. The advantage of high speed in
terms of power output per unit volume was emphasized in Chapter 1, and the
universal motor is perhaps the best everyday example which demonstrates how
a high power can be obtained with small size by designing for a high speed.
Until recently the universal motor offered the only relatively cheap way of
reaping the beneﬁt of high speed from single-phase a.c. supplies. Other small
a.c. machines, such as induction motors and synchronous motors, were limited
Conventional D.C. Motors
107

to maximum speeds of 3000 rev/min at 50 Hz (or 3600 rev/min at 60 Hz), and
therefore could not compete in terms of power per unit volume. The avail-
ability of high-frequency inverters (see Chapter 7) has opened up the prospect
of higher speciﬁc outputs from induction motors and permanent magnet
motors in many appliances. The transition away from the universal motor is
under way, but because of the huge investment in high volume manufacturing
that has been made over many years, it is still being produced in signiﬁcant
numbers.
Speed control of small universal motors is straightforward using a triac (in effect
a pair of thyristors connected back to back) in series with the a.c. supply. By varying
the ﬁring angle, and hence the proportion of each cycle for which the triac
conducts, the voltage applied to the motor can be varied to provide speed control.
This approach is widely used for electric drills, fans, etc. If torque control is required
(as in hand power tools, for example), the current is controlled rather than the
voltage, and the speed is determined by the load.
8. SELF-EXCITED D.C. MACHINE
At various points in this chapter we have seen that the d.c. machine can change from
motoring to generating depending on whether its induced or generated e.m.f. was
less than or greater than the voltage applied to the armature terminals. We assumed
that the machine was connected to a voltage source, from which it could draw both
its excitation (ﬁeld) and armature currents. But if we want to use the machine as
a generator in a location isolated from any voltage source, we have to consider how
to set up the ﬂux to enable the machine to work as an energy converter.
When the ﬁeld is provided by permanent magnets, there is no problem. As soon
as the prime-mover (an internal combustion engine, perhaps) starts to turn the
rotor, a speed-dependent e.m.f. (voltage) is produced in the armature and we can
connect our load to the terminals and start to generate power. To ensure a more or
less constant voltage, the engine will be governed to keep the speed constant.
If the machine has a ﬁeld winding that is intended to be connected in parallel
(shunt) with the armature, it is easy to imagine that once the machine is generating
an armature voltage, there will be a ﬁeld current and ﬂux. But before we get
a motional e.m.f. we need ﬂux, and we can’t have ﬂux without a ﬁeld current, and
we won’t get ﬁeld current until we have generated an e.m.f.
The answer to this apparent difﬁculty usually lies in taking advantage of the
residual magnetic ﬂux remaining in the magnetic circuit from the time the machine
was last used. If the residual ﬂux is sufﬁcient we will begin to generate as soon as the
rotor is turned, and provided the ﬁeld is connected the right way round across the
armature, the ﬁrst few milliamps of ﬁeld current will increase the ﬂux and we will
then have positive feedback which we might expect to result in a runaway situation
108
Electric Motors and Drives

with ever-increasing generated voltage. Fortunately, provided that the driven speed
is constant, the growth of ﬂux is stabilized by saturation of the magnetic circuit, as
we will discuss next. This procedure is known as self-excitation, for obvious reasons.
(Should we be unfortunate enough to connect the ﬁeld the wrong way round, we
will be disappointed: but if the connections were undisturbed from the previous
time, we should be OK.)
The stabilizing effect of saturation is shown in Figure 3.16. The solid line in the
graph on the right is a typical ‘magnetization curve’ of the machine. This is a plot of
the generated e.m.f. (E) as a function of ﬁeld current when the rotor is driven at
a constant speed. This test is best done with a separate supply to the ﬁeld, and
(usually) at the rated speed. For low and medium values of the ﬁeld current, the ﬂux
is proportional to the current, so the motional e.m.f. is linear, but at higher ﬁeld
currents the magnetic circuit starts to saturate, the ﬂux no longer increases in
proportion, and consequently the generated voltage ﬂattens out. The armature
circuit is open, so the terminal voltage (Va) is equal to the induced e.m.f. (E).
When we want the machine to self-excite, we connect the ﬁeld in parallel with
the armature as shown in Figure 3.16. The current in the ﬁeld is then given by
If ¼ Va/Rf, where Rf is the resistance of the ﬁeld winding, and we have neglected
the small armature resistance. The two dashed lines relate to ﬁeld circuit resistances
of 100 U and 200 U, and the intersection of these with the magnetization curve
gives the stable operating points. For example, when the ﬁeld resistance is 100 U,
and the armature voltage is 200 V, the ﬁeld current of 2 A is just sufﬁcient to
generate the motional e.m.f. of 200 V (point A). At lower values of ﬁeld current, the
generated voltage exceeds the value needed to maintain the ﬁeld current, so the
excess voltage causes the current to increase in the inductive circuit until the steady
state is reached.
Increasing the resistance of the ﬁeld circuit to 200 U results in a lower generated
voltage (point B), but this is a less stable situation, with small changes in resistance
Figure 3.16 Self-excited d.c. generator.
Conventional D.C. Motors
109

leading to large changes in voltage. It should also be clear that if the resistance is
increased above 200 U, the resistance line will be above the magnetization curve,
and self-excitation will be impossible.
9. TOY MOTORS
The motors used in model cars, trains, etc. are rather different in construction from
those discussed so far, primarily because they are designed almost entirely with cost
as the primary consideration. They also run at high speeds, so it is not important for
the torque to be smooth. A typical arrangement used for rotor diameters from
0.5 cm to perhaps 3 cm is shown in Figure 3.17.
The rotor, made from laminations with a small number (typically three or ﬁve)
of multi-turn coils in very large ‘slots’, is simple to manufacture, and because the
commutator has few segments, it too is cheap to make. The ﬁeld system (stator)
consists of radially magnetized ceramic magnets with a steel backplate to complete
the magnetic circuit.
The rotor clearly has very pronounced saliency, with three very large projec-
tions which are in marked contrast to the rotors we looked at earlier where the
surface was basically cylindrical. It is easy to imagine that even when there is no
current in the rotor coils, there is a strong tendency for the stator magnets to pull
one or other of the rotor saliencies into alignment with a stator pole, so that the
rotor would tend to lock in any one of six positions. This cyclic ‘detent’ torque is
due to the variation of reluctance with rotor position, an effect which is exploited in
a.c. reluctance motors (see Chapter 10), but is unwanted here. To combat the
Figure 3.17 Miniature d.c. motor for use in models and toys.
110
Electric Motors and Drives

problem the rotor laminations are skewed before the coils are ﬁtted, as shown in the
lower sketch on the left.
Each of the three rotor poles carries a multi-turn coil, the start of which is
connected to a commutator segment, as shown in the cross-section on the right of
Figure 3.17. The three ends are joined together. The brushes are wider than the
inter-segment space, so in some rotor positions the current from say the positive
brush will divide and ﬂow ﬁrst through two coils in parallel until it reaches the
common point, then through the third coil to the negative brush, while in other
positions the current ﬂows through only two coils.
A real stretch of imagination is required to picture the mechanism of torque
production using the ‘BIl’ approach we have followed previously, as the geometry is
so different. But we can take a more intuitive approach by considering for each
position the polarity and strength of the magnetization of each of the three rotor
poles, which depend of course on the direction and magnitude of the respective
currents. Following the discussion in the previous paragraph, we can see that in
some positions there will be say a strong N and two relatively weak S poles, while at
others there will be one strong N, one strong S, and one unexcited pole.
Thus although the rotor appears to be a three-pole device, the magnetization
pattern is always two-pole (because two adjacent weak S poles function as a single
stronger S pole). When the rotor is rotating, the stator N pole will attract the nearest
rotor S pole, pulling it round towards alignment. As the force of attraction
diminishes to zero, the commutator reverses the rotor current in that pole so that it
now becomes an N and is pushed away towards the S stator pole.
There is a variation of current with angular position as a result of the different
resistances seen by the brushes as they alternately make contact with either one or
two segments, and the torque is far from uniform, but operating speeds are typically
several thousand rev/min and the torque pulsations are smoothed out by the rotor
and load inertia.
Conventional D.C. Motors
111

CHAPTER FOUR
D.C. Motor Drives
1. INTRODUCTION
Until the 1960s, the only satisfactory way of obtaining the variable-voltage d.c.
supply needed for speed control of an industrial d.c. motor was to generate it with
a d.c. generator. The generator was driven at ﬁxed speed by an induction motor,
and the ﬁeld of the generator was varied in order to vary the generated voltage. For
a brief period in the 1950s these ‘Ward Leonard’ sets were superseded by grid-
controlled mercury arc rectiﬁers, but these were soon replaced by thyristor
converters which offered cheaper ﬁrst cost, higher efﬁciency (typically over 95%),
smaller size, reduced maintenance and faster response to changes in set speed. The
disadvantages of rectiﬁed supplies are that the waveforms are not pure d.c., that the
overload capacity of the converter is very limited, and that a single converter is not
inherently capable of regeneration.
Though no longer pre-eminent, study of the d.c. drive is valuable for two
reasons:
•
The structure and operation of the d.c. drive are reﬂected in almost all other
drives, and lessons learned from the study of the d.c. drive therefore have close
parallels in other types.
•
Under constant-ﬂux conditions the behavior is governed by a relatively simple
set of linear equations, so predicting both steady-state and transient behavior is
not difﬁcult. When we turn to the successors of the d.c. drive, notably the
induction motor drive, we will ﬁnd that things are much more complex, and
that in order to overcome the poor transient behavior, the control strategies
adopted are based on emulating the inherent characteristics of the d.c. drive.
The ﬁrst and major part of this chapter is devoted to thyristor-fed drives, after which
we will look brieﬂy at chopper-fed drives that are used mainly in medium and small
sizes, and ﬁnally turn our attention to small servo-type drives.
2. THYRISTOR D.C. DRIVES – GENERAL
For motors up to a few kilowatts the armature converter draws power from either
a single-phase or 3-phase utility supply. For larger motors 3-phase is preferred
because the waveforms are much smoother, although traction uses single-phase
with a series inductor to smooth the current. A separate thyristor or diode rectiﬁer is
used to supply the ﬁeld of the motor: the power is much lower than the armature
Electric Motors and Drives
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-098332-5.00004-8
 2013 Austin Hughes and William Drury.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
113j

power, the inductance is much higher, and so the supply is often single-phase, as
shown in Figure 4.1.
The arrangement shown in Figure 4.1 is typical of most d.c. drives and provides
for closed-loop speed control. The function of the two control loops will be
explored later, but readers who are not familiar with the basics of feedback and
closed-loop systems may ﬁnd it helpful to read through Appendix 1 at this point.
The main power circuit consists of a six-thyristor bridge circuit (as discussed in
Chapter 2) which rectiﬁes the incoming a.c. supply to produce a d.c. supply to the
motor armature. By altering the ﬁring angle of the thyristors the mean value of the
rectiﬁed voltage can be varied, thereby allowing the motor speed to be controlled.
We saw in Chapter 2 that the controlled rectiﬁer produces a crude form of d.c.
with a pronounced ripple in the output voltage. This ripple component gives rise to
pulsating currents and ﬂuxes in the motor, and in order to avoid excessive eddy-
current losses and commutation problems the poles and frame should be of lami-
nated construction. It is accepted practice for motors supplied for use with thyristor
drives to have laminated construction, but older motors often have solid poles and/
or frames, and these will not always work satisfactorily with a rectiﬁer supply. It is
also the norm for d.c. motors for variable-speed operation to be supplied with an
attached ‘blower’ motor as standard. This provides continuous through ventilation
and allows the motor to operate continuously at full torque without overheating,
even down to the lowest speeds. (See Plate 4.1)
Low-power control circuits are used to monitor the principal variables of
interest (usually motor current and speed), and to generate appropriate ﬁring pulses
so that the motor maintains constant speed despite variations in the load. The ‘speed
reference’ (Figure 4.1), historically an analogue voltage varying from 0 to 10 V,
obtained from a manual speed-setting potentiometer or from elsewhere in the
plant, now more typically comes in digital form.
Figure 4.1 Schematic diagram of speed-controlled d.c. motor drive.
114
Electric Motors and Drives

The combination of power, control and protective circuits constitutes the
converter. Standard modular converters are available as off-the-shelf items in sizes
from 100 W up to several hundred kW, while larger drives will be tailored to
individual requirements. Individual converters may be mounted in enclosures with
isolators, fuses, etc. or groups of converters may be mounted together to form
a multi-motor drive.
2.1 Motor operation with converter supply
The basic operation of the rectifying bridge has been discussed in Chapter 2, and we
now turn to the matter of how the d.c. motor behaves when supplied with ‘d.c.’
from a controlled rectiﬁer.
By no stretch of the imagination could the waveforms of armature voltage
looked at in Chapter 2 (e.g. Figure 2.13) be thought of as good d.c., and it would
not be unreasonable to question the wisdom of feeding such an unpleasant-looking
waveform to a d.c. motor. In fact it turns out that the motor works almost as well as
it would if fed with pure d.c., for two main reasons. First, the armature inductance
of the motor causes the waveform of armature current to be much smoother than
the waveform of armature voltage, which in turn means that the torque ripple is
much less than might have been feared. And secondly, the inertia of the armature
is sufﬁciently large for the speed to remain almost steady despite the torque ripple. It
is indeed fortunate that such a simple arrangement works so well, because any
attempt to smooth out the voltage waveform (perhaps by adding smoothing
capacitors) would prove to be prohibitively expensive in the power ranges of
interest.
2.2 Motor current waveforms
For the sake of simplicity we will look at operation from a single-phase (2-pulse)
converter, but similar conclusions apply to the 6-pulse one. The voltage (Va)
applied to the motor armature is typically as shown in Figure 4.2(a): as we saw in
Chapter 2, it consists of rectiﬁed ‘chunks’ of the incoming mains voltage, the precise
shape and average value depending on the ﬁring angle.
The voltage waveform can be considered to consist of a mean d.c. level (Vdc),
and a superimposed pulsating or ripple component which we can denote loosely as
vac. If the supply is at 50 Hz, the fundamental frequency of the ripple is 100 Hz. The
mean voltage Vdc can be altered by varying the ﬁring angle, which also incidentally
alters the ripple (i.e. vac).
The ripple voltage causes a ripple current to ﬂow in the armature, but because
of the armature inductance, the amplitude of the ripple current is small. In other
words, the armature presents a high impedance to a.c. voltages. This smoothing
effect of the armature inductance is shown in Figure 4.2(b), from which it can be
seen that the current ripple is relatively small in comparison with the
D.C. Motor Drives
115

corresponding voltage ripple. The average value of the ripple current is of course
zero, so it has no effect on the average torque of the motor. There is nevertheless
a variation in torque every half-cycle of the mains, but because it is of small
amplitude and high frequency (100 or 120 Hz for the 1-phase case here, but 300 or
360 Hz for 3-phase) the variation in speed (and hence back e.m.f. E) will not
usually be noticeable.
The current at the end of each pulse is the same as at the beginning, so it follows
that the average voltage across the armature inductance (L) is zero. We can therefore
equate the average applied voltage to the sum of the back e.m.f. (assumed pure d.c.
because we are ignoring speed ﬂuctuations) and the average voltage across the
armature resistance, to yield
Vdc ¼ E þ IdcR
(4.1)
which is exactly the same as for operation from a pure d.c. supply. This is very
important, as it underlines the fact that we can control the mean motor voltage, and
hence the speed, simply by varying the converter delay angle.
The smoothing effect of the armature inductance is important in achieving
successful motor operation: the armature acts as a low-pass ﬁlter, blocking most of
the ripple, and leading to a more or less constant armature current. For the
smoothing to be effective, the armature time-constant needs to be long compared
with the pulse duration (half a cycle with a 2-pulse drive, but only one-sixth of a
cycle in a 6-pulse drive). This condition is met in all 6-pulse drives, and in many
2-pulse ones. Overall, the motor then behaves much as it would if it was supplied
Figure 4.2 Armature voltage (a) and armature current (b) waveforms for continuous-
current operation of a d.c. motor supplied from a single-phase fully controlled thyristor
converter, with ﬁring angle of 60.
116
Electric Motors and Drives

from an ideal d.c. source (though the I2R loss is higher than it would be if the
current was perfectly smooth).
The no-load speed is determined by the applied voltage (which depends on the
ﬁring angle of the converter); there is a small drop in speed with load; and, as we
have previously noted, the average current is determined by the load. In Figure 4.2,
for example, the voltage waveform in (a) applies equally for the two load conditions
represented in (b), where the upper current waveform corresponds to a high value
of load torque while the lower is for a much lighter load, the speed being almost the
same in both cases. (The small difference in speed is due to the IR term, as explained
in Chapter 3.) We should note that the current ripple remains the same – only the
average current changes with load. Broadly speaking, therefore, we can say that the
speed is determined by the converter ﬁring angle, which represents a very satis-
factory state of affairs because we can control the ﬁring angle by low-power control
circuits and thereby regulate the speed of the drive.
The current waveforms in Figure 4.2(b) are referred to as ‘continuous’, because
there is never any time during which the current is not ﬂowing. This ‘continuous
current’ condition is the norm in most drives, and it is highly desirable because it is
only under continuous current conditions that the average voltage from the
converter is determined solely by the ﬁring angle, and is independent of the load
current. We can see why this is so with the aid of Figure 2.8, imagining that the
motor is connected to the output terminals and that it is drawing a continuous
current. For half of a complete cycle, the current will ﬂow into the motor from T1
and return to the supply via T4, so the armature is effectively switched across the
supply and the armature voltage is equal to the supply voltage, which is assumed to
be ideal; i.e. it is independent of the current drawn. For the other half of the time,
the motor current ﬂows from T2 and returns to the supply via T3, so the motor is
again hooked up to the supply, but this time the connections are reversed. Hence
the average armature voltage (and thus, to a ﬁrst approximation the speed) is deﬁned
once the ﬁring angle is set.
2.3 Discontinuous current
We can see from Figure 4.2(b) that as the load torque is reduced, there will come
a point where the minima of the current ripple touch the zero-current line, i.e. the
current reaches the boundary between continuous and discontinuous current. The
load at which this occurs will also depend on the armature inductance, because
the higher the inductance the smoother the current (i.e. the less the ripple).
Discontinuous current mode is therefore most likely to be encountered in small
machines with low inductance (particularly when fed from 2-pulse converters) and
under light-load or no-load conditions.
Typical armature voltage and current waveforms in the discontinuous mode are
shown in Figure 4.3, the armature current consisting of discrete pulses of current
D.C. Motor Drives
117

that occur only while the armature is connected to the supply, with zero current
for the period (represented by q in Figure 4.3) when none of the thyristors is
conducting and the motor is coasting free from the supply.
The shape of the current waveform can be understood by noting that with
resistance neglected, equation (3.7) can be rearranged as
di
dt ¼ 1
L ðV  EÞ
(4.2)
which shows that the rate of change of current (i.e. the gradient of the lower graph
in Figure 4.3) is determined by the instantaneous difference between the applied
voltage V and the motional e.m.f. E. Values of (V  E) are shown by the vertical
hatchings in Figure 4.3, from which it can be seen that if V > E, the current is
increasing, while if V < E, the current is falling. The peak current is thus deter-
mined by the area of the upper or lower shaded areas of the upper graph.
The ﬁring angle in Figures 4.2 and 4.3 is the same, at 60, but the load is less in
Figure 4.3 and hence the average current is lower (though, for the sake of the
explanation offered below, the current axis in Figure 4.3 is expanded as compared
with that in Figure 4.2). It should be clear by comparing these ﬁgures that the
armature voltage waveforms (solid lines) differ because, in Figure 4.3, the current
falls to zero before the next ﬁring pulse arrives and during the period shown as q the
motor ﬂoats free, its terminal voltage during this time being simply the motional
e.m.f. (E). To simplify Figure 4.3 it has been assumed that the armature resistance is
small and that the corresponding volt-drop (IaRa) can be ignored. In this case, the
average armature voltage (Vdc) must be equal to the motional e.m.f., because there
can be no average voltage across the armature inductance when there is no net
change in the current over one pulse: the hatched areas – representing the volt-
seconds in the inductor – are therefore equal.
Figure 4.3 Armature voltage and current waveforms for discontinuous-current oper-
ation of a d.c. motor supplied from a single-phase fully controlled thyristor converter,
with ﬁring angle of 60.
118
Electric Motors and Drives

The most important difference between Figures 4.2 and 4.3 is that the average
voltage is higher when the current is discontinuous, and hence the speed corre-
sponding to the conditions in Figure 4.3 is higher than in Figure 4.2 despite both
having the same ﬁring angle. And whereas in continuous mode a load increase
can be met by an increased armature current without affecting the voltage (and
hence speed), the situation is very different when the current is discontinuous. In
the latter case, the only way that the average current can increase is for the speed
(and hence E) to fall so that the shaded areas in Figure 4.3 become larger.
This means that the behavior of the motor in discontinuous mode is much
worse than in the continuous current mode, because, as the load torque is increased,
there is a serious drop in speed. The resulting torque–speed curve therefore has
a very unwelcome ‘droopy’ characteristic in the discontinuous current region, as
shown in Figure 4.4, and in addition the I2R loss is much higher than it would be
with pure d.c.
Under very light or no-load conditions, the pulses of current become virtually
non-existent, the shaded areas in Figure 4.3 become very small and the motor speed
approaches that at which the back e.m.f. is equal to the peak of the supply voltage
(point C in Figure 4.4).
It is easy to see that inherent torque–speed curves with sudden discontinuities of
the form shown in Figure 4.4 are very undesirable. If, for example, the ﬁring angle is
set to zero and the motor is fully loaded, its speed will settle at point A, its average
armature voltage and current having their full (rated) values. As the load is reduced,
current remaining continuous, and there is the expected slight rise in speed, until
point B is reached. This is the point at which the current is about to enter the
discontinuous phase. Any further reduction in the load torque then produces
a wholly disproportionate – not to say frightening – increase in speed, especially if
the load is reduced to zero when the speed reaches point C.
There are two ways by which we can improve these inherently poor charac-
teristics. First, we can add extra inductance in series with the armature to further
smooth the current waveform and lessen the likelihood of discontinuous current.
Figure 4.4 Torque–speed curves illustrating the undesirable ‘droopy’ characteristic
associated with discontinuous current. The improved characteristic (shown dashed)
corresponds to operation with continuous current.
D.C. Motor Drives
119

The effect of adding inductance is shown by the dashed lines in Figure 4.4. And
secondly, we can switch from a single-phase converter to a 3-phase one which
produces smoother voltage and current waveforms, as discussed in Chapter 2.
When the converter and motor are incorporated in a closed-loop drive system
the user should be unaware of any shortcomings in the inherent motor/converter
characteristics because the control system automatically alters the ﬁring angle to
achieve the target speed at all loads. In relation to Figure 4.4, for example, as far as
the user is concerned the control system will conﬁne operation to the shaded
region, and the fact that the motor is theoretically capable of running unloaded at
the high speed corresponding to point C is only of academic interest.
It is worth mentioning that discontinuous current operation is not restricted to
the thyristor converter, but occurs in many other types of power-electronic system.
Broadly speaking, converter operation is more easily understood and analyzed when
in continuous current mode, and the operating characteristics are more desirable, as
we have seen here. We will not dwell on the discontinuous mode in the rest of the
book, as it is beyond our scope, and unlikely to be of concern to the drive user.
2.4 Converter output impedance: overlap
So far we have tacitly assumed that the output voltage from the converter was
independent of the current drawn by the motor, and depended only on the delay
angle a. In other words we have treated the converter as an ideal voltage source.
In practice the a.c. supply has a ﬁnite impedance, and we must therefore expect
a volt-drop which depends on the current being drawn by the motor. Perhaps
surprisingly, the supply impedance (which is mainly due to inductive leakage
reactances in transformers) manifests itself at the output stage of the converter as
a supply resistance, so the supply volt-drop (or regulation) is directly proportional to
the motor armature current.
It is not appropriate to go into more detail here, but we should note that the
effect of the inductive reactance of the supply is to delay the transfer (or commu-
tation) of the current between thyristors, a phenomenon known as overlap. The
consequence of overlap is that instead of the output voltage making an abrupt jump
at the start of each pulse, there is a short period where two thyristors are conducting
simultaneously. During this interval the output voltage is the mean of the voltages
of the incoming and outgoing voltages, as shown typically in Figure 4.5. When the
drive is connected to a ‘stiff’ (i.e. low impedance) industrial supply the overlap will
only last for perhaps a few microseconds, so the ‘notch’ shown in Figure 4.5 would
be barely visible on an oscilloscope. Books always exaggerate the width of the
overlap for the sake of clarity, as in Figure 4.5: with a 50 or 60 Hz supply, if the
overlap lasts for more than say 1 millisecond, the implication is that the supply
system impedance is too high for the size of converter in question, or conversely,
the converter is too big for the supply.
120
Electric Motors and Drives

Returning to the practical consequences of supply impedance, we simply have
to allow for the presence of an extra ‘source resistance’ in series with the output
voltage of the converter. This source resistance is in series with the motor armature
resistance, and hence the motor torque–speed curves for each value of a have
a somewhat steeper droop than they would if the supply impedance was zero.
However, as part of a closed-loop control system, the drive would automatically
compensate for any speed droop resulting from overlap.
2.5 Four-quadrant operation and inversion
So far we have looked at the converter as a rectiﬁer, supplying power from the a.c.
utility supply to a d.c. machine running in the positive direction and acting as
a motor. As explained in Chapter 3, this is known as one-quadrant operation, by
reference to quadrant 1 of the complete torque–speed plane shown in Figure 3.12.
But suppose we want to run a motor in the opposite direction, with negative
speed and torque, i.e. in quadrant 3. How do we do it? And what about operating
the machine as a generator, so that power is returned to the a.c. supply, the
converter then ‘inverting’ power rather than rectifying, and the system operating in
quadrant 2 or quadrant 4? We need to do this if we want to achieve regenerative
braking. Is it possible, and if so how?
The good news is that as we saw in Chapter 3 the d.c. machine is inherently
a bi-directional energy converter. If we apply a positive voltage V greater than E,
a current ﬂows into the armature and the machine runs as a motor. If we reduce V
so that it is less than E, the current, torque and power automatically reverse
direction, and the machine acts as a generator, converting mechanical energy (its
own kinetic energy in the case of regenerative braking) into electrical energy. And if
we want to motor or generate with the reverse direction of rotation, all we have to
do is to reverse the polarity of the armature supply. The d.c. machine is inherently
a four-quadrant device, but needs a supply which can provide positive or negative
voltage, and simultaneously handle either positive or negative current.
Figure 4.5 Distortion of converter output voltage waveform caused by rectiﬁer
overlap.
D.C. Motor Drives
121

This is where we meet a snag: a single thyristor converter can only handle
current in one direction, because the thyristors are unidirectional devices. This
does not mean that the converter is incapable of returning power to the supply,
however. The d.c. current can only be positive, but (provided it is a fully
controlled converter) the d.c. output voltage can be either positive or negative (see
Chapter 2). The power ﬂow can therefore be positive (rectiﬁcation) or negative
(inversion).
For normal motoring where the output voltage is positive (and assuming a fully
controlled converter), the delay angle (a) will be up to 90. (It is common practice
for the ﬁring angle corresponding to rated d.c. voltage to be around 20 when the
incoming a.c. voltage is normal: then if the a.c. voltage falls for any reason, the ﬁring
angle can be further reduced to compensate and allow full d.c. voltage to be
maintained.)
When a is greater than 90, however, the average d.c. output voltage is
negative, as indicated by equation (2.5), and shown in Figure 4.6. A single fully
controlled converter therefore has the potential for two-quadrant operation,
though it has to be admitted that this capability is not easily exploited unless we are
prepared to employ reversing switches in the armature or ﬁeld circuits. This is
discussed next.
2.6 Single-converter reversing drives
We will consider a fully controlled converter supplying a permanent-magnet
motor, and see how the motor can be regeneratively braked from full speed in one
direction, and then accelerated up to full speed in reverse. We looked at this
procedure in principle at the end of Chapter 3, but here we explore the practicalities
of achieving it with a converter-fed drive. We should be clear from the outset that
in practice all the user has to do is to change the speed reference signal from full
forward to full reverse; the control system in the drive converter takes care of
matters from then on. What it does, and how, is discussed below.
Figure 4.6 Average d.c. output voltage from a fully controlled thyristor converter as
a function of the ﬁring angle delay a.
122
Electric Motors and Drives

When the motor is running at full speed forward, the converter delay angle
will be small, and the converter output voltage V and current I will both be
positive. This condition is shown in Figure 4.7(a), and corresponds to operation in
quadrant 1.
In order to brake the motor, the torque has to be reversed. The only way this
can be done is by reversing the direction of armature current. The converter can
only supply positive current, however, so to reverse the motor torque we have to
reverse the armature connections, using a mechanical switch or contactor, as shown
in Figure 4.7(b). (Before operating the contactor, the armature current would be
reduced to zero by lowering the converter voltage, so that the contactor is not
required to interrupt current.) Note that because the motor is still rotating in the
positive direction, the back e.m.f. remains in its original sense; but now the
motional e.m.f. is seen to be assisting the current and so to keep the current within
bounds the converter must produce a negative voltage V which is just a little less
than E. This is achieved by setting the delay angle at the appropriate point between
90 and 180. (The dashed line in Figure 4.6 indicates that the maximum acceptable
negative voltage will generally be somewhat less than the maximum positive
voltage: this restriction arises because of the need to preserve a margin for
commutation of current between thyristors.) Note that the converter current is still
positive (i.e. upwards in Figure 4.7(b)), but the converter voltage is negative, and
power is thus ﬂowing back to the supply system. In this condition the system is
operating in quadrant 2, and the motor is decelerating because of the negative
torque. As the speed falls, E reduces, and so V must be reduced progressively to keep
the current at full value. This is achieved automatically by the action of the current-
control loop, which is discussed later.
The current (i.e. torque) needs to be kept negative in order to run up to speed in
the reverse direction, but after the back e.m.f. changes sign (as the motor reverses)
the converter voltage again becomes positive and greater than E, as shown in
Figure 4.7(c). The converter is then rectifying, with power being fed into the
motor, and the system is operating in quadrant 3.
Schemes using reversing contactors are not suitable where the reversing time
is critical or where periods of zero torque are unacceptable, because of the
Figure 4.7 Stages in motor reversal using a single-converter drive and mechanical
reversing switch.
D.C. Motor Drives
123

delay caused by the mechanical reversing switch, which may easily amount to
200–400 ms. Field reversal schemes operate in a similar way, but reverse the ﬁeld
current instead of the armature current. They are even slower, up to 5 s, because of
the relatively long time-constant of the ﬁeld winding.
2.7 Double converter reversing drives
Where full four-quadrant operation and rapid reversal is called for, two converters
connected in anti-parallel are used, as shown in Figure 4.8. One converter supplies
positive current to the motor, while the other supplies negative current.
The bridges are operated so that their d.c. voltages are almost equal, thereby
ensuring that any d.c. circulating current is small, and a reactor may be placed
between the bridges to limit the ﬂow of ripple currents which result from the
unequal ripple voltages of the two converters.
In most applications, the reactor can be dispensed with and the converters
operated one at a time. The changeover from one converter to the other can only
take place after the ﬁring pulses have been removed from one converter and the
armature current has decayed to zero. Appropriate zero-current detection circuitry
is provided as an integral part of the drive, so that as far as the user is concerned, the
two converters behave as if they were a single ideal bi-directional d.c. source. There
is a dead (torque-free) time typically of only 10 ms or so during the changeover
period from one bridge to the other.
Prospective users need to be aware of the fact that a basic single converter can
only provide for operation in one quadrant. If regenerative braking is required,
either ﬁeld or armature reversing contactors will be needed; and if rapid reversal is
essential, a double converter has to be used. All these extras naturally push up the
purchase price.
2.8 Power factor and supply effects
One of the drawbacks of a converter-fed d.c. drive is that the supply power-factor is
very low when the motor is operating at low speed (i.e. low armature voltage), and
is less than unity even at base speed and full-load. This is because the supply current
waveform lags the supply voltage waveform by the delay angle a, as shown (for
Figure 4.8 Double-converter reversing drive.
124
Electric Motors and Drives

a 3-phase converter) in Figure 4.9, and also the supply current is approximately
rectangular (rather than sinusoidal).
It is important to emphasize that the supply power-factor is always lagging, even
when the converter is inverting. There is no way of avoiding the low power-factor,
so users of large drives need to be prepared to augment their existing power-factor,
correcting equipment if necessary.
The harmonics in the mains current waveform can give rise to a variety of
disturbance problems, and supply authorities generally impose statutory limits. For
large drives (say hundreds of kW), ﬁlters may have to be provided to prevent these
limits from being exceeded.
Since the supply impedance is never zero, there is also inevitably some distortion
of the mains voltage waveform, as shown in Figure 4.10, which indicates the effect
of a 6-pulse converter on the supply line-to-line voltage waveform. The spikes and
notches arise because the utility supply is momentarily short-circuited each time the
current commutates from one thyristor to the next, i.e. during the overlap period
discussed earlier. For the majority of small and medium drives, connected to
stiff industrial supplies, these notches are too small to be noticed (they are
greatly exaggerated for the sake of clarity in Figure 4.10); but they can cause
Figure 4.9 Supply voltage and current waveforms for single-phase converter-fed d.c.
motor drive.
Figure 4.10 Distortion of line voltage waveform caused by overlap in 3-phase fully
controlled converter. (The width of the notches has been exaggerated for the sake of
clarity.)
D.C. Motor Drives
125

serious disturbance to other consumers when a large drive is connected to a weak
supply.
3. CONTROL ARRANGEMENTS FOR D.C. DRIVES
The most common arrangement, which is used with only minor variations
from small drives of say 0.5 kW up to the largest industrial drives of several MW, is
the so-called two-loop control. This has an inner feedback loop to control the
current (and hence torque) and an outer loop to control speed. When position
control is called for, a further outer position loop is added. A two-loop scheme for
a thyristor d.c. drive is discussed ﬁrst, but the essential features are the same in
a chopper-fed drive. Later the simpler arrangements used in low-cost small drives
are mentioned.
In order to simplify the discussion we will assume that the control signals are
analogue, although in all modern versions the implementation will be digital, and
we will limit consideration to those aspects which will be beneﬁcial for the user to
know something about. In practice, once a drive has been commissioned, there are
only a few adjustments to which the user has access. While most of them are
self-explanatory (e.g. max. speed, min. speed, accel. and decel. rates), some are less
obvious (e.g. ‘current stability’, ‘speed stability’, ‘IR comp’.) so these are explained.
To appreciate the overall operation of a two-loop scheme we can consider what
we would do if we were controlling the motor manually. For example, if we found
by observing the tachogenerator that the speed was below target, we would want to
provide more current (and hence torque) in order to produce acceleration, so we
would raise the armature voltage. We would have to do this gingerly, however,
being mindful of the danger of creating an excessive current because of the delicate
balance that exists between the back e.m.f. E and applied voltage V. We would
doubtless wish to keep our eye on the ammeter at all times to avoid blowing up the
thyristors; and as the speed approached the target, we would trim back the current (by
lowering the applied voltage) so as to avoid overshooting the set speed. Actions of this
sort are carried out automatically by the drive system, which we will now explore.
A standard d.c. drive system with speed and current control is shown in
Figure 4.11. The primary purpose of the control system is to provide speed control,
so the ‘input’ to the system is the speed reference signal on the left, and the output is
the speed of the motor (as measured by a tachogenerator) on the right. As with any
closed-loop system, the overall performance is heavily dependent on the quality of
the feedback signal, in this case the speed-proportional voltage provided by the
tachogenerator. It is therefore important to ensure that the tacho is of high quality
(so that, for example, its output voltage does not vary with ambient temperature,
and is ripple-free) and as a result the cost of the tacho often represents a signiﬁcant
fraction of the total cost.
126
Electric Motors and Drives

We will take an overview of how the scheme operates ﬁrst, and then examine
the function of the two loops in more detail.
To get an idea of the operation of the system we will consider what will happen
if, with the motor running light at a set speed, the speed reference signal is suddenly
increased. Because the set (reference) speed is now greater than the actual speed
there will be a speed-error signal (see also Figure 4.12), represented by the output
of the left-hand summing junction in Figure 4.11. A speed error indicates that
acceleration is required, which in turn means torque, i.e. more current. The speed
error is ampliﬁed by the speed controller (which is more accurately described as
a speed-error ampliﬁer) and the output serves as the reference or input signal to the
inner control system. The inner feedback loop is a current-control loop, so when
the current reference increases, so does the motor armature current, thereby
providing extra torque and initiating acceleration. As the speed rises the speed error
reduces and the current and torque therefore reduce to obtain a smooth approach to
the target speed.
We will now look in more detail at the inner (current-control) loop, as its
correct operation is vital to ensure that the thryistors are protected against excessive
current.
3.1 Current limits and protection
The closed-loop current controller, or current loop, is at the heart of the drive system
and is indicated by the shaded region in Figure 4.11. The purpose of the current loop
is to make the actual motor current follow the current reference signal (Iref) shown in
Figure 4.11. It does this by comparing a feedback signal of actual motor current
with the current reference signal, amplifying the difference (or current error), and
using the resulting ampliﬁed current-error signal to control the ﬁring angle a, and
hence the output voltage, of the converter. The current feedback signal is obtained
Figure 4.11 Schematic diagram of analogue controlled-speed drive with current and
speed feedback control loops.
D.C. Motor Drives
127

either from a d.c. current transformer (which gives an isolated analogue voltage
output), or from a.c. current transformer/rectiﬁers in the mains supply lines.
The job of comparing the reference (demand) and actual current signals and
amplifying the error signal is carried out by the current-error ampliﬁer. By giving
the current-error ampliﬁer a high gain, the actual motor current will always
correspond closely to the current reference signal, i.e. the current error will be small,
regardless of motor speed. In other words, we can expect the actual motor current
to follow the ‘current reference’ signal at all times, the armature voltage being
automatically adjusted by the controller so that, regardless of the speed of the motor,
the current has the correct value.
Of course no control system can be perfect, but it is usual for the current-error
ampliﬁer to be of the proportional plus integral (PI) type (see below), in which
case the actual and demanded currents will be exactly equal under steady-state
conditions.
The importance of preventing excessive converter currents from ﬂowing has
been emphasized previously, and the current control loop provides the means to
this end. As long as the current control loop functions properly, the motor current
can never exceed the reference value. Hence by limiting the magnitude of the
current reference signal (by means of a clamping circuit), the motor current can
never exceed the speciﬁed value. This is shown in Figure 4.12, which represents
a small portion of Figure 4.11. The characteristics of the speed controller are shown
in the shaded panel, from which we can see that for small errors in speed, the current
reference increases in proportion to the speed, thereby ensuring ‘linear system’
behavior with a smooth approach to the target speed. However, once the speed
Figure 4.12 Detail showing characteristics of speed-error ampliﬁer.
128
Electric Motors and Drives

error exceeds a limit, the output of the speed-error ampliﬁer saturates and there is
thus no further increase in the current reference. By arranging for this maximum
current reference to correspond to the full (rated) current of the system there is no
possibility of the current in the motor and converter exceeding its rated value, no
matter how large the speed error becomes.
This ‘electronic current limiting’ is by far the most important protective feature
of any drive. It means that if, for example, the motor suddenly stalls because the load
seizes (so that the back e.m.f. falls dramatically), the armature voltage will auto-
matically reduce to a very low value, thereby limiting the current to its maximum
allowable level.
The inner loop is critical in a two-loop control system, so the current loop must
guarantee that the steady-state motor current corresponds exactly with the refer-
ence, and the transient response to step changes in the current reference should be
fast and well damped. The ﬁrst of these requirements is satisﬁed by the integral term
in the current-error ampliﬁer, while the second is obtained by judicious choice of
the ampliﬁer proportional gain and time-constant. As far as the user is concerned,
a ‘current stability’ adjustment may be provided to allow him/her to optimize the
transient response of the current loop.
On a point of jargon, it should perhaps be mentioned that the current-error
ampliﬁer is more often than not called either the ‘current controller’ (as in
Figure 4.11) or the ‘current ampliﬁer’. The ﬁrst of these terms is quite sensible, but
the second can be very misleading: there is after all no question of the motor current
itself being ampliﬁed.
3.2 Torque control
For applications requiring the motor to operate with a speciﬁed torque regardless of
speed (e.g. in line tensioning), we can dispense with the outer (speed) loop, and
simply feed a current reference signal directly to the current controller (typically via
a ‘torque ref ’ terminal on the control board). This is because torque is directly
proportional to current, so the current controller is in effect also a torque controller.
We may have to make an allowance for accelerating torque, by means of a transient
‘inertia compensating’ signal, which could simply be added to the torque demand.
In the current-control mode the current remains constant at the set value, and
the steady running speed is determined by the load. If the torque reference signal
was set at 50%, for example, and the motor was initially at rest, it would accelerate
with a constant current of half rated value until the load torque was equal to the
motor torque. Of course, if the motor was running without any load, it would
accelerate quickly, the applied voltage ramping up so that it always remained higher
than the back e.m.f. by the amount needed to drive the speciﬁed current into the
armature. Eventually the motor would reach a speed (a little above normal ‘full’
speed) at which the converter output voltage had reached its upper limit, and it was
D.C. Motor Drives
129

therefore no longer possible to maintain the set current: thereafter, the motor speed
would remain steady.
This discussion assumes that torque is proportional to armature current, which is
true only if the ﬂux is held constant, which in turn requires the ﬁeld current to be
constant. Hence in all but small drives the ﬁeld will be supplied from a thyristor
converter with current feedback. Variations in ﬁeld circuit resistance due to
temperature changes, and/or changes in the utility supply voltage, are thereby
automatically compensated and the ﬂux is maintained at its rated value.
3.3 Speed control
The outer loop in Figure 4.11 provides speed control. Speed feedback is typically
provided by a d.c. tachogenerator, and the actual and required speeds are fed into
the speed-error ampliﬁer (often known simply as the speed ampliﬁer or the speed
controller).
Any difference between the actual and desired speed is ampliﬁed, and the
output serves as the input to the current loop. Hence if, for example, the actual
motor speed is less than the desired speed, the speed ampliﬁer will demand current
in proportion to the speed error, and the motor will therefore accelerate in an
attempt to minimize the speed error.
When the load increases, there is an immediate deceleration and the speed-error
signal increases, thereby calling on the inner loop for more current. The increased
torque results in acceleration and a progressive reduction of the speed error until
equilibrium is reached at the point where the current reference (Iref) produces
a motor current that gives a torque equal and opposite to the load torque. Looking
at Figure 4.12, where the speed controller is shown as a simple proportional
ampliﬁer (P control), it will be readily appreciated that in order for there to be
a steady-state value of Iref, there would have to be a ﬁnite speed error; i.e. a P
controller would not allow us to reach exactly the target speed. (We could approach
the ideal by increasing the gain of the ampliﬁer, but that might lead us to instability.)
To eliminate the steady-state speed error we can easily arrange for the speed
controller to have an integral (I) term as well as a proportional (P) term (see
Appendix 1). A PI controller can have a ﬁnite output even when the input is zero,
which means that we can achieve zero steady-state error if we employ PI control.
The speed will be held at the value set by the speed reference signal for all loads
up to the point where full armature current is needed. If the load torque increases
any more the speed will drop because the current-loop will not allow any more
armature current to ﬂow. Conversely, if the load attempted to force the speed above
the set value, the motor current would be reversed automatically, so that the motor
acts as a brake and regenerates power to the mains.
To emphasize further the vitally important protective role of the inner loop,
we can see what happens when, with the motor at rest (and unloaded for the sake
130
Electric Motors and Drives

of simplicity), we suddenly increase the speed reference from zero to full value,
i.e. we apply a step demand for full speed. The speed error will be 100%, so the
output (Iref) from the speed-error ampliﬁer will immediately saturate at its
maximum value (Imax, as shown in Figure 4.12), this value corresponding to the
maximum (rated) current of the motor. The motor current will therefore be at
rated value, and the motor will accelerate at full torque. Speed and back e.m.f.
(E) will therefore rise at a constant rate, the applied voltage (V ) increasing
steadily so that the difference (V  E) is sufﬁcient to drive rated current (I)
through the armature resistance. A very similar sequence of events was discussed
in Chapter 3, and is illustrated by the second half of Figure 3.13. (In some drives
the current reference is allowed to reach 150% or even 200% of rated value for
a few seconds, in order to provide a short torque boost. This is particularly
valuable in starting loads with high static friction, and is known as ‘two-stage
current limit’.)
The output of the speed ampliﬁer will remain saturated until the actual speed is
quite close to the target speed, and for all this time the motor current will therefore
be held at full value. Only when the speed is within a few per cent of target will the
speed-error ampliﬁer come out of saturation. Thereafter, as the speed continues to
rise, and the speed error falls, the output of the speed-error ampliﬁer falls below the
clamped level. Speed control then enters a linear regime, in which the correcting
current (and hence the torque) is proportional to speed error, giving a smooth
approach to ﬁnal speed.
A ‘good’ speed controller will result in zero steady-state error, and have a well-
damped response to step changes in the demanded speed. The integral term in the
PI control caters for the requirement of zero steady-state error, while the transient
response depends on the setting of the proportional gain and time-constant. The
‘speed stability’ setting (traditionally a potentiometer) is provided to allow ﬁne
tuning of the transient response. (It should be mentioned that in some high-
performance drives the controller will be of the PID form, i.e. it will also include
a differential (D) term. The D term gives a bit of a kick to the controllers when
a step change is called for – in effect advanced warning that we need a bit of smart
action to change the current in the inductive circuit.)
It is important to remember that it is much easier to obtain a good transient
response with a regenerative drive, which has the ability to supply negative current
(i.e. braking torque) should the motor overshoot the desired speed. A non-
regenerative drive cannot furnish negative current (unless ﬁtted with reversing
contactors), so if the speed overshoots the target the best that can be done is to
reduce the armature current to zero and wait for the motor to decelerate naturally.
This is not satisfactory, and every effort therefore has to be made to avoid controller
settings which lead to an overshoot of the target speed.
As with any closed-loop scheme, problems occur if the feedback signal is lost
when the system is in operation. If the tacho feedback became disconnected, the
D.C. Motor Drives
131

speed ampliﬁer would immediately saturate, causing full torque to be applied. The
speed would then rise until the converter output reached its maximum output
voltage. To guard against this, many drives incorporate tacho-loss detection
circuitry, and in some cases armature voltage feedback (see later section) auto-
matically takes over in the event of tacho failure.
Drives which use ﬁeld-weakening to extend the speed range include automatic
provision for controlling both armature voltage and ﬁeld current when running
above base speed. Typically, the ﬁeld current is kept at full value until the armature
voltage reaches about 95% of rated value. When a higher speed is demanded, the
extra armature voltage applied is accompanied by a simultaneous reduction in the
ﬁeld current, in such a way that when the armature voltage reaches 100% the ﬁeld
current is at the minimum safe value.
3.4 Overall operating region
A standard drive with ﬁeld-weakening provides armature voltage control of speed
up to base speed, and ﬁeld-weakening control of speed thereafter. Any torque up to
the rated value can be obtained at any speed below base speed, and as explained in
Chapter 3 this region is known as the ‘constant torque’ region. Above base speed,
the maximum available torque reduces inversely with speed, so this is known as the
‘constant power’ region. For a converter-fed drive the operating region in quadrant
1 of the torque–speed plane is therefore as shown in Figure 3.10. (If the drive is
equipped for regenerative and reversing operation, the operating area is mirrored in
the other three quadrants, of course.)
3.5 Armature voltage feedback and IR compensation
In low-power drives where precision speed-holding is not essential, and cost must
be kept to a minimum, the tachogenerator may be dispensed with and the armature
voltage used as a ‘speed feedback’ instead. Performance is clearly not as good as with
tacho feedback, since while the steady-state no-load speed is proportional to
armature voltage, the speed falls as the load (and hence armature current) increases.
We saw in Chapter 3 that the drop in speed with load was attributable to the
armature resistance volt-drop (IR), and the steady-state drop in speed can therefore
be compensated by boosting the applied voltage in proportion to the current. ‘IR
compensation’ would in such cases be provided on the drive circuit for the user to
adjust to suit the particular motor. The compensation is far from perfect, since it
cannot cope with temperature variation of resistance, or with load transients.
3.6 Drives without current control
Very low-cost, low-power drives may dispense with a full current control loop, and
incorporate a crude ‘current-limit’ which only operates when the maximum set
current would otherwise be exceeded. These drives usually have an in-built ramp
132
Electric Motors and Drives

circuit which limits the rate of rise of the set speed signal so that under normal
conditions the current limit is not activated. They are, however, prone to tripping
in all but the most controlled of applications and environments.
4. CHOPPER-FED D.C. MOTOR DRIVES
If the source of supply is d.c. (for example, in a battery vehicle or a rapid transit
system) a chopper-type converter is usually employed. The basic operation of
a single-switch chopper was discussed in Chapter 2, where it was shown that the
average output voltage could be varied by periodically switching the battery voltage
on and off for varying intervals. The principal difference between the thyristor-
controlled rectiﬁer and the chopper is that in the former the motor current always
ﬂows through the supply, whereas in the latter the motor current only ﬂows from
the supply terminals for part of each cycle.
A single-switch chopper using a transistor, MOSFET or IGBT can only supply
positive voltage and current to a d.c. motor, and is therefore restricted to one-quadrant
motoring operation. When regenerative and/or rapid speed reversal is called for, more
complex circuitry is required, involving two or more power switches, and conse-
quently leading to increased cost. Many different circuits are used and it is not possible
to go into detail here, but it will be recalled that the two most important types were
described in section 2 of Chapter 2: the simplest or ‘buck’ converter provides an output
voltage in the range 0 < E, where E is the battery voltage, while the slightly more
complex ‘boost’ converter provides output voltages greater than that of the supply.
4.1 Performance of chopper-fed d.c. motor drives
We saw earlier that the d.c. motor performed almost as well when fed from a phase-
controlled rectiﬁer as it does when supplied with pure d.c. The chopper-fed motor
is, if anything, rather better than the phase-controlled, because the armature current
ripple can be less if a high chopping frequency is used.
A typical circuit and waveforms of armature voltage and current are shown in
Figure 4.13: these are drawn with the assumption that the switch is ideal. A
chopping frequency of around 100 Hz, as shown in Figure 4.13, is typical of
medium and large chopper drives, while small drives often use a much higher
chopping frequency, and thus have lower ripple current. As usual, we have assumed
that the speed remains constant despite the slightly pulsating torque, and that the
armature current is continuous.
The shape of the armature voltage waveform reminds us that when the tran-
sistor is switched on, the battery voltage V is applied directly to the armature, and
during this period the path of the armature current is indicated by the dotted line in
Figure 4.13(a). For the remainder of the cycle the transistor is turned ‘off’ and the
current freewheels through the diode, as shown by the dashed line in
D.C. Motor Drives
133

Figure 4.13(b). When the current is freewheeling through the diode, the armature
voltage is clamped at (almost) zero.
The speed of the motor is determined by the average armature voltage (Vdc),
which in turn depends on the proportion of the total cycle time (T) for which the
transistor is ‘on’. If the on and off times are deﬁned as Ton ¼ kT and Toff ¼ (1  kT ),
where 0 < k < 1, then the average voltage is simply given by
Vdc ¼ kV
(4.3)
from which we see that speed control is effected via the on time ratio k.
Figure 4.13 Chopper-fed d.c. motor. In (a) the transistor is ‘on’ and armature current is
ﬂowing through the voltage source; in (b) the transistor is ‘off’ and the armature current
freewheels through the diode. Typical armature voltage and current waveforms are
shown at (c), with the dotted line representing the current waveform when the load
torque is reduced by half.
134
Electric Motors and Drives

Turning now to the current waveforms shown in Figure 4.13(c), the upper
waveform corresponds to full-load, i.e. the average current (Idc) produces the full rated
torque of the motor. If now the load torque on the motor shaft is reduced to half rated
torque, and assuming that the resistance is negligible, the steady-state speed will remain
the same but the new mean steady-state current will be halved, as shown by the lower
dotted curve. We note, however, that although, as expected, the mean current is
determined by the load, the ripple current is unchanged, and this is explained below.
If we ignore resistance, the equation governing the current during the ‘on’
period is
V ¼ E þ L di
dt; or di
dt ¼ 1
L ðV  EÞ
(4.4)
Since V is greater than E, the gradient of the current (di/dt) is positive, as can be seen
in Figure 4.13(c). During this ‘on’ period the battery is supplying power to the
motor. Some of the energy is converted to mechanical output power, but some is
also stored in the magnetic ﬁeld associated with the inductance. The latter is given
by ½Li2, and so as the current (i) rises, more energy is stored.
During the ‘off ’ period, the equation governing the current is
0 ¼ E þ L di
dt; or di
dt ¼ E
L
(4.5)
We note that during the ‘off’ time the gradient of the current is negative (as shown
in Figure 4.13(c)) and it is determined by the motional e.m.f. E. During this period,
the motor is producing mechanical output power which is supplied from the energy
stored in the inductance, so not surprisingly the current falls as the energy previously
stored in the ‘on’ period is now given up.
We note that the rise and fall of the current (i.e. the current ripple) is inversely
proportional to the inductance, but is independent of the mean d.c. current, i.e. the
ripple does not depend on the load.
To study the input/output power relationship, we note that the battery current
only ﬂows duringtheonperiod, and its average value isthereforekIdc. Since thebattery
voltage is constant, the power supplied is simply given by V(kIdc) ¼ kVIdc. Looking at
the motor side, the average voltage is given by Vdc ¼ kV, and the average current
(assumed constant) is Idc, so the power input to the motor is again kVIdc, i.e. there is no
loss of power in the ideal chopper. Given that k is less than 1, we see that the input
(battery) voltage is higher than the output (motor) voltage, but conversely the input
current is less than the output current, and in this respect we see that the chopper
behaves in much the same way for d.c. as a conventional transformer does for a.c.
4.2 Torque–speed characteristics and control arrangements
Under open-loop conditions (i.e. where the mark/space ratio of the chopper is ﬁxed
at a particular value) the behavior of the chopper-fed motor is similar to that of the
D.C. Motor Drives
135

converter-fed motor discussed earlier (see Figure 4.3). When the armature current is
continuous the speed falls only slightly with load, because the mean armature voltage
remains constant. But when the armature current is discontinuous (which is most
likely at high speeds and light load) the speed falls off rapidly when the load increases,
because the mean armature voltage falls as the load increases. Discontinuous current
can be avoided by adding an inductor in series with the armature, or by raising the
chopping frequency, but when closed-loop speed control is employed, the unde-
sirable effects of discontinuous current are masked by the control loop.
The control philosophy and arrangements for a chopper-fed motor are the same
as for the converter-fed motor, with the obvious exception that the mark/space
ratio of the chopper is used to vary the output voltage, rather than the ﬁring angle.
5. D.C. SERVO DRIVES
The precise meaning of the term ‘servo’ in the context of motors and drives is
difﬁcult to pin down. Broadly speaking, if a drive incorporates ‘servo’ in its
description, the implication is that it is intended speciﬁcally for closed-loop or
feedback control, usually of shaft torque, speed or position. Early servomechanisms
were developed primarily for military applications, and it quickly became apparent
that standard d.c. motors were not always suited to precision control. In particular,
high torque to inertia ratios were needed, together with smooth ripple-free torque.
Motors were therefore developed to meet these exacting requirements, and not
surprisingly they were, and still are, much more expensive than their industrial
counterparts. Whether the extra expense of a servo motor can be justiﬁed depends
on the speciﬁcation, but prospective users should always be on their guard to ensure
they are not pressed into an expensive purchase when a conventional industrial
drive could cope perfectly well.
The majority of servo drives are sold in modular form, consisting of a high-
performance permanent magnet motor, often with an integral tachogenerator, and
a chopper-type power ampliﬁer module. The drive ampliﬁer normally requires
aseparateregulatedd.c.powersupply,if,asisnormallythecase,thepoweristobedrawn
from theutility supply. Continuous output powers range from a few watts up to perhaps
2–5 kW, with voltages of 12 V, 24 V, 48 V and multiples of 50 V being standard.
There has been an even more pronounced movement in the servo market than
in industrial drives, away from d.c. in favor of the a.c. permanent magnet or
induction motor, although d.c. servos do retain some niche applications.
5.1 Servo motors
Although there is no sharp dividing line between servo motors and ordinary motors,
the servo type will be intended for use in applications which require rapid accel-
eration and deceleration. The design of the motor will reﬂect this by catering for
136
Electric Motors and Drives

intermittent currents (and hence torques) of many times the continuously rated
value. Because most servo motors are small, their armature resistances are relatively
high: the short-circuit (locked-rotor) current at full armature voltage is therefore
perhaps only a few times the continuously rated current, and the drive ampliﬁer will
normally be selected so that it can cope with this condition, giving the motor a very
rapid acceleration from rest. The even more arduous condition in which the full
armature voltage is suddenly reversed with the motor running at full speed is also
quite normal. (Both of these modes of operation would of course be quite
unthinkable with a large d.c. motor, because of the huge currents which would ﬂow
as a result of the much lower per-unit armature resistance.)
In order to maximize acceleration, the rotor inertia must be minimized, and one
obvious way to achieve this is to construct a motor in which only the electric circuit
(conductors) on the rotor moves, the magnetic part (either iron or permanent
magnet) remaining stationary. This principle is adopted in ‘ironless rotor’ and
‘printed armature’ motors.
In the ironless rotor or moving-coil type (Figure 4.14) the armature conductors
are formed as a thin-walled cylinder consisting essentially of nothing more than
varnished wires wound in skewed form together with the disc-type commutator
(not shown). Inside the armature sits a two-pole (upper N, lower S) permanent
magnet which provides the radial ﬂux, and outside it is a steel cylindrical shell which
completes the magnetic circuit.
Needless to say the absence of any slots to support the armature winding results
in a relatively fragile structure, which is therefore limited to diameters of not much
over 1 cm. Because of their small size they are often known as micromotors, and are
very widely used in cameras, video systems, card readers, etc.
The printed armature type is altogether more robust, and is made in sizes up to
a few kW. They are generally made in disc or pancake form, with the direction of
ﬂux axial and the armature current radial. The armature conductors resemble spokes
on a wheel, the conductors themselves being formed on a lightweight disc. Early
versions were made by using printed-circuit techniques, but pressed fabrication is
now more common. Since there are usually at least a hundred armature conductors,
Figure 4.14 Ironless rotor d.c. motor. The commutator (not shown) is usually of the disc
type.
D.C. Motor Drives
137

the torque remains almost constant as the rotor turns, which allows them to produce
very smooth rotation at low speed. Inertia and armature inductance are low, giving
a good dynamic response, and the short and fat shape makes them suitable for
applications such as machine tools and disc drives where axial space is at a premium.
5.2 Position control
As mentioned earlier many servo motors are used in closed-loop position control
applications, so it is appropriate to look brieﬂy at how this is achieved. Later (in
Chapter 10) we will see that the stepping motor provides an alternative open-loop
method of position control, which can be cheaper for some less demanding
applications.
In the example shown in Figure 4.15, the angular position of the output shaft is
intended to follow the reference voltage (qref), but it should be clear that if the
motor drives a toothed belt, linear outputs can also be obtained. The potentiometer
mounted on the output shaft provides a feedback voltage proportional to the actual
position of the output shaft. The voltage from this potentiometer must be a linear
function of angle, and must not vary with temperature, otherwise the accuracy of
the system will be in doubt.
The feedback voltage (representing the actual angle of the shaft) is subtracted
from the reference voltage (representing the desired position) and the resulting
position error signal is ampliﬁed and used to drive the motor so as to rotate the
output shaft in the desired direction. When the output shaft reaches the target
position, the position error becomes zero, no voltage is applied to the motor, and
the output shaft remains at rest. Any attempt to physically move the output shaft
from its target position immediately creates a position error and a restoring torque is
applied by the motor.
Figure 4.15 Closed-loop angular position control using d.c. motor and angle feedback
from a servo-type potentiometer.
138
Electric Motors and Drives

The dynamic performance of the simple scheme described above is very
unsatisfactory as it stands. In order to achieve a fast response and to minimize
position errors caused by static friction, the gain of the ampliﬁer needs to be high,
but this in turn leads to a highly oscillatory response which is usually unacceptable.
For some ﬁxed-load applications matters can be improved by adding a compen-
sating network at the input to the ampliﬁer, but the best solution is to use ‘tacho’
(speed) feedback (shown dashed in Figure 4.15) in addition to the main position
feedback loop. Tacho feedback clearly has no effect on the static behavior (since the
voltage from the tacho is proportional to the speed of the motor), but has the effect
of increasing the damping of the transient response. The gain of the ampliﬁer can
therefore be made high in order to give a fast response, and the degree of tacho
feedback can then be adjusted to provide the required damping (see Figure 4.16).
Many servo motors have an integral tachogenerator for this purpose. (This is
a particular example of the general principle by which the response can be improved
by adding ‘derivative of output’ feedback: in this case the speed signal is the rate of
change (or derivative) of the angular position.)
The example above dealt with an analogue scheme in the interests of simplicity,
but digital position control schemes (with an encoder instead of a potentiometer,
and no tacho) are now much more common, especially when brushless motors (see
Chapter 9) are used. Complete ‘controllers on a card’ are available as off-the-shelf
items, and these offer ease of interface to other systems as well as providing for
improved ﬂexibility in shaping the dynamic response.
6. DIGITALLY CONTROLLED DRIVES
As in all forms of industrial and precision control, digital implementations have
replaced analogue circuitry in the vast majority of electric drive systems, but there
are few instances where this has resulted in any real change to the basic structure of
the drive with respect to the motor control, and in most cases understanding how
the drive functions is still best approached in the ﬁrst instance by studying the
Figure 4.16 Typical step responses for a closed-loop position control system, showing
the improved damping obtained by the addition of tacho feedback.
D.C. Motor Drives
139

analogue version. Digital control electronics has brought with it a considerable
advance in the auxiliary control and protection functions which are now routinely
found on a drive system. Digital control electronics has also facilitated the
commercial implementation of advanced a.c. motor control strategies, which will
be discussed in Chapters 7 and 8. However, as far as understanding d.c. drives is
concerned, users who have developed a sound understanding of how the analogue
version operates will ﬁnd little to trouble them when considering the digital
equivalent. Accordingly this section is limited to the consideration of a few of the
advantages offered by digital implementations, and readers seeking more are rec-
ommended to consult a book such as the Control Techniques Drives and Controls
Handbook, 2nd edition, by W. Drury.
Many drives use digital speed feedback, in which a pulse train generated from
a shaft-mounted encoder is compared (using a phase-locked loop) with a reference
pulse train whose frequency corresponds to the desired speed, or where the
reference is transmitted to the drive in the form of a synchronous serial word.
Consequently, the feedback is more accurate and drift-free and noise in the encoder
signal is easily rejected, so that very precise speed holding can be guaranteed. This is
especially important when a number of independent motors must all be driven at
identical speed. Phase-locked loops are also used in the ﬁring-pulse synchronizing
circuits, to overcome the problems caused by noise on the mains waveform.
Digital controllers offer freedom from drift, added ﬂexibility (e.g. program-
mable ramp-up, ramp-down, maximum and minimum speeds, etc.), ease of
interfacing and linking to other drives and host computers and controllers, and self-
tuning. User-friendly diagnostics represents another beneﬁt, providing the local or
remote user with current and historical data on the state of all the key drive vari-
ables. Digital drives also offer many more functions, including user programmable
functions as are found on programmable logic controllers as well as a host of
communications interfaces to allow incorporation into industrial automation
systems.
140
Electric Motors and Drives

CHAPTER FIVE
Induction Motors – Rotating Field,
Slip and Torque
1. INTRODUCTION
Judged in terms of ﬁtness for purpose coupled with simplicity, the induction motor
must rank alongside the screwthread as one of mankind’s best inventions. It is not
only supremely elegant as an electromechanical energy converter, but is also by far
the most important, with something like half of all the electricity generated being
converted back to mechanical energy in induction motors. Despite playing a key
role in industrial society, it remains largely unnoticed because of its workaday role
driving machinery, pumps, fans, compressors, conveyors, hoists, and a host of other
routine but vital tasks. It will doubtless continue to dominate ﬁxed-speed appli-
cations, but, thanks to the availability of reliable variable-frequency inverters, it is
now also the leader in the controlled-speed arena.
Like the d.c. motor, the induction motor develops torque by the interaction of
axial currents on the rotor and a radial magnetic ﬁeld produced by the stator. But
whereas in the d.c. motor the ‘work’ current has to be fed into the rotor by means of
brushes and a commutator, the torque-producing currents in the rotor of the
induction motor are induced by electromagnetic action, hence the name ‘induc-
tion’ motor. The stator winding therefore not only produces the magnetic ﬁeld (the
‘excitation’), but also supplies the energy which is converted to mechanical output.
The absence of any sliding mechanical contacts and the consequent saving in terms
of maintenance is a major advantage of the induction motor over the d.c. machine.
Other differences between the induction motor and the d.c. motor are ﬁrst that
the supply to the induction motor is a.c. (usually 3-phase, but in smaller sizes single-
phase); secondly that the magnetic ﬁeld in the induction motor rotates relative to
the stator, while in the d.c. motor it is stationary; and thirdly that both stator and
rotor in the induction motor are non-salient (i.e. effectively smooth) whereas the
d.c. motor stator has projecting poles or saliencies which deﬁne the position of the
ﬁeld windings.
Given these differences we might expect to ﬁnd major contrasts between the
performance of the two types of motor, and it is true that their inherent characteristics
exhibit distinctive features. But there are also many aspects of behavior which are
similar, as we shall see. Perhaps most important from the user’s point of view is that
there is no dramatic difference in size or weight between an induction motor and
a d.c. motor giving the same power at the same base speed, though the induction
Electric Motors and Drives
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-098332-5.00005-X
 2013 Austin Hughes and William Drury.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
141j

motor will usually be cheaper. The similarity in size is a reﬂection of the fact that both
types employ similar amounts of copper and iron, while the difference in price stems
from the simpler construction and production volume of the induction motor.
1.1 Outline of approach
Throughout this chapter we will be concerned with how the induction motor
behaves in the steady state, i.e. the supply voltage and frequency are constant, the
load is steady, and any transients have died away. We will aim to develop a sound
qualitative understanding of the steady-state behavior, based on the ideas we have
discussed so far (magnetic ﬂux, m.m.f., reluctance, electromagnetic force, motional
e.m.f.). But despite many similarities with the d.c. motor, most readers will probably
ﬁnd that the induction motor is more difﬁcult to understand. This is because we are
now dealing with alternating rather than steady quantities (so, for example,
inductive reactance becomes very signiﬁcant), and also because (as mentioned
earlier) a single winding acts simultaneously as the producer of the ﬂux and the
supplier of the converted energy.
In the next chapter, we will extend our qualitative understanding to look at how
motor performance depends on design parameters: we will again be following an
approach that has served well since the early days of the induction motor, and was
developedtoreﬂectthefactthatmotorswereoperatedataﬁxedvoltageandfrequency.
It turns out that under these ‘utility supply’ conditions, the transient performance is
poor and fast control of torque is not possible, and so the induction motor was
considered unable to compete with the d.c. motor in controlled-speed drives.
All this changed rapidly beginning in the 1970s. The full set of governing
equations (describing not only the steady state but also the much more complex
dynamic behavior) had become tractable with computer simulation, which in turn
led the way to understanding how the stator currents would have to be manipulated
to obtain fast control of torque. The hardware for implementing rapid current
control became available with the development of pulse-width modulation (PWM)
inverters, but it was not until digital signal processing ﬁnally became cheap and fast
enough to deal with the complex control algorithms that so-called ‘ﬁeld-oriented’
or ‘vector’ control emerged as a practicable commercial proposition. We will defer
consideration of this spectacularly successful system until later, because experience
has shown that a solid grounding based on the classical approach is invaluable before
getting to grips with more demanding ideas, which are introduced in Chapter 7.
2. THE ROTATING MAGNETIC FIELD
To understand how an induction motor operates, we must ﬁrst unravel the
mysteries of the rotating magnetic ﬁeld. We will see later that the rotor is effectively
dragged along by the rotating ﬁeld, but that it can never run quite as fast as the ﬁeld.
142
Electric Motors and Drives

Our look at the mechanism of the rotating ﬁeld will focus on the stator
windings because they act as the source of the ﬂux. In this part of the discussion we
will ignore the presence of the rotor conductors. This makes it much easier to
understand what governs the speed of rotation and the magnitude of the ﬁeld,
which are the two factors that most inﬂuence motor behavior.
Having established how the rotating ﬁeld is set up, and what its speed and
strength depend on, we move on to examine the rotor, concentrating on how it
behaves when exposed to the rotating ﬁeld, and discovering how the induced rotor
currents and torque vary with rotor speed. In this section we assume – again for the
sake of simplicity – that the rotating ﬂux set up by the stator is not inﬂuenced by the
rotor.
Finally we turn attention to the interaction between the rotor and stator,
verifying that our earlier assumptions are well justiﬁed. Having done this we are in
a position to examine the ‘external characteristics’ of the motor, i.e. the variation of
motor torque and stator current with speed. These are the most important char-
acteristics from the point of view of the user.
Readers who are unfamiliar with routine a.c. circuit theory, including reac-
tance, impedance, phasor diagrams (but not, at this stage, ‘j’ notation) and basic ideas
about 3-phase systems will have to do some preparatory work1 before tackling the
later sections of this chapter.
Before we investigate how the rotating magnetic ﬁeld is produced, we should
be clear what it actually is. Because both the rotor and stator iron surfaces are
smooth (apart from the regular slotting), and are separated by a small air-gap, the
ﬂux produced by the stator windings crosses the air-gap radially. The behavior of
the motor is dictated by this radial ﬂux, so we will concentrate ﬁrst on establishing
a mental picture of what is meant by the ‘ﬂux wave’ in an induction motor.
The pattern of ﬂux in an ideal 4-pole motor supplied from a balanced 3-phase
source is shown in Figure 5.1(a). The top sketch corresponds to time t ¼ 0; the
middle one shows the ﬂux pattern one-quarter of a cycle of the supply later (i.e.
5 ms if the frequency is 50 Hz); and the lower one corresponds to a further quarter-
cycle later. We note that the pattern of ﬂux lines is repeated in each case, except that
the middle and lower ones are rotated by 45 and 90, respectively, with respect to
the top sketch.
The term ‘4-pole’ reﬂects the fact that ﬂux leaves the stator from two N poles, and
returns at two S poles. Note, however, that there are no physical features of the stator
iron that mark it out as being 4-pole, rather than say 2-pole or 6-pole. As we will see,
it is the layout and interconnection of the stator coils which set the pole-number.
If we plot the variation of the radial air-gap ﬂux density with respect to distance
round the stator, at each of the three instants of time, we get the patterns shown in
1 The revised book Electrical and Electronic Technology, 10th Edition by Edward Hughes (no relation) is
a tried and tested favorite.
Induction Motors – Rotating Field, Slip and Torque
143

Figure 5.1(b). The ﬁrst feature to note is that the radial ﬂux density varies sinu-
soidally in space. There are two N peaks and two S peaks, but the transition from N
to S occurs in a smooth sinusoidal way, giving rise to the term ‘ﬂux wave’. The
distance from the center of one N pole to the center of the adjacent S pole is called
the pole-pitch, for obvious reasons.
Staying with Figure 5.1(b), we note that after one-quarter of a cycle of the
mains frequency, the ﬂux wave retains its original shape, but has moved round
the stator by half a pole-pitch, while after half a cycle it has moved round by a full
pole-pitch. If we had plotted the patterns at intermediate times, we would have
discovered that the wave maintained a constant shape, and progressed smoothly,
advancing at a uniform rate of two pole-pitches per cycle of the supply. The term
‘traveling ﬂux wave’ is thus an appropriate one to describe the air-gap ﬁeld.
For the 4-pole wave here, one complete revolution takes two cycles of the
supply, so the speed is 25 rev/s (1500 rev/min) with a 50 Hz supply, or 30 rev/s
(1800 rev/min) at 60 Hz. The general expression for the speed of the ﬁeld (which is
known as the synchronous speed) Ns, in rev/min is
Ns ¼ 120f
p
(5.1)
Figure 5.1 (a) Flux pattern in a 4-pole induction motor at three successive instants of
time, each one-quarter of a cycle apart; (b) radial ﬂux density distribution in the air-gap
at the three instants shown in Figure 5.1(a).
144
Electric Motors and Drives

where p is the pole-number. The pole-number must be an even integer, since for
every N pole there must be an S pole. Synchronous speeds for commonly used
pole-numbers are given in Table 5.1.
We can see from the table that if we want the ﬁeld to rotate at intermediate
speeds, we will have to be able to vary the supply frequency, and this is what
happens in inverter-fed motors, which are dealt with in Chapter 7.
2.1 Production of rotating magnetic ﬁeld
Now that we have a picture of the ﬁeld, we turn to how it is produced. If we inspect
the stator winding of an induction motor we ﬁnd that it consists of a uniform array
of identical coils, located in slots. The coils are in fact connected to form three
identical groups or phase-windings, distributed around the stator, and symmetrically
displaced with respect to one another. The three phase-windings are connected
either in star (wye) or delta (mesh), as shown in Figure 5.2.
The three phase-windings are connected to a balanced 3-phase a.c. supply, and
so the currents (which produce the m.m.f. that sets up the ﬂux) are of equal
amplitude but differ in time-phase by one-third of a cycle (120), forming
a balanced 3-phase set.
2.2 Field produced by each phase-winding
The aim of the winding designer is to arrange the layout of the coils so that each
phase-winding, acting alone, produces an m.m.f. wave (and hence an air-gap ﬂux
Table 5.1 Synchronous speeds, in rev/min
Pole-number
50 Hz
60 Hz
2
3000
3600
4
1500
1800
6
1000
1200
8
750
900
10
600
720
12
500
600
Figure 5.2 Star (wye) and delta (mesh) connection of the three phase-windings of a
3-phase induction motor.
Induction Motors – Rotating Field, Slip and Torque
145

wave) of the desired pole-number, and with a sinusoidal variation of amplitude with
angle. Getting the desired pole-number is not difﬁcult: we simply have to choose
the right number and pitch of coils, as shown by the diagrams of an elementary
4-pole winding in Figure 5.3.
In Figure 5.3(a) we see that by positioning two coils (each of which spans one
pole-pitch) 180 apart we obtain the correct number of poles (i.e. 4). However, the
air gap ﬁeld – shown by only two ﬂux lines per pole for the sake of clarity – is
uniform between each go and return coil-side, not sinusoidal.
A clearer picture of the air-gap ﬂux wave is presented in the developed view in
Figure 5.3(b), where more equally spaced ﬂux lines have been added to emphasize
the uniformity of the ﬂux density between the ‘go’ and ‘return’ sides of the coils.
Finally, the plot of the air-gap ﬂux density underlines the fact that this very basic
arrangement of coils produces a rectangular ﬂux density wave, whereas what we are
seeking is a sinusoidal wave.
We can improve matters by adding more coils in the adjacent slots, as shown in
Figure 5.4. All the coils have the same number of turns, and carry the same current.
The addition of the extra slightly displaced coils gives rise to the stepped waveform
of m.m.f. and air-gap ﬂux density shown in Figure 5.4. It is still not sinusoidal, but is
much better than the original rectangular shape.
Figure 5.3 Arrangement (a) and developed diagram (b) showing elementary 4-pole,
single-layer stator winding consisting of four conductors spaced by 90. The ‘go’
side of each coil (shown by the plus symbol) carries current into the paper at the
instant shown, while the ‘return’ side (shown by the dot) carries current out of the
paper.
146
Electric Motors and Drives

It turns out that if we were to insist on having a perfect sinusoidal ﬂux density
waveform, we would have to distribute the coils of one phase in a smoothly varying
sinusoidal pattern over the whole periphery of the stator. This is not a practicable
proposition, ﬁrst because we would also have to vary the number of turns per coil
from point to point, and secondly because we want the coils to be in slots, so it is
impossible to avoid some measure of discretization in the layout. For economy of
manufacture we are also obliged to settle for all the coils being identical, and we
must make sure that the three identical phase-windings ﬁt together in such a way
that all the slots are fully utilized. (See Plate 5.1)
Despite these constraints we can get remarkably close to the ideal sinusoidal
pattern, especially when we use a ‘two-layer’ winding (in which case the stator
slots may contain turns from more than one phase winding). A typical arrange-
ment of one phase is shown in Figure 5.5. The upper expanded sketch shows how
each coil sits with its ‘go’ side in the top of a slot while the ‘return’ side occupies
the bottom of a slot rather less than one pole-pitch away. Coils which span less
than a full pole-pitch are known as short-pitch or short-chorded: in this particular
case the coil pitch is six slots and the pole-pitch is nine slots, so the coils are short-
pitched by three slots.
This type of winding is almost universal in all but small induction motors, the
coils in each phase being grouped together to form ‘phase-bands’ or ‘phase-belts’.
Since we are concentrating on the ﬁeld produced by only one of the phase-windings
(or ‘phases’), only one-third of the coils in Figure 5.5 are shown carrying current.
The remaining two-thirds of the coils form the other two phase-windings, as dis-
cussed below.
Returning to the ﬂux density plot in Figure 5.5 we see that the effect of short-
pitching is to increase the number of steps in the waveform, and that as a result the
ﬁeld produced by one phase is a fair approximation to a sinusoid.
The current in each phase pulsates at the supply frequency, so the ﬁeld produced
by say phase A, pulsates in sympathy with the current in phase A, the axis of each
‘pole’ remaining ﬁxed in space, but its polarity changing from N to S and back once
Figure 5.4 Developed diagram showing ﬂux density produced by one phase of
a single-layer winding having three slots per pole per phase.
Induction Motors – Rotating Field, Slip and Torque
147

per cycle. There is no hint of any rotation in the ﬁeld of one phase, but when
the ﬁelds produced by each of the three phases are combined, matters change
dramatically.
2.3 Resultant 3-phase ﬁeld
The layout of coils for the complete 4-pole winding is shown in Figure 5.6(a). The
‘go’ sides of each coil are represented by the capital letters (A, B, C) and the ‘return’
sides are identiﬁed by bars over the letters (A; B; C). (For the sake of comparison,
a 6-pole winding layout that uses the same stator slotting is shown in Figure 5.6(b):
here the pole-pitch is six slots and the coils are short-pitched by one slot.)
Returning to the 4-pole winding, we can see that the windings of phases B and
C are identical with that of phase A apart from the fact that they are displaced in
space by plus and minus two-thirds of a pole-pitch, respectively. Phases B and C
therefore also produce pulsating ﬁelds, along their own ﬁxed axes in space. But the
currents in phases B and C also differ in time-phase from the current in phase A,
lagging by one-third and two-thirds of a cycle, respectively. To ﬁnd the resultant
Figure 5.5 Developed diagram showing layout of windings in a 3-phase, 4-pole, two-
layer induction motor winding, together with the ﬂux density wave produced by one
phase acting alone. The upper detail shows how the coil-sides form upper and lower
layers in the slots.
148
Electric Motors and Drives

ﬁeld we must therefore superimpose the ﬁelds of the three phases, taking account
not only of the spatial differences between windings, but also the time differences
between the currents. This is a tedious process, so the intermediate steps have been
omitted and instead we move straight to the plot of the resultant ﬁeld for the
complete 4-pole machine, for three discrete times during one complete cycle, as
shown in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.6 Developed diagram showing arrangement of 3-phase, two-layer windings
in a 36-slot stator. A 4-pole winding with three slots/pole/phase is shown in (a), and a 6-
pole winding with two slots/pole/phase is shown in (b).
Figure 5.7 Resultant air–gap ﬂux density wave produced by a complete 3-phase,
4-pole winding at three successive instants in time.
Induction Motors – Rotating Field, Slip and Torque
149

We see that the three pulsating ﬁelds combine beautifully and lead to a resultant
4-pole ﬁeld which rotates at a uniform rate, advancing by two pole-pitches for
every cycle of the supply. The resultant ﬁeld is not exactly sinusoidal in shape
(though it is actually more sinusoidal than the ﬁeld produced by the individual
phase-windings), and its shape varies a little from instant to instant; but these are
minor worries. The resultant ﬁeld is amazingly close to the ideal traveling wave and
yet the winding layout is simple and easy to manufacture. This is an elegant
engineering achievement, however one looks at it.
2.4 Direction of rotation
The direction of rotation depends on the order in which the currents reach their
maxima, i.e. on the phase-sequence of the supply. Reversal of direction is therefore
simply a matter of interchanging any two of the lines connecting the windings to
the supply.
2.5 Main (air-gap) ﬂux and leakage ﬂux
Broadly speaking the motor designer shapes the stator and rotor teeth to encourage
as much as possible of the ﬂux produced by the stator windings to pass right down
the rotor teeth, so that before completing its path back to the stator it is fully linked
with the rotor conductors (see later) which are located in the rotor slots. We will see
later that this tight magnetic coupling between stator and rotor windings is necessary
for good running performance, and the ﬁeld which provides the coupling is of
course the main or air-gap ﬁeld, which we are in the midst of discussing.
In practice the vast majority of the ﬂux produced by the stator is indeed main or
‘mutual’ ﬂux. But there is some ﬂux which bypasses the rotor conductors, linking
only with the stator winding, and known as stator leakage ﬂux. Similarly not all the
ﬂux produced by the rotor currents links the stator, but some (the rotor leakage
ﬂux) links only the rotor conductors.
The use of the pejorative-sounding term ‘leakage’ suggests that these leakage
ﬂuxes are unwelcome imperfections, which we should go out of our way to mini-
mize. However, while the majority of aspects of performance are certainly enhanced
if the leakage is as small as possible, others (notably the large and unwelcome current
drawn from the mains when the motor is started from rest directly on the utility
supply) are made much worse if the coupling is too good. So we have the somewhat
paradoxical situation in which the designer ﬁnds it comparatively easy to lay out the
windings to produce a good main ﬂux, but is then obliged to juggle the detailed
design of the slots in order to obtain just the right amount of leakage ﬂux to give
acceptable all-round performance. (In contrast, as we will see later, an inverter-fed
induction motor can avoid such issues as excessive starting current and, ideally, could
be designed with much lower leakage than its utility-fed counterpart. It has to be said,
however, that the majority of induction motors are still designed for general-purpose
150
Electric Motors and Drives

use, and in this respect they lose out in comparison with other forms of motor that are
speciﬁcally designed for operation with a drive.)
The weight which attaches to the matter of leakage ﬂux is reﬂected in the
prominent part played by the associated leakage reactance in equivalent circuit
models of the induction motor (see Appendix 2). However, such niceties are of
limited importance to the user, so in this and the next chapters we will limit
references to leakage reactance to well-deﬁned contexts, and, in general, where the
term ‘ﬂux’ is used, it will refer to the main air-gap ﬁeld.
2.6 Magnitude of rotating ﬂux wave
We have already seen that the speed of the ﬂux wave is set by the pole-number of
the winding and the frequency of the supply. But what is it that determines the
amplitude of the ﬁeld?
To answer this question we can continue to neglect the fact that under normal
conditions there will be induced currents in the rotor. We might even ﬁnd it easier
to imagine that the rotor conductors have been removed altogether: this may seem
a drastic assumption, but will prove justiﬁed later. The stator windings are assumed
to be connected to a balanced 3-phase a.c. supply so that a balanced set of currents
ﬂow in the windings. We denote the phase voltage by V, and the current in each
phase by Im, where the subscript m denotes ‘magnetizing’ or ﬂux-producing
current.
From the discussion in Chapter 1 we know that the magnitude of the ﬂux wave
(Bm) is proportional to the winding m.m.f., and is thus proportional to Im. But what
we really want to know is how the ﬂux density depends on the supply voltage and
frequency, since these are the only two parameters over which we have control.
To guide us to the answer, we must ﬁrst ask what effect the traveling ﬂux wave
will have on the stator winding. Every stator conductor will of course be cut by the
rotating ﬂux wave, and will therefore have an e.m.f. induced in it. Since the ﬂux
wave varies sinusoidally in space, and cuts each conductor at a constant velocity,
a sinusoidal e.m.f. is induced in each conductor. The magnitude of the e.m.f. is
proportional to the magnitude of the ﬂux wave (Bm), and to the speed of the wave
(i.e. to the supply frequency f ). The frequency of the induced e.m.f. depends on the
time taken for one N pole and one S pole to cut the conductor. We have already
seen that the higher the pole-number, the slower the ﬁeld rotates, but we found that
the ﬁeld always advances by two pole-pitches for every cycle of the supply. The
frequency of the e.m.f. induced in the stator conductors is therefore the same as the
supply frequency, regardless of the pole-number. (This conclusion is what we
would have reached intuitively, since we would expect any linear system to react at
the same frequency at which we excited it.)
The e.m.f. in each complete phase winding (E ) is the sum of the e.m.f.s in the
phase coils, and thus will also be at supply frequency. (The alert reader will realize
Induction Motors – Rotating Field, Slip and Torque
151

that while the e.m.f. in each coil has the same magnitude, it will differ in time phase,
depending on the geometrical position of the coil. Most of the coils in each phase-
band are close together, however, so their e.m.f.s – though slightly out of phase –
will more or less add up directly.)
If we were to compare the e.m.f.s in the three complete phase windings, we
would ﬁnd that they were of equal amplitude, but out of phase by one-third of
a cycle (120), thereby forming a balanced 3-phase set. This result could have been
anticipated from the overall symmetry. This is very helpful, as it means that we need
only consider one of the phases in the rest of the discussion.
So we ﬁnd that when an alternating voltage V is applied, an alternating e.m.f. E
is induced. We can represent this state of affairs by the primitive a.c. equivalent
circuit for one phase shown in Figure 5.8.
The resistance shown in Figure 5.8 is the resistance of one complete phase-
winding. Note that the e.m.f. E is shown as opposing the applied voltage V. This
must be so, otherwise we would have a runaway situation in which the voltage V
produced the magnetizing current Im which in turn set up an e.m.f. E, which added
to V, which further increased Im and so on ad inﬁnitum.
Applying Kirchhoff ’s voltage law to the a.c. circuit in Figure 5.8 yields
V ¼ ImR þ E
(5.2)
We ﬁnd in practice that the term ImR (which represents the volt-drop due to
winding resistance) is usually very much less than the applied voltage V. In other
words most of the applied voltage is accounted for by the opposing e.m.f. E. Hence
we can make the approximation
VzE
(5.3)
But we have already seen that the e.m.f. is proportional to Bm and to f, i.e.
EfBm f
(5.4)
So by combining equations (5.3) and (5.4) we obtain
Bm ¼ k V
f
(5.5)
Figure 5.8 Simple equivalent circuit for the induction motor under no-load conditions.
152
Electric Motors and Drives

where the constant k depends on the number of turns per coil, the number of coils
per phase and the distribution of the coils.
Equation (5.5) is of fundamental importance in induction motor operation. It
shows that if the supply frequency is constant, the ﬂux in the air-gap is directly
proportional to the applied voltage, or in other words the voltage sets the ﬂux. We
can also see that if we raise or lower the frequency (in order to increase or reduce the
speed of rotation of the ﬁeld), we will have to raise or lower the voltage in
proportion if, as is usually the case, we want the magnitude of the ﬂux to remain
constant. (We will see in Chapters 7 and 8 that the early inverter drives used this so-
called ‘V/f control’ to keep the ﬂux constant at all speeds.)
It may seem a paradox that having originally homed-in on the magnetizing
current Im as being the source of the m.m.f. which in turn produces the ﬂux, we
ﬁnd that the actual value of the ﬂux is governed only by the applied voltage and
frequency, and Im does not appear at all in equation (5.5). We can see why this is by
looking again at Figure 5.8 and asking what would happen if, for some reason, the
e.m.f. (E) were to reduce. We would ﬁnd that Im would increase, which in turn
would lead to a higher m.m.f., more ﬂux, and hence to an increase in E. There is
clearly a negative feedback effect taking place, which continually tries to keep E
equal to V. It is rather like the d.c. motor (Chapter 3) where the speed of the
unloaded motor always adjusted itself so that the back e.m.f. almost equaled the
applied voltage. Here, the magnetizing current always adjusts itself so that the
induced e.m.f. is almost equal to the applied voltage.
Needless to say this does not mean that the magnetizing current is arbitrary,
but to calculate it we would have to know the number of turns in the winding,
the length of the air-gap (from which we could calculate the gap reluctance) and
the reluctance of the iron paths. From a user point of view there is no need to
delve further in this direction. We should, however, recognize that the reluctance
will be dominated by the air-gap, and that the magnitude of the magnetizing
current will therefore depend mainly on the size of the gap: the larger the gap, the
bigger the magnetizing current. Since the magnetizing current contributes to
stator copper loss, but not to useful output power, we would like it to be as small
as possible, so we ﬁnd that induction motors usually have the smallest air-gap
which is consistent with providing the necessary mechanical clearances. Despite
the small air-gap the magnetizing current can be appreciable: in a 4-pole motor, it
may be typically 50% of the full-load current, and even higher in 6-pole and
8-pole designs.
2.7 Excitation power and volt-amps
The setting up of the traveling wave by the magnetizing current amounts to the
provision of ‘excitation’ for the motor. Some energy is stored in the magnetic ﬁeld,
but since the amplitude remains constant once the ﬁeld has been established, no net
power input is needed to sustain the ﬁeld. We therefore ﬁnd that under the
Induction Motors – Rotating Field, Slip and Torque
153

conditions discussed so far, i.e. in the absence of any rotor currents, the power input
to the motor is very small. (We should perhaps note that the rotor currents in a real
motor are very small when it is running light, so the hypothetical situation we are
looking at is not as far removed from reality as we may have supposed.)
Ideally the only source of power losses would be the copper losses in the stator
windings, but to this must be added the ‘iron losses’ which arise from eddy currents
and hysteresis in the laminated steel cores of rotor and stator. However, we have
seen that the magnetizing current can be quite large, its value being largely
determined by the air-gap, so we can expect an unloaded induction motor to draw
appreciable current from the supply, but very little real power. The volt-amps will
therefore be substantial, but the power-factor will be very low, the magnetizing
current lagging the supply voltage by almost 90, as shown in the time phasor
diagram (Figure 5.9).
Viewed from the supply the stator looks more or less like a pure inductance,
a fact which we would expect intuitively given that – having ignored the rotor
circuit – we are left with only an arrangement of ﬂux-producing coils surrounded
by a good magnetic circuit.
2.8 Summary
When the stator is connected to a 3-phase supply, a sinusoidally distributed, radially
directed rotating magnetic ﬂux density wave is set up in the air-gap. The speed of
rotation of the ﬁeld is directly proportional to the frequency of the supply, and
inversely proportional to the pole-number of the winding. The magnitude of the
ﬂux wave is proportional to the applied voltage, and inversely proportional to the
frequency.
When the rotor circuits are ignored (i.e. under no-load conditions), the real
power drawn is small, but the magnetizing current itself can be quite large, giving
rise to a signiﬁcant reactive power demand from the utility supply.
3. TORQUE PRODUCTION
In this section we begin with a brief description of rotor types, and introduce the
notion of ‘slip’, before moving on to explore how the torque is produced, and
Figure 5.9 Phasor diagram for the induction motor under no-load conditions, showing
magnetizing current Im.
154
Electric Motors and Drives

investigate the variation of torque with speed. We will ﬁnd that the behavior of the
rotor varies widely according to the slip, and we therefore look separately at low and
high values of slip. Throughout this section we will assume that the rotating
magnetic ﬁeld is unaffected by anything which happens on the rotor side of the air-
gap. Later, we will see that this assumption is pretty well justiﬁed.
3.1 Rotor construction
Two types of rotor are used in induction motors. In both, the rotor ‘iron’ consists of
a stack of silicon steel laminations with evenly spaced slots punched around the
circumference. As with the stator laminations, the surface is coated with an oxide
layer which acts as an insulator, preventing unwanted axial eddy-currents from
ﬂowing in the iron.
The cage rotor is by far the most common: each rotor slot contains a solid
conductor bar and all the conductors are physically and electrically joined together
at each end of the rotor by conducting ‘end-rings’ (Figure 5.10, plate 5.2 and see
also Figure 8.4). In the larger sizes the conductors will be of copper, in which case
the end-rings are brazed on. In small and medium sizes, the rotor conductors and
end rings may be of copper or die-cast in aluminum.
The term squirrel cage was widely used at one time and the origin should be
clear from Figure 5.10. The rotor bars and end-rings are reminiscent of the rotating
cages used in bygone days to exercise small rodents (or rather to amuse their human
captors).
The absence of any means for making direct electrical connection to the rotor
underlines the fact that in the induction motor the rotor currents are induced by the
air-gap ﬁeld. It is equally clear that because the rotor cage comprises permanently
short-circuited conductor bars, no external control can be exercised over the
resistance of the rotor circuit once the rotor has been made. This is a signiﬁcant
drawback which can be avoided in the second type of rotor, which is known as the
‘wound-rotor’ or ‘slipring’ type.
Figure 5.10 Cage rotor construction. The stack of pre-punched laminations is shown
on the left, with the copper or aluminum rotor bars and end-rings on the right.
Induction Motors – Rotating Field, Slip and Torque
155

In the wound rotor, the slots accommodate a set of three phase-windings very
much like those on the stator. The windings are connected in star, with the three
ends brought out to three sliprings (Figure 5.11). The rotor circuit is thus open, and
connection can be made via brushes bearing on the sliprings. In particular, the
resistance of each phase of the rotor circuit can be increased by adding external
resistances, as indicated in Figure 5.11. Adding resistance can be beneﬁcial in some
circumstances, as we will see.
Cage-rotors are usually cheaper to manufacture, and are very robust and reliable.
Until the advent of variable-frequency inverter supplies, however, the superior
control which was possible from the slipring type meant that the extra expense of the
wound rotor and its associated control gear was frequently justiﬁed, especially for
high-power machines. Nowadays comparatively few are made, and then only in large
sizes. But many old motors remain in service, so they are included in Chapter 6.
3.2 Slip
A little thought will show that the behavior of the rotor depends very much on its
relative velocity with respect to the rotating ﬁeld. If the rotor is stationary, for
example, the rotating ﬁeld will cut the rotor conductors at synchronous speed,
thereby inducing a high e.m.f. in them. On the other hand, if the rotor was running
at the synchronous speed, its relative velocity with respect to the ﬁeld would be
zero, and no e.m.f.s would be induced in the rotor conductors.
The relative velocity between the rotor and the ﬁeld is known as the slip speed.
If the speed of the rotor is N, the slip speed is Ns  N, where Ns is the synchronous
speed of the ﬁeld, usually expressed in rev/min. The slip (as distinct from slip speed)
is the normalized quantity deﬁned by
s ¼ Ns  N
Ns
(5.6)
and is usually expressed either as a ratio as in equation (5.6), or as a percentage. A slip of
0 therefore indicates that the rotor speed is equal to the synchronous speed, while
Figure 5.11 Schematic diagram of wound rotor for induction motor, showing sliprings
and brushes to provide connection to the external (stationary) 3-phase resistance.
156
Electric Motors and Drives

a slip of 1 corresponds to zero speed. (When tests are performed on induction motors
with their rotor deliberately held stationary so that the slip is 1, the test is said to be
under ‘locked-rotor’ conditions. The same expression is often used loosely to mean
zero speed, even when the rotor is free to move, e.g. when it is started from rest.)
3.3 Rotor-induced e.m.f. and current
The rate at which the rotor conductors are cut by the ﬂux – and hence their induced
e.m.f. – is directly proportional to the slip, with no induced e.m.f. at synchronous
speed (s ¼ 0) and maximum induced e.m.f. when the rotor is stationary (s ¼ 1).
The frequency of the rotor e.m.f. (the slip frequency) is also directly propor-
tional to slip, since the rotor effectively slides with respect to the ﬂux wave, and the
higher the relative speed, the more times in a second each rotor conductor is cut by
an N and an S pole. At synchronous speed (slip ¼ 0) the slip frequency is zero, while
at standstill (slip ¼ 1), the slip frequency is equal to the supply frequency. These
relationships are shown in Figure 5.12.
Although the e.m.f. induced in every rotor bar will have the same magnitude and
frequency,theywillnotbeinphase.Atanyparticularinstant,barsunderthepeakofthe
N poles of the ﬁeld will have maximum positive voltage in them, those under the peak
of the S poles will have maximum negative voltage (i.e. 180 phase shift), and those in
between will have varying degrees of phase shift. The pattern of instantaneous voltages
in the rotor is thus a replica of the ﬂux density wave, and the rotor-induced ‘voltage
wave’ therefore moves relative to the rotor at slip speed, as shown in Figure 5.13.
All the rotor bars are short-circuited by the end-rings, so the induced voltages
will drive currents along the rotor bars, the currents forming closed paths through
the end-rings, as shown in the developed diagram (Figure 5.14).
In Figure 5.14 the variation of instantaneous e.m.f. in the rotor bars is shown in
the upper sketch, while the corresponding instantaneous currents ﬂowing in the
Figure 5.12 Variation of rotor-induced e.m.f. and frequency with speed and slip.
Induction Motors – Rotating Field, Slip and Torque
157

rotor bars and end-rings are shown in the lower sketch. The lines representing
the currents in the rotor bars have been drawn so that their width is proportional
to the instantaneous currents in the bars.
3.4 Torque
The axial currents in the rotor bars will interact with the radial ﬂux wave to produce
the driving torque of the motor, which will act in the same direction as the rotating
ﬁeld, the rotor being dragged along by the ﬁeld. We note that slip is essential to this
mechanism, so that it is never possible for the rotor to catch up with the ﬁeld, as there
would then be no rotor e.m.f., no current,and no torque. The fact that motor action is
only possibleif thespeedisless thanthesynchronousspeedexplainswhy theinduction
machine is described as ‘asynchronous’. Finally, we can see that the cage rotor will
automatically adapt to whatever pole-number is impressed by the stator winding, so
that the same rotor can be used for a range of different stator pole-numbers.
Figure 5.13 Pattern of induced e.m.f.s in rotor conductors. The rotor ‘voltage wave’
moves at a speed of sNs with respect to the rotor surface.
Figure 5.14 Instantaneous sinusoidal pattern of rotor currents in rotor bars and end-
rings. Only one pole-pitch is shown, but the pattern is repeated.
158
Electric Motors and Drives

3.5 Rotor currents and torque – small slip
When the slip is small (say between 0 and 10%), the frequency of induced e.m.f. is
also very low (between 0 and 5 Hz if the supply frequency is 50 Hz). At these low
frequencies the impedance of the rotor circuits is predominantly resistive, the
inductive reactance being small because the rotor frequency is low.
The current in each rotor conductor is therefore in time-phase with the e.m.f.
in that conductor, and the rotor current-wave is therefore in space-phase with the
rotor e.m.f. wave, which in turn is in space-phase with the ﬂux wave. This situation
was assumed in the previous discussion, and is represented by the space waveforms
shown in Figure 5.15.
To calculate the torque we ﬁrst need to evaluate the ‘BIrlr’ product (see equation
(1.2)) in order to obtain the tangential force on each rotor conductor. The torque is
then given by the total force multiplied by the rotor radius. We can see from
Figure 5.15 that where the ﬂux density has a positive peak, so does the rotor current,
so that particular bar will contribute a high tangential force to the total torque.
Similarly, where the ﬂux has its maximum negative peak, the induced current is
maximum and negative, so the tangential force is again positive. We don’t need to
work out the torque in detail, but it should be clear that the resultant will be given
by an equation of the form
T ¼ kBIr
(5.7)
where B and Ir denote the amplitudes of the ﬂux density wave and the rotor current
wave, respectively. Provided that there are a large number of rotor bars (which is
a safe bet in practice), the waves shown in Figure 5.15 will remain the same at all
instants of time, so the torque remains constant as the rotor rotates.
If the supply voltage and frequency are constant, the ﬂux will be constant (see
equation (5.5)). The rotor e.m.f. (and hence Ir) is then proportional to slip, so we
can see from equation (5.7) that the torque is directly proportional to slip. We must
remember that this discussion relates to low values of slip only, but since this is the
normal running condition, it is extremely important.
Figure 5.15 Pattern of air-gap ﬂux density, induced e.m.f. and current in cage rotor
bars at low values of slip.
Induction Motors – Rotating Field, Slip and Torque
159

The torque–speed (and torque–slip) relationship for small slips is thus approx-
imately a straight line, as shown by the section of line AB in Figure 5.16.
If the motor is unloaded, it will need very little torque to keep running –
only enough to overcome friction in fact – so an unloaded motor will run with
a very small slip at just below the synchronous speed, as shown at A in
Figure 5.16.
When the load is increased, the rotor slows down, and the slip increases, thereby
inducing more rotor e.m.f. and current, and thus more torque. The speed will settle
when the slip has increased to the point where the developed torque equals the load
torque – e.g. point B in Figure 5.16.
Induction motors are usually designed so that their full-load torque is
developed for small values of slip. Small ones typically have a full-load slip of 8%,
large ones around 1%. At the full-load slip, the rotor conductors will be carrying
their safe maximum continuous current, and if the slip is any higher, the rotor
will begin to overheat. This overload region is shown by the dotted line in
Figure 5.16.
The torque–slip (or torque–speed) characteristic shown in Figure 5.16 is
a good one for most applications, because the speed only falls a little when the
load is raised from zero to its full value. We note that, in this normal operating
region, the torque–speed curve is very similar to that of a d.c. motor (see
Figure 3.9).
3.6 Rotor currents and torque – large slip
As the slip increases, the rotor e.m.f. and rotor frequency both increase in direct
proportion to the slip. At the same time the rotor inductive reactance, which was
negligible at low slip (low rotor frequency), begins to be appreciable in
comparison with the rotor resistance. Hence although the induced current
continues to increase with slip, it does so more slowly than at low values of slip, as
shown in Figure 5.17.
Figure 5.16 Torque–speed relationship for low values of slip.
160
Electric Motors and Drives

At high values of slip, the rotor current also lags behind the rotor e.m.f. because
of the inductive reactance. The alternating current in each bar reaches its peak well
after the induced voltage, and this in turn means that the rotor current wave has
a space-lag with respect to the rotor e.m.f. wave (which is in space-phase with the
ﬂux wave). This space-lag is shown by the angle fr in Figure 5.18.
The space-lag means that the peak radial ﬂux density and peak rotor currents no
longer coincide, which is bad news from the point of view of torque production,
because although we have high values of both ﬂux density and current, they do not
occur simultaneously at any point around the periphery. What is worse is that at
some points we even have ﬂux density and currents of opposite sign, so over those
regions of the rotor surface the torque contributed will actually be negative. The
overall torque will still be positive, but is much less than it would be if the ﬂux and
current waves were in phase. We can allow for the unwelcome space-lag by
modifying equation (5.7), to obtain a more general expression for torque as
T ¼ kBIr cos fr
(5.8)
Equation (5.7) is merely a special case of equation (5.8), which only applies under
low-slip conditions where cosfrz1:
Figure 5.17 Magnitude of current induced in rotor over the full (motoring) range of
slip.
Figure 5.18 Pattern of air-gap ﬂux density, induced e.m.f. and current in cage rotor
bars at high values of slip. (These waveforms should be compared with the corre-
sponding ones when the slip is small, see Figure 5.15.)
Induction Motors – Rotating Field, Slip and Torque
161

For most cage rotors, it turns out that as the slip increases the term cos fr reduces
more quickly than the current (Ir) increases, so that at some slip between 0 and 1 the
developed torque reaches a maximum value. This is illustrated in the typical torque–
speed characteristic shown in Figure 5.19. The peak torque actually occurs at a slip at
which the rotor inductive reactance is equal to the rotor resistance, so the motor
designer can position the peak torque at any slip by varying the reactance to resis-
tance ratio.
3.7 Generating – negative slip
When we explored the steady-state characteristics of the d.c. machine (see section 4
in Chapter 3) we saw that at speeds less than that at which it runs when unloaded the
machine acts as a motor, converting electrical energy into mechanical energy. But if
the speed is above the no-load speed (for example, when driven by a prime-mover),
the machine generates and converts mechanical energy into electrical form.
The inherently bi-directional energy converting property of the d.c. machine
seems to be widely recognized. But in the experience of the authors the fact that the
induction machine behaves in the same way is far less well accepted, and indeed it is
not uncommon to ﬁnd users expressing profound scepticism at the thought that
their ‘motor’ could possibly generate.
In fact, the induction machine behaves in essentially the same way as the d.c.
machine,and if the rotor is driven by an external torquesuch that its speed is above the
synchronous speed (i.e. the slip becomes negative), the electromagnetic torque
reverses direction, and the power becomes negative, with energy fed back to the
utility supply. It is important to note that, just as with the d.c. machine, this transition
from motoring to generating takes place naturally, without intervention on our part.
When the speed is greater than synchronous, we can see from equation (5.6)
that the slip is negative, and in this negative slip region the torque is also negative,
the torque–speed curve broadly mirroring that in the motoring region, as shown in
Figure 5.20. We will discuss this further in Chapter 6, but it is worth noting that for
both, motoring and generating continuous operation will be conﬁned to low values
of slip, as indicated by the heavy line in Figure 5.20.
Figure 5.19 Typical complete torque–speed characteristic for motoring region of cage
induction motor.
162
Electric Motors and Drives

4. INFLUENCE OF ROTOR CURRENT ON FLUX
Up to now all our discussion has been based on the assumption that the
rotating magnetic ﬁeld remains constant, regardless of what happens on the
rotor. We have seen how torque is developed, and that mechanical output
power is produced. We have focused attention on the rotor, but the output
power must be provided from the stator winding, so we must turn attention to
the behavior of the whole motor, rather than just the rotor. Several questions
spring to mind.
First, what happens to the rotating magnetic ﬁeld when the motor is working?
Won’t the m.m.f. of the rotor currents cause it to change? Secondly, how does the
stator know when to start supplying real power across the air-gap to allow the rotor
to do useful mechanical work? And ﬁnally, how will the currents drawn by the
stator vary as the slip is changed?
These are demanding questions, for which full treatment is beyond our scope.
But we can deal with the essence of the matter without too much difﬁculty. Further
illumination can be obtained from the equivalent circuit, which is discussed in
Appendix 2.
4.1 Reduction of ﬂux by rotor current
We should begin by recalling that we have already noted that when the rotor
currents are negligible (s ¼ 0), the e.m.f. which the rotating ﬁeld induces in the
stator winding is very nearly equal to the applied voltage. Under these conditions
a reactive current (which we termed the magnetizing current) ﬂows into the
windings, to set up the rotating ﬂux. Any slight tendency for the ﬂux to fall is
immediately detected by a corresponding slight reduction in e.m.f. which is
Figure 5.20 Typical torque–speed characteristic showing stable motoring and gener-
ating regions.
Induction Motors – Rotating Field, Slip and Torque
163

reﬂected in a disproportionately large increase in magnetizing current, which thus
opposes the tendency for the ﬂux to fall.
Exactly the same feedback mechanism comes into play when the slip increases
from zero, and rotor currents are induced. The rotor currents are at slip frequency,
and they give rise to a rotor m.m.f. wave, which therefore rotates at slip speed (sNs)
relative to the rotor. But the rotor is rotating at a speed of (1  s)Ns, so that when
viewed from the stator, the rotor m.m.f. wave always rotates at synchronous speed,
regardless of the speed of the rotor.
The rotor m.m.f. wave would, if unchecked, cause its own ‘rotor ﬂux
wave’, rotating at synchronous speed in the air-gap, in much the same way that
the stator magnetizing current originally set up the ﬂux wave. The rotor ﬂux
wave would oppose the original ﬂux wave, causing the resultant ﬂux wave to
reduce.
However, as soon as the resultant ﬂux begins to fall, the stator e.m.f. reduces,
thereby admitting more current to the stator winding, and increasing its m.m.f. A
very small drop in the e.m.f. induced in the stator is sufﬁcient to cause a large
increase in the current drawn from the supply because the e.m.f. E (see Figure 5.8)
and the supply voltage V are both very large in comparison with the stator
resistance volt-drop IR. The ‘extra’ stator m.m.f. produced by the large increase
in stator current effectively ‘cancels’ the m.m.f. produced by the rotor currents,
leaving the resultant m.m.f. (and hence the rotating ﬂux wave) virtually
unchanged.
There must be a small drop in the resultant m.m.f. (and ﬂux) of course, to alert
the stator to the presence of rotor currents. But because of the delicate balance
between the applied voltage and the induced e.m.f. in the stator the change in ﬂux
with load is very small, at least over the normal operating speed-range, where the
slip is small. In large motors, the drop in ﬂux over the normal operating region is
typically less than 1%, rising to perhaps 10% in a small motor.
The discussion above should have answered the question as to how the stator
knows when to supply mechanical power across the air-gap. When a mechanical
load is applied to the shaft, the rotor slows down, the slip increases, rotor currents
are induced and their m.m.f. results in a modest (but vitally important) reduction in
the air-gap ﬂux wave. This in turn causes a reduction in the e.m.f. induced in the
stator windings and therefore an increase in the stator current drawn from the
supply. We can anticipate that this is a stable process (at least over the normal
operating range) and that the speed will settle when the slip has increased sufﬁciently
that the motor torque equals the load torque.
As far as our conclusions regarding torque are concerned, we see that our
original assumption that the ﬂux was constant is near enough correct when the slip
is small. We will ﬁnd it helpful and convenient to continue to treat the ﬂux as
constant (for given stator voltage and frequency) when we turn later to methods of
controlling the normal running speed.
164
Electric Motors and Drives

It has to be admitted, however, that at high values of slip (i.e. low rotor speeds),
we cannot expect the main ﬂux to remain constant, and in fact we would ﬁnd in
practice that when the motor was ﬁrst switched on to the utility supply (50 or
60 Hz), with the rotor stationary, the main ﬂux might typically be only half what it
was when the motor was at full speed. This is because at high slips, the leakage ﬂuxes
assume a much greater importance than under normal low-slip conditions. The
simple arguments we have advanced to predict torque would therefore need to be
modiﬁed to take account of the reduction of main ﬂux if we wanted to use them
quantitatively at high slips. There is no need for us to do this explicitly, but it will be
reﬂected in any subsequent curves portraying typical torque–speed curves for real
motors. Such curves are of course used when selecting a motor to run directly from
the utility supply, since they provide the easiest means of checking whether the
starting and run-up torque is adequate for the job in hand. Fortunately, we will see
in Chapter 7 that when the motor is fed from an inverter, we can avoid the
undesirable effects of high-slip operation, and guarantee that the ﬂux is at its
optimum value at all times.
5. STATOR CURRENT–SPEED CHARACTERISTICS
To conclude this chapter we will look at how the stator current behaves,
remembering that we are assuming that the machine is directly connected to
a utility supply of ﬁxed voltage and frequency. Under these conditions the
maximum current likely to be demanded and the power factor at various loads are
important matters that inﬂuence the running cost.
In the previous section, we argued that as the slip increased, and the rotor did
more mechanical work, the stator current increased. Since the extra current is
associated with the supply of real (i.e. mechanical output) power (as distinct from
the original magnetizing current which was seen to be reactive), this additional
‘work’ component of current is more or less in phase with the supply voltage, as
shown in the phasor diagrams (Figure 5.21).
The resultant stator current is the sum of the magnetizing current, which is
present all the time, and the load component, which increases with the slip. We can
see that as the load increases, the resultant stator current also increases, and moves
more nearly into phase with the voltage. But because the magnetizing current is
appreciable, the difference in magnitude between no-load and full-load currents
may not be all that great. (This is in sharp contrast to the d.c. motor, where the no-
load current in the armature is very small in comparison with the full-load current.
Note, however, that in the d.c. motor, the excitation (ﬂux) is provided by a separate
ﬁeld circuit, whereas in the induction motor the stator winding furnishes both the
excitation and the work currents. If we consider the behavior of the work
components of current only, both types of machine look very similar.)
Induction Motors – Rotating Field, Slip and Torque
165

The simple ideas behind Figure 5.21 are based on an approximation, so we
cannot push them too far: they are fairly close to the truth for the normal operating
region, but break down at higher slips, where the rotor and stator leakage reactances
become signiﬁcant. A typical current locus over the whole range of slips for a cage
motor is shown in Figure 5.22. We note that the power factor is poor when the
motor is lightly loaded, and becomes worse again at high slips, and also that the
current at standstill (i.e. the ‘starting’ current) is perhaps ﬁve times the full-load
value.
Very high currents when started direct-on-line are one of the worst features of
the cage induction motor. They not only cause unwelcome volt-drops in the supply
system, but also call for heavier switchgear than would be needed to cope with
full-load conditions. Unfortunately, for reasons discussed earlier, the high starting
Figure 5.22 Phasor diagram showing the locus of stator current over the full range of
speeds from no-load (full speed) down to the locked-rotor (starting) condition.
Figure 5.21 Phasor diagrams showing stator current at no-load, part-load and full-load.
The resultant current in each case is the sum of the no-load (magnetizing) current and
the load component.
166
Electric Motors and Drives

currents are not accompanied by high starting torques, as we can see from
Figure 5.23, which shows current and torque as functions of slip for a general-
purpose cage motor.
We note that the torque per ampere of current drawn from the mains is typically
very low at start-up, and only reaches a respectable value in the normal operating
region, i.e. when the slip is small. This matter is explored further in Chapter 6, and
also in Appendix 2.
Figure 5.23 Typical torque–speed and current–speed curves for a cage induction
motor. The torque and current axes are scaled so that 100% represents the continu-
ously rated (full-load) value.
Induction Motors – Rotating Field, Slip and Torque
167

CHAPTER SIX
Induction Motors – Operation
from 50/60 Hz Supply
1. INTRODUCTION
This chapter is concerned with how the induction motor behaves when connected
to a supply of constant voltage and frequency. Despite the onward march of the
inverter-fed motor, this remains the most widely used and important mode of
operation, the motor running directly connected to a utility supply.
The key operating characteristics are considered, and we look at how these can
be modiﬁed to meet the needs of some applications through detailed design. The
limits of operation are investigated for the induction machine operating as both
a motor and a generator. Methods of speed control which are not dependent on
changing the frequency of the stator supply are also explored. Finally, while the
majority of industrial applications utilize the 3-phase induction motor, the role
played by single-phase motors is acknowledged with a review of the types and
characteristics of this variant.
2. METHODS OF STARTING CAGE MOTORS
2.1 Direct starting – problems
Our everyday domestic experience is likely to lead us to believe that there is nothing
more to starting a motor than closing a switch, and indeed for most low-power
machines (up to a few kW) – of whatever type – that is indeed the case. By simply
connecting the motor to the supply we set in train a sequence of events which sees
the motor draw power from the supply while it accelerates to its target speed. When
it has absorbed and converted sufﬁcient energy from electrical to kinetic form, the
speed stabilizes and the power drawn falls to a low level until the motor is required
to do useful mechanical work. In these low-power applications acceleration to full
speed may take less than a second, and we are seldom aware of the fact that the
current drawn during the acceleration phase is often higher than the continuous
rated current.
For motors over a few kW, however, it is necessary to assess the effect on the
supply system before deciding whether or not the motor can be started simply by
switching directly on to the supply. If supply systems were ideal (i.e. the supply
voltage remained unaffected regardless of how much current was drawn) there
Electric Motors and Drives
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-098332-5.00006-1
 2013 Austin Hughes and William Drury.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
169j

would be no problem starting any induction motor, no matter how large. The
problem is that the heavy current drawn while the motor is running up to speed
may cause a large drop in the system supply voltage, annoying other customers on
the same supply and perhaps taking it outside statutory limits.
It is worthwhile reminding ourselves about the inﬂuence of supply impedance
at this point, as this is at the root of the matter, so we begin by noting that any supply
system, no matter how complicated, can be modeled by means of the delightfully
simple Thévenin equivalent circuit shown in Figure 6.1. (We are assuming balanced
3-phase operation, so a 1-phase equivalent circuit will sufﬁce.)
The supply is represented by an ideal voltage source (Vs) in series with the
supply impedance Zs. When no load is connected to the supply, and the current is
zero, the terminal voltage is Vs; but as soon as a load is connected the load current (I )
ﬂowing through the source impedance results in a volt-drop, and the output voltage
falls from Vs to V, where
V ¼ Vs  IZs
(6.1)
For most industrial supplies the source impedance is predominantly inductive, so
that Zs is simply an inductive reactance, Xs. Typical phasor diagrams relating to
a supply with a purely inductive reactance are shown in Figure 6.2: in (a) the load is
also taken to be purely reactive, while the load current in (b) has the same
magnitude as in (a) but the load is resistive. The output (terminal) voltage in each
case is represented by the phasor labeled V.
For the inductive load (a) the current lags the terminal voltage by 90, while for
the resistive load (b) the current is in phase with the terminal voltage. In both cases
the volt-drop across the supply reactance (IXs) leads the current by 90.
The ﬁrst point to note is that, for a given magnitude of load current, the volt-
drop is in phase with Vs when the load is inductive, whereas with a resistive load the
volt-drop is almost at 90 to Vs. This results in a much greater fall in the magnitude
of the output voltage when the load is inductive than when it is resistive. The
second – obvious – point is that the larger the current, the more the drop in voltage.
Unfortunately, when we try to start a large cage induction motor we face
a double-whammy because not only is the starting current typically ﬁve or six times
Figure 6.1 Equivalent circuit of supply system.
170
Electric Motors and Drives

rated current, but it is also at a low power-factor, i.e. the motor looks predomi-
nantly inductive when the slip is high. (In contrast, when the machine is up to speed
and fully loaded, its current is perhaps only one-ﬁfth of its starting current and it
presents a predominantly resistive appearance as seen by the supply. Under these
conditions the supply voltage is hardly any different from no-load.)
Since the drop in voltage is attributable to the supply impedance, if we want to
be able to draw a large starting current without upsetting other consumers it would
clearly be best for the supply impedance to be as low as possible, and preferably zero.
But from the supply authority viewpoint a very low supply impedance brings the
problem of how to cope in the event of an accidental short-circuit across the
terminals. The short-circuit current is inversely proportional to the supply
impedance, and tends to inﬁnity as Zs approaches zero. The cost of providing the
switchgear to clear such a large fault current would be prohibitive, so a compromise
always has to be reached, with values of supply impedances being set by the supply
authority to suit the anticipated demands.
Systems with low internal impedance are known as ‘stiff ’ supplies, because the
voltage is almost constant regardless of the current drawn. (An alternative way of
specifying the nature of the supply is to consider the fault current that would ﬂow if
the terminals were short-circuited: a system with a low impedance would have
a high fault current or ‘fault level’.) Starting on a stiff supply requires no special
arrangements and the three motor leads are simply switched directly onto the mains.
This is known as ‘direct-on-line’ (DOL) or ‘direct-to-line’ (DTL) starting. The
switching will usually be done by means of a contactor, incorporating fuses and
other overload/thermal protection devices, and operated manually by local or
remote pushbuttons, or interfaced to permit operation from a programmable
controller or computer.
Figure 6.2 Phasor diagrams showing the effect of supply-system impedance on the
output voltage with (a) inductive load and (b) resistive load.
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
171

In contrast, if the supply impedance is high (i.e. a low fault level) an appreciable
volt-drop will occur every time the motor is started, causing lights to dim and
interfering with other apparatus on the same supply. With this ‘weak’ supply,
some form of starter is called for to limit the current at starting and during the
run-up phase, thereby reducing the magnitude of the volt-drop imposed on the
supply system. As the motor picks up speed, the current falls, so the starter is
removed as the motor approaches full speed. Naturally enough the price to be
paid for the reduction in current is a lower starting torque, and a longer run-up
time.
Whether or not a starter is required depends on the size of the motor in relation
to the capacity or fault level of the supply, the prevailing regulations imposed by the
supply authority, and the nature of the load.
The references above to ‘low’ and ‘high’ supply impedances must therefore be
interpreted in relation to the impedance of the motor when it is stationary. A large
(and therefore low impedance) motor could well be started quite happily direct-on-
line in a major industrial plant, where the supply is ‘stiff ’, i.e. the supply impedance
is very much less than the motor impedance. But the same motor would need
a starter when used in a rural setting remote from the main power system, and fed by
a relatively high impedance or ‘weak’ supply. Needless to say, the stricter the
rules governing permissible volt-drop, the more likely it is that a starter will be
needed.
Motors which start without signiﬁcant load torque or inertia can accelerate
very quickly, so the high starting current is only drawn for a short period. A
10 kW motor would be up to speed in a second or so, and the volt-drop may
therefore be judged as acceptable. Clutches are sometimes ﬁtted to permit ‘off-
load’ starting, the load being applied after the motor has reached full speed.
Conversely, if the load torque and/or inertia are/is high, the run-up may take
many seconds, in which case a starter may prove essential. No strict rules can be
laid down, but obviously the bigger the motor, the more likely it is to require
a starter.
2.2 Star/delta (wye/mesh) starter
This is the simplest and most widely used method of starting. It provides for the
windings of the motor to be connected in star (wye) to begin with, thereby
reducing the voltage applied to each phase to 58% (i.e. 1/O3) of its direct-on-line
value. Then, when the motor speed approaches its running value, the windings are
switched to delta (mesh) connection. The main advantage of the method is its
simplicity, while its main drawbacks are that the starting torque is reduced (see
below), and the sudden transition from star to delta gives rise to a second shock –
albeit of lesser severity – to the supply system and to the load. For star/delta
switching to be possible both ends of each phase of the motor windings must be
172
Electric Motors and Drives

brought out to the terminal box. This requirement is met in the majority of motors,
except small ones which are usually permanently connected in delta.
With a star/delta starter the current drawn from the supply is approximately
one-third of that drawn in a direct-on-line start, which is very welcome, but at the
same time the starting torque is also reduced to one-third of its direct-on-line value.
Naturally we need to ensure that the reduced torque will be sufﬁcient to accelerate
the load, and bring it up to a speed at which it can be switched to delta without an
excessive jump in the current.
Various methods are used to detect when to switch from star to delta.
Historically, in manual starters, the changeover is determined by the operator
watching the ammeter until the current has dropped to a low level, or listening to
the sound of the motor until the speed becomes steady. Automatic versions are
similar in that they detect either falling current or speed rising to a threshold level,
but for all but large motors they operate after a preset time.
2.3 Autotransformer starter
A 3-phase autotransformer is usually used where star/delta starting provides insuf-
ﬁcient starting torque. Each phase of an autotransformer consists of a single winding
on a laminated core. The incoming supply is connected across the ends of the coils,
and one or more tapping points (or a sliding contact) provide a reduced voltage
output, as shown in Figure 6.3.
The motor is ﬁrst connected to the reduced voltage output, and when the
current has fallen to the running value, the motor leads are switched over to the full
voltage.
If the reduced voltage is chosen so that a fraction a of the line voltage is used to
start the motor, the starting torque is reduced to approximately a2 times its direct-
on-line value, and the current drawn from the mains is also reduced to a2 times its
direct value. As with the star/delta starter, the torque per ampere of supply current is
the same as for a direct start.
Figure 6.3 Autotransformer starter for cage induction motor.
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
173

2.4 Resistance or reactance starter
By inserting three resistors or inductors of appropriate value in series with the
motor, the starting current can be reduced by any desired extent, but only at the
expense of a disproportionate reduction in starting torque.
For example, if the current is reduced to half its direct-on-line value, the motor
voltage will be halved, so the torque (which is proportional to the square of the
voltage – see later) will be reduced to only 25% of its direct-on-line value. This
approach is thus less attractive in terms of torque per ampere of supply current than
the star/delta method. One attractive feature, however, is that as the motor speed
increases and its effective impedance rises, the volt-drop across the extra impedance
reduces, so the motor voltage rises progressively with the speed, thereby giving
more torque. When the motor is up to speed, the added impedance is shorted out
by means of a contactor.
2.5 Solid-state soft starting
This method is now the most widely used. It provides a smooth build-up of current
and torque, the maximum current and acceleration time are easily adjusted, and it is
particularly valuable where the load must not be subjected to sudden jerks. The
only real drawback over conventional starters is that the mains currents during run-
up are not sinusoidal, which can lead to interference with other equipment on the
same supply.
The most widely used arrangement comprises three pairs of back-to-back
thyristors (or triacs) connected in series with the three supply lines, as shown in
Figure 6.4(a).
Each thyristor is ﬁred once per half-cycle, the ﬁring being synchronized with
the utility supply and the ﬁring angle being variable so that each pair conducts
for a varying proportion of a cycle. Typical current waveforms are shown in
Figure 6.4(b): they are clearly not sinusoidal but the motor will tolerate them quite
happily.
A wide variety of control philosophies can be found, with the degree of
complexity and sophistication being reﬂected in the price. The cheapest open-loop
systems simply alter the ﬁring angle linearly with time, so that the voltage applied to
the motor increases as it accelerates. The ‘ramp-time’ can be set by trial and error to
give an acceptable start, i.e. one in which the maximum allowable current from the
supply is not exceeded at any stage. This approach is reasonably satisfactory when
the load remains the same, but requires resetting each time the load changes. Loads
with high static friction are a problem because nothing happens for the ﬁrst part of
the ramp, during which time the motor torque is insufﬁcient to move the load.
When the load ﬁnally moves, its acceleration is often too rapid. The more advanced
open-loop versions allow the level of current at the start of the ramp to be chosen,
and this is helpful with ‘sticky’ loads.
174
Electric Motors and Drives

More sophisticated systems – usually with on-board digital controllers – provide
for tighter control over the acceleration proﬁle by incorporating an inner current-
control loop. After an initial ramping up to the start level (over the ﬁrst few cycles),
the current is held constant at the desired level throughout the accelerating period,
the ﬁring angle of the thyristors being continually adjusted to compensate for the
changing effective impedance of the motor. By keeping the current at the
maximum value which the supply can tolerate, the run-up time is minimized. As
with the open-loop systems the velocity–time proﬁle is not necessarily ideal, since
with constant current the motor torque exhibits a very sharp rise as the pull-out slip
is reached, resulting in a sudden surge in speed. Some systems also include a motor
model which estimates speed and allows the controller to follow a ramp or other
speed–time proﬁle.
Prospective users need to be wary of some of the promotional literature: claims
are sometimes made that massive reductions in starting current can be achieved
Figure 6.4 (a) Thyristor soft-starter, (b) typical motor current waveforms.
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
175

without corresponding reductions in starting torque. This is nonsense: the current
can certainly be limited, but as far as torque per line amp is concerned soft-start
systems are no better than series reactor systems, and not as good as the auto-
transformer and star/delta methods. Caution should also be exercised in relation to
systems that use only one or two triacs: these are fairly common in smaller sizes
(<50 kW). Although they do limit the current in one or two phases as compared
with direct-on-line starting, the unbalanced currents distort the air-gap ﬂux and this
gives rise to uneven (pulsating) torque.
2.6 Starting using a variable-frequency inverter
Operation of induction motors from variable-frequency inverters is discussed in
Chapters 7 and 8, but it is appropriate to mention here that one of the advantages of
inverter-fed operation is that starting is not a problem because it is usually possible to
obtain rated torque from standstill up to rated speed without drawing an excessive
current from the supply. None of the other starting methods we have looked at has
this ability, so in some applications it may be that the comparatively high cost of the
inverter is justiﬁed solely on the grounds of its starting and run-up potential.
3. RUN-UP AND STABLE OPERATING REGIONS
In addition to having sufﬁcient torque to start the load it is obviously necessary for
the motor to bring the load up to full speed. To predict how the speed will rise after
switching on we need the torque–speed curves of the motor and the load, and the
total inertia.
By way of example, we can look at the case of a motor with two different loads
(Figure 6.5). The solid line is the torque–speed curve of the motor, while the
broken lines represent two different load characteristics. Load (A) is typical of
a simple hoist, which applies constant torque to the motor at all speeds, while load
Figure 6.5 Typical torque–speed curve showing two different loads which have the
same steady running speed (N).
176
Electric Motors and Drives

(B) might represent a fan. For the sake of simplicity, we will assume that the load
inertias (as seen at the motor shaft) are the same.
The speed–time curves for run-up are shown in Figure 6.6. Note that the
gradient of the speed–time curve (i.e. the acceleration) is obtained by dividing the
accelerating torque Tacc (which is the difference between the torque developed by
the motor and the torque required to run the load at that speed) by the total inertia.
In this example, both loads ultimately reach the same steady speed, N (i.e. the
speed at which motor torque equals load torque), but B reaches full speed much
more quickly because the accelerating torque is higher during most of the run-up.
Load A picks up speed slowly at ﬁrst, but then accelerates hard (often with
a characteristic ‘whoosh’ produced by the ventilating fan) as it passes through the
peak torque speed and approaches equilibrium conditions.
It should be clear that the higher the total inertia, the slower the acceleration,
and vice versa. The total inertia means the inertia as seen at the motor shaft, so if
gearboxes or belts are employed the inertia must be ‘referred’, as discussed in
Chapter 11.
An important qualiﬁcation ought to be mentioned in the context of the motor
torque–speed curves shown by the solid line in Figure 6.5. This is that curves like
this represent the torque developed by the motor when it has settled down at the
speed in question, i.e. they are the true steady-state curves. In reality, a motor will
generally only be in a steady-state condition when it settles at its normal running
speed, so for most of the speed range the motor will be accelerating.
In particular, when the motor is ﬁrst switched on, there will be a transient
period as the three currents gradually move towards a balanced 3-phase pattern.
During this period the torque can ﬂuctuate wildly at the supply frequency, and,
with brief negative excursions, typically as shown in Figure 6.7 which relates to
a small unloaded motor. During the transient period the average torque may be very
low (as in Figure 6.7) in which case acceleration only begins in earnest after the ﬁrst
few cycles. In this particular example the transient persists long enough to cause an
overshoot of the steady-state speed and an oscillation before settling.
Figure 6.6 Speed–time curves during run-up, for motor and loads shown in Figure 6.5.
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
177

Fortunately, the average torque during run-up can be fairly reliably obtained
from the steady-state curves (usually available from the manufacturer), particularly if
the inertia is high and the motor takes many cycles to reach full speed, in which case
we would consider the torque–speed curve as being ‘quasi-steady state’.
3.1 Harmonic effects – skewing
A further cautionary note in connection with the torque–speed curves shown in this
and most other books relates to the effects of harmonic air-gap ﬁelds. In Chapter 5 it
was explained that despite the limitations imposed by slotting, the stator winding
m.m.f. is remarkably close to the ideal of a pure sinusoid. Unfortunately, because it
is not a perfect sinusoid, Fourier analysis reveals that in addition to the predominant
fundamental component, there are always additional unwanted ‘space harmonic’
ﬁelds. These harmonic ﬁelds have synchronous speeds that are inversely propor-
tional to their order. For example, a 4-pole, 50 Hz motor will have a main ﬁeld
rotating at 1500 rev/min, but in addition there may be a 5th harmonic (20-pole)
ﬁeld rotating in the reverse direction at 300 rev/min, a 7th harmonic (28-pole) ﬁeld
rotating forwards at 214 rev/min, etc. These space harmonics are minimized by
stator winding design, but not all can be eliminated.
If the rotor has a very large number of bars it will react to the harmonic ﬁeld in
much the same way as to the fundamental, producing additional induction-motor
torques centered on the synchronous speed of the harmonic, and leading to
unwanted dips in the torque speed, typically as shown in Figure 6.8.
Users should not be too alarmed as in most cases the motor will ride through the
harmonic during acceleration, but in extreme cases a motor might, for example,
Figure 6.7 Run-up of unloaded motor, showing torque transients persisting for the ﬁrst
few cycles of the supply.
178
Electric Motors and Drives

stabilize on the 7th harmonic, and ‘crawl’ at about 214 rev/min, rather than running
up to 4-pole speed (1500 rev/min at 50 Hz), as shown by the dot in Figure 6.8.
To minimize the undesirable effects of space harmonics the rotor bars in the
majority of induction motors are not parallel to the axis of rotation, but instead they
are skewed along the rotor length, (typically by around one or two slot-pitches, see
later Figure 8.4). This has very little effect as far as the fundamental ﬁeld is con-
cerned, but can greatly reduce the response of the rotor to harmonic ﬁelds.
Because the overall inﬂuence of the harmonics on the steady-state curve is
barely noticeable, and their presence might worry users, they are rarely shown, the
accepted custom being that ‘the’ torque–speed curve represents the behavior due to
the fundamental component only.
3.2 High inertia loads – overheating
Apart from accelerating slowly, high inertia loads pose a particular problem of rotor
heating which can easily be overlooked by the unwary user. Every time an
induction motor is started from rest and brought up to speed, the total energy
dissipated as heat in the motor windings is equal to the stored kinetic energy of the
motor plus load. Hence with high inertia loads, very large amounts of energy are
released as heat in the windings during run-up, even if the load torque is negligible
when the motor is up to speed. With totally enclosed motors the heat ultimately has
to ﬁnd its way to the ﬁnned outer casing of the motor, which is cooled by air from
the shaft-mounted external fan. Cooling of the rotor is therefore usually much
worse than that of the stator, and the rotor is thus most likely to overheat during
high inertia run-ups.
No hard and fast rules can be laid down, but manufacturers usually work to
standards which specify how many starts per hour can be tolerated. Actually, this
information is useless unless coupled with reference to the total inertia, since
doubling the inertia makes the problem twice as bad. However, it is usually assumed
that the total inertia is not likely to be more than twice the motor inertia, and this is
certainly the case for most loads. If in doubt, the user should consult the
Figure 6.8 Torque–speed curve showing the effect of space harmonics, and illustrating
the possibility of a motor ‘crawling’ on the 7th harmonic.
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
179

manufacturer, who may recommend a larger motor than might seem necessary if it
was simply a matter of meeting the full-load power requirements.
3.3 Steady-state rotor losses and efﬁciency
The discussion above is a special case which highlights one of the less attractive
features of induction machines. This is that it is never possible for all the power
crossing the air-gap from the stator to be converted to mechanical output, because
some is always lost as heat in the rotor circuit resistance. In fact, it turns out that at
slip s the total power (Pr) crossing the air-gap always divides, so a fraction sPr is lost as
heat, while the remainder (1  s)Pr is converted to useful mechanical output (see
also Appendix 2).
Hence when the motor is operating in the steady-state the energy-conversion
efﬁciency of the rotor is given by
hr ¼ Mechanical output power
Power into rotor
¼ ð1  sÞ
(6.2)
This result is very important, and shows us immediately why operating at small
values of slip is desirable. With a slip of 5% (or 0.05), for example, 95% of the air-gap
power is put to good use. But if the motor was run at half the synchronous speed
(s ¼ 0.5), 50% of the air-gap power would be wasted as heat in the rotor.
We can also see that the overall efﬁciency of the motor must always be
signiﬁcantly less than (1  s), because in addition to the rotor copper losses there are
stator copper losses, iron losses and windage and friction losses. This fact is some-
times forgotten, leading to conﬂicting claims such as ‘full-load slip ¼ 5%, overall
efﬁciency ¼ 96%’, which is clearly impossible.
3.4 Steady-state stability – pull-out torque and stalling
We can check stability by asking what happens if the load torque suddenly changes
for some reason. The load shown by the lower broken line in Figure 6.9 is stable at
speed X: for example, if the load torque increased from Ta to Tb, the load torque
Figure 6.9 Torque–speed curve illustrating stable operating region (OXYZ).
180
Electric Motors and Drives

would be greater than the motor torque, so the motor would decelerate. As the
speed dropped, the motor torque would rise, until a new equilibrium was reached,
at the slightly lower speed (Y ). The converse would happen if the load torque
reduced, leading to a higher stable running speed.
But what happens if the load torque is increased more and more? We can see
that as the load torque increases, beginning at point X, we eventually reach point Z,
at which the motor develops its maximum torque. Quite apart from the fact that the
motor is now well into its overload region, and will be in danger of overheating, it
has also reached the limit of stable operation. If the load torque is further increased,
the speed falls (because the load torque is more than the motor torque), and as it
does so the shortfall between motor torque and load torque becomes greater and
greater. The speed therefore falls faster and faster, and the motor is said to be
‘stalling’. With loads such as machine tools (a drilling machine, for example), as soon
as the maximum or ‘pull-out’ torque is exceeded, the motor rapidly comes to a halt,
making an angry humming sound. With a hoist, however, the excess load would
cause the rotor to be accelerated in the reverse direction, unless it was prevented
from doing so by a mechanical brake.
4. TORQUE–SPEED CURVES – INFLUENCE OF ROTOR
PARAMETERS
We saw earlier that the rotor resistance and reactance inﬂuenced the shape of the
torque–speed curve. Both of these parameters can be varied by the designer, and we
will explore the pros and cons of the various alternatives. To limit the mathematics
the discussion will be mainly qualitative, but it is worth mentioning that the whole
matter can be dealt with rigorously using the equivalent circuit approach, as dis-
cussed in Appendix 2.
We will deal with the cage rotor ﬁrst because it is the most important, but the
wound rotor allows a wider variation of resistance to be obtained, so it is discussed
later.
4.1 Cage rotor
For small values of slip, i.e.in the normal running region, the lower wemake the rotor
resistance the steeper the slope of the torque–speed curve becomes, as shown in
Figure 6.10. We can see that at the rated torque (shown by the horizontal dotted line
in Figure 6.10) the full-load slip of the low-resistance cage is much lower than that of
the high-resistance cage. But we saw earlier that the rotor efﬁciency is equal to (1  s),
where s is the slip. So we conclude that the low resistance rotor not only gives better
speed holding, but is also much more efﬁcient. There is of course a limit to how low
we can make the resistance: copper allows us to achieve a lower resistance than
aluminum, but we can’t do any better than ﬁll the slots with solid copper bars.
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
181

As we might expect there are drawbacks with a low resistance rotor. The direct-
on-line starting torque is reduced (see Figure 6.10), and worse still the starting
current is increased. The lower starting torque may prove insufﬁcient to accelerate
the load, while increased starting current may lead to unacceptable volt-drops in the
supply.
Altering the rotor resistance has little or no effect on the value of the peak (pull-
out) torque, but the slip at which the peak torque occurs is directly proportional to
the rotor resistance. By opting for a high enough resistance (by making the cage
from bronze, brass or other relatively high-resistivity material) we can if we wish
arrange for the peak torque to occur at or close to starting, as shown in Figure 6.10.
The snag in doing this is that the full-load efﬁciency is inevitably low because the
full-load slip will be high (see Figure 6.10).
There are some applications for which high-resistance motors were traditionally
well suited, an example being for metal punching presses, where the motor accel-
erates a ﬂywheel which is used to store energy. In order to release a signiﬁcant amount
of energy, the ﬂywheel slows down appreciably during impact, and the motor then
has to accelerate it back up to full speed. The motor needs a high torque over
a comparatively wide speed range, and does most of its work during acceleration.
Once up to speed the motor is effectively running light, so its low efﬁciency is of little
consequence. (We should note that this type of application is now often met by
drives, but because the induction motor is so robust and long-lived, signiﬁcant
numbers of ‘heritage’ installations will persist, particularly in the developing world.)
High-resistance motors are sometimes used for speed control of fan-type loads,
and this is taken up again later when we explore speed control.
To sum up, a high rotor resistance is desirable when starting and at low speeds,
while a low resistance is preferred under normal running conditions. To get the best
of both worlds, we need to be able to alter the resistance from a high value at starting
to a lower value at full speed. Obviously we can’t change the actual resistance of the
Figure 6.10 Inﬂuence of rotor resistance on the torque–speed curve of a cage motor.
The full-load running speeds are indicated by the vertical dotted lines.
182
Electric Motors and Drives

cage once it has been manufactured, but it is possible to achieve the desired effect
with either a ‘double cage’ or a ‘deep bar’ rotor.
4.2 Double cage and deep bar rotors
Double cage rotors have an outer cage made of relatively high-resistivity material
such as bronze, and an inner cage of low resistivity, usually copper, as shown on the
left in Figure 6.11.
The inner cage of low-resistance copper is sunk deep into the rotor, so that it is
almost completely surrounded by iron. This causes the inner bars to have a much
higher leakage inductance than if they were near the rotor surface, so that under
starting conditions (when the induced rotor frequency is high) their inductive
reactance is very high and little current ﬂows in them. In contrast, the bars of the
outer cage (of higher resistance bronze) are placed so that their leakage ﬂuxes face
a much higher reluctance path, leading to a low leakage inductance. Hence under
starting conditions, rotor current is concentrated in the outer cage, which, because
of its high resistance, produces a high starting torque.
At the normal running speed the roles are reversed. The rotor frequency is low,
so both cages have low reactance and most of the current therefore ﬂows in the
low-resistance inner cage. The torque–speed curve is therefore steep, and the
efﬁciency is high.
Considerable variation in detailed design is possible in order to shape the
torque–speed curve to particular requirements. In comparison with a single-cage
rotor, the double cage gives much higher starting torque, substantially less starting
current, and marginally worse running performance.
The deep bar rotor has a single cage, usually of copper, formed in slots which are
deeper and narrower than in a conventional single-cage design. Construction is
simpler and therefore cheaper than in a double-cage rotor, as shown on the right in
Figure 6.11.
The deep bar approach ingeniously exploits the fact that the effective resistance
of a conductor is higher under a.c. conditions than under d.c. conditions. With
a typical copper bar of the size used in an induction motor rotor, the difference in
effective resistance between d.c. and say 50 or 60 Hz (the so-called ‘skin effect’)
would be negligible if the conductor were entirely surrounded by air. But when it is
almost completely surrounded by iron, as in the rotor slots, its effective resistance at
mains frequency may be two or three times its d.c. value.
Figure 6.11 Double cage (left) and deep bar (right) rotors.
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
183

Under starting conditions, when the rotor frequency is equal to the supply
frequency, the skin effect is very pronounced, and the rotor current is concentrated
towards the top of the slots. The effective resistance is therefore increased, resulting
in a high starting torque from a low starting current. When the speed rises and
the rotor frequency falls, the effective resistance reduces towards its d.c. value, and
the current distributes itself more uniformly across the cross-section of the bars. The
normal running performance thus approaches that of a low-resistance single-cage
rotor, giving a high efﬁciency and stiff torque–speed curve. The pull-out torque is,
however, somewhat lower than for an equivalent single-cage motor because of the
rather higher leakage reactance.
Most small and medium motors are designed to exploit the deep bar effect to
some extent, reﬂecting the view that for most applications the slightly inferior
running performance is more than outweighed by the much better starting
behavior. A typical torque–speed curve for a general-purpose medium-size (55 kW)
motor is shown in Figure 6.12. Such motors are unlikely to be described by the
maker speciﬁcally as ‘deep bar’ but they nevertheless incorporate a measure of the
skin effect and consequently achieve the ‘good’ torque–speed characteristic shown
by the solid line in Figure 6.12.
The current–speed relationship is shown by the dashed line in Figure 6.12, both
torque and current scales being expressed in per-unit (p.u.). This notation is widely
used as a shorthand, with 1 p.u. (or 100%) representing rated value. For example,
a torque of 1.5 p.u. simply means one and a half times rated value, while a current of
400% means a current of four times rated value.
4.3 Starting and run-up of slipring motors
By adding external resistance in series with the rotor windings the starting current
can be kept low but at the same time the starting torque is high. This was the major
advantage of the wound-rotor or slipring motor, which made it well suited for loads
Figure 6.12 Typical torque–speed and current–speed curves for a general-purpose
industrial cage motor.
184
Electric Motors and Drives

with heavy starting duties such as stone-crushers, cranes and conveyor drives, for
most of which the inverter-fed cage motor is now preferred.
The inﬂuence of rotor resistance is shown by the set of torque–speed curves in
Figure 6.13.
Typically the resistance at starting would be selected to give full-load torque
together with rated current from the utility supply. The starting torque is then as
indicated by point A in Figure 6.13.
As the speed rises, the torque would fall more or less linearly if the resistance
remained constant, so in order to keep close to full torque the resistance is gradually
reduced, either in steps, in which case the trajectory ABC, etc. is followed
(Figure 6.13), or continuously so that maximum torque is obtained throughout.
Ultimately the external resistance is made zero by shorting out the sliprings, and
thereafter the motor behaves like a low-resistance cage motor, with a high running
efﬁciency.
5. INFLUENCE OF SUPPLY VOLTAGE ON TORQUE–SPEED
CURVE
We established earlier that at any given slip, the air-gap ﬂux density is proportional
to the applied voltage, and the induced current in the rotor is proportional to the
ﬂux density. The torque – which depends on the product of the ﬂux and the rotor
current – therefore depends on the square of the applied voltage. This means that
a comparatively modest fall in the voltage will result in a much larger reduction in
torque capability, with adverse effects which may not be apparent to the unwary
until too late.
To illustrate the problem, consider the torque–speed curves for a cage motor
shown in Figure 6.14. The curves (which have been expanded to focus attention on
Figure 6.13 Torque–speed curves for a wound-rotor (slipring) motor showing how the
external rotor-circuit resistance (R) can be varied in steps to provide an approximately
constant torque during acceleration.
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
185

the low-slip region) are drawn for full voltage (100%), and for a modestly reduced
voltage of 90%. With full voltage and full-load torque the motor will run at point
X, with a slip of say 5%. Since this is the normal full-load condition, the rotor and
stator currents will be at their rated values.
Now suppose that the voltage falls to 90%. The load torque is assumed to be
constant so the new operating point will be at Y. Since the air-gap ﬂux density is
now only 0.9 of its rated value, the rotor current will have to be about 1.1 times
rated value to develop the same torque, so the rotor e.m.f. is required to increase by
10%. But the ﬂux density has fallen by 10%, so an increase in slip of 20% is called for.
The new slip is therefore 6%.
The drop in speed from 95% of synchronous to 94% may well not be noticed,
and the motor will apparently continue to operate quite happily. But the rotor
current is now 10% above its rated value, so the rotor heating will be 21% more than
is allowable for continuous running. The stator current will also be above rated
value, so if the motor is allowed to run continuously, it will overheat. This is one
reason why all large motors are ﬁtted with protection which is triggered by over-
temperature. Many small and medium motors do not have such protection, so it is
important to guard against the possibility of undervoltage operation.
Another potential danger arises if the supply voltage is unbalanced, i.e. the three
line-to-line voltages are unequal. This is most likely where the supply impedance is
high and the line currents are unequal due to unbalanced loads elsewhere on the
system.
Electrical engineers use the technique of ‘symmetrical components’ to analyze
unbalanced 3-phase voltages. It is a method whereby the effect of unbalanced
voltages on, say, a motor is quantiﬁed by ﬁnding how the motor behaves when
subjected, independently, to three sets of balanced voltages that together simulate
the actual unbalanced voltages.
The ﬁrst balanced set is the positive sequence component: its phase-sequence is
the normal one, e.g. UVW or ABC; the second is the negative sequence, having the
phase sequence WVU; and the third is the zero sequence, in which the 3-phase
Figure 6.14 Inﬂuence of stator supply voltage on torque–speed curves.
186
Electric Motors and Drives

voltage components are co-phasal. There are simple analytic formulae for ﬁnding
the components from the original three unbalanced voltages.
If the supply is balanced, the negative sequence and zero sequence components
are both zero. Any unbalance gives rise to a negative sequence component, which
will set up a rotating magnetic ﬁeld traveling in the opposite direction to that of the
main (positive sequence) component, and thus cause a braking torque and increase
the losses, especially in the rotor. The zero sequence components produce
a stationary ﬁeld with three times the pole-number of the main ﬁeld, but this can
only happen when the motor has a star point connection.
Perhaps the most illuminating example of the application of symmetrical
components as far as we are concerned is in the case of single-phase machines,
where a single winding produces a pulsating ﬁeld. This is an extreme case of
unbalance because two of the phases are non-existent! It turns out that the positive
sequence and negative sequence components are equal, which leads naturally to the
idea that the pulsating ﬁeld can be resolved into two counter-rotating ﬁelds. We
will see later in this chapter that we can extend this picture to understand how the
single-phase induction motor works.
Returning to 3-phase motors, a quite modest unbalance can be serious in terms
of overheating. For example, to meet international standards motors are expected to
tolerate only 1% negative sequence voltage continuously. Large motors often have
negative sequence protection ﬁtted, while small ones will rely on their thermal
protection device to prevent overheating. Alternatively, if continuous operation
under unbalanced conditions is required the motor must be de-rated signiﬁcantly,
e.g. to perhaps 80% of full-load with a voltage unbalance of 4%.
6. GENERATING
Having explored the torque–speed curve for the normal motoring region, where
the speed lies between zero and just below synchronous, we must ask what happens
if the speed is above the synchronous speed, i.e. the slip is negative. The unam-
biguous answer to this question is that the machine will switch from motoring to
generating. Strangely, as mentioned previously, the authors have often encountered
users who express deep scepticism, or even outright disbelief at the prospect of
induction machines generating, so it is important that we attempt to counter what is
clearly a widely held misconception.
A typical torque–speed curve for a cage motor covering the full range of speeds
which are likely in practice is shown in Figure 6.15.
We can see from Figure 6.15 that the decisive factor as far as the direction of the
torque is concerned is the slip, rather than the speed. When the slip is positive
the torque is positive, and vice versa. The torque therefore always acts so as to urge
the rotor to run at zero slip, i.e. at the synchronous speed. If the rotor is tempted to
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
187

run faster than the ﬁeld it will be slowed down, while if it is running below
synchronous speed it will be urged to accelerate forwards. In particular, we note that
for slips greater than 1, i.e. when the rotor is running backwards (i.e. in the opposite
direction to the ﬁeld), the torque will remain positive, so that if the rotor is
unrestrained it will ﬁrst slow down and then change direction and accelerate in the
direction of the ﬁeld.
6.1 Generating region
For negative slips, i.e. when the rotor is turning in the same direction, but at
a higher speed than the traveling ﬁeld, the ‘motor’ torque is in fact negative. In
other words, the machine develops a torque that opposes the rotation, which can
therefore only be maintained by applying a driving torque to the shaft. In this region
the machine acts as an induction generator, converting mechanical power from the
shaft into electrical power into the supply system. Cage induction machines are used
in this way in wind-power generation schemes, as described in a later section.
It is worth stressing that, just as with the d.c. machine, we do not have to make
any changes to an induction motor to turn it into an induction generator. In both
cases, all that is needed is a source of mechanical power to turn the rotor faster than
it would run if there was zero load or friction torque. For the d.c. motor, its ideal
no-load speed is that at which its back e.m.f. equals the supply voltage, whereas for
the induction motor, it is the synchronous speed.
On the other hand, we should be clear that, unlike the d.c. machine, the
induction machine can only generate when it is connected to the supply. If we
disconnect an induction motor from the utility supply and try to make it generate
simply by turning the rotor we will not get any output because there is nothing to
Figure 6.15 Torque–speed curve over motoring region (slip between 0 and 1), braking
region (slip greater than 1) and generating region (negative slip).
188
Electric Motors and Drives

set up the working ﬂux: the ﬂux (excitation) is not present until the motor is
supplied with magnetizing current from the supply. It seems likely that this apparent
inability to generate in isolation is what gave rise to the myth that induction
machines cannot generate at all: a widely held view, but wholly incorrect!
There are comparatively few applications in which utility-supplied motors ﬁnd
themselves in the generating region, though as we will see later it is quite common
in inverter-fed drives. We will, however, look at one example of a utility supply-fed
motor in the so-called regenerative mode to underline the value of the motor’s
inherent ability to switch from motoring to generating automatically, without the
need for any external intervention.
Consider a cage motor driving a simple hoist through a reduction gearbox, and
suppose that the hook (unloaded) is to be lowered. Because of the static friction in
the system, the hook will not descend on its own, even after the brake is lifted, so on
pressing the ‘down’ button the brake is lifted and power is applied to the motor so
that it rotates in the lowering direction. The motor quickly reaches full speed and
the hook descends. As more and more rope winds off the drum, a point is reached
where the lowering torque exerted by the hook and rope is greater than the running
friction, and a restraining torque is then needed to prevent a runaway. The necessary
stabilizing torque is automatically provided by the motor acting as a generator as
soon as the synchronous speed is exceeded, as shown in Figure 6.15. The speed will
therefore be held at just above the synchronous speed, provided of course that the
peak generating torque (see Figure 6.15) is not exceeded.
6.2 Self-excited induction generator
In previous sections we have stressed that the rotating magnetic ﬁeld or excitation is
provided by the magnetizing current drawn from the supply, so it would seem
obvious that the motor could not generate unless a supply was provided to furnish
the magnetizing current. However, it is possible to make the machine ‘self-excite’ if
the conditions are right, and given the robustness of the cage motor this can make it
an attractive proposition, especially for small-scale isolated installations.
We saw in Chapter 5 that when the induction motor is running at its normal
speed, the rotating magnetic ﬁeld that produces the currents and torque on the rotor
also induced balanced 3-phase induced e.m.f.s in the stator windings, the magnitude
of the e.m.f.s being not a great deal less than the voltage of the utility supply. So to
act as an independent generator what we want to do is to set up the rotating
magnetic ﬁeld without having to connect to an active voltage source.
We discussed a similar matter in Chapter 3, in connection with self-excitation of
the shunt d.c. machine. We saw that if enough residual magnetic ﬂux remained
in the ﬁeld poles after the machine had been switched off, the e.m.f. produced when
the shaft was rotated could begin to supply current to the ﬁeld winding, thereby
increasing the ﬂux, further raising the e.m.f. and initiating a positive feedback (or
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
189

bootstrap) process which was ultimately stabilized by the saturation characteristic of
the iron in the magnetic circuit.
Happily, much the same can be achieved with an isolated induction motor. We
aim to capitalize on the residual magnetism in the rotor iron, and, by turning the
rotor, generate an initial voltage in the stator to kick-start the process. The e.m.f.
induced must then drive current to reinforce the residual ﬁeld and promote the
positive feedback to build up the traveling ﬂux ﬁeld. Unlike the d.c. machine,
however, the induction motor has only one winding that provides both excitation
and energy converting functions, so given that we want to get the terminal voltage
to its rated level before we connect whatever electrical load we plan to supply, it is
clearly necessary to provide a closed path for the would-be excitation current. This
path should encourage the build-up of magnetizing current – and hence terminal
voltage.
‘Encouraging’ the current means providing a very low impedance path, so that
a small voltage drives a large current, and, since we are dealing with a.c. quantities,
we naturally seek to exploit the phenomenon of resonance, by placing a set of
capacitors in parallel with the (inductive) windings of the machine, as shown in
Figure 6.16.
The reactance of a parallel circuit consisting of pure inductance (L) and
capacitance (C ) at angular frequency u is given by X ¼ uL  1/uC, so at low and
high frequencies the reactance is very large, but at the so-called resonant frequency
(u0 ¼ 1/OLC ), the reactance becomes zero. Here the inductance is the magne-
tizing inductance of each phase of the induction machine, and C is the added
capacitance, the value being chosen to give resonance at the desired frequency of
generation. Of course the circuit is not ideal because there is resistance in the
windings, but nevertheless the inductive reactance can be ‘tuned out’ by choice of
capacitance, leaving a circulating path of very low resistance. Hence by turning the
rotor at the speed at which the desired frequency is produced by the residual
Figure 6.16 Self-excited induction generator. The load is connected only after the
stator voltage has built up.
190
Electric Motors and Drives

magnetism (e.g. 1800 rev/min for a 4-pole motor to generate 60 Hz), the initial
modest e.m.f. produces a disproportionately high current and the ﬂux builds up
until limited by the non-linear saturation characteristic of the iron magnetic circuit.
We then get balanced 3-phase voltages at the terminals, and the load can be applied
by closing switch S (Figure 6.16).
The description above gives only a basic outline of the self-excitation mecha-
nism. Such a scheme would only be satisfactory for a very limited range of driven
speeds and loads, and in practice further control features are required to vary the
effective capacitance (typically using triac control) in order to keep the voltage
constant when the load and/or speed vary widely.
6.3 Doubly-fed induction machine for wind-power
generation
The term doubly-fed refers to an induction machine in which both stator and rotor
windings are connected to an a.c. power source: we are therefore talking about
wound rotor (or slipring) motors, where the rotor windings are accessed through
insulated rotating sliprings.
Traditionally, large slipring machines were used in Kramer1 drives to recover
the slip energy in the rotor and return it to the supply, so that efﬁcient operation was
possible at much higher slips than would otherwise have been possible. Some
Kramer drives remain, but in the twenty-ﬁrst century by far the major application
for the doubly-fed induction machine is in wind-power generation where the wind
turbine feeds directly into the utility grid.
Before we see why the doubly-fed motor is favored, we should ﬁrst
acknowledge that in principle we could take a cage motor, connect it directly to
the utility grid, and drive its rotor from the wind turbine (via a gearbox with an
output speed a little above synchronous speed) so that it supplied electrical power
to the grid. However, the range of speeds over which stable generation is
possible would be only a few per cent above synchronous, and this is a poor
match as far as the turbine characteristics are concerned. Ideally, in order to
abstract the maximum power from the wind, the speed of rotation of the blades
must vary according to the conditions, so being forced to remain at a more-or-
less constant speed by being connected to a cage motor is not good news. In
addition, when there are rapid ﬂuctuations in wind speed that produce bursts of
power, the fact that the speed is constant means that there are rapid changes in
torque which produce unwelcome fatigue loading in the gearbox. What is really
wanted is a generator in which the generated frequency can be maintained
constant over a wider speed range, and this is where the doubly-fed system
scores.
1 See, for example, The Control Techniques Drives and Controls Handbook, 2nd edition, by W. Drury.
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
191

The stator is connected directly to the utility grid, while the rotor windings are
also linked to the grid, but via a pair of a.c./d.c. converters, as shown in Figure 6.17.
The converters – connected via a d.c. link – allow power to ﬂow to or from the
ﬁxed-frequency grid into or out of the rotor circuit, the frequency of which varies
according to the shaft speed (see below). The rating of these converters will be
substantially less than the rated power output of the induction machine, depending
on the speed range that is to be accepted. For example, if the speed range is to be
1.3Ns, where Ns is the synchronous speed of the induction motor connected to
the grid, and full torque is to be available over the full speed range, the rating of the
converters will be only 30% of the rating of the machine. (This is a major advantage
over the alternative of having a conventional synchronous generator and
a frequency converter of 100% rating.)
Understanding all the details of how the doubly-fed induction generator
operates is not easy, but we can get to the essence by picturing the relationship
between the rotating magnetic ﬁeld and the stator and rotor.
Given that the stator is permanently connected to the utility grid, we know that
the magnitude and speed of the rotating magnetic ﬁeld cannot vary, so the
synchronous speed of a 4-pole machine connected to the 60 Hz supply will be
1800 rev/min. If we want to generate power to the grid at this speed, we feed d.c.
(i.e. zero frequency) into the rotor, and we then have what amounts to a conven-
tional synchronous machine, which can motor or generate, and its power-factor can
be controlled via the rotor current (see section 2 of Chapter 9). The 4-pole ﬁeld
produced by the rotor is stationary with respect to the rotor, but because the rotor is
turning at 1800 rev/min, it rotates at the same speed as the traveling ﬁeld produced
by the stator windings, the two effectively being locked together so that torque can
be transmitted and power can be converted. Energy conversion is only possible at the
speed of exactly 1800 rev/min.
Now suppose that the wind turbine speed falls so that the speed at the machine
shaft is only 1500 rev/min. For the rotor to be able to lock on to the 1800 rev/min
stator ﬁeld, the ﬁeld that it produces must rotate at 300 rev/min (in a positive sense)
relative to the rotor, so that its speed relative to the stator is 1500 þ 300 ¼ 1800.
This is achieved by supplying the rotor with 3-phase current at a frequency of
Figure 6.17 Doubly-fed wound-rotor induction machine for wind-power generation.
192
Electric Motors and Drives

10 Hz. Conversely, if the turbine drives the machine shaft speed at 2100 rev/min,
the rotor ﬁeld must rotate at 300 rev/min in a negative sense relative to the rotor;
i.e. the rotor currents must again be at 10 Hz, but with reversed phase sequence.
It turns out that if the input speed is below synchronous (1500 rev/min in the
example above), electrical power has to be fed into the rotor circuit. This power is
taken from the utility grid, but (neglecting losses, which are small) it then emerges
from the stator, together with the mechanical power supplied by the turbine. Thus
we can think of the electrical input power to the rotor as merely ‘borrowed’ from
the grid to allow the energy conversion to take place; of course, the net power
supplied to the grid all comes from the turbine. In this example, if the turbine
torque is at rated value, the overall power output will be 1500/1800P, i.e. 5P/6,
where P is the rated power at normal (synchronous) speed. This will be made up
of an output power of P from the stator, from which the rotor converters take
300/1800P, i.e. P/6 into the rotor.
When the driven speed is above synchronous (e.g. 2100 rev/min), both stator
and rotor circuits export power to the grid. In this case, with rated turbine torque,
the power to the grid will be 2100/1800P, i.e. 7P/6, comprising P from the stator
and P/6 from the rotor converter.
We should be clear that there is no magic in being able to exceed the original
rated power of our machine. At full torque, the electric and magnetic loadings will
be at their rated values, and the increase in power is therefore entirely due to the
higher speed. We discussed this towards the end of Chapter 1.
Just as with a conventional (single-speed) synchronous machine, we can control
the extent to which the stator and rotor sides contribute to the setting up of the
resultant ﬂux, and this means that we can control the grid power-factor via the rotor
circuit; this can be very advantageous where there is a system requirement to export
or absorb reactive volt-amperes.
7. BRAKING
7.1 Plug reversal and plug braking
Because the rotor always tries to catch up with the rotating ﬁeld, it can be reversed
rapidly simply by interchanging any two of the supply leads. The changeover is
usually obtained by having two separate 3-pole contactors, one for forward and one
for reverse. This procedure is known as plug reversal or plugging, and is illustrated in
Figure 6.18.
The motor is initially assumed to be running light (and therefore with a very
small positive slip) as indicated by point A on the dashed torque–speed curve in
Figure 6.18(a). Two of the supply leads are then reversed, thereby reversing the
direction of the ﬁeld, and bringing the mirror-image torque–speed curve shown by
the solid line into play. The slip of the motor immediately after reversal is
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
193

approximately 2, as shown by point B on the solid curve. The torque is thus
negative, and the motor decelerates, the speed passing through zero at point C and
then rising in the reverse direction before settling at point D, just below the
synchronous speed.
The speed–time curve is shown in Figure 6.18(b). We can see that the decel-
eration (i.e. the gradient of the speed–time graph) reaches a maximum as the motor
passes through the peak torque (pull-out) point, but thereafter the ﬁnal speed is
approached gradually, as the torque tapers down to point D.
Very rapid reversal is possible using plugging; for example, a 1 kW motor will
typically reverse from full speed in under one second. But large cage motors can
only be plugged if the supply can withstand the very high currents involved, which
are even larger than when starting from rest. Frequent plugging will also cause
serious overheating, because each reversal involves the ‘dumping’ of four times the
stored kinetic energy as heat in the windings.
Plugging can also be used to stop the rotor quickly, but obviously it is then
necessary to disconnect the supply when the rotor comes to rest, otherwise it will
run up to speed in reverse. A shaft-mounted reverse-rotation detector is therefore
used to trip out the reverse contactor when the speed reaches zero.
We should note that whereas in the regenerative mode (discussed in the
previous section) the slip was negative, allowing mechanical energy from the load to
be converted to electrical energy and fed back to the mains, plugging is a wholly
dissipative process in which all the kinetic energy ends up as heat in the motor.
7.2 Injection braking
This is the most widely used method of electrical braking. When the ‘stop’ signal
occurs the 3-phase supply is interrupted, and a d.c. current is fed into the stator via
two of its terminals. The d.c. supply is usually obtained from a rectiﬁer fed via a low-
voltage high-current transformer.
We saw earlier that the speed of rotation of the air-gap ﬁeld is directly
proportional to the supply frequency, so it should be clear that since d.c. is
Figure 6.18 Torque–speed and speed–time curves for plug reversal of cage motor.
194
Electric Motors and Drives

effectively zero frequency, the air-gap ﬁeld will be stationary. We also saw that the
rotor always tries to run at the same speed as the ﬁeld. So if the ﬁeld is stationary, and
the rotor is not, a braking torque will be exerted. A typical torque–speed curve for
braking a cage motor is shown in Figure 6.19, from which we see that the braking
(negative) torque falls to zero as the rotor comes to rest.
This is in line with what we would expect, since there will only be induced
currents in the rotor (and hence torque) when the rotor is ‘cutting’ the ﬂux. As with
plugging, injection (or dynamic) braking is a dissipative process, all the kinetic
energy being turned into heat inside the motor.
8. SPEED CONTROL
We have seen that to operate efﬁciently an induction motor must run with a small
slip. It follows that any efﬁcient method of speed control must be based on varying
the synchronous speed of the ﬁeld, rather than the slip. The two factors which
determine the speed of the ﬁeld are the supply frequency and the pole-number (see
equation (5.1)).
The pole-number has to be an even integer, so where continuously adjustable
speed control over a wide range is called for, the best approach by far is to provide
a variable-frequency supply. This method is very important, and is dealt with
separately in Chapters 7 and 8. In this chapter we are concerned with constant-
frequency (utility-connected) operation, so we are limited to either pole-changing,
which can provide discrete speeds only, or slip-control which can provide
continuous speed control, but is inherently inefﬁcient.
8.1 Pole-changing motors
For some applications continuous speed control may be an unnecessary luxury, and
it may be sufﬁcient to be able to run at two discrete speeds. Among many instances
Figure 6.19 Torque–speed curve for d.c. injection braking of cage motor.
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
195

where this can be acceptable and economic are pumps, lifts and hoists, fans and some
machine tool drives.
We established in Chapter 5 that the pole-number of the ﬁeld was determined
by the layout and interconnection of the stator coils, and that once the winding has
been designed, and the frequency speciﬁed, the synchronous speed of the ﬁeld is
ﬁxed. If we wanted to make a motor which could run at either of two different
speeds, we could construct it with two separate stator windings (say 4-pole and
6-pole), and energize the appropriate one. There is no need to change the cage
rotor since the pattern of induced currents can readily adapt to suit the stator pole-
number. Early two-speed motors did have two distinct stator windings, but were
bulky and inefﬁcient.
It was soon realized that if half of the phase-belts within each phase-winding
could be reversed in polarity, the effective pole-number could be halved. For
example, a 4-pole m.m.f. pattern (N–S–N–S) would become (N–N–S–S), i.e.
effectively a 2-pole pattern with one large N and one large S pole. By bringing out
six leads instead of three, and providing switching contactors to effect the reversal,
two discrete speeds in the ratio 2:1 are therefore possible from a single winding.
The performance at the high (e.g. 2-pole) speed is relatively poor, which is not
surprising in view of the fact that the winding was originally optimized for 4-pole
operation.
It was not until the advent of the more sophisticated pole amplitude modulation
(PAM) method in the 1960s that two-speed single-winding high-performance
motors with more or less any ratio of speeds became available from manufacturers.
This subtle technique allows close ratios such as 4/6, 6/8, 8/10 or wide ratios such as
2/24 to be achieved. The beauty of the PAM method is that it is not expensive. The
stator winding has more leads brought out, and the coils are connected to form non-
uniform phase-belts, but otherwise construction is the same as for a single-speed
motor. Typically six leads will be needed, three of which are supplied for one speed,
and three for the other, the switching being done by contactors. The method of
connection (star or delta) and the number of parallel paths within the winding are
arranged so that the air-gap ﬂux at each speed matches the load requirement. For
example, if constant torque is needed at both speeds, the ﬂux needs to be made the
same, whereas if reduced torque is acceptable at the higher speed the ﬂux can
obviously be lower.
8.2 Voltage control of high-resistance cage motors
Where efﬁciency is not of paramount importance, the torque (and hence the
running speed) of a cage motor can be controlled simply by altering the supply
voltage. The torque at any slip is approximately proportional to the square of the
voltage, so we can reduce the speed of the load by reducing the voltage. The
method is not suitable for standard low-resistance cage motors, because their stable
196
Electric Motors and Drives

operating speed range is very restricted, as shown in Figure 6.20(a). But if special
high-rotor resistance motors are used, the gradient of the torque–speed curve in the
stable region is much less, and a somewhat wider range of steady-state operating
speeds is available, as shown in Figure 6.20(b).
The most unattractive feature of this method is the low efﬁciency which is
inherent in any form of slip-control. We recall that the rotor efﬁciency at slip s is
(1  s), so if we run at say 70% of synchronous speed (i.e. s ¼ 0.3), 30% of the power
crossing the air-gap is wasted as heat in the rotor conductors. The approach is
therefore only practicable where the load torque is low at low speeds, so a fan-type
characteristic is suitable, as shown in Figure 6.20(b). Voltage control became feasible
only when relatively cheap thyristor a.c. voltage regulators arrived on the scene
during the 1970s, and although it enjoyed some success it is now seldom seen. The
hardware required is essentially the same as discussed earlier for soft starting, and
a single piece of kit can therefore serve for both starting and speed control.
8.3 Speed control of wound-rotor motors
The fact that the rotor resistance can be varied easily allows us to control the slip
from the rotor side, with the stator supply voltage and frequency constant. Although
the method is inherently inefﬁcient it is still sometimes used because of its simplicity
and comparatively low cost.
A set of torque–speed characteristics is shown in Figure 6.21, from which it
should be clear that by appropriate selection of the rotor circuit resistance, any
torque up to typically 1.5 times full-load torque can be achieved at any speed.
8.4 Slip energy recovery
Instead of wasting rotor-circuit power in an external resistance, it can be converted
and returned to the mains supply. Frequency conversion is necessary because the
rotor circuit operates at slip frequency, so it cannot be connected directly to the
utility supply. These systems (which are known as the static Kramer drive) have
Figure 6.20 Speed control of cage motor by stator voltage variation; (a) low-resistance
rotor, (b) high-resistance rotor.
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
197

largely been superseded by inverter-fed cage motors, but some survive so a brief
mention is in order.
In a slip energy recovery system, the slip-frequency a.c. from the rotor is ﬁrst
rectiﬁed in a 3-phase diode bridge and smoothed before being returned to the
utility supply via a 3-phase thyristor bridge converter operating in the inverting
mode (see Chapter 4). A transformer is usually required to match the output from
the controlled bridge to the mains voltage. Since the cost of both converters
depends on the slip power they have to handle, this system is most often used where
only a modest range of speeds (say from 70% of synchronous and above) is required,
such as in large pump and compressor drives.
9. POWER-FACTOR CONTROL AND ENERGY
OPTIMIZATION
In addition to their use for soft-start and speed control, thyristor voltage regulators
provide a means for limited control of power-factor for cage motors, and this can
allow a measure of energy economy. However, the fact is that there are compara-
tively few situations where considerations of power-factor and/or energy economy
alone are sufﬁcient to justify the expense of a voltage controller. Only when the
motor operates for very long periods running light or at low load can sufﬁcient savings
be made to cover the outlay. There is certainly no point in providing energy
economy when the motor spends most of its time working at or near full-load.
Both power-factor control and energy optimization rely on the fact that the air-
gap ﬂux is proportional to the supply voltage, so that by varying the voltage, the ﬂux
can be set at the best level to cope with the prevailing load. We can see straightaway
that nothing can be achieved at full-load, since the motor needs full ﬂux (and hence
full voltage) to operate as intended. Some modest savings in losses can be achieved at
reduced load, as we will see.
Figure 6.21 Inﬂuence of external rotor resistance (R) on torque–speed curve of wound-
rotor motor.
198
Electric Motors and Drives

If we imagine the motor to be running with a low load torque and full voltage,
the ﬂux will be at its full value, and the magnetizing component of the stator current
will be larger than the work component, so the input power-factor (cos fa) will be
very low, as shown in Figure 6.22(a).
Now suppose that the voltage is reduced to say half (by phasing back the
thyristors), thereby halving the air-gap ﬂux and reducing the magnetizing current
by at least a factor of two. With only half the ﬂux, the rotor current must double to
produce the same torque, so the work current reﬂected in the stator will also
double. The input power-factor (cos fb) will therefore improve considerably (see
Figure 6.22(b)). Of course the slip with ‘half-ﬂux’ operation will be higher (by
a factor of four), but with a low-resistance cage it will still be small, and the drop in
speed will therefore be slight.
The success (or otherwise) of the energy economy obtained depends on the
balance between the iron losses and the copper losses in the motor. Reducing the
voltage reduces the ﬂux, and hence reduces the eddy current and hysteresis losses in
the iron core. But as we have seen above, the rotor current has to increase to
produce the same torque, so the rotor copper loss rises. The stator copper loss will
reduce if (as in Figure 6.22) the magnitude of the stator current falls. In practice,
with average general-purpose motors, a net saving in losses only occurs for light
loads, say at or below 25% of full-load, though the power-factor will always
increase.
10. SINGLE-PHASE INDUCTION MOTORS
Single-phase induction motors are simple, robust and reliable, and continue
to be used in large numbers especially in domestic and commercial applications
Figure 6.22 Phasor diagram showing improvement of power-factor by reduction of
stator voltage.
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
199

where 3-phase supplies are not available. Although outputs of up to a few kW are
possible, the majority are below 0.5 kW, and are used in straightforward applica-
tions such as refrigeration compressors, and dryers, pumps and fans, small machine
tools, etc. However, these traditional applications can now beneﬁt from the
superior control and low cost provided by the simple inverter and 3-phase
induction or permanent magnet motor, so the single-phase motor looks set for
a niche role in future.
10.1 Principle of operation
If one of the leads of a 3-phase motor is disconnected while it is running light, it will
continue to run with a barely perceptible drop in speed, and a somewhat louder
hum. With only two leads remaining there can only be one current, so the motor
must be operating as a single-phase machine. If load is applied the slip increases more
quickly than under 3-phase operation, and the stall torque is much less, perhaps
one-third. When the motor stalls and comes to rest it will not restart if the load is
removed, but remains at rest drawing a heavy current and emitting an angry hum. It
will burn out if not disconnected rapidly.
It is not surprising that a truly single-phase cage induction motor will not start
from rest, because as we saw in Chapter 5 the single winding, fed with a.c., simply
produces a pulsating ﬂux in the air-gap, without any suggestion of rotation. It is,
however, surprising to ﬁnd that if the motor is given a push in either direction it will
pick up speed, slowly at ﬁrst but then with more vigor, until it settles with a small
slip, ready to take up load. Once turning, a rotating ﬁeld is evidently brought into
play to continue propelling the rotor.
We can understand how this comes about by ﬁrst picturing the pulsating m.m.f.
set up by the current in the stator winding as being the resultant of two identical
traveling waves of m.m.f., one in the forward direction and the other in reverse.
(This equivalence is not self-evident, but can be demonstrated by applying the
method of symmetrical components, discussed earlier in this chapter.)
When the rotor is stationary, it reacts equally to both traveling waves, and no
torque is developed. When the rotor is turning, however, the induced rotor
currents are such that their m.m.f. opposes the reverse stator m.m.f. to a greater
extent than they oppose the forward stator m.m.f. The result is that the forward ﬂux
wave (which is what develops the forward torque) is bigger than the reverse ﬂux
wave (which exerts a drag). The difference widens as the speed increases, the
forward ﬂux wave becoming progressively bigger as the speed rises while the reverse
ﬂux wave simultaneously reduces. This ‘positive feedback’ effect explains why the
speed builds slowly at ﬁrst, but later zooms up to just below synchronous speed. At
the normal running speed (i.e. small slip), the forward ﬂux is many times larger than
the backward ﬂux, and the drag torque is only a small percentage of the forward
torque.
200
Electric Motors and Drives

As far as normal running is concerned, a single winding is therefore sufﬁcient.
But all motors must be able to self-start, so some mechanism has to be provided to
produce a rotating ﬁeld even when the rotor is at rest. Several methods are
employed, all of them using an additional winding.
The second winding usually has less copper than the main winding, and is located
in the slots which are not occupied by the main winding, so that its m.m.f. is displaced
in space relative to that of the main winding. The current in the second winding is
supplied from the same single-phase source as the main winding current, but is caused
to have a phase-lag, by a variety of means which are discussed later. The combination
of a space displacement between the two windings together with a time displacement
between the currents produces a 2-phase machine. If the two windings were iden-
tical, displaced by 90, and fed with currents with 90 phase-shift, an ideal rotating
ﬁeld would be produced. In practice we can never achieve a 90 phase-shift between
the currents, and it turns out to be more economic not to make the windings
identical. Nevertheless, a decent rotating ﬁeld is set up, and entirely satisfactory
starting torque can be obtained. Reversal is simply a matter of reversing the polarity of
one of the windings, and performance is identical in both directions.
The most widely used methods are described below. At one time it was common
practice for the second or auxiliary winding to be energized only during start and
run-up, and for it to be disconnected by means of a centrifugal switch mounted on
the rotor, or sometimes by a time-switch. This practice gave rise to the term ‘starting
winding’. Nowadays it is more common to ﬁnd both windings in use all the time.
10.2 Capacitor run motors
A capacitor is used in series with the auxiliary winding (Figure 6.23) to provide
a phase-shift between the main and auxiliary winding currents. The capacitor
(usually of a few mF, and with a voltage rating which may well be higher than the
mains voltage) may be mounted piggyback fashion on the motor, or located else-
where. Its value represents a compromise between the conﬂicting requirements of
high starting torque and good running performance.
A typical torque–speed curve is also shown in Figure 6.21; the modest starting
torque indicates that capacitor run motors are generally best suited to fan-type loads.
Where higher starting torque is needed, two capacitors can be used, one being
switched out when the motor is up to speed.
Figure 6.23 Single-phase capacitor-run induction motor.
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
201

As mentioned above, the practice of switching out the starting winding alto-
gether is no longer favored, but many old ones remain, and where a capacitor is used
they are known as ‘capacitor start’ motors.
10.3 Split-phase motors
The main winding is of thick wire, with a low resistance and high reactance, while
the auxiliary winding is made of fewer turns of thinner wire with a higher resistance
and lower reactance (Figure 6.24). The inherent difference in impedance is sufﬁ-
cient to give the required phase-shift between the two currents without needing
any external elements in series. Starting torque is good at typically 1.5 times full-
load torque, as also shown in Figure 6.24. As with the capacitor type, reversal is
accomplished by changing the connections to one of the windings.
10.4 Shaded pole motors
There are several variants of this extremely simple, robust and reliable cage motor,
which is used for low-power applications such as hair-dryers, oven fans, ofﬁce
equipment, and display drives. A 2-pole version from the cheap end of the market is
shown in Figure 6.25.
Figure 6.24 Single-phase split-phase induction motor.
Figure 6.25 Shaded pole induction motor.
202
Electric Motors and Drives

The rotor, typically between 1 and 4 cm diameter, has a die-cast aluminum
cage, while the stator winding is a simple concentrated coil wound round the
laminated core. The stator pole is slotted to receive the ‘shading ring’, which is
a single short-circuited turn of thick copper or aluminum.
Most of the pulsating ﬂux produced by the stator winding by-passes the shading
ring and crosses the air-gap to the rotor. But some of the ﬂux passes through the
shading ring, and because it is alternating it induces an e.m.f. and current in the ring.
The opposing m.m.f. of the ring current diminishes and retards the phase of the ﬂux
through the ring, so that the ﬂux through the ring reaches a peak after the main ﬂux,
thereby giving what amounts to a rotation of the ﬂux across the face of the pole.
This far from perfect traveling wave of ﬂux produces the motor torque by inter-
action with the rotor cage. Efﬁciencies are low because of the rather poor magnetic
circuit and the losses caused by the induced currents in the shading ring, but this is
generally acceptable when the aim is to minimize ﬁrst cost. Series resistance can be
used to obtain a crude speed control, but this is only suitable for fan-type loads. The
direction of rotation depends on whether the shading ring is located on the right or
left side of the pole, so shaded pole motors are only suitable for uni-directional
loads.
11. POWER RANGE
Having praised the simplicity and elegance of the induction motor, it is perhaps
not surprising that they are successful over an extraordinarily wide power range
from multi-megawatts down to a few tens of watts. (Indeed we cannot think of any
other non-electric energy converter that can exceed a span of six orders of
magnitude!)
At the upper end the limit is largely a question of low demand, there being few
applications that need a shaft that delivers many tens of megawatts. But at the lower
end we may wonder why there are no very small ones. Industrial (3-phase)
induction motors are rarely found below about 200 W, and single-phase versions
rarely extend below about 50 W, yet applications in this range are legion.
We will see that when we scale down a successful design, the excitation or ﬂux-
producing function of the windings becomes more and more demanding until
eventually the heat produced in the windings by the excitation current causes the
permissible temperature to be reached. There is then no spare capacity for the vital
function of supplying the mechanical output power, so the machine is of no use.
11.1 Scaling down – the excitation problem
We can get to the essence of the matter by imagining that we take a successful
design and scale all the linear dimensions by half. We know that in order to fully
utilize the iron of the magnetic circuit we would want the air-gap ﬂux density to be
Induction Motors – Operation from 50/60 Hz Supply
203

the same as in the original design, so because the air-gap length has been halved the
stator m.m.f. needs to be half of what it was. The number of coils and the turns in
each coil remain as before, so if the original magnetizing current was Im, the
magnetizing current of the half-scale motor will be Im /2.
Turning now to what happens to the resistance of the winding, we will assume
that the resistance of the original winding was R. In the half-scale motor, the total
length of wire is half of what it was, but the cross-sectional area of the wire is only
a quarter of the original. As a result the new resistance is twice as great, i.e. 2R.
The power dissipated in providing the air-gap ﬂux in the original motor is
given by I2
mR, while the corresponding excitation power in the half-scale motor is
given by
Im
2
2
2R ¼ 1
2 I2
mR
When we consider what determines the steady temperature rise of a body in which
heat is dissipated, we ﬁnd that the equilibrium condition is reached when the rate of
loss of heat to the surroundings is equal to the rate of production of heat inside the
body. And, not surprisingly, the rate of loss of heat to the surroundings depends on
the temperature difference between the body and its surroundings, and on the
surface area through which the heat escapes. In the case of the copper windings in
a motor, the permissible temperature rise depends on the quality of insulation, so we
will make the reasonable assumption that the same insulation is used for the scaled
motor as for the original.
We have worked out that the power dissipation in the new motor is half of that
in the original. However, the surface area of the new winding is only one-quarter,
so clearly the temperature rise will be higher, and if all other things were equal, it
will double. We might aim to ease matters by providing bigger slots so that the
current density in the copper could be reduced, but as explained in Chapter 1 this
means that there is less iron in the teeth to carry the working ﬂux. A further problem
arises because it is simply not practicable to go on making the air-gap smaller
because the need to maintain clearances between the moving parts would require
unacceptably tight manufacturing tolerances.
Obviously, there are other factors that need to be considered, not least that
a motor is designed to reach its working temperature when the full current (not just
the magnetizing current) is ﬂowing. But the fact is that the magnetization problem
we have highlighted is the main obstacle in small sizes, not only in induction motors
but also in any motor that derives its excitation from the stator windings. Permanent
magnets therefore become attractive for small motors, because they provide the
working ﬂux without producing unwelcome heat. Permanent magnet motors are
discussed in Chapter 9.
204
Electric Motors and Drives

CHAPTER SEVEN
Variable Frequency Operation
of Induction Motors
1. INTRODUCTION
We saw in Chapter 6 the many attributes of the induction motor which have
made it the preferred workhorse of industry. These include simple low-cost
construction which lends itself to totally enclosed designs suitable for dirty or even
hazardous environments; limited routine maintenance with no brushes; only three
power connections; and good full-load efﬁciency. We have also seen that when
operated from the utility supply there are a number of undesirable characteristics,
the most notable being that there is only one speed of operation (or more precisely
a narrow load-dependent speed range). In addition, starting equipment is often
required to avoid excessive currents of up to six times rated current when starting
direct-on-line; reversal requires two of the power cables to be interchanged; and
the instantaneous torque cannot be controlled, so the transient performance is
poor.
We will see in this chapter that all the good features of the mains operated
induction motor are retained and all the bad characteristics detailed above can be
avoided when the induction motor is supplied from a variable-frequency source; i.e.
its supply comes from an inverter.
The chapter divides broadly into two parts, both dealing with the capabilities
of the induction motor when supplied from an inverter. The ﬁrst part (sections
2 and 3) deals with the steady-state behavior when the operating frequency is solely
determined by the inverter, and is independent of what is happening at the motor.
We will refer to this set-up as ‘inverter-fed’, and in the early days of converter-
driven induction motors this was the norm, the frequency being set by an oscillator
that controlled the sequential periodic switching of the devices in the inverter. We
will see that by appropriate control of the frequency and voltage we are able to
operate over a very wide range of the torque–speed plane, but we will also identify
the factors that place limits on what can be achieved. On a steady-state basis, this
arrangement proved able to compete with the d.c. drive, but even when incor-
porated into a closed-loop control scheme the transient performance remained
inferior. It is well worth absorbing the main messages from this study because
although most contemporary drives now operate on a different basis, the steady-
state running conditions at the motor remain the same. Readers who were able to
follow the material in Chapter 6 should ﬁnd this part straightforward.
Electric Motors and Drives
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-098332-5.00007-3
 2013 Austin Hughes and William Drury.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
205j

In the second major part of this chapter (from section 4), we explore both
‘ﬁeld-oriented’ and ‘direct torque’ methods for control of the inverter/induction
motor combination. We prefer not to use the term ‘inverter-fed’ in these
circumstances because although the motor derives its supply from an inverter,
the switching of the inverter devices is determined by the state of the ﬂux
and currents in the motor, rather than being imposed from a separate oscil-
lator. Both methods allow us to achieve hitherto unheard of levels of
transient performance, but it is important to note that they only became
possible because of the development of fast, cheap, digital processors that can
implement the high-speed calculations necessary to model and control the motor
in real time.
Understanding ﬁeld-oriented control is usually regarded as challenging, even for
experienced drives personnel, not least because the subject tends to be highly
mathematical. However, although we will adopt a largely graphical approach to get
to the heart of the matter, it is likely that most readers will ﬁnd it advisable to absorb
the tutorial material in sections 4 and 5 ﬁrst.
For most of this chapter we will assume that the motor is supplied from an
ideal balanced sinusoidal voltage source. Our justiﬁcation for doing this is that
although the pulse-width-modulated voltage waveform supplied by the inverter
will not be sinusoidal (see Figure 7.1), the motor performance depends
principally on the fundamental (sinusoidal) component of the applied voltage.
This is a somewhat surprising but extremely welcome simpliﬁcation, because it
allows us to make use of our knowledge of how the induction motor behaves
with a sinusoidal supply to anticipate how it performs when fed from an
inverter.
There will be more discussion of the various control arrangements and prac-
ticalities of inverter-fed operation in Chapter 8.
Figure 7.1 Typical voltage and current waveforms for PWM inverter-fed induction
motor. (The fundamental-frequency component is shown by the dotted line.)
206
Electric Motors and Drives

2. INVERTER-FED INDUCTION MOTOR DRIVES
It was explained in Chapter 6 that the induction motor can only run efﬁciently at
low slips, i.e. close to the synchronous speed of the rotating ﬁeld. The best method
of speed control must therefore provide for continuous smooth variation of the
synchronous speed, which in turn calls for variation of the supply frequency. This is
readily achieved using a power electronic inverter (as discussed in Chapter 2) to
supply the motor. A complete speed control scheme, which is illustrated with speed
feedback, is shown in simpliﬁed block diagram form in Figure 7.2.
The arrangement shown in Figure 7.2 shows the motor with a speed sensor
attached to the motor shaft. For all but the most demanding dynamic applications,
or where full torque at standstill is a requirement, a speed sensor would not normally
be required. This is good news as ﬁtting a speed sensor to a standard induction
motor involves signiﬁcant additional cost and additional cabling.
We should recall that the function of the converter (i.e. rectiﬁer and variable-
frequency inverter) is to draw power from the ﬁxed-frequency constant-voltage
mains, rectify it and then convert it to variable frequency, variable voltage for
driving the induction motor. Both the rectiﬁer and the inverter employ switching
strategies (see Chapter 2), so the power conversions are accomplished efﬁciently and
the converter can be compact.
2.1 Steady-state operation – importance of achieving
full ﬂux
Three simple relationships need to be borne in mind in order to simplify under-
standing of how the inverter-fed induction motor behaves. First, we established in
Chapter 5 that, for a given induction motor, the torque developed depends on the
magnitude of the rotating ﬂux density wave, and on the slip speed of the rotor, i.e.
on the relative velocity of the rotor with respect to the ﬂux wave. Secondly, the
Figure 7.2 General arrangement of inverter-fed variable-frequency induction motor
controlled-speed drive.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
207

strength or amplitude of the ﬂux wave depends directly on the supply voltage to the
stator windings, and inversely on the supply frequency. Thirdly, the absolute speed
of the ﬂux wave depends directly on the supply frequency.
Recalling that the motor can only operate efﬁciently when the slip is small, we
see that the basic method of speed control rests on the control of the speed of
rotation of the ﬂux wave (i.e. the synchronous speed), by control of the supply
frequency. If the motor is a 4-pole one, for example, the synchronous speed will be
1500 rev/min when supplied at 50 Hz, 1800 rev/min at 60 Hz, 750 rev/min at
25 Hz, and so on. The no-load speed will therefore be almost exactly proportional
to the supply frequency, because the torque at no load is small and the corre-
sponding slip is also very small.
Turning now to what happens on load, we know that when a load is applied the
rotor slows down, the slip increases, more current is induced in the rotor, and more
torque is produced. When the speed has reduced to the point where the motor
torque equals the load torque, the speed becomes steady. We normally want the
drop in speed with load to be as small as possible, not only to minimize the drop in
speed with load, but also to maximize efﬁciency: in short, we want to minimize the
slip for a given load.
We saw in Chapter 5 that the slip for a given torque depends on the amplitude
of the rotating ﬂux wave: the higher the ﬂux, the smaller the slip needed for a given
torque. It follows that having set the desired speed of rotation of the ﬂux wave by
controlling the output frequency of the inverter we must also ensure that the
magnitude of the ﬂux is adjusted so that it is at its full (rated) value,1 regardless of the
speed of rotation. This is achieved, in principle, by making the output voltage from
the inverter vary in the appropriate way in relation to the frequency.
Given that the amplitude of the ﬂux wave is proportional to the supply voltage
and inversely proportional to the frequency, it follows that if we arrange that the
voltage supplied by the inverter varies in direct proportion to the frequency, the
ﬂux wave will have a constant amplitude. This simple mode of operation – where
the V/f ratio is constant – was for many years the basis of the control strategy applied
to most inverter-fed induction motors, and it can still be found in some commercial
products.
Many inverters are designed for direct connection to the utility supply, without
a transformer, and as a result the maximum inverter output voltage is limited to
a value similar to that of the supply system. Since the inverter will normally be used
to supply a standard induction motor designed, for example, for 400 V, 50 Hz
operation, it is obvious that when the inverter is set to deliver 50 Hz, the voltage
1 In general, operating at rated ﬂux gives the best performance and on most loads the highest efﬁciency.
Some commercial drives offer a mode of control in which the ﬂux is reduced typically with the
square of the speed: this can provide some beneﬁt at low speeds for fan and pump-type loads where
the magnetizing current accounts for a signiﬁcant proportion of the motor losses.
208
Electric Motors and Drives

should be 400 V, which is within the inverter’s voltage range. But when the
frequency is raised to say 100 Hz, the voltage should – ideally – be increased to
800 V in order to obtain full ﬂux. The inverter cannot supply voltages above 400 V,
and it follows that in this case full ﬂux can only be maintained up to the base speed.
Established practice is for the inverter to be capable of maintaining the ‘V/f ratio’, or
rather the ﬂux, constant up to the base speed (frequently 50 or 60 Hz), but to accept
that at higher frequencies the voltage will be constant at its maximum value. This
means that the ﬂux is maintained constant at speeds up to base speed, but beyond
that the ﬂux reduces inversely with frequency. Needless to say the performance
above base speed is adversely affected, as we will see.
Users are sometimes alarmed to discover that both voltage and frequency
change when a new speed is demanded. Particular concern is expressed when the
voltage is seen to reduce when a lower speed is called for. Surely, it is argued, it can’t
be right to operate say a 400 V induction motor at anything less than 400 V. The
fallacy in this view should now be apparent: the ﬁgure of 400 V is simply the correct
voltage for the motor when run directly from the utility supply, at say 50 Hz. If this
full voltage were to be applied when the frequency was reduced to say 25 Hz, the
implication would be that the ﬂux would rise to twice its rated value. This would
greatly overload the magnetic circuit of the machine, giving rise to excessive
saturation of the iron, an enormous magnetizing current, and wholly unacceptable
iron and copper losses. To prevent this from happening, and keep the ﬂux at its
rated value, it is essential to reduce the voltage in proportion to frequency. In the
case above, for example, the correct voltage at 25 Hz would be 200 V.
It is worth stressing here that when considering a motor to be fed from an
inverter there is no longer any special signiﬁcance about the utility network
frequency, and the motor can be wound for almost any base frequency. For
example, a motor wound for 400 V, 100 Hz could in the above example operate
with constant ﬂux right up to 100 Hz.
3. TORQUE–SPEED CHARACTERISTICS
When the voltage at each frequency is adjusted so that the ratio of voltage to
frequency (V/f ) is kept constant up to base speed, a family of torque–speed curves
as shown in Figure 7.3 is obtained. These curves are typical for a standard induction
motor of several kW output.
As expected, the no-load speeds are directly proportional to the frequency, and if
the frequency is held constant, e.g. at 25 Hz in Figure 7.3, the speed drops only
modestly from no-load (point a) to full-load (point b). These are therefore good, useful
open-loop characteristics, because the speed is held fairly well from no-load to full-
load. If the application calls for the speed to be held precisely, this can clearly be ach-
ieved by raising the frequency so that the full-load operating point moves to point (c).
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
209

We note also that the pull-out torque and the torque stiffness (i.e. the slope of
the torque–speed curve in the normal operating region) is more or less the same at
all points below base speed, except at low frequencies where the voltage drop over
the stator resistance becomes very signiﬁcant as the applied voltage is reduced. A
simple V/f control system would therefore suffer from signiﬁcantly reduced ﬂux and
hence less torque at low speeds, as indicated in Figure 7.3.
The low-frequency performance can be improved by increasing the V/f ratio at
low frequencies in order to restore full ﬂux, a technique which is referred to as
‘voltage boost’. In modern drive control schemes which calculate ﬂux from a motor
model (see section 8), the voltage is automatically boosted from the linear V/f
characteristic that the approximate theory leads us to expect. A typical set of torque–
speed curves for a drive with the improved low-speed torque characteristics
obtained with voltage boost is shown in Figure 7.4.
The characteristics in Figure 7.4 have an obvious appeal because they indicate
that the motor is capable of producing practically the same maximum torque at all
speeds from zero up to the base (50 Hz) speed. This region of the characteristics is
Figure 7.3 Torque–speed curves for inverter-fed induction motor with constant V/f
ratio.
Figure 7.4 Typical torque–speed curves for inverter-fed induction motor with constant
ﬂux up to base speed (50 Hz) and constant voltage at higher frequencies.
210
Electric Motors and Drives

known as the ‘constant torque’ region, which means that for frequencies up to base
speed, the maximum possible torque which the motor can deliver is independent of
the set speed. Continuous operation at peak torque will not be allowable
because the motor will overheat, so an upper limit will be imposed by the
controller, as discussed shortly. With this imposed limit, operation below base speed
corresponds to the armature-voltage control region of a d.c. drive, as exempliﬁed in
Figure 3.9.
We should note that the availability of high torque at low speeds (especially at
zero speed) means that we can avoid all the ‘starting’ problems associated with ﬁxed-
frequency operation (see Chapter 6). By starting off with a low frequency which is
then gradually raised the slip speed of the rotor is always small, i.e. the rotor operates
in the optimum condition for torque production all the time, thereby avoiding all
the disadvantages of high slip (low torque and high current) that are associated with
utility-frequency/direct-on-line (DOL) starting. This means that not only can the
inverter-fed motor provide rated torque at low speeds, but – perhaps more
importantly – it does so without drawing any more current from the utility supply
than under full-load conditions, which means that we can safely operate from
a weak supply without causing excessive voltage dips. For some essentially ﬁxed-
speed applications, the superior starting ability of the inverter-fed system alone may
justify its cost.
Beyond the base frequency, the ﬂux (‘V/f ratio’) reduces because V remains
constant. The amplitude of the ﬂux wave therefore reduces inversely with the
frequency. Under constant ﬂux operation, the pull-out torque always occurs at the
same absolute value of slip, but in the constant-voltage region the peak torque
reduces inversely with the square of the frequency and the torque–speed curve
becomes less steep, as shown in Figure 7.4.
Although the curves in Figure 7.4 show what torque the motor can produce for
each frequency and speed, they give no indication of whether continuous operation
is possible at each point, yet this matter is of course extremely important from the
user’s viewpoint, and is discussed next.
3.1 Limitations imposed by the inverter – constant power
and constant torque regions
A primary concern in the inverter is to limit the currents to a safe value as far as the
main switching devices and the motor are concerned. The current limit will be
typically set to the rated current of the motor, and the inverter control circuits will
be arranged so that no matter what the user does the output current cannot exceed
this safe (thermal) value, other than for clearly deﬁned overload (e.g. 120% for 60
seconds) for which the motor and inverter will have been speciﬁed and rated. (For
some applications involving a large number of starts and stops, the motor and drive
may be specially designed for the speciﬁc duty.)
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
211

In modern control schemes (sections 8 and 9) it is possible to have independent
control of the ﬂux- and torque-producing components of the current, and in this
way the current limit imposes an upper limit on the permissible torque. In the
region below base speed, this will normally correspond to the rated torque of the
motor, which is typically about half the pull-out torque, as indicated by the shaded
region in Figure 7.5. Note that this is usually a thermal limit imposed by the motor
design.
Above base speed, it is not possible to increase the voltage and so the ﬂux
reduces inversely with the frequency. Since the stator (and therefore rotor) currents
are again thermally limited (as we saw in the constant torque region), the maximum
permissible torque also reduces inversely with the speed, as shown in Figure 7.5.
This region is consequently known as the ‘constant power’ region. There is of
course a close parallel with the d.c. drive here, both systems operating with reduced
or weak ﬁeld in the constant power region. In the constant power region, the ﬂux is
reduced and so the motor has to operate with higher slips than below base speed to
develop the full (rated) rotor current and correspondingly reduced torque.
The voltage drop over the stator leakage inductance (see Appendix 2) increases
with frequency. At typically twice base speed the extent of this voltage drop reduces
the available voltage to such an extent that it is no longer possible for the motor to
provide constant power operation, as indicated by the cross-hatched area in Figure 7.5.
3.2 Limitations imposed by the motor
The traditional practice in d.c. drives is to use a motor speciﬁcally designed for
operation from a thyristor converter. The motor will have a laminated frame, will
probably come complete with a tachogenerator, and – most important of all – will
have been designed for through ventilation and equipped with an auxiliary air
blower. Adequate ventilation is guaranteed at all speeds, and continuous operation
with full torque (i.e. full current) at even the lowest speed is therefore in order.
Figure 7.5 Constant torque, constant power and high-speed motoring regions.
212
Electric Motors and Drives

By contrast, it is still common for inverter-fed systems to use a standard
industrial induction motor. These motors are usually totally enclosed, with an
external shaft-mounted fan which blows air over the ﬁnned outer case (and an
internal stirring fan to circulate air inside the motor to avoid spot heating). They are
designed ﬁrst and foremost for continuous operation from the ﬁxed frequency
utility supply, and running at base speed.
As we have mentioned earlier, when such a motor is operated at a low
frequency (e.g. 7.5 Hz), the speed is much lower than base speed and the efﬁciency
of the cooling fan is greatly reduced. At the lower speed the motor will be able to
produce as much torque as at base speed (see Figure 7.4) but in doing so the losses in
both stator and rotor will also be more or less the same as at base speed, so it will
overheat if operated for any length of time.
However, induction motors bearing the name ‘inverter grade’ or similar are
readily available. As well as having reinforced insulation systems (see Chapter 8),
they have been designed to offer a constant torque operating range below rated
speed, typically down to 30% of base speed, without the need for an external
cooling fan. In addition they may be offered with an external cooling fan to allow
operation at constant (rated) torque down to standstill.
3.3 Four-quadrant capability
So far in this chapter it is natural that we have concentrated on motoring in quadrant
1 of the torque–speed plane (see Figure 3.12), because this is where the machine will
spend most of its time running, but it is important to remind ourselves that the
induction motor is equally at home as a generator, a role that it will frequently
perform, even with an ordinary load, when a reduction in speed is called for. We
should also recall that in this part of the chapter we are studying variable-frequency
operation at the fundamental level, so we should bear in mind that in practice details
of the control strategy will vary from drive to drive.
We can see how intermittent generation occurs with the aid of the torque–
speed curves shown in Figure 7.6. These have been extended into quadrant 2, i.e.
the negative-slip region, where the rotor speed is higher than synchronous, and
a braking torque is exerted.
The family of curves indicates that for each set speed (i.e. each frequency) the
speed remains reasonably constant because of the relatively steep torque–slip
characteristic of the cage motor. If the load is increased beyond rated torque, an
internal current limit comes into play to prevent the motor from reaching the
unstable region beyond pull-out. Instead, the frequency and speed are reduced, and
so the system behaves in a similar way to a d.c. drive.
Sudden changes in the speed reference are buffered so that the frequency is
gradually increased or decreased. If the load inertia is low and/or the ramp time
sufﬁciently long, the acceleration will be accomplished without the motor entering
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
213

the current-limit region. On the other hand, if the inertia is large and/or the ramp
time was very short, the acceleration will take place as discussed below.
Suppose the motor is operating in the steady state with a constant load torque at
point (a), when a new higher speed corresponding to point (d) is demanded. The
frequency is increased, causing the motor torque to rise to point (b), where the
current has reached the allowable limit. The rate of increase of frequency is then
automatically reduced so that the motor accelerates under constant-current condi-
tions to point (c), where the current falls below the limit: the frequency then remains
constant and the trajectory follows the curve from (c) to settle ﬁnally at point (d).
A typical deceleration trajectory is shown by the path aefg in Figure 7.6. The
torque is negative for much of the time, the motor operating in quadrant 2 and
regenerating kinetic energy. Because we have assumed that the motor is supplied
from an ideal voltage source, this excess energy will return to the supply automat-
ically. In practice, however, we should note that many drives do not have the
capability to return power to the a.c. supply, and the excess energy therefore has to
be dissipated in a resistor inside the converter. (The resistor is usually connected across
the d.c. link, and controlled by a chopper. When the level of the d.c. link voltage
rises, because of the regenerated energy, the chopper switches the resistor on to
absorb the energy. High inertia loads which are subjected to frequent deceleration
can therefore pose problems of excessive power dissipation in this ‘dump’ resistor.)
To operate as a motor in quadrant 3 all that is required is for the phase sequence
of the supply to be reversed, say from ABC to ACB. Unlike the utility-fed motor,
Figure 7.6 Acceleration and deceleration trajectories in the torque–speed plane.
214
Electric Motors and Drives

there is no need to swap two of the power leads because the phase sequencing can
be changed easily at the low-power logic level in the inverter. With reverse phase
sequence, a mirror image set of ‘motoring’ characteristics is available, as shown in
Figure 7.7. The shaded regions are as described for Figure 7.5, and the dashed lines
indicate either short-term overload operation (quadrants 1 and 3) or regeneration
during deceleration (quadrants 2 and 4).
Note that unlike the d.c. motor control strategies we examined in Chapter 4,
neither the motor current, nor indeed any representation of torque, plays a role in
the motor control strategy discussed so far (except when the current hits a limit, as
discussed above).
4. INTRODUCTION TO FIELD-ORIENTED CONTROL
We now begin the second part of this chapter, which explores the contemporary
approach to control of the inverter/induction motor combination. Field-oriented
(or vector) control allows the induction motor/inverter combination to outperform
conventional industrial d.c. drives, and its progressive reﬁnement since the 1980s
represents a major landmark in the history of electrical drives. It is therefore
appropriate that its importance is properly reﬂected in this book, because one of our
aims is to equip readers with sufﬁcient understanding to allow them to converse
intelligently with manufacturers and suppliers.
4.1 Outline of remainder of this chapter
Up to now, we have been able to cover topics without recourse to any very
demanding mathematics, relying instead on physical explanations and diagrams,
Figure 7.7 Operating regions in all four quadrants of the torque–speed plane.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
215

and our aim is to continue this approach. However, anyone who has consulted an
article or textbook on the subject of ﬁeld-oriented control will quickly become
aware that most treatments involve extensive use of matrices and transform theory,
and that many of the terms used will not be familiar to anyone not already
schooled in the analysis of electrical machines. Fortunately, from our point of
view, it is nevertheless possible to understand the underlying basis of ﬁeld-
oriented control via a relatively simple graphical approach, but even for this we
have to make use of some ideas (such as ﬂux linkage, and space phasors) that we
have not discussed previously, so these are presented in the remainder of this
section.
In section 5 we take a fresh look at the production of torque in induction
motors, this time with the motor being supplied with controlled currents from
a voltage-source inverter. We begin by taking a physical viewpoint that yields
simple pictures that turn out to be accompanied by surprisingly simple formulae for
torque. More importantly, the subsequent discussion in sections 6 and 7 makes clear
what has to be done to achieve ‘ideal’ dynamic control of torque, something that
was considered impossible until power electronics arrived.
The practical implementation of ﬁeld-oriented control of torque is explored in
section 8 through a detailed examination of the modus operandi of a typical sen-
sorless control scheme. And ﬁnally, we look brieﬂy at direct torque control, an
alternative control strategy, in section 9.
In the remainder of this section we provide an introduction to some of the
graphical and circuit-based techniques that we will need in order to understand
torque control. The aim is to familiarize ourselves with the methodology and
techniques that are used, after which we can sidestep the actual analysis and instead
highlight the lessons that emerge from the torque-modeling exercise.
Readers who are comfortable with the distinction between transient and
steady-state conditions and familiar with space phasors, transformation between
reference frames, and the circuit modeling of electrical machines, may wish to skip
this (inevitably rather long) treatment.
4.2 Transient and steady states in electric circuits
Field-oriented control allows us to obtain (almost) instantaneous (step) changes in
torque on demand, and it does this by jumping directly from one steady-state
condition to another. This simple statement is seldom given the prominence it
deserves, but it is a simple truth, to be recalled whenever there is a danger of being
bamboozled by a surfeit of technospeak.
Given the very poor inherent response of the induction motor to sudden changes
in load or utility supply (see, for example, Figure 6.7), it will come as no surprise when
we learn later that this sudden transitionbetween steady states can only beachieved by
precise control of the magnitude, frequency and instantaneous phase of the stator
216
Electric Motors and Drives

currents. As will emerge, the key requirement of a successful sudden transition is that
it must not involve a step change in the stored energy of the system.
As an introduction to the underlying principle of changing from one steady state
to another without any transient, we can look at the behavior of a series resistor
and inductor circuit fed by an ideal voltage source (Figure 7.8). This is much simpler
than the induction motor (it only has one energy storage element – the inductor)
but it demonstrates the key requirement to be satisﬁed for transient-free switching.
First, we look at the current when the voltage is a step at t ¼ 0 (Figure 7.8(a)). The
steady-state current is simply V/R, but the current cannot rise instantaneously because
that would require the energy stored in the inductor (½Li2) to be supplied in zero
time, which corresponds to an impulse of inﬁnite power. So in addition to the steady-
state term iss ¼ V/R, there is a transient term given by itr ¼ (V/R)e(t/s), where the
time-constant, s ¼ L/R. The total current is the sum of the steady-state and transient
components, as shown by the lower dotted line in Figure 7.8(a).
Now consider a more relevant situation, where we wish the current to jump
suddenly from a steady state at one frequency (in this case zero amplitude at zero
frequency (i.e. d.c.) for t < 0) to a sinusoidal steady state for t > 0.
Figure 7.8(b) shows what happens if we make the sudden transition in the
applied voltage (from zero d.c.) at a point where the new voltage waveform is zero
but rising, i.e. at t ¼ 0. We note that the current does not immediately assume its
steady state, but displays the characteristic decaying transient, lasting for several
cycles before the steady state is reached, with the current ﬁnally lagging the voltage
by an angle f. Examination of the steady-state current waveform shows that the
current is negative as the voltage rises through zero, so this particular attempt to
Figure 7.8 Transition between steady states in series R–L circuit.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
217

jump straight into the steady state is clearly doomed from the outset because it
would have required the circuit to anticipate the arrival of the voltage by having
a negative current already in existence!
The fundamental reason for the transient adjustment in Figure 7.8(b) is that we
are seeking an instantaneous increase in the energy stored in the inductor from its
initial value of zero, which is clearly impossible. It turns out that if we want to avoid
the transient, we must make the jump without requiring a change in the stored
energy, which in this example means at the point when the current passes through
zero, as shown in Figure 7.8(c). The voltage that has to be applied therefore starts
abruptly at a value V sin f, as shown, and the current immediately enters its steady
state, with no transient term.
We will see later that the principle of not disturbing the stored energy is the key
requirement for obtaining step changes in torque from an induction motor.
4.3 Space phasor representation of m.m.f. waves
The space phasor (or space vector) provides a shorthand graphical way of repre-
senting sinusoidally distributed spatial quantities such as the m.m.f. and ﬂux waves
that we explored in Chapter 5. It avoids us having to consider individual currents by
focusing on their combined effects, and thus makes things easier to understand.
We begin by taking a fresh look at the rotating stator m.m.f., making the
reasonable assumption that each of the 3-phase windings produces a sinusoidally
distributed m.m.f. with respect to distance around the air-gap, which in turn implies
that the winding itself is sinusoidally distributed (rather than sitting in clearly deﬁned
groups of coils as in the real machine discussed previously). For convenience, we
will consider a 2-pole winding.
We can represent the relative position of the windings in space as shown in
Figure 7.9. In Figure 7.9(a) phases B and C are on open-circuit so that we can focus
on how the m.m.f. of phase A is represented. When the current in phase A is positive
(i.e. current ﬂows into the dotted end), we have chosen to represent its sinusoidal
m.m.f. pattern by a vector along the axis of the winding and pointing away from it
(Figure 7.9(a)), and so when the current is negative the vector points towards the coil
(Figure 7.9(b)). The length of the vector is directly proportional to the instantaneous
value of the current, as indicated by the relative sizes of the two vectors.
In Figure 7.9(c), phase A has its maximum positive current, while phases B and
C both have negative currents of half the maximum value. Because each m.m.f. is
distributed sinusoidally in space, we can ﬁnd their resultant (R) using the approach
that is probably more familiar in the context of a.c. circuits, i.e. by adding the three
components
vectorially.
In
this
particular
example,
the
resultant
m.m.f.
(Figure 7.9(d)) is co-phasal with the m.m.f. of phase A, but one and half times larger.
We can now use the approach outlined above to ﬁnd the resultant m.m.f. when
the windings are supplied with balanced 3-phase currents of equal amplitude but
218
Electric Motors and Drives

displaced in time by one-third of a cycle (i.e. 120). The axes of the phases are
displaced in space as shown in Figure 7.9, and the three currents are shown as
functions of time in the upper part of Figure 7.10. Four consecutive times are
identiﬁed, separated by one-twelfth of a complete cycle, or 30 in angle terms.
The lower part of the diagram represents the m.m.f.s in a space phasor diagram.
At each instant the three individual phase m.m.f.s are shown in magnitude and
position, together with the resultant m.m.f. At time t0, for example, the situation is
the same as in Figure 7.9, with phase A at maximum positive current and phases B
and C having equal negative currents of half the magnitude of that in phase A;
at t1 phase B is zero while phases A and C have equal but opposite currents; and
so on.
The four sketches suggest that the resultant m.m.f. describes an arc of constant
radius, and it can easily be shown analytically that this is true. So although each
phase produces a pulsating m.m.f. along its axis, the overall m.m.f. is constant in
amplitude (with a value equal to 1.5 times the phase peak), and it rotates at
a uniform rate, completing one revolution per cycle if the ﬁeld is 2-pole (as here),
half a revolution if 4-pole, etc. This is in line with our ﬁndings in Chapter 5.
We should note that although we have developed the idea of space phasors by
focusing on steady-state sinusoidal operation, the approach is equally valid for any
set of instantaneous currents, and is therefore applicable under transient conditions,
for example during acceleration when the instantaneous frequency of the currents
may change continuously.
Figure 7.9 Space phasor representation of m.m.f. waves.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
219

An alternative way of representing the resultant m.m.f. pattern produced by a set
of balanced 3-phase windings follows naturally from the discussion above. We
imagine a hypothetical single m.m.f. vector that has a constant magnitude but rotates
relative to the stator at the synchronous speed. This turns out to be an exceptionally
useful mental picture when we come to study the behavior of the inverter-fed
induction motor, because the currents are then under our control and we are able to
specify precisely the magnitude, speed and angular position of the stator m.m.f.
vector in order to achieve precise control of torque.
4.4 Transformation of reference frames
In the previous section we saw that the resultant m.m.f. was of constant amplitude
and rotated at a constant angular velocity with respect to a reference frame ﬁxed to
the stator. As far as an observer in the stationary reference frame is concerned, the
same m.m.f. could equally well be produced by a set of sinusoidally distributed
windings fed with constant (d.c.) current and mounted on a structure that rotated at
the same angular velocity as the actual m.m.f. wave. On the other hand, if we were
attached to a reference frame rotating with the m.m.f., the space phasor would
clearly appear to us to be constant.
Transformations between reference frames have long been used to simplify the
analysis of electrical machines, especially under dynamic conditions, but until fast
signal-processing became available that approach was seldom used for live control
Figure 7.10 Resultant m.m.f. space phasor for balanced 3-phase operation at four
discrete times, each separated by one-twelfth of a cycle (i.e. 30).
220
Electric Motors and Drives

purposes. We will see later in this chapter that the method is used in ﬁeld-oriented
controlschemes to transform the statorcurrents into a rotating reference framelocked
to the rotating rotor ﬂux space phasor, thereby making them amenable for control
purposes.
Transformation is usually accomplished in two stages, as shown in Figure 7.11.
The ﬁrst stage involves replacing the three windings by two in quadrature, with
balanced sinusoidal currents of the same frequency but having a 90 phase shift. In
this case the ‘fb’ stationary reference frame has phase a aligned with phase U. To
produce the same m.m.f., the two windings need either more turns or more
current, or a combination of both. This is known as the Clarke transformation.
The second stage (the Park transformation) is more radical as the new vari-
ables Id and Iq are in a rotating reference frame, and they remain constant under
steady-state conditions, as shown in Figure 7.11. Again we need to specify the
turns ratio and/or the current scaling. (Strictly speaking there is no need for the
intermediate (2-phase) transformation, because we can transform directly from
3-phase to two-axis, but we have included it because it is often mentioned in the
literature.)
It should be clear that the magnitude of the currents Id and Iq will depend on the
angle l, which is the angle between the two reference frames at a speciﬁed instant,
Figure 7.11 Transformation from 3-phase stationary axis reference frame to two-axis
(d–q) rotating reference frame.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
221

typically at t ¼ 0. As far as we are concerned, it is sufﬁcient to note that there are
well-established formulae relating the input and output variables, both for the
forward transformation (U, V, W to d, q) and for the inverse transformation, so it is
straightforward to construct algorithms to perform the transformations. We should
also note that while we have considered the transformation of sinusoidal currents,
the technique is equally valid for instantaneous values.
4.5 Circuit modeling of the induction motor
Up to now in this book we have developed our understanding by starting with
a physical picture of the interactions between the magnetic ﬁeld and current-
carrying conductors, but we quickly realized that in the case of the d.c. machine
(and the utility-fed induction motor) there was a lot to be gained by making use of
an ‘equivalent circuit’ model, particularly in terms of performance prediction. In so
doing we were representing all the distributed interactions of the motor by way of
their ultimate effect as manifested at the electrical terminals and the mechanical
‘terminal’, i.e. the output shaft.
As long ago as the early nineteenth century it was known that the a.c. trans-
former could be analyzed as a pair of magnetically linked coils, and it did not take
long to show that all of the important types of a.c. electrical machine can also be
analyzed by regarding them as a set of circuits, the electrical parameters (resistance,
inductance) of which were either measured or calculated. The vital difference
compared with the static transformer is that in the machine, the coils on the rotor
move with respect to those on the stator, thereby causing a variation in the extent of
the magnetic interaction between the rotor and stator. This variation turns out to be
the essential requirement for the machine to produce torque and to be capable of
energy conversion.
4.6 Coupled circuits, induced e.m.f. and ﬂux linkage
By ‘coupled circuits’ we mean two or more circuits, often in the form of multi-turn
coils sharing a magnetic circuit, where the magnetic ﬂux produced by the current in
one coil not only links with its own winding, but also with those of the other coils.
The coupling medium is the magnetic ﬁeld, and as we will see the electrical effect of
the coupling is manifested when the ﬂux changes.
We know from Faraday’s law that when the magnetic ﬂux (f) linking a coil
changes, an e.m.f. (e) is induced in the coil, given by
e ¼ N df
dt ;
i.e. the e.m.f. is proportional to the rate of change of the ﬂux. (The minus sign
indicates that if the induced e.m.f. is allowed to drive a current, the m.m.f. produced
by the current will be in opposition to that which produced the original changing
222
Electric Motors and Drives

ﬂux.) This equation only applies if all the ﬂux links all N turns of the coil, the
situation most commonly approached in transformer windings that share a common
magnetic circuit, and are thus very tightly coupled.
We have seen that windings for induction motors are distributed, and the ﬂux
wave produced by the current in the winding is also distributed around the air-gap.
As a result not all of the ﬂux produced by one winding links with all of its turns, and
we have to perform a summation (integration) of all the ‘turns times ﬂux that links
them’ contributions to ﬁnd the ‘total effective self ﬂux linkage’, which we denote
by the symbol psi (j). The e.m.f. induced when the self-produced ﬂux linkage
changes in, say, a stator winding (subscript S) is then given by
es ¼ djS
dt
In an induction motor there are three distributed windings on the stator, and either
a cage or three more distributed windings on the rotor, and some of the ﬂux produced
by current in any one of the windings will link all of the others. We term this ‘mutual
ﬂux linkage’, and often denote it by a double sufﬁx: for example, the symbol jSR is
the mutual ﬂux linkage between a stator winding and a rotor winding.
In the same way that an e.m.f. is induced in a winding when its self-produced
ﬂux changes, so also are e.m.f.s induced in all other windings that are mutually
coupled to it. For example, if the ﬂux produced by the stator winding changes, the
e.m.f. in the rotor (subscript R) is given by
eR ¼ djSR
dt
4.7 Self and mutual inductance
The self and mutual ﬂux linkages produced by a winding are proportional to the
current in the winding. The ratio of ﬂux linkage to the current that produces it is
therefore a constant, and is deﬁned as the inductance of the winding. The self
inductance (L) is given by
L ¼ Self flux linkage
Current
¼ jS
iS
;
while the mutual inductance (M ) is deﬁned as
MSR ¼ Mutual flux linkage
Current
¼ jSR
iS
The self and mutual inductances therefore depend on the design of the magnetic
circuit and the layout of the windings.
We can now recast the expressions for e.m.f. derived above so that they involve
the rates of change of the currents and the inductances, rather than the ﬂuxes. This is
a very important simpliﬁcation because it allows us to represent the distributed
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
223

effects of the magnetic coupling in single lumped-parameter electric circuit terms.
The self-induced and mutually induced e.m.f.s are now given by
eS ¼ L diS
dt ;
and
eR ¼ MSR
diS
dt
4.8 Obtaining torque from a circuit model
We represent the two sets of 3-phase distributed windings of the induction motor
by means of the six ﬁctitious ‘equivalent’ coils shown in Figure 7.12. (We are using
the well-proven fact that a cage rotor behaves in essentially the same way as one
with a wound rotor, as explained in Chapter 5.) The three stator coils remain
stationary, while those on the rotor obviously move when the angle q changes.
Because the air-gap is smooth, and the rotor is assumed to be magnetically
homogeneous, all the self inductances are independent of the rotor position, as are
the mutual inductances between pairs of stator coils and between pairs of rotor coils.
Symmetry also means that the mutuals between any two stator or rotor phases are
the same.
However, it is obvious that the mutual inductance between a stator and a rotor
winding will vary with the position of the rotor: when stator and rotor windings are
aligned, the ﬂux linkage will be maximum, and when they are positioned at right
angles, the ﬂux linkage will bezero. With windings that are distributed so asto produce
sinusoidal ﬂux waves, the mutual inductances vary sinusoidally with the angle q.
To a circuit theory practitioner, it is this variation of mutual inductance with
position that immediately signals that torque production is possible. In fact it is
straightforward (if somewhat intellectually demanding) to show that the torque
Figure 7.12 Coupled-circuit model of 3-phase induction motor.
224
Electric Motors and Drives

produced when the sets of windings in Figure 7.12 carry currents is given by the
rather fearsome-looking expression
T ¼
X
iSiR
dMSR
dq
What this means is that to ﬁnd the total torque we have to ﬁnd the summation of
nine terms, each of which represents a contribution to the total torque from one of
the nine stator–rotor pairs. So we need the instantaneous value of each of the
six currents, and the rate of change of inductance with rotor position for each
stator–rotor pair. For example, the term representing the contribution to torque
made by stator coil A interacting with rotor coil B is given by
TSARB ¼ iSAiRB
dMSARB
dq
In practice we can use various expedients to simplify the torque expression, for
example we know that mutual inductance is a reciprocal property, i.e. MAB ¼ MBA,
and we can exploit symmetry, but the important thing to note here is that it is
a straightforward business to ﬁnd the torque from the circuit model, provided that
we know the currents and the inductances.
4.9 Finding the rotor currents
The rotor currents are induced, and to ﬁnd them we have to solve the set of six
equations relating them to the applied stator voltages, using Kirchhoff ’s voltage law.
So, for example, the voltage equation below relating to rotor phase A includes
a term representing the resistive volt-drop, another representing the self-induced
e.m.f. and ﬁve others representing the mutual coupling with the other windings.
There are two more rotor equations and three similar ones for the stator windings.
yRA ¼ iRARR þ LRA
diRA
dt þ MRARB
diRB
dt þ MRARC
diRC
dt
þ MRASA
diSA
dt
þ MRASB
diSB
dt þ MRASC
diSC
dt
In the induction motor the rotor windings are usually short-circuited, so there is no
applied voltage and the left-hand side of each rotor equation is zero.
If we have to solve these six simultaneous differential equations when the stator
terminal voltages are speciﬁed (typical of utility-fed constant-frequency conditions),
we have a very challenging task that demands computer assistance, even under
steady-state conditions. However, when the stator currents are speciﬁed (as we will see
is the norm in an inverter-fed motor under vector control), the equations can be
solved much more readily. Indeed under steady-state locked rotor conditions we can
employ an armory of techniques such as j notation and phasor diagrams to solve the
equations by hand.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
225

We have now seen in principle how to predict the torque, and how to solve for
the rotor currents, when the stator currents are speciﬁed. So we are now in
a position to see what can be learned from a study of the known outcomes under
two speciﬁc conditions.
In the next section, we look at how the torque varies when the stator windings
are fed with a balanced set of 3-phase a.c. currents of constant amplitude but variable
frequency, and the rotor is stationary. Although this is not of practical importance, it
is very illuminating, and it points the way to the second and much more signiﬁcant
mode of operation, in which the net rotor ﬂux is kept constant at all frequencies;
this is dealt with in section 6.
5. STEADY-STATE TORQUE UNDER CURRENT-FED
CONDITIONS
Historically there was little interest in analysis under current-fed conditions because
we had no means of direct control over the stator currents, but the inverter-fed
drive allows the stator currents to be forced very rapidly to whatever value we want,
regardless of the induced e.m.f.s in the windings. Fortunately, we will see that
knowing the currents from the outset makes quantifying the torque very much
easier, and it also allows us to derive simple quantitative expressions that indicate
how the machine should be controlled to achieve precise torque control, even
under dynamic conditions.
To simplify our mental picture we will begin with the rotor at rest, and we
will assume that we have a wound rotor with balanced 3-phase windings that for
the moment are open-circuited, i.e. that no current can ﬂow in them. With
balanced 3-phase stator currents of amplitude Is we know from the discussion
above that the traveling stator m.m.f. wave can be represented by a single space
phasor that rotates at the synchronous speed, and that in the absence of any
currents in the rotor (and neglecting saturation of the iron) the ﬂux wave will be
in phase with the m.m.f. and proportional to it. This is shown Figure 7.13(a): in
this sketch the rotor and stator are stationary, but all the patterns rotate at
synchronous speed.
On the left of Figure 7.13(a) is a graphical representation of the sinusoidal
distribution of resultant current around the stator at a given instant, and the cor-
responding ﬂux pattern (dashed lines). Note that there is no rotor current. On the
right of Figure 7.13(a) is a phasor that can represent both the stator m.m.f. and what
we will call the resultant mutual ﬂux linkage, both of which are proportional to the
stator current. The expression ‘mutual ﬂux linkage’ in Figure 7.13(a) thus represents
the total effective ﬂux linkages with the rotor due to the stator traveling ﬂux wave.
In circuit terms, this ﬂux linkage is proportional to the mutual inductance between
the stator and rotor windings (M ), and to the stator current (IS), i.e. MIS.
226
Electric Motors and Drives

Now we short-circuit the rotor windings, and solve the set of equations for
the rotor currents in the steady state. In view of the symmetry it comes as no
surprise to ﬁnd that they also form a balanced 3-phase set, at the same frequency as
those of the stator, but displaced in time-phase. The resultant pattern of currents
in the rotor is shown on the left of Figure 7.13(b), together with the ﬂux pattern
(dashed lines) that they would set up if they acted alone. Note that the stator
currents that are responsible for inducing the rotor currents have been deliberately
suppressed in Figure 7.13(b), because we want to highlight the rotor’s reaction
separately.
The m.m.f. due to the rotor currents is represented by the phasor shown on the
right of Figure 7.13(b), and again this can also serve to represent the rotor self ﬂux
linkages (LRIR) attributable to the induced currents. It is clear that the time phase
shift between stator and rotor currents causes a space phase shift between stator and
rotor m.m.f.s, with the rotor m.m.f. broadly tending to oppose the stator m.m.f. If
the rotor had zero resistance, the rotor m.m.f. would directly oppose that of the
stator. The ﬁnite rotor resistance displaces the angle, as shown in Figure 7.13(b). We
will see shortly that this phase angle varies widely and is determined by the
frequency.
To ﬁnd the resultant m.m.f. acting on the rotor we simply add the stator and
rotor m.m.f. vectors, as shown in Figure 7.13(c). It is this m.m.f. that produces the
resultant ﬂux at the rotor, and we can therefore also use it to represent the net rotor
Figure 7.13 Space phasors of m.m.f. and ﬂux linkage under locked-rotor conditions.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
227

ﬂux linkage (jR). The ﬂux pattern at the rotor is shown by the solid lines in
Figure 7.13(c, left). (But we should note that the number of ﬂux lines shown in
Figure 7.13(a–c) is not intended to reﬂect the relative magnitudes of ﬂux densities,
which, if saturation was not present, would be higher in the two upper sketches.)
We should also note that, as expected, the behavior is independent of the rotor
position angle q, because the rotor symmetry means that when viewed from the
stator, the rotor always looks the same overall.
Close examination of Figure 7.13(c) reveals an extremely important fact. The
resultant rotor ﬂux vector (jR) is perpendicular to the rotor current vector. This
means that the rotor current wave (shown on the left of Figure 7.13(c)) is oriented
in the ideal position in space to maximize the torque production, because the largest
current is coincident with the maximum ﬂux density. If we look back to Figures 3.1
and 3.2, we will see that this is exactly how the ﬂux and current are disposed in the
d.c. machine, the N pole facing the positive currents and the S pole opposite the
negative currents.
When we evaluate the torque under these conditions, a very simple analytical
result emerges: the torque turns out to be given by the product of the rotor ﬂux
linkage and the rotor current, i.e.
T ¼ jRIR
The similarity of this expression to the torque expression for a d.c. machine is self-
evident, and further underlines the fundamental unity of machines exploiting the
‘BIl’ mechanism discussed in Chapter 1. We note also that in Figure 7.13(c, right),
one side of the right-angle triangle is jR while the other is proportional to the rotor
current IR. Hence the area of the triangle is proportional to the torque, which
makes it easy to visualize how torque varies with frequency, which we look at
shortly.
(The keen reader may recall that the mental pictures we employed in Chapter 5
were based on the calculation of torque from the product of the air-gap ﬂux wave
and the rotor current wave, and that these were not in phase, except at very low slip
frequency. The much simpler picture which has now been revealed – in which the
ﬂux and current waves are always ideally disposed as far as torque production is
concerned – arises because we have chosen to focus on the resultant rotor ﬂux
linkage, not the air-gap ﬂux: we are discussing the same mechanism as in Chapter 5,
but the new viewpoint has thrown up a much simpler picture of torque
production.)
We will see later that the rotor ﬂux linkage is the central player in the ﬁeld-
oriented or vector control methods that now dominate in inverter-fed drives. To
make full use of the ﬂux-carrying capacity of the rotor iron, and to achieve step
changes in torque, we will keep the amplitude of jR constant, and we will explore
this shortly. But ﬁrst we will look at how the torque depends on slip when the
amplitude of the stator current is kept constant.
228
Electric Motors and Drives

5.1 Torque vs slip frequency – constant stator current
An alert reader might question why the title of this section includes reference to slip
frequency, when we have speciﬁed so far that the rotor is stationary, in which case
the effective slip is 1 and the frequency induced in the rotor will always be the same
as the stator frequency. The reason for referring to slip frequency is that, as far as the
reaction of the rotor is concerned, the only thing that matters is the relative speed of
the traveling stator ﬁeld with respect to the rotor.
So if we study the static model with an induced rotor frequency of 2 Hz, the
torque that we predict can represent locked rotor conditions with 2 Hz on the
stator; or the rotor running with a slip of 0.1 with 20 Hz on the stator; or a slip of
0.04 with 50 Hz on the stator; and so on. In short, under current-fed conditions,
our model correctly predicts the rotor behavior, including the torque, when we
supply the stator windings at the slip frequency. (Note that all other aspects of
behavior on the stator side are not represented in this model.)
The variation in the ﬂux linkage triangle with slip frequency, assuming that the
amplitude of the stator current is constant, is shown in Figure 7.14. The locus of the
resultant rotor ﬂux linkage as the slip is varied is shown by the semi-circles. The
right-hand side relates to low values of slip frequency, where the rotor self ﬂux
linkage is much less than the stator mutual ﬂux linkage, so the resultant rotor ﬂux is
not much less than when the slip is zero. In other words, at low slips the presence of
the rotor currents has little effect on the magnitude of the resultant ﬂux, as we saw in
Chapter 5. Low-slip operation is the norm in controlled drives. The left-hand
drawing relates to high values of slip, where the large induced currents in the rotor
lead to a rotor m.m.f. that is almost able to wipe out the stator m.m.f., leaving a very
small resultant ﬂux in the rotor. We will not be concerned with this end of the
diagram in an inverter drive.
There is a simple formula for the angle f, which is given by
tan f ¼ us s
(7.1)
where s ¼ LR/RR, the rotor time-constant.
We noted earlier that the torque is proportional to the area of the triangle, so
it should be clear that the peak torque is reached when the slip increases from the
Figure 7.14 Locus of rotor ﬂux linkage space phasor as slip frequency varies.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
229

point T and moves to Tmax. At this point, f ¼ p/4 and the slip frequency is given
by uS ¼ 1/s ¼ RR/LR. Under these constant-current conditions, the slip at
which maximum torque occurs is much less than under constant-voltage
conditions, because the rotor self inductance is much larger than the rotor leakage
inductance.
6. TORQUE VS SLIP FREQUENCY – CONSTANT ROTOR
FLUX LINKAGE
As already mentioned, it is clear that to make full use of the ﬂux-carrying capacity of
the rotor iron, we will want to keep the amplitude of the rotor ﬂux jR constant.
Given that the majority of the rotor ﬂux links the stator (see Figure 7.13(c)), keeping
the rotor ﬂux constant also means that for most operating conditions, the stator ﬂux
is also more or less constant, as we assumed in Chapter 5.
In this section we explore how steady-state torque varies with slip when the
rotor ﬂux is maintained constant: this is illuminating, but much more importantly it
prepares us for the ﬁnal section, which deals with how we are able to achieve precise
control of torque even under dynamic conditions.
We can see from Figure 7.14 that to keep the rotor ﬂux constant we will have to
increase the stator current with slip. This is illustrated graphically in Figure 7.15, in
which the rotor ﬂux linkage jR is shown vertically to make it easier to see that it
remains constant. In the left-hand diagram, the slip is very small, so the induced
rotor current and the torque (which is proportional to the area of the triangle) are
both small. The rotor ﬂux is more or less in phase with the applied stator ﬂux
linkage because the ‘opposing’ inﬂuence of the rotor m.m.f. is small.
In the middle and right-hand diagrams the slip is progressively higher, so the
induced rotor current is larger and the stator current has to increase in order to keep
the rotor ﬂux constant.
There is a simple analytical relationship that gives the required value of stator
current as a function of slip, but of more interest is the relationship between the
Figure 7.15 Constant rotor ﬂux linkage space phasors at low, medium and high values
of slip, showing variation of stator current required to keep rotor ﬂux constant.
230
Electric Motors and Drives

induced rotor current and the slip. From Figure 7.15, we can see that the tangent of
the angle f is given by
tan f ¼ LRIR
jR
Combining this with equation (7.1) we ﬁnd that the rotor current is given by
IR ¼
jR
RR

uslip
(7.2)
The bracketed term is constant; therefore the rotor current is directly propor-
tional to the slip. Hence the horizontal sides of the triangles in Figure 7.15 are
proportional to slip, and since the vertical side is constant, the area of each
triangle (and torque) is also proportional to slip. To emphasize this simple rela-
tionship, the right-hand diagram in Figure 7.15 has been drawn to correspond to
a slip three times higher than that of the middle one, so the horizontal side of the
right-hand sketch is three times as long, and the area of the triangle (and torque)
is trebled.
We note that when the rotor ﬂux is maintained constant, the torque–speed
curve becomes identical to that of the d.c. motor. In this respect the behavior
differs markedly from that under both constant-voltage and constant-current
conditions, where a peak or pull-out torque is reached at some value of slip.
With constant rotor ﬂux there is no theoretical limit to the torque, but in
practice the maximum will be governed by thermal limits on the rotor and stator
currents.
For those who prefer the physical viewpoint it is worth noting that the results
discussed in this section could have been deduced directly from Figure 7.13(c),
which indicates that the resultant rotor ﬂux and rotor current waves are always
aligned (i.e. the peak ﬂux density coincides with the peak current density) so that
if the ﬂux is held constant, the torque is proportional to the rotor current. The
rotor current is proportional to the motionally induced e.m.f., which in
turn depends on the velocity of the ﬂux wave relative to the rotor, i.e. the slip
speed.
6.1 Flux and torque components of stator current
If we resolve the stator ﬂux-linkage phasor MIs into its components parallel and
perpendicular to the rotor ﬂux, the signiﬁcance of the terms ‘ﬂux component’ and
‘torque component’ of the stator current becomes obvious (Figure 7.16).
We can view the ‘ﬂux’ component as being responsible for setting up the rotor
ﬂux, and this is the component that we must keep constant in order to maintain the
working ﬂux of the machine at a constant value for all slips. It is clearly analogous to
the ﬁeld current that sets up the ﬂux in a d.c. motor.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
231

The other (‘torque’) component (which is proportional to the rotor current) can
be thought of as being responsible for nullifying the opposing effect of the rotor
current that results when the rotor conductors are ‘cut’ by the traveling ﬂux wave.
This current component is therefore seen as the counterpart of the armature or
work current in the d.c. motor.
Looking back to the left-hand diagram in Figure 7.15, we see that at small slips
(light load) the stator current is small and practically in phase with the ﬂux; this is
what we referred to as the magnetizing current in previous chapters. At higher slips,
the stator current is larger, reﬂecting that it now has a torque or ‘work’ component
in addition to its magnetizing component, which again accords with our ﬁndings in
previous chapters.
6.2 Establishing the ﬂux
In the previous discussion we assumed that steady-state conditions prevailed, with
the rotor ﬂux wave remaining of constant magnitude and rotating relative to the
rotor at the slip speed. We now look at how the ﬂux wave was established, and we
will see that the reaction of the rotor is very different from its subsequent steady-
state behavior.
We start with the rotor at rest, no current in any of the windings, and hence no
ﬂux. With reference to Figure 7.9, we suppose that we supply a step (d.c.) current
into phase A, which will split with half exiting from each of phases B and C, and
producing a stationary sinusoidally distributed m.m.f. that, ultimately, will produce
the ﬂux pattern labeled ‘ﬁnal state’ in Figure 7.17.
But of course the rotor windings are short-circuited, with no ﬂux through
them, and closed electrical circuits behave like many things in the physical world in
that they react to change by opposing it. In this context, if the ﬂux linking a winding
changes, Faraday’s law tells us there will be an induced e.m.f. The direction of the
e.m.f. is such that if it acts in a closed circuit and produces a current, the m.m.f.
produced by that current will be in opposition to the ‘incoming’ m.m.f./ﬂux.
(Formally this is expressed by Lenz’s law, and sometimes by the use of a negative
sign preceding the e.m.f. equation that quantiﬁes Faraday’s law.)
Figure 7.16 Flux and torque components of stator current.
232
Electric Motors and Drives

So when the stator m.m.f. phasor suddenly comes into existence, the immediate
reaction of the rotor is the production of a negative stationary rotor m.m.f. pattern,
i.e. in direct opposition to the stator m.m.f.: this is labeled ‘initial instant’ in
Figure 7.17. Instantaneously, the magnitude of the rotor m.m.f. is such as to keep
the rotor ﬂux linkage at zero, as it was previously.
However, because of the rotor resistance, the rotor current needs a voltage to
sustain it, and the voltage can only be induced if the ﬂux changes. So the rotor ﬂux
begins to increase, rising rapidly at ﬁrst (high e.m.f.) then with ever-decreasing
gradient leading to lower current and lower rotor m.m.f. The response is a ﬁrst-
order one, governed by the rotor time-constant, so after one time-constant (middle
sketch) the ﬂux linking the rotor reaches about 63% of its ﬁnal value, while the rotor
current has fallen to 37% of its initial value. Finally, the rotor’s struggle to prevent
the ﬂux changing comes to an end and the rotor ﬂux linkage reaches a steady value
determined by the stator current. If the resultant rotor ﬂux linkage is the target value
for steady-state running (jR), the corresponding stator current is what we previ-
ously referred to as the ‘ﬂux component’.
The physical reason why it takes time to build the ﬂux is that energy is stored in
a magnetic ﬁeld, so we cannot suddenly produce a ﬁeld because that would require
Figure 7.17 Diagrams illustrating the build-up of rotor ﬂux when a step of stator m.m.f.
occurs.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
233

an impulse of inﬁnite power. If we want to build up the ﬂux more rapidly, we can
put in a bigger step of stator current at ﬁrst, so that the ﬂux heads for a higher ﬁnal
value than we really need, and then reduce the current when we get close to the
ﬂux we are seeking.
We began this section with d.c. current in the stator, which in effect corre-
sponds to zero slip frequency, all the ﬁeld patterns being stationary in space. Because
there is no relative motion involved, there is no motional e.m.f. and hence no
torque. The ‘torque component’ only comes into play when there is relative
motion between the rotor and the rotor ﬂux wave, i.e. when there is slip. Obvi-
ously, to cause rotation the frequency must be increased, and as we have seen in the
previous section the stator current then has to be adjusted with slip and torque to
keep the rotor ﬂux linkage constant.
Finally, it is worth revisiting Figure 7.16 brieﬂy to reconcile what we have
discussed in this section with our picture of steady-state operation, where the rotor
currents are at slip frequency. On the left we have the ﬁctitious ‘ﬂux component’ of
stator current, which remains constant in magnitude and aligned with the rotor ﬂux
linkage, jR, along the so-called direct axis. When we ﬁrst established this ﬂux, the
rotor reacted as we have discussed above, but after a few time-constants the ﬂux
settled to a constant value along the direct axis in the direction of the ﬂux
component of the stator m.m.f. This is why the arrows on jR point in the same
direction as the stator ﬂux producing component.
However, we note from Figure 7.16 that the rotor ﬂux linkage phasor (LRIR) is
always equal in magnitude to the torque component of the stator mutual ﬂux
linkage phasor, but, as shown by the arrows, it is in the opposite direction. There is
therefore no resultant m.m.f. or tendency for ﬂux to develop along this, the so-
called quadrature axis. This is what we would expect in the light of the previous
discussion, where we saw that the reaction of mutually coupled windings to any
suggestion of change is for currents to spring up so as to oppose the change. In the
literature when, as here, the ‘torque’ current does not affect the ﬂux, the axes are
said to be ‘decoupled’.
7. DYNAMIC TORQUE CONTROL
If we want to obtain a step increase in torque, we have to change the rotor ﬂux or
the rotor current instantaneously, so as to jump instantaneously from one steady-
state operating condition to another. We have seen above that because a magnetic
ﬁeld has stored energy associated with it, it is not possible to change the rotor ﬂux
linkage instantaneously. In the case of the induction motor, any change in the rotor
ﬂux is governed by the rotor time-constant, which will be as much as 0.25 seconds
for even a modest motor of a few kW rating, and much longer for large motors.
This is not acceptable when we are seeking instantaneous changes in torque.
234
Electric Motors and Drives

The alternative is to keep the ﬂux constant, and make the rotor current change as
quickly as possible.
In the previous section, our aim was to grow the rotor ﬂux, which, because of its
stored energy, took a while to reach the steady state. However, if we keep the rotor
ﬂux linkage constant (by ensuring that the ﬂux component of the stator current is
constant and aligned with the ﬂux) we can cause sudden changes to the motionally
induced rotor current by making sudden changes in the torque component of the
stator current.
We achieve sudden step changes in the stator currents by means of a fast-acting
closed-loop current controller. Fortunately, under transient conditions the effective
inductance looking in at the stator is quite small (it is equal to the leakage induc-
tance), so it is possible to obtain very rapid changes in the stator currents by applying
high, short-duration impulsive voltages to the stator windings. In this respect the
stator current controller closely resembles the armature current controller used in
the d.c. drive.
When a step change in torque is required the magnitude, frequency, and phase
of the stator currents are changed (almost) instantaneously in such a way that the
rotor current jumps suddenly from one steady state to another. But in this transition
it is only the torque component of stator current that is changed, leaving the ﬂux
component aligned with the rotor ﬂux. There is therefore no change in the
magnitude of the rotor ﬂux wave and no change in the stored energy in the ﬁeld, so
the change can be accomplished almost instantaneously.
We can picture what happens by asking what we would see if we were able to
observe the stator m.m.f. wave at the instant that a step increase in torque was
demanded. For the sake of simplicity, we will assume that the rotor speed remains
constant, and consider an increase in torque by a factor of three (as between the
middle and right-hand sketches in Figure 7.15), in which case we would ﬁnd that:
•
the stator m.m.f. wave suddenly increases its amplitude;
•
it suddenly accelerates to a new synchronous speed, so the slip increases by
a factor of three;
•
it jumps forward to retain its correct relative phase with respect to the rotor
ﬂux; i.e. the angle between the stator m.m.f. and the rotor ﬂux increases from
f2 to f3.
Thereafter the stator m.m.f. retains its new amplitude, and rotates at its new speed.
The rotor current experiences a step change from a steady state at its initial slip
frequency to a new steady state with three times the amplitude and frequency, and
there is a step increase in torque by a factor of three, as shown in Figure 7.18(a). The
new current is maintained by the new (higher) stator currents and slip frequency.
We should note particularly that it is the jump in the angular position (i.e. space
phase angle) that accompanies the step changes in magnitude and frequency of the
stator m.m.f. phasor that allows the very rapid and transient-free control of torque.
Given that the deﬁnition of a vector quantity is one which has magnitude and
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
235

direction, and that the angular position of the phasor deﬁnes the direction in which
it is pointing, it is clear why this technique gained the name ‘vector control’.2
To underline the importance of the sudden change in phase of the stator current
(i.e. the sudden jump in angular position of the stator m.m.f. in achieving a step of
torque), Figure 7.18(b) shows what happens typically if only the magnitude and
frequency, but not the position, are suddenly changed. The steady-state conditions
are ultimately reached, but only after an undesirable transient governed by the
(long) rotor time-constant, which may persist for several cycles at the slip frequency.
The fundamental reason for the transient is that if the magnitude of the stator
current is suddenly increased without a change of position, the ﬂux and torque
components both increase proportionately. The change in the ﬂux component
portends a change in the rotor ﬂux (and associated stored energy), which in turn is
resisted by induced rotor currents until they decay and the steady state is reached.
7.1 Summary
This section has described the underlying principles by which very rapid and precise
torque control can be achieved from an induction motor, but we should remember
that until sophisticated power-electronic control became possible the approach
outlined here was only of academic interest. The fact that the modern inverter-fed
drive is able to implement torque control and achieve such outstandingly impressive
Figure 7.18 Step changes in rotor current. (a) Transient-free transition with correct
changes to magnitude, frequency and instantaneous position of stator m.m.f. wave (i.e.
vector control). (b) Same changes to magnitude and frequency, but not phase.
2 The term vector control has sometimes been misused to refer to drives that do not include ﬁeld
orientation. However, the term is so ubiquitous that we cannot avoid it, so when we refer to ‘vector
control’ we mean a proper ﬁeld-oriented system.
236
Electric Motors and Drives

performance from a motor whose inherent transient behavior is poor, represents
a major milestone in the already impressive history of the induction motor. The way
in which such drives achieve ﬁeld-oriented control is discussed next.
8. IMPLEMENTATION OF FIELD-ORIENTED CONTROL
An essential requirement if we are to unravel the workings of the overall scheme for
ﬁeld-oriented control is an understanding of the pulse-width modulation (PWM)
vector modulator/inverter combination that is a feature of all such schemes, so this is
covered ﬁrst.
8.1 PWM controller/vector modulator
In the inverters we have looked at so far (see section 4 of Chapter 2) we have
supposed that the periodic switching required to approximate a sinusoidal output
was provided from a master oscillator. The frequency of the oscillator determined
the frequency of the a.c. voltage applied to the motor, and the amplitude was
controlled separately. In terms of space phasors this allows control of the amplitude
and frequency, but not the instantaneous angular position of the voltage and current
phasors. As we have seen, it is the additional ability to make instantaneous changes
to the angular position of the output phasor that is the key to dynamic torque control,
and this is the key feature provided by the ‘vector modulator’.
We now explore what the inverter can produce in terms of its output voltage
phasor. We recall that there are six devices (switches) in three legs (see Figure 2.17),
and to avoid a short-circuit both switches in one leg must not be turned on at the
same time. If we make the further restriction that each phase winding must at all
times be connected to one or other of the d.c. link terminals, there are only eight
possible combinations, as shown in Figure 7.19.
The six switching combinations labeled 1–6 each produce an output voltage
phasor of equal amplitude but displaced in phase by 60 as shown in the lower part
of each diagram, while the ﬁnal two combinations have all three terminals joined
together so the voltage is zero. The six unit vectors are shown with their correct
relative phase, but rotated so as to bring U6 horizontal, in Figure 7.20.
Having only six states of the voltage phasor at our disposal is clearly not
satisfactory, because we need to exert precise control over the magnitude and
position of the voltage phasor at any instant, so this is where the ‘time modu-
lation’ aspect comes into play. For example, if we switch rapidly between states
U1 and U6, spending the same amount of time with each, we will effectively
have synthesized a voltage phasor lying half way between them, and of magni-
tude U1 cos 30 (or 86.7% of U1), as shown by the vector U(x) in the upper-
right part of Figure 7.20. If we spend a higher proportion of the time on U1 and
the remainder on U2, we could produce the vector U(y). As long as we spend
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
237

the whole of the sample time on either U1 or U6, we will end up somewhere
along the line joining U1 to U6.
We have used the terms ‘switch rapidly’ and ‘the time’ without specifying what
they mean. In practice, we would expect the modulating frequency to be perhaps
a few kHz up to the low tens of kHz, so ‘the time’ means one cycle at this
frequency, say 100 microseconds at 10 kHz. So for as long as we wished the voltage
phasor to remain at U(x), we would spend 50 ms of each sample period alternately
connected to U1 and U6.
Recalling that ideally we want to be able to choose both magnitude and
position it is clearly not satisfactory to be constrained to the outer edges of the
hexagon. So now we bring the zero vector into play. For example, suppose we wish
the voltage phasor to be U(z), as in the lower sketch. This is composed of (0.5)U5
Figure 7.19 Voltage phasors for all acceptable combinations of switching for a 3-phase
inverter.
238
Electric Motors and Drives

plus (0.3)U6. Hence in each modulating cycle of 100 ms, we will spend times of
50 ms on U5, 30 ms on U6 and 20 ms with one of the zero states.
The precise way in which these periods are divided within one cycle of the
modulating frequency is a matter of important detail in relation to the distribution and
minimization of losses between the six switching devices, but need not concern us
here. Sufﬁce it to say that it is a straightforward matter to arrange for digital software/
hardware that has input signals representing the magnitude and instantaneous position
of the output voltage phasor, and which selects and modulates the six switches
appropriately, to create the desired output until told to move to a new location.
When we introduced the idea of space phasors earlier in this chapter, we saw
that if we begin with balanced 3-phase sinusoidal voltages, the voltage phasor is of
constant length and rotates at a uniform rate. Looking at it the other way round, it
should be clear that if we arrange for the output of the inverter to be a voltage
phasor of constant length, rotating at a constant rate, then the corresponding phase
voltages must form a balanced sinusoidal set, which is what we want for steady-state
running.
We conclude that in the steady state, the magnitude of the input signal to the
vector modulator would have a constant amplitude and its angle would increase at
a linear rate corresponding to the desired angular velocity of the output. Clearly in
order to avoid having to deal with ever-increasing angles, the input signal to the
modulator will reset each time a full cycle of 360 is reached, as shown in Figure 7.21.
Away from the steady-state condition, for example during acceleration, we
should recall that to preserve the linear relation between torque and the stator
current component (IT), the ﬂux component of the stator current phasor (IF) must
Figure 7.20 Synthesis of intermediate voltage phasors in vector modulator.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
239

remain aligned with the rotor ﬂux. As we will see in the next section, this is ach-
ieved by deriving the angle input to the vector modulator directly from the absolute
angular position of the rotor ﬂux.
8.2 Torque control scheme
A simpliﬁed block diagram of a typical ﬁeld-oriented torque control system is
shown in Figure 7.22.
The ﬁrst and most important fact to bear in mind in the discussion that follows is
that Figure 7.22 represents a torque control scheme, and that for applications that
require speed control, it will form the ‘inner loop’ of a closed-loop speed control
scheme. The torque and ﬂux inputs will therefore be outputs from the speed
controller, as indicated in Figure 7.23.
Returning to Figure 7.22 it has to be acknowledged that it looks rather
daunting, and getting to grips with it is not for the faint-hearted. However, if we
examine it a bit at a time, it should be possible to grasp the essential features of its
Figure 7.22 Simpliﬁed block diagram of a typical ﬁeld-oriented torque control system.
Figure 7.21 Angle reference to vector modulator corresponding to constant frequency
operation of inverter. Note that the angle resets to zero at the end of each cycle.
240
Electric Motors and Drives

operation. To simplify matters, we will focus on steady-state conditions, despite the
fact that the real merit of the system lies in its ability to provide precise torque
control even under transient conditions.
Taking the broad overview ﬁrst, we can see that there are similarities with the
d.c. drive with its inner current (torque) control loop (see Chapter 4), notably the
stator current feedback and the use of proportional and integral (PI) controllers to
control the torque and ﬂux components of the stator current. It would be good if
we could measure the ﬂux and torque components directly, but of course the
current components do not have separate existences: they are merely components
of the stator current, which is what we can measure. The motor has three phases,
but because we are assuming that there is no neutral connection, it sufﬁces to
measure only two of the line currents (because the sum of the three is zero). The
information from these two currents allows us to keep track of the angular position
of the stator current phasor with respect to the stationary reference frame (qS) as
shown in Figure 7.24.
However, the stator current feedback signals are alternating at the frequency
supplied by the inverter, and the corresponding stator space phasor is rotating at the
Figure 7.24 Stator current and rotor ﬂux reference angles.
Figure 7.23 Schematic diagram of closed-loop speed control system.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
241

supply frequency with respect to a stationary reference frame. Before the ﬂux and
torque components of these signals (IF and IT) can be identiﬁed (and subsequently
fed back to the PI controllers) they must ﬁrst be transformed (see section 4) into
a reference frame that rotates with the rotor ﬂux. As explained previously, the rotor
ﬂux angle qRef is therefore an essential input to the transformation algorithm, as
shown in Figure 7.22.
The broken line in the middle of Figure 7.22 separates quantities deﬁned in the
stationary reference frame (on the right) from those in the rotating reference frame
(on the left). In the steady state, all those on the left are d.c., while all those on the
right are time-varying.
The reader might wonder why, when we follow the signal path of the
current control loops, beginning on the right with the phase current transducers,
there is no matching ‘inverse transform’ to get us back from the rotating
reference frame on the left to the stationary reference frame on the right. The
answer lies in the nature of the input signal to the PWM/vector modulator and
inverter, which we discussed above. Let us suppose that the motor is running in
the steady state, so that the output voltage phasor rotates at a constant rate with
angular frequency u. Under these conditions the rotor ﬂux phasor also rotates
with constant angular velocity u, so the angle of the ﬂux vector with respect to
the stationary reference frame (qRef) increases linearly with time. Also, in the
steady state, the output from the PI controllers is constant, so the angle qV
(Figure 7.22) is constant. Hence the input angle to the modulator (qm in
Figure 7.22), which is the sum of qRef and qV, is also a ramp in time, and this is
what provides the rotation of the output voltage phasor. In effect, the system is
self-sustaining: the primary time-varying input angle to the modulator comes
from the ﬂux position signal (which is already in the stationary reference frame),
and the PI controller provides the required magnitude signal (jVSj) and the
additional angle (qV).
Turning now to the action of the PI controllers, we see from Figure 7.22 that
the outputs are voltage commands in response to the differences between the
feedback (actual) values of the transformed currents and their demanded values. The
ﬂux demand will usually be constant up to base speed, while the torque demand will
usually be the output from the speed or position controller, as shown in Figure 7.23.
The proportional term gives an immediate response to an error, while the integral
term ensures that the steady-state error is zero. The outputs from the two PI
controllers (which are in the form of quadrature voltage demands, VF and VT) are
then converted from rectangular to polar form, to produce amplitude and phase
signals, jVSj and qV, where
jVSj ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
V 2
F þ V 2
T
q
; and qV ¼ tan1 VT
VF
;
as shown in Figure 7.25.
242
Electric Motors and Drives

The amplitude term speciﬁes the magnitude of the output voltage phasor (and
thus the three phase voltages applied to the motor), with any variation of the d.c.
link voltage (Vdc) being compensated in the PWM controller. The phase angle (qV)
represents the desired angle between the stator voltage phasor and the rotor ﬂux
phasor, both of which are measured in the stationary reference frame. The angle of
the rotor ﬂux phasor is qRef, so qV is added at the input to the vector modulator to
yield the stator voltage phasor angle qm, as shown in Figure 7.22.
We can usefully conclude our look at the steady state by adding the stator
voltage phasor to Figure 7.24 to produce Figure 7.26, to provide reassurance that, in
the steady state, the rather different approach we have taken in this section is
consistent with the classical approach taken earlier.
8.3 Transient operation
We concluded earlier that for the motor torque to be directly proportional to the
torque component of stator current, it is necessary to keep the magnitude of the
rotor ﬂux constant and to ensure that the ﬂux component of stator current is aligned
with the rotor ﬂux. This is achieved automatically because the principal angle input
Figure 7.26 Time phasor diagram showing stator voltage and current under steady-
state conditions.
Figure 7.25 Derivation of voltage phasor from ﬂux and torque components.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
243

to the vector modulator comes directly from the rotor ﬂux angle (qRef), as shown in
Figure 7.22. So during acceleration, for example, the instantaneous angular velocity
of the rotor ﬂux wave will remain in step with that of the stator current phasor, so
that there is no possibility of the two waves falling out of synchronism with one
another.
In section 7 we discussed a speciﬁc example of how to obtain a step change in
torque by making near-instantaneous changes to the magnitude, speed and position
of the stator m.m.f. wave, and we are now in a position to see how this particular
strategy is effected using the control scheme shown in Figure 7.22.
A step demand for torque causes a step increase in jVSj and qV at the output of
the rectangular to polar converter in order to effect a very rapid increase in the
magnitude and instantaneous position of the stator current phasor. At the same
time, the algorithm that calculates the slip velocity of the ﬂux wave (see later,
equation (7.3)) yields a step increase because of the sudden increase in the torque
component of stator current. The principal angular input to the vector modulator
(the ﬂux angle (qRef)) therefore changes gradient abruptly, as shown in
Figure 7.27.
Recalling that the steady-state stator frequency is governed by the angular
velocity of the ﬂux (i.e. dqRef/dt), this lines up with our expectation that (assuming
the rotor velocity is constant) the stator frequency will increase in order to increase
the slip and provide the new higher torque.
8.4 Acceleration from rest
Measured results showing how the real and transformed currents behave during
acceleration from rest to base speed, are shown in Figure 7.28. These relate to
a motor whose rotor time-constant is approximately 0.1 s, and cover a time of 0.5 s.
The upper diagram shows the demanded values for the transformed ﬂux and
torque components of stator current; the middle diagram shows the measured
(actual) ﬂux and torque components; and the lower shows the three phase
currents.
Figure 7.27 Flux angle reference showing response to a sudden step demand for
increased torque.
244
Electric Motors and Drives

At t ¼ 0, the ﬂux demand signal is set to its highest possible level of 30 A in
order to raise the ﬂux from zero as quickly as possible to its target value (10 A). Note
how the actual transformed ﬂux component of stator current (IT) follows the demand
signal very rapidly, with only slight overshoot. The signal IT is the transformed
version of the phase winding currents, so the fact that IT is on target is of course
indicative that the phase currents are established rapidly and held while the ﬂux builds
up, as we can see in the lower ﬁgure. During this period phase U carries a positive
current of 30 A while phases V and W each carry a negative current of 15 A.
After about one time-constant the demand is reduced to 10 A, and thereafter
held constant. This ‘rapid forcing’ ensures that by 0.2 s, the rotor ﬂux has been fully
established.
At 0.2 s, a torque producing demand is applied to accelerate the motor, and
maintained until 0.4 s, when the torque producing reference is reduced to zero, and
the motor stops accelerating.
We note the almost immediate and transient-free transition of the 3-phase
currents from their initial steady (d.c.) values immediately prior to 0.2 s, into constant
Figure 7.28 Experimental results showing build-up of ﬂux followed by sudden demand
for step increase in torque until motor reaches its target speed. (Courtesy of Emerson –
Control Techniques)
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
245

amplitude, ‘smoothly increasing frequency’ a.c. currents over the next 0.2 s. And
then there is a similarly near-perfect transition to reduced amplitude steady-state
conditions (at about 40 Hz) after 0.4 s. In the steady state, the torque component is
negligible because the motor is unloaded, and the stator current consists only of the
ﬂux component, which traditionally would be referred to as the magnetizing
current.
Younger readers will doubtless not require convincing of the validity of these
remarkable results, but they might ﬁnd it salutary to know that until the 1970s it was
widely believed that such performance would never be possible.
To conclude this section we can draw a further parallel between the ﬁeld-
oriented induction motor and the d.c. motor. We see from Figure 7.28 that as the
motor accelerates, the frequency of the stator currents increases with the speed. If
we stationed ourselves on the rotor of a d.c. motor as it accelerated, the rate at which
the current in each rotor coil reversed as it was commutated would also increase in
proportion to the speed, though of course we are not aware of it when we are in the
stationary reference frame.
8.5 Deriving the rotor ﬂux angle
Bynow,thekey role playedbytherotor ﬂuxangle shouldhave become clear, so ﬁnally
we look at how it is obtained. It is not practical or economic to ﬁt a ﬂux sensor to the
motor, so industrial control schemes invariably estimate the position of the ﬂux.
We will ﬁrst establish an expression for absolute rotor ﬂux angle (qRef) in the
stationary reference frame in terms of quantities that can either be measured or
estimated. Readers who ﬁnd the derivation indigestible need not worry as it is the
conclusions that are important, not the analytical detail.
If we let the angle of the rotor body with respect to the stationary reference
frame be q, then the instantaneous angular velocities of the rotor ﬂux wave and the
rotor itself are given by
uflux ¼ dqRef
dt
urotor ¼ dq
dt
The rotor motional e.m.f. is directly proportional to the rotor ﬂux linkage and the
slip velocity, i.e.
VR ¼ jR

uflux  urotor

;
and the rotor current is therefore given by
IR ¼ jR

uflux  urotor

RR
246
Electric Motors and Drives

The corresponding component of stator current is given (see Figure 7.16) by
IST ¼ LR
M IR
Combining these equations and rearranging gives
dqRef
dt
¼ MRR
jRLR
IST þ urotor ¼
 M
sjR

IST þ urotor
(7.3)
where s is the rotor time-constant. Hence to ﬁnd the rotor ﬂux angle at time t we
must integrate the expression above.
The mutual inductance M is a constant, and although the time-constant will
vary because the rotor resistance varies with temperature, it will change relatively
slowly, so we can treat it as constant, in which case the rotor ﬂux angle is given by
qRef ¼
Zt
0
urotordt þ M
s
Zt
0
IST
jR
dt
¼ q þ M
s
Zt
0
IST
jR
dt
Note that because of the symmetry of the rotor, we only need the time-varying
element of the rotor body angle (q), not the absolute position, so the constant of
integration is not required. (In contrast, for vector control of permanent magnet
motors, the absolute position is important, because the rotor has saliency.)
The various methods that are used to keep track of the ﬂux angle are what
differentiate the various practical and commercial implementations of ﬁeld-oriented
control, as we will now see.
If we have a shaft encoder we can measure the rotor position (q), or if we have
a measured speed signal, we can derive q by direct integration. This approach
involves the fewest estimations, and therefore will normally offer superior perfor-
mance, especially at low speeds, but is more costly because it requires extra trans-
ducers. We will refer to systems that use shaft feedback as ‘closed-loop’, but in the
literature they may be also referred to as ‘direct vector control’. In common with all
schemes, the second term has to be estimated.
Many different methods of estimating the instantaneous parameter values are
employed, but all employ a digital simulation or mathematical model of the motor/
inverter system. The model runs in real time and is subjected to the same inputs as
the actual motor, the model then being continuously ﬁne-tuned so that the pre-
dicted and actual outputs match. Modern drives measure the circuit parameters
automatically at the commissioning stage, and can even reﬁne them on a near-
continual basis to capture parameter variations.
The majority of vector control schemes eliminate the need for measurement of
rotor position, and instead the rotor position term in equation (7.3) is also estimated
from a motor model, based on the known motor voltage and currents. Rather
confusingly, in order to differentiate them from schemes that do have shaft
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
247

transducers, these systems are known as ‘open-loop’ or ‘indirect’ vector control.
The term ‘open loop’ is a misleading one because at its heart is the closed-loop
torque control shown in Figure 7.22, but it is widely used: what it really means is
‘no shaft feedback’.
The main problems of the open-loop approach occur at low speeds where
motor voltages become very low and measurement noise can render the algorithms
unreliable. Techniques such as high-frequency injection of diagnostic signals exist,
but are yet to ﬁnd acceptance in the market on standard motors. Open-loop
inverter-fed induction motors are usually unsuitable for continuous operation at
frequencies below 0.75 Hz, and struggle to produce full torque in this region.
An additional difﬁculty is that the signiﬁcant variation of rotor resistance with
temperature is reﬂected in the value of the all-important rotor time-constant s. Any
difference between the real rotor time constant and the value used by the model
causes an error in the calculation of the ﬂux position and so the reference frame
becomes misaligned. If this happens, the ﬂux and torque control are no longer
completely decoupled, which results in suboptimum performance and possible
instability. To avoid this, routines are included in the drive to provide ongoing
estimates of the rotor time constant.
9. DIRECT TORQUE CONTROL
Direct torque control is an alternative high-performance strategy for vector/ﬁeld
orientation, and warrants a brief discussion to conclude our look at contemporary
schemes. Developed from work ﬁrst published in 1985 it theoretically provides the
fastest possible torque response by employing a ‘bang-bang’ approach to maintain
ﬂux and torque within deﬁned hysteresis bands. Like ﬁeld-oriented control, it only
became practicable with the emergence of relatively cheap and powerful digital
signal processing.
Direct torque control avoids coordinate transformations because all the control
actions take place in the stator reference frame. In addition there are no PI
controllers, and a switching table determines the switching of devices in the
inverter in place of the PWM approach favored for ﬁeld-oriented control. These
apparent advantages are offset by the need for a higher sampling rate (up to 40 kHz
as compared with 6–15 kHz) leading to higher switching loss in the inverter;
a more complex motor model; and inferior torque ripple. Because a hysteresis
method is used the inverter has a continuously variable switching frequency which
may be seen as an advantage in spreading the spectrum of acoustic noise from the
motor.
We saw in the previous sections that in ﬁeld-oriented control, the torque was
obtained from the product of the rotor ﬂux and the torque component of stator
current. But there are many other ways in which the torque can be derived, for
248
Electric Motors and Drives

example in terms of the product of the rotor and stator ﬂuxes and the sine of the
angle between, or the stator ﬂux and current and the sine of the angle between
them. The latter is the approach discussed in the next section, but ﬁrst a word about
hysteresis control.
A good example of hysteresis control is discussed later in this book, in relation to
‘chopper drives’ for stepping motors in Chapter 9. Another more familiar example is
the control of temperature in a domestic oven. Both are characterized by a simple
approach in which full corrective action is applied whenever the quantity to be
controlled falls below a set threshold, and when the target is reached, the power is
switched off until the controlled quantity again drops below the threshold. The
frequency of the switching depends on the time-constant of the process and the
width of the hysteresis band: the narrower the band and the shorter the time-
constant, the higher the switching frequency.
In the domestic oven, for example, the ‘on’ and ‘off’ temperatures can be a few
degrees apart because the cooking process is not that critical and the time-constant
is many minutes. As a result the switching on and off is not so frequent as to be
irritating and wear out the relay contacts. If the hysteresis band were to be nar-
rowed to a fraction of a degree to get tighter control of the cooking temperature,
the price to be paid would be incessant clicking on and off, and shortened life of the
relay.
9.1 Outline of operation
The block diagram of a typical direct torque control scheme is shown in
Figure 7.29. There are several similarities with the scheme shown in Figure 7.22,
notably the inverter, the phase current feedback, and the separate ﬂux and torque
demands, which may be generated by the speed controller, as in Figure 7.23.
However, there are substantial differences. Earlier we discovered that the
inverter output voltage space phasor has only six active positions, and two zero states
Figure 7.29 Block diagram of typical direct torque control scheme.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
249

(see Figure 7.19), corresponding to the eight possible combinations of the six
switching devices. This means that at every instant there are only eight options in
regard to the voltage that we can apply to the motor terminals. In the ﬁeld-oriented
approach, PWM techniques are employed to alternate between adjacent unit
vectors to produce an effective voltage phasor of any desired magnitude and
instantaneous position. However, with direct torque control, only one of the eight
intrinsic vectors is used for the duration of each sample, during which the estimated
stator ﬂux and torque are monitored.
The motor model is exposed to the same inputs as the real motor, and from it
the software continuously provides updated estimates of the stator ﬂux and torque.
These are compared with the demanded values and as soon as either strays outside its
target hysteresis band, a logical decision is taken as to which of the six voltage
phasors is best placed to drive the ﬂux and/or torque back onto target. At that
instant the switching is changed to bring the desired voltage phasor into play. The
duration of each sample therefore varies according to the rate of change of the two
parameters being monitored: if they vary slowly it will take a long time before they
hit the upper or lower hysteresis limit and the sample will be relatively long,
whereas if they change rapidly, the sample time will be shortened and the sample
frequency will increase. Occasionally, the best bet will be to apply zero voltage, so
one of the two zero states then takes over.
9.2 Control of stator ﬂux and torque
We will restrict ourselves to operation below base speed, so we should always bear
in mind that although we will talk about controlling the stator ﬂux, what we really
mean is keeping its magnitude close to its normal (rated) value at which the
magnetic circuit is fully utilized. We should also recall that when the stator ﬂux is at
its rated value and in the steady state, so is the rotor ﬂux.
It is probably easiest to grasp the essence of the direct torque method by focusing
on the stator ﬂux linkage, and in particular on how (a) the magnitude of the stator
ﬂux is kept within its target limits and (b) how its phase angle with respect to the
current is used to control the torque.
The reason for using stator ﬂux linkage as a reference quantity is primarily the
ease with which it can be controlled. When we discussed the basic operation of the
induction motor in Chapter 5, we concluded that the stator voltage and frequency
determined the ﬂux, and we can remind ourselves why this is by writing the voltage
equation for the stator as
VS ¼ ISRS þ djS
dt
(We are being rather loose here, by treating space phasor quantities as real variables,
but there is nothing to be gained by being pedantic when the message we take away
250
Electric Motors and Drives

will be valid.) In the interests of clarity we will make a further simpliﬁcation by
ignoring the resistance voltage term, which will usually be small compared with VS.
This yields
VS ¼ djS
dt
or; in integral form; js ¼
Z
VS dt
The differential form shows us that the rate of change of stator ﬂux is determined by
the stator voltage, while the integral form reminds us that to build the ﬂux (e.g.
from zero) we have to apply a ﬁxed volt-second product, with either a high voltage
for a short time, or a low voltage for a long time. We will limit ourselves to the ﬁne-
tuning of the ﬂux after it has been established, so we will only be talking about very
short sample intervals of time (Dt) during which the change in ﬂux linkage that
results (DjS) is given by
DjS ¼ VSDt
As far as we are concerned, jS represents the stator ﬂux linkage space phasor, which
has magnitude and direction relative to the stator reference frame, and VS represents
one of the six possible stator voltage space phasors that the inverter can deliver. So if
we consider an initial ﬂux linkage vector jS as shown in Figure 7.30(a), and assume
that we apply, over time, Dt, each of the six possible options, we will produce six
new ﬂux-linkage vectors. The tips of the new vectors are labeled j1 to j6 in the
ﬁgure, but only one (j4) is fully drawn (dashed) to avoid congestion. There is also
the option of applying zero voltage, which would of course leave the initial ﬂux-
linkage unchanged.
In (a) option 4 results in a reduction in amplitude and (assuming anticlockwise
rotation) a retardation in phase of the original ﬂux, but if the original ﬂux linkage
Figure 7.30 Space phasor diagram of stator ﬂux linkage showing how the outcome of
applying a given volt-second product depends on the original phase angle. In (a) the
magnitude is reduced and the phase is retarded, while in (b) the magnitude is increased
and the phase is advanced.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
251

had a different phase, as shown in diagram (b), option 4 results in an increase in
magnitude and an advance in phase. It should be clear that outcomes vary according
to initial conditions, and therefore an extensive look-up table will be needed to
store all this information.
Having seen how we can alter the magnitude and phase of the stator ﬂux, we
now consider the ﬂux linkage phasor during steady-state operation with constant
speed and torque, in which case we know that ideally all the space phasors will be
rotating at a constant angular velocity.
The locus of the stator ﬂux linkage space phasor (jS) is shown in Figure 7.31. In
this diagram the spacing of hysteresis bands indicated by the innermost and
outermost dashed lines have been greatly exaggerated in order to show the
trajectory of the ﬂux linkage phasor more clearly. Ideally, the phasor should rotate
smoothly along the center dotted line.
In this example, the initial position shown has the ﬂux linkage at the lower
bound, so the ﬁrst switching brings voltage vector 1 into play to drive the amplitude
up and the phase forward. When the upper bound is reached, vector 3 is used,
followed by vector 1 again and then vector 3. Recalling that the change in the ﬂux
linkage depends on the time for which the voltage is applied, we can see from the
diagram that the second application of vector 3 lasts longer than the ﬁrst. (We
should also reiterate that in this example only a few switchings take place while the
ﬂux rotates through 60: in practice the hysteresis band is very much narrower, and
there may be many hundreds of transitions.)
We are considering steady-state operation, and so we would wish to keep the
torque constant. Given that the ﬂux is practically constant, this means we need to
keep the angle between the ﬂux and the stator current constant. This is where the
Figure 7.31 Trajectory of stator ﬂux linkage under steady-state conditions.
252
Electric Motors and Drives

torque hysteresis controller shown in Figure 7.29 comes in. It has to decide what
switching will best keep the phase on target, so it runs in parallel with the magnitude
controller we have looked at here. Each controller will output a signal for either an
increase or decrease in its respective variable (i.e. magnitude or phase) and these are
then passed to the optimal switching table to determine the best switching strategy
in the prevailing circumstances (see Figure 7.29).
As we saw when discussing ﬁeld-oriented control, it is not possible to make very
rapid changes to the rotor ﬂux because of the associated stored energy. Because the
rotor and stator are tightly coupled it follows that the magnitude of the stator ﬂux
linkage cannot change very rapidly either. However, just as with ﬁeld-oriented
control, sudden changes in torque can be achieved by making sudden changes to
the phase of the ﬂux linkage, i.e. to the tangential component of the phasor shown
in Figure 7.31.
Variable Frequency Operation of Induction Motors
253

CHAPTER EIGHT
Inverter-fed Induction
Motor Drives
1. INTRODUCTION
We have seen in Chapter 6 why the relatively simple and low-cost induction motor
is the preferred choice for many ﬁxed speed applications, and in Chapter 7 we saw
that by using ﬁeld orientation/vector or direct torque control, it is possible to
achieve not only steady-state speed control but also dynamic performance superior
to that of a thyristor d.c. drive. We have also seen that achieving such performance is
dependent on the ability to perform very fast/real-time modeling of the motor and
very rapid control of the motor voltage magnitude and phase.
In this chapter we look at some of the practical aspects of inverter-fed induction
motor drives and consider the impressive performance of commercially available
drives. We will also brieﬂy revisit the subject of control and, for the sake of balance,
look at an application where ﬁeld orientation struggles and direct torque control
simply doesn’t work.
While it comes as no surprise that the inverter-fed induction motor is now the
best-selling industrial drive, the adoption of the standard induction motor in
a variable-speed drive is not without potential problems, so it is important to be
aware of their existence and learn something of the methods of mitigation. We will
therefore consider some of the important practical issues which result from oper-
ating standard (utility supply) motors from a variable frequency inverter.
Finally, we will look at the most popular inverter circuits and highlight their
most important characteristics.
2. PULSE-WIDTH MODULATED (PWM) VOLTAGE SOURCE
INVERTER (VSI)
Several alternative drive topologies are applied to induction motors and the most
relevant of these are discussed later in this chapter. By far the most important for
most industrial applications has a diode bridge rectiﬁer (which only allows energy
ﬂow from the supply to the d.c. link) and a PWM VSI, as shown in Figure 8.1, and
this arrangement will now be the focus of our attention.
Most low-power inverters use MOSFET switching devices in the inverter
bridge, and may switch at ultrasonic frequencies, which naturally results in quiet
Electric Motors and Drives
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-098332-5.00008-5
 2013 Austin Hughes and William Drury.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
255j

operation. Medium- and larger-power inverters use insulated-gate bipolar transis-
tors (IGBTs) which can be switched at high enough frequencies to be ultrasonic for
most of the population. It should be remembered, however, that the higher the
switching frequency the higher the inverter losses, and hence the lower the efﬁ-
ciency, and so a compromise must be reached.
Variable-frequency inverter-fed induction motor drives are used in ratings up
to many megawatts. Standard 50 or 60 Hz motors are often used, though the use of
a variable-frequency inverter means that motors of almost any rated frequency can
be employed. By ‘rated’ frequency we mean the frequency at which the maximum
possible output voltage of the power converter is achieved. We saw in Chapter 7
that operation above rated frequency limits performance and so this needs to be
carefully considered when specifying a drive system. Commercially available
inverters operate with output frequencies typically from 0 Hz up to perhaps several
hundred Hz, and, in some cases, much higher frequencies. The low-frequency
limit is generally determined by the form of control, while the higher frequency
depends on the control and the physical dimensioning of the power electronic
circuits (where stray inductance can be a problem if interconnections become
too long).
The majority of inverters are 3-phase input and 3-phase output, but single-
phase input versions are available up to about 7.5 kW. Some inverters (usually less
than 3 kW) are speciﬁcally designed for use with single-phase motors, but these are
unusual and will not be considered further. The upper operating frequency is
generally limited by the mechanical stresses in the rotor. Very-high-speed motors
for applications such as centrifuges and wood working machines can be designed,
with special rotor construction and bearings for speeds up to 40,000 rev/min, or
even higher.
A fundamental aspect of any converter which is often overlooked is the
instantaneous energy balance. In principle, for any balanced 3-phase load, the total
load power remains constant from instant to instant, so if it were possible to build an
ideal 3-phase input, 3-phase output converter, there would be no need for the
Figure 8.1 Pulse-width modulated (PWM) voltage source inverter (VSI).
256
Electric Motors and Drives

converter to include any energy storage elements. In practice, all converters require
some energy storage (in capacitors or inductors), but these are relatively small when
the input is 3-phase because the energy balance is good. However, as mentioned
above, many low-power (and some high-power, rail traction) converters are
supplied from a single-phase source. In this case, the instantaneous input power is
zero at least twice per cycle of the mains (because the voltage and current go
through zero every half-cycle). If the motor is 3-phase and draws power at
a constant rate from the d.c. link, it is obviously necessary to store sufﬁcient energy
in the converter to supply the motor during the brief intervals when the load power
is greater than the input power. This explains why the most bulky components in
many power inverters are electrolytic capacitors in the d.c. link. (Some drive
manufacturers are now designing products, for connection to a 3-phase supply, with
low values of d.c. capacitance for undemanding applications where the subsequent
reduction in control/performance is acceptable, and this is discussed in section 7.)
The output waveform produced by the PWM inverter in an a.c. drive also
brings with it challenges for the motor, which we will consider later. When we
looked at the converter-fed d.c. motor we saw that the behavior was governed
primarily by the mean d.c. voltage, and that for most purposes we could safely
ignore the ripple components. A similar approximation is useful when looking at
how the inverter-fed induction motor performs. We make use of the fact that
although the actual voltage waveform supplied by the inverter will not be sinu-
soidal, the motor behavior depends principally on the fundamental (sinusoidal)
component of the applied voltage. This is a somewhat surprising but extremely
welcome simpliﬁcation, because it allows us to make use of our knowledge of how
the induction motor behaves with a sinusoidal supply to anticipate how it will
behave when fed from an inverter.
In essence, the reason why the harmonic components of the applied voltage are
much less signiﬁcant than the fundamental is that the impedance of the motor at the
harmonic frequencies is much higher than at the fundamental frequency. This
causes the current to be much more sinusoidal than the voltage (as previously shown
in principle in Figure 7.1), and this means that we can expect a sinusoidal traveling
ﬁeld to be set up in much the same way as discussed in Chapter 5.
In commercial inverters the switching frequency is high and the measurement
and interpretation of the actual waveforms is not straightforward. For example, the
voltage and current waveforms in Figure 8.2 relate to an industrial drive with
a 3 kHz switching frequency. Note the blurring of the individual voltage pulses
(a result of sampling limitations of the oscilloscope), and the near-sinusoidal
fundamental component of current. We might be concerned at what appear to be
spikes of current, but consideration of the motor leakage inductance and the limited
forcing voltage will conﬁrm that such rapid rates of change of current are impos-
sible: the spikes are in fact the result of noise on the signal from the current
transducer.
Inverter-fed Induction Motor Drives
257

Measurement of almost all quantities associated with power electronic
converters is difﬁcult, and great care must be taken in the selection of instrumen-
tation and interpretation of the results. A clear understanding of grounding is also
important when reviewing inverter d.c. link and output waveforms since unlike
a utility supply there is no clear, or at least simple, ground reference.
3. PERFORMANCE OF INVERTER-FED INDUCTION
MOTOR DRIVES
It has often been said that the steady-state performance of the inverter-fed
induction motor is broadly comparable with that of an industrial d.c. drive, but in
fact the performance of the inverter-fed induction motor is better in almost all
respects.
To illustrate this, we can consider how quickly an induction motor drive, with
ﬁeld-oriented control, can change the motor shaft torque. Remarkably, the torque
can be stepped from zero to rated value and held there in less than 1 ms, and this can
now be achieved by a motor even without a speed/position sensor. For comparison,
a thyristor-fed d.c. motor could take up to one-sixth of a 50/60 Hz mains cycle, i.e.
around 3 ms before the next ﬁring pulse can even initiate the process of increasing
the torque, and clearly considerably longer to complete the task.
The induction motor is also clearly more robust and better suited to hazardous
environments, and can run at higher speeds than the d.c. motor, which is limited by
the performance of its commutator.
Figure 8.2 Actual voltage and current waveforms for a star-connected, PWM-fed
induction motor. Upper trace – voltage across U and V terminals; lower trace – U phase
motor current. (See Plate 8.2)
258
Electric Motors and Drives

The ﬁeld-oriented control strategy, coupled with the ability, through a PWM
inverter, to change the stator voltage phasor in magnitude, phase and frequency
very rapidly, is at the heart of this exceptional motor shaft performance. The
majority of commercial inverter systems embody such control strategies, but the
quantiﬁcation of shaft performance is subject to a large number of variables and
manufacturers’ data in this respect needs to be interpreted with care. Users are
interested in how quickly the speed of the motor shaft can be changed, and often
manufacturers quote the speed loop response, but many other factors contribute
signiﬁcantly to the overall performance. Some of the most important, considering
a spectrum of applications, are:
•
Torque response: The time needed for the system to respond to a step change in
torque demand and settle to the new demanded level.
•
Speed recovery time: The time needed for the system to respond to a step
change in the load torque and recover to the demanded speed.
•
Minimum supply frequency at which 100% torque can be achieved.
•
Maximum torque at 1 Hz.
•
Speed loop response: This is deﬁned in a number of different ways but a useful
measure is determined by running the drive at a non-zero speed and applying
a square wave speed reference and looking at the overshoot of speed on the
leading edge of the square wave: an overshoot of 15% is – for most applications –
considered practically acceptable. For the user, it is always a good idea to seek
clariﬁcation from the manufacturer whenever ﬁgures are quoted for the speed
(or current/torque) loop bandwidth of a digital drive, because this can be
deﬁned in a number of ways (often to the advantage of the supplier and not to
the beneﬁt of the application).
Note that the above measures of system performance should be obtained under
conditions which avoid the drive hitting current limits, as this obviously limits the
performance. Tests should typically be undertaken on a representative motor with
load inertia approximately equal to the motor inertia.
Indications of the performance of open-loop and closed-loop ﬁeld-oriented
induction motor control schemes are shown in Table 8.1.
The performance of a closed-loop inverter-fed induction motor is comparable
to that of a closed-loop permanent magnet motor, which we discuss in Chapter 9.
This comes as a great surprise to many people (including some who have spent
a lifetime in drives). It is particularly noteworthy given that the majority of
induction motor drives use standard motors which were designed for ﬁxed speed
operation and broad application. Permanent magnet motors, however, tend to be
customized and many have been designed with relatively low inertias (long length
and small diameter rotor), which facilitate rapid speed changes, or high inertias
(short shaft and large diameter rotor), which promote smooth rotation in the
presence of load changes. Special induction motor designs are available, however,
and are sometimes the preferred solution.
Inverter-fed Induction Motor Drives
259

In the remainder of this section we give broad indications of the applicability of
the various drive conﬁgurations that should prove helpful when looking at speciﬁc
applications.
3.1 Open-loop (without speed/position feedback) induction
motor drives
Open-loop induction motor drives are used in applications that require moderate
performance (fans and pumps, conveyors, centrifuges, etc.). The performance char-
acteristics of these drives are summarized below:
•
There is moderate transient performance with full torque production down to
approximately 2% of rated speed.
•
Although a good estimate of stator resistance improves torque production at low
speeds, the control system will work with an inaccurate estimate, albeit with
reduced torque.
•
A good estimate of motor slip improves the ability of the drive to hold the
reference speed, but the control system will work with an inaccurate estimate,
albeit with poorer speed holding.
The performance of open-loop induction motor drives continues to improve.
Techniques for sensing the rotational speed of an induction motor without the need
for a shaft-mounted speed or position sensor pervade the technical literature, and
will in time ﬁnd their way into some commercial drives.
3.2 Closed-loop (with speed/position feedback) induction
motor drives
Induction motor drives with closed-loop control are used in similar applications to
d.c. motor drives (cranes and hoists, winders and unwinders, paper and pulp pro-
cessing, metal rolling, etc.). These drives are also particularly suited to applications
Table 8.1 Performance of open-loop and closed-loop ﬁeld-oriented induction motor
control schemes.
Open-loop
(without position
feedback)
Closed loop
(with position
feedback)
Torque response (ms)
<0.5
<0.5
Speed recovery time (ms)
<20
<10
Min. speed with 100%
torque (Hz)
0.8
Standstill
Max. torque at 1 Hz (%)
>175
>175
Speed loop response (Hz)
75
125
260
Electric Motors and Drives

that must operate at very high speeds with a high level of ﬁeld weakening, for
example spindle motors. The performance characteristics of these drives are
summarized below.
•
There is good dynamic performance at speeds down to standstill when position
feedback is used.
•
Only incremental position feedback is required. This can be provided with
a position sensor or alternatively a sensorless scheme can be used. The transient
performance of a sensorless scheme will be lower than when a position sensor is
used and lower torque is produced at very low speeds.
•
The robustness of the rotor makes induction motors particularly well suited to
high-speed applications that require ﬁeld weakening. The motor current
reduces as the speed is increased and the ﬂux is reduced.
•
Induction motors are generally less efﬁcient than permanent magnet motors
because of their additional rotor losses.
3.3 When ﬁeld orientation and direct torque control
cannot be used
Field orientation and direct torque control both rely upon modeling the ﬂux in the
motor. If a single inverter is being used to feed more than one motor as in
Figure 8.3, neither control strategy can be used.
In such systems individual motor control is not possible and the only practical
form of control is to feed the motor group with an appropriate voltage source, of
which the magnitude and frequency can be controlled. In fact, this is exactly the
traditional form of V/f control which predominated in early inverters. The output
frequency, and hence the no-load speed of the motor, is set by the speed refer-
ence signal, which was traditionally applied in the form of an analogue voltage
(0–10 V) or current (4–20 mA), but is now a digital signal. In most automated
applications the speed demand comes from a remote controller such as a PLC
(programmable logic controller), while in simpler applications there will be
a digital user interface on a control panel, or on the drive itself. The drive would
Figure 8.3 Simple V/f induction motor control strategy applied to a multi-motor
system.
Inverter-fed Induction Motor Drives
261

have the facility to adjust the V/f ratio. It would also have the facility to boost the
voltage at low frequencies to compensate for the dominating inﬂuence of the
stator winding resistance.
The fact that ﬁeld orientation schemes use a vector modulator/PWM controller
(see Figure 7.22) indicates that to adapt the ﬁeld-oriented scheme for multi-motor
drives is relatively simple: all that is required is to provide a sawtooth waveform of
the appropriate frequency as input to the vector modulator (see Figure 7.21).
Unfortunately, for direct torque control there is no such controller available and in
order to provide multi-motor operation manufacturers employing this control
strategy must also provide a PWM controller speciﬁcally to cater for such a load.
4. EFFECT OF INVERTER WAVEFORM AND VARIABLE
SPEED ON THE INDUCTION MOTOR
It is often stated that standard ‘off-the-shelf ’ a.c. motors can be used without
problem on modern PWM inverters. While such claims may be largely justiﬁed,
inverters do have some impact and limitations are inevitable. In particular, the
harmonic components of the voltages and currents create acoustic noise; they
always give rise to additional iron and copper losses; and they have other effects
which are perhaps less obvious. In addition, the operation of a standard motor –
with its cooling system designed to suit ﬁxed-speed operation – can be a signiﬁcant
limitation, and this will also be considered here.
4.1 Acoustic noise
Acoustic noise can usually be reduced by selecting a higher switching frequency
(at the cost of higher inverter losses). It is interesting to note that not all motors
exhibit the same motor characteristic when connected to identical inverters. The
differences are usually small, and relate primarily to the clamping of the iron in the
stator of the motor. Certain switching frequencies may excite resonances in some
motors often related to the tie bars between the end frames: these can be alarming
but easily remedied by changing the switching frequency, or, if the tie bar is external
to the motor frame, by adding a wedge to change the natural frequency of the bar.
4.2 Motor insulation and the impact of long
inverter-motor cables
The PWM waveform has another very signiﬁcant, but perhaps less obvious, effect,
related to the very high rates of change of voltage (dV/dt), which results in tran-
siently uneven voltage distribution across the motor winding, as well as short
duration voltage overshoots because of reﬂection effects in the motor cable. This
might damage the motor insulation.
262
Electric Motors and Drives

In a modern 400 V power converter the d.c. link voltage is around 540 V, the
voltage switches in a time of the order of 100 ns, and so at the terminal of the drive
there is a dV/dt of over 5000 V/ms. The motor insulation will usually cope with this
high dV/dt, but in practical installations the motor may be some distance, perhaps
hundreds of meters, away from the drive, and in this case we also have to recognize
that at these very high rates of change of voltage the cable behaves as a transmission
line. Hence when the voltage edge reaches the motor terminals, a reﬂection occurs
because the motor impedance is higher than that of the cable. Consequently, the
motor terminal voltage sees an overshoot of theoretically up to twice the step
voltage. Fortunately the inductance and the high-frequency resistance of the cable
mitigate these effects somewhat, causing the actual rise time to increase so that in
practice the voltage overshoot usually has little detrimental effect on the main motor
insulation systems between phases and from phase to earth, which are traditionally
designed to withstand overvoltage pulses. However, some low-cost (or very old)
motors may have relatively poor inter-phase insulation, which can lead to
premature insulation failure. Further, at each pulse edge the drive has to provide
a pulse of current to charge the capacitance of the converter-motor cable, and in
small drives, with very long motor cables, this charging current may, in extreme
cases, exceed the rated current of the motor, and determine the rating of the
required drive!
In case all this sounds alarming, the fact is that such problems are extremely
unusual and usually associated with systems employing very old or very-low-cost
motors with poor insulation systems, and/or with drive systems with rated voltages
over 690 V. Naturally enough, the problem is more pronounced on medium
voltage drives where it is not uncommon for dV/dt ﬁlters to be ﬁtted between the
inverter and the motor.
This phenomenon is now very well understood by reputable motor manu-
facturers. International standards on appropriate insulation systems have also been
published, notably IEC 34-17 and NEMA MG1pt31.
4.3 Losses and impact on motor rating
Operation of induction motors on an inverter supply inevitably results in additional
losses in the machine as compared with a sinusoidal utility supply. These losses fall
into three main categories:
•
Stator copper loss: This is proportional to the square of the r.m.s. current
although additional losses due to skin effect associated with the high-frequency
components also contribute. We have seen in Figure 8.2 that the motor current
is reasonably sinusoidal and hence, as we would expect, the increase in copper
loss is seldom signiﬁcant.
•
Rotor copper loss: The rotor resistance is different for each harmonic current
present in the rotor due to skin effect (and is particularly pronounced in deep bar
Inverter-fed Induction Motor Drives
263

rotors). Since the rotor resistance is a function of frequency, the rotor copper loss
must be calculated independently for each harmonic. While these additional
losses used to be signiﬁcant in the early days of PWM inverters with low
switching frequencies, in modern drives with switching frequencies above
3 kHz the additional losses are minimal.
•
Iron loss: This is increased by the harmonic components in the motor voltage.
For PWM voltage source inverters using sinusoidal modulation and switching
frequencies of 3 kHz or higher, the additional losses are therefore primarily iron
losses and are generally small, resulting in a loss of motor efﬁciency by 1–2%. Motors
designed for enhanced efﬁciency, e.g. to meet the IEC IE2/IE3 requirements or
NEMA EPACT and premium efﬁciency requirements, also experience a pro-
portionately lower increase in losses with inverter supplies because of the use of
reduced-loss magnetic steels.
However, the increase in losses does not directly relate to a derating factor for
standard machines since the harmonic losses are not evenly distributed through the
machine. The harmonic losses mostly occur in the rotor and have the effect of raising
the rotor temperature. Whether or not the machine was designed to be stator critical
(stator temperature deﬁning the thermal limit) or rotor critical clearly has a signiﬁcant
impact of the need for, or magnitude of, any derating. The cooling system (see
below) is at least as important, however, and in practice it emerges that a standard
motor may have to be derated by 5 or even 10% for use on an inverter supply.
Whereas a d.c. motor was invariably supplied with through ventilation provided
by an auxiliary blower, to allow it to operate continuously at low speeds without
overheating, the standard induction motor has no such provision. Having been
designed primarily for ﬁxed-frequency/full-speed operation, most induction
motors tend to be totally enclosed (IP44 or IP54) with a shaft-mounted fan at the
non-drive end running within a cowl to duct the cooling air over a ﬁnned motor
body as shown in Figure 8.4. Note also the cast ‘paddles’ on the rotor endrings
which provide internal air circulation and turbulence to assist with transmitting the
heat from the rotor to the stator housing and from there to the atmosphere.
Thus although the inverter is capable of driving the induction motor with full
torque at low speeds, continuous operation at rated torque is unlikely to be possible
because the standard shaft-mounted cooling fan will be less effective at reduced speed
and the motor will overheat. We should say, however, that for applications such as
fans and pumps where the load torque is proportional to the cube of the speed, no
such problems exist, but for many applications it is a signiﬁcant consideration.
4.4 Bearing currents
Scare stories periodically appear in the trade press and journals relating to motor
failures in inverter-fed a.c. motors. It should be said immediately that such failures
are rare, and mainly associated with medium voltage systems.
264
Electric Motors and Drives

With a balanced 3-phase sinusoidal supply the sum of the three stator currents in
an a.c. motor is zero and there is no further current ﬂow outside the motor. In
practice, however, there are conditions which may result in currents ﬂowing
through the bearings of a.c. motors even when fed with a sinusoidal 50 or 60 Hz
supply, and the risk is further increased when using an inverter supply. Any
asymmetric ﬂux distribution within an electrical machine can result in an induced
voltage from one end of the rotor shaft to the other. If the bearing ‘breakover
voltage’ is exceeded (the electrical strength of the lubricant ﬁlm being of the order
of 50 V) or if electrical contact is made between the moving and ﬁxed parts of the
bearing this will result in a current ﬂowing through both bearings. The current is of
low (often slip) frequency and its amplitude is limited only by the resistance of the
shaft and bearings, so it can be destructive. In some large machines it is common and
good practice to ﬁt an insulated bearing, usually on the non-drive end, to stop such
currents ﬂowing.
Any motor may also be subject to bearing currents if its shaft is connected to
machinery at a different ground potential from the motor frame. It is therefore
important to ensure that the motor frame is connected through a low-inductance
route to the structure of the driven machinery. This issue is well understood and
with modern motors such problems are rare.
4.5 ‘Inverter grade’ induction motors
Addressing the above potential hazards, induction motors bearing the name
‘inverter grade’ or similar are readily available. They would typically have reinforced
insulation systems and have a thermal capacity for a constant torque operating range,
often down to 30% of base speed, without the need for additional external cooling.
Figure 8.4 Typical shaft-mounted external cooling fan on an a.c. induction motor.
(Courtesy of Emerson – Leroy Somer.) (See Plate 8.4)
Inverter-fed Induction Motor Drives
265

Further they would have options to ﬁt thermocouples, a separate cooling fan (for
very-low-speed operation) and a speed/position feedback device.
International standards exist to help users and suppliers in this complex area.
NEMA MG1-2006, Part 31 gives guidance on operation of squirrel cage induction
motors with adjustable-voltage and adjustable-frequency controls. IEC 60034-17
and IEC 60034-25 give guidance on the operation of induction motors with
converter supplies, and design of motors speciﬁcally intended for converter supplies,
respectively.
5. EFFECT OF THE INVERTER-FED INDUCTION MOTOR ON
THE UTILITY SUPPLY
It is a common misconception to believe that the harmonic content of the motor
current waveform and the motor power-factor are directly reﬂected on the utility
supply, but this is not the case. The presence of the inverter, with its energy-
buffering d.c. link capacitor, results in near unity power-factor as seen by the utility
regardless of load or speed of operation, which is of course highly desirable. It is not
all good news, however, so we now look at the impact of an inverter-fed drive on
the utility.
5.1 Harmonic currents
Harmonic current is generated by the input rectiﬁer of an a.c. drive. The essential
circuit for a typical a.c. variable-speed drive is shown in Figure 8.1. The utility
supply is rectiﬁed by the diode bridge, and the resulting d.c. voltage is smoothed by
the d.c. link capacitor and, for drives rated typically at over 2.2 kW, the d.c. current
is smoothed by an inductor in the d.c. circuit. The d.c. voltage is then chopped up
in the inverter stage, which uses PWM to create a sinusoidal output voltage of
adjustable voltage and frequency.
While small drive ratings may have a single-phase supply, we will consider a 3-
phase supply. We see from Figure 8.5 that current ﬂows into the rectiﬁer as a series
of pulses that occur whenever the supply voltage exceeds that of the d.c. link, which
is when the diodes start to conduct. The amplitude of these pulses is much larger
than the fundamental component, which is shown by the dashed line.
Figure 8.6 shows the spectral analysis of the current waveform in Figure 8.5.
Note that all currents shown in spectra comprise lines at multiples of the 50 Hz
utility frequency. Because the waveform is symmetrical in the positive and negative
half-cycles, apart from imperfections, even-order harmonics are present only at
a very low level. The odd-order harmonics are quite high, but they diminish with
increasing harmonic number. For the 3-phase input bridge there are no triplen
harmonics, and by the 25th harmonic the level is negligible. The frequency of this
harmonic for a 50 Hz supply is 1250 Hz, which is in the audio frequency part of the
266
Electric Motors and Drives

electromagnetic spectrum and well below the radio-frequency part, which is
generally considered to begin at 150 kHz. This is important, because it shows that
supply harmonics are low-frequency effects, which are quite different from radio-
frequency EMC effects. They are not sensitive to ﬁne details of layout and screening
of circuits, and any remedial measures which are required use conventional elec-
trical power techniques such as tuned power-factor capacitors and phase-shifting
transformers. This should not be confused with the various techniques used to
control electrical interference from fast switching devices, sparking electrical
contacts, etc.
The actual magnitudes of the current harmonics depend on the detailed design
of the drive, speciﬁcally the values of d.c. link capacitance and, where used, d.c. link
Figure 8.5 Typical current from utility supply for a 1.5 kW 3-phase drive.
Figure 8.6 Harmonic spectrum of the current waveform shown in Figure 8.5.
Inverter-fed Induction Motor Drives
267

inductance, as well as the impedance of the utility system to which it is connected,
and the other non-linear loads on the system.
We should make clear that industrial problems due to harmonics are unusual,
although with the steady increase in the use of electronic equipment, they may be
more common in the future. Problems have occurred most frequently in ofﬁce
buildings with a very high density of personal computers, and in cases where most of
the supply capacity is used by electronic equipment such as drives, converters
and uninterruptible power supplies (UPS).
As a general rule, if the total rectiﬁer loading (drives, UPS, PCs, etc.) on a power
system comprises less than 20% of its current capacity then harmonics are unlikely to
be a limiting factor. In many industrial installations the capacity of the supply
considerably exceeds the installed load, and a large proportion of the load is not
a signiﬁcant generator of harmonics – uncontrolled (direct-on-line) induction
motors and resistive heating elements generate minimal harmonics.
If rectiﬁer loading exceeds 20% then a harmonic control plan should be in place.
This requires some experience and guidance can often be sought from equipment
suppliers. The good news is that if it is considered that a problem will exist with the
estimated level of harmonics then there are a number of options available to reduce
the distortion to acceptable levels.
A.C. drives rated over 2.2 kW tend to be designed with inductance built into
the d.c. link and/or the a.c. input circuit. This gives the better supply current
waveform and dramatically improved spectrum as shown in Figures 8.7 and 8.8,
respectively, which are again for a 1.5 kW drive for ease of comparison with the
previous illustrations. (In this case the inductance in each line is speciﬁed as ‘2%’,
which means that when rated fundamental current ﬂows in the line, the volt-drop
across the inductor is equal to 2% of the supply voltage.) Note the change of vertical
Figure 8.7 Input current waveform for the 3-phase 1.5 kW drive with d.c. and 2% a.c.
inductors.
268
Electric Motors and Drives

scale between Figures 8.5 and 8.7, which may tend to obscure the fact that the
pulses of current now reach about 5 A, rather than the 17 A or so previously, but the
fundamental component remains at 4 A because the load is the same. (Remember
that while we have just demonstrated the tremendous improvement in supply
harmonics achieved by adding d.c. link inductance to a 1.5 kW drive, standard
drives would rarely be manufactured with any inductance because while the
harmonic spectrum looks worrying, the currents are at such a low level that they
would rarely cause practical problems.)
Standard 3-phase drives rated up to about 200 kW tend to use conventional 6-
pulse rectiﬁers. At higher powers, it may be necessary to increase the pulse number
to improve the supply-side waveform, and this involves a special transformer with
two separate secondary windings, as shown for a 12-pulse rectiﬁer in Figure 8.9.
Figure 8.8 Harmonic spectrum of the improved current waveform shown in Figure 8.7.
Figure 8.9 Basic 12-pulse rectiﬁer arrangement.
Inverter-fed Induction Motor Drives
269

The voltages in the transformer secondary star and delta windings have the same
magnitude but a relative phase shift of 30. Each winding has its own set of six
diodes, and each produces a 6-pulse output voltage. The two outputs are generally
connected in parallel, and, because of the phase shift, the resultant voltage consists of
12 pulses of 30 per cycle, rather than the six pulses of 60 shown, for example, in
Figure 2.13.
The phase shift of 30 is equivalent to 180 at the ﬁfth and seventh harmonics
(as well as 17, 19, 29, 31, etc.), so that ﬂux and hence primary current at these
harmonics cancels in the transformer, and the resultant primary waveform
therefore approximates well to a sinusoid, as shown for the 150 kW drive in
Figure 8.10.
The use of drive systems with an input rectiﬁer/converter using PWM which
generates negligible harmonic current in the utility supply is becoming increasingly
common. This also permits the return of power from the load to the supply, and is
discussed later in section 7.
5.2 Power-factor
The power-factor of an a.c. load is a measure of the ratio of the average power to
the product of r.m.s. current and voltage, and is given by:
Power-factor ¼
Average power ðWÞ
r:m:s: volts  r:m:s: amps
With a sinusoidal supply voltage and a linear load the current will also be sinusoidal,
with a phase-shift of f with respect to the voltage. The power is then given by the
simple expression
W ¼ VI cos f;
Figure 8.10 Input current waveform for 150 kW drive with 12-pulse rectiﬁer.
270
Electric Motors and Drives

where V and I are r.m.s. values ( which are equal to the peak of the sinusoid divided
by O2), and so in this case the power-factor is equal to cos f. Clearly the maximum
possible power-factor is 1.
Unfortunately, in power electronic circuits either the voltage or the current or
both are non-sinusoidal, so there is no simple formula for the r.m.s. values or the
mean power, all of which have to be found by integration of the waveforms. There
is therefore no simple formula for the power-factor, but frequent use is made of
a related quantity known as the fundamental power-factor, given by
Fundamental power-factor ¼
Average power
Fundamental r:m:s: volts  Fundamental r:m:s: amps
The inﬂuence of the harmonics in the non-sinusoidal waveforms causes the actual
power-factor to be lower than the fundamental power-factor, so users should be
aware that when suppliers quote the power-factor of a drive they are usually
ignoring the harmonic currents, and quoting cos f, the fundamental power-factor.
It may be worth reminding readers who are not familiar with industrial energy
tariffs why maximizing the power-factor is important. All industrial users pay
primarily for the energy used, which depends on the integrated total of the product
of power and time, but most are also penalized for drawing the power at a low
power-factor (because the currents are higher and therefore switchgear and cables
have to be larger than would otherwise be necessary). In addition, there may be
a penalty related to the maximum volt-ampere product in a speciﬁed period, so
again a high power-factor is desirable.
Fortunately, for the diode bridge, which is the most common form of rectiﬁer
in a commercial a.c. drive, cos f is close to unity for all speed and load conditions.
To illustrate this, we can consider a typical 11 kW induction motor operating at
full-load, connected either directly to the mains supply or through an a.c. variable-
speed drive. Comparative ﬁgures are given in Table 8.2.
Table 8.2 Comparative ﬁgures for a typical 11 kW induction motor operating
at full-load.
At supply
terminals
DOL
motor
Motor via
a.c. drive
Notes on drive parameters
Voltage (V)
400
400
R.m.s. current (A)
21.1
21.4
No signiﬁcant change
Fundamental
current (A)
21.1
18.8
Reduced because magnetizing
current is not drawn directly from
the utility supply
Fundamental
power factor
(cos f)
0.85
0.99
Improved because input rectiﬁer
current is in phase with supply
voltage
Power (W)
12,440
12,700
Slight increase at full-load due to
drive losses
Inverter-fed Induction Motor Drives
271

A typical PWM induction motor drive improves the power-factor as compared
with a direct-on-line motor because it reduces the requirement of the supply to
provide the magnetizing current for the motor, but in return generates harmonics.
Power consumption at full-load is slightly increased due to losses of the drive.
6. INVERTER AND MOTOR PROTECTION
We have stressed before that power semiconductors are notoriously intolerant of
excess current, and so even in the earliest drives of this type, current was measured in
order to trip the drive when a simple current threshold was exceeded and before
damage to the inverter could be done. Some protection schemes would also sense
high currents and reduce the applied frequency to reduce the current.
The stored energy in the drive and motor inductances and capacitances also
needs to be handled without inducing voltages or currents which can damage the
system components. As previously mentioned, the basic power circuit is not
inherently capable of regenerating energy back into the supply, and, when a braking
duty results in energy ﬂow into the d.c link, a ‘dump resistor’ (see section 7) of the
right thermal rating needs to be provided in order to limit the circuit voltages.
Motor protection also requires current measurement, but here it is thermal
protection of the motor that is of concern. A very approximate indication of the
losses or heating effect in the motor is obtained by monitoring the product of the
square of the motor current times time. This so-called i2t protection is still referred
to as motor thermal protection in drives, though many of the thermal algorithms
now employed are very much more complex and accurate than their primitive
predecessors.
Modern commercial drives include extensive internal protection systems as well
as thermal motor modeling systems, but such drives are designed for a multiplicity of
applications and motor designs and so must be conﬁgured during installation.
Where multiple motors are fed from a single inverter (as described in section 3) each
motor must have individual thermal trips, because the fault current of an individual
motor may not be signiﬁcant when a large number of motors are connected to the
same inverter.
7. ALTERNATIVE CONVERTER TOPOLOGIES
7.1 Braking
The inverter (motor converter) that forms the output stage of the popular voltage
source a.c. motor drives described above inherently allows the motor to be
controlled in either direction of rotation and also allows power to ﬂow in either
direction between the d.c link and the motor, as shown in Figure 8.1.
272
Electric Motors and Drives

The simple diode rectiﬁer that is often used between the utility supply and the
d.c. terminals of the inverter does not allow power to ﬂow back into the supply.
Therefore an a.c. motor drive based on this conﬁguration cannot be used where
power is required to ﬂow from the motor to the utility supply. On the face of it,
this limitation might be expected to cause a problem in almost all applications
when shutdown of a process is involved and the machine being driven by the
motor has to be braked by the motor. The kinetic energy has to be dissipated, and
during active deceleration power ﬂows from the motor to the d.c. link, thereby
causing the voltage across the d.c. link capacitor to rise to reﬂect the extra stored
energy.
To prevent the power circuit from being damaged, d.c. link overvoltage
protection is included in most industrial drive control systems. This shuts down the
inverter if the d.c. link voltage exceeds a trip threshold, but this is at best a last resort.
It may be possible to limit the voltage across the d.c. link capacitor by restricting the
energy ﬂow from the motor to the d.c. link by controlling the slowdown ramp, but
again this is not always acceptable to the user.
To overcome the limited deceleration possible with the scheme described
above, the diode rectiﬁer can be supplemented with a d.c. link braking resistor
circuit as shown in Figure 8.11.
In this arrangement, when the d.c. link voltage exceeds the braking threshold
voltage, the switching device is turned on. Provided the braking resistor has a low
enough resistance to absorb more power than the power ﬂowing from the inverter,
the d.c. link voltage will begin to fall and the switching device will be turned off
again. In this way the on and off times are automatically set depending on the power
from the inverter, and the d.c. link voltage is limited to the braking threshold. To
limit the switching frequency of the braking circuit, appropriate hysteresis is
included in its control.
A braking resistor circuit is used in many applications where it is practical and
acceptable to dissipate stored kinetic energy in a resistor, and hence there is no
longer a limit on the dynamic performance of the system.
Figure 8.11 Induction motor drive with a braking resistor circuit.
Inverter-fed Induction Motor Drives
273

7.2 Active front end
The diode rectiﬁer does not allow power ﬂow from the d.c. link to the supply.
There are various circuits that can be used to recover the load energy and return it to
the supply, one of which is the active rectiﬁer shown in Figure 8.12, in which the
diode rectiﬁer is replaced with an IGBT inverter.
The labeling of the two converters shown in Figure 8.12 reﬂects their functions
when the drive is operating in its normal ‘motoring’ sense, but during active braking
(or even continuous generation) the converter on the left will be inverting power
from the d.c. link to the utility supply, while that on the right will be rectifying the
output from the induction generator.
This arrangement if often referred to as an ‘active front end’. Additional input
inductors are usually required to limit the unwanted currents generated by the
switching action of the inverter, but by using PWM control the front-end converter
can be controlled to give near sinusoidal current waveforms with a power-factor close
to unity, so that the complete system presents a near perfect load to the utility supply.
An active rectiﬁer is used where full four-quadrant operation and good quality
input waveforms are required. Cranes and elevators, engine test rigs and cable laying
ships are some applications where an active rectiﬁer may be appropriate. The
performance characteristics of this conﬁguration are summarized below:
•
Power ﬂow between the motor and the mains supply is possible in both
directions, and so this makes the drive more efﬁcient than when a braking
resistor is used.
•
Good quality input current waveforms, i.e. low harmonic distortion of the
utility supply.
•
Supply power-factor can be controlled to near unity.
Clearly, however, an active rectiﬁer is more expensive than a simple diode
rectiﬁer and a brake resistor.
7.3 Multi-level inverter
The inverter drive circuit described above is widely used in drive systems rated to
around 2 MW at voltages from 400 V but is more usually seen at higher voltages
including in medium voltage inverters (2–11 kV). At higher powers, switching the
current in the devices proves more problematic in terms of the losses, and so
Figure 8.12 Induction motor drive with active front-end rectiﬁer.
274
Electric Motors and Drives

switching frequencies have to be reduced. At higher voltages the impact of the rate
of change of voltage on the motor insulation causes switching times to be extended
and hence losses increase. In addition, while higher voltage power semiconductors
are available, they tend to be relatively expensive and so commercial consideration is
given to the series connection of devices, but here voltage sharing between devices
is a problem due to the disproportionate impact of any small difference between
switching characteristics.
Multi-level converters have been developed which address these issues. One
example from among many different topologies is shown in Figure 8.13.
In this example four capacitors act as potential dividers to provide four discrete
voltage levels, and each arm of the bridge has four series-connected IGBTs with
anti-parallel diodes. The four intermediate voltage levels are connected by means of
clamping diodes to the link between the series IGBTs. To obtain full voltage
between the outgoing lines all four devices in one of the upper arms are switched
on, together with all four in a different lower arm, while for say half voltage only the
bottom two in an upper arm are switched on. The quarter and three-quarter levels
can be selected in a similar fashion, and in this way a good ‘stepped’ approximation
to a sinewave can be achieved.
Clearly there are more devices turned on simultaneously than in a basic inverter,
and this gives rise to an unwelcome increase in the total conduction loss. But this is
offset by the fact that because the VA rating of each device is smaller than that of the
equivalent single device, the switching loss is much reduced.
For the inverter in Figure 8.13 the stepped waveform will have four positive, four
negative and a zero level(s). The oscilloscope trace in Figure 8.14 is from a six-level
Figure 8.13 Multi-level inverter (motor converter only shown).
Inverter-fed Induction Motor Drives
275

inverter, and clearly displays the six discrete levels. A sophisticated modulation
strategy is required in order not only to achieve a close approximation to a sinewave,
but also to ensure that the reduction of charge (and voltage) across a capacitor during
its periods of discharge period is compensated by a subsequent charging current.
Multi-level inverters have advantages over the conventional PWM inverter:
•
Higher effective output switching frequency for a given PWM frequency.
Smaller ﬁlter components are required.
•
Improved EMC due to lower dV/dt at output terminals – less stress on the
motor insulation.
•
Higher d.c. link voltages achievable for medium voltage applications due to
voltage sharing of power devices within each inverter leg.
However, there are drawbacks:
•
The number of power devices is increased by at least a factor of two; each IGBT
requires a ﬂoating gate drive and power supply; and additional voltage clamping
diodes are required.
•
The number of d.c. bus capacitors may increase, but this is unlikely to be
a practical problem as lower voltage capacitors in series are likely to be the most
cost-effective solution.
•
The balancing of the d.c. link capacitor voltages requires careful management/
control.
•
Control/modulation schemes are more complicated.
For low-voltage drives (690 V and below) the disadvantages of using a multi-
level inverter tend to outweigh the advantages, with even three-level converters
being signiﬁcantly more expensive than conventional topologies. However, multi-
level converters are entering this market, so the situation may change.
7.4 Cycloconverter
The operation of the cycloconverter was discussed in Chapter 2, so here – for
completeness – we need only to recap the main features and areas of application.
Figure 8.14 Six-level inverter output voltage waveform.
276
Electric Motors and Drives

The drive is inherently four quadrant; its maximum output frequency is limited
to approximately half the supply frequency by considerations related to harmonics
in the motor currents and torque, stability, and dimensions of the drive compo-
nents. It is thus suited to large low-speed drives, where motors can be made with
high pole-number and thus low synchronous speed. The complexity of the drive
means that only high power systems (>>1 MW), or specialized applications (e.g.
conveyor drives for use in hazardous environments) are economic. They are used on
large ball mills, mine winders, etc.
Due to the modulation of the converter ﬁring angles, the harmonic content of
the utility supply is complex and designs for appropriate harmonic ﬁlters become
somewhat involved.
7.5 Matrix converter
Recently, much attention has been focused in technical journals on the matrix
converter, the principle of which is shown in Figure 8.15.
The matrix converter operates in much the same way as a cycloconverter. For
example, if we assume that we wish to synthesize a 3-phase sinusoidal output of
a known voltage and frequency, we know at every instant what voltage we want,
say between the lines A and B, and we know what the voltages are between the
three incoming lines. So we switch on whichever pair of the A and B switches
connects us to the two incoming lines whose voltage at the time is closest to the
desired output line-to-line voltage, and we stay with it whenever it offers the best
approximation to what we want. As soon as a different combination of switches
would allow us to hook onto a more appropriate pair of input lines, the switching
pattern changes.
Because there are only three different incoming line-to-line voltages to choose
from, we cannot expect to synthesize a decent sinusoidal waveform with simple
switching, so in order to obtain a better approximation to a sinusoidal waveform we
must use chopping. This means that the switches have to be capable of operating at
much higher frequencies than fundamental output frequency, so that switching loss
becomes an important consideration.
Figure 8.15 Matrix converter.
Inverter-fed Induction Motor Drives
277

While the basic circuit is not new, recent advances in power devices offer the
potential to overcome many of the drawbacks inherent in the early implementa-
tions that used discrete IGBTs due to the lack of suitable packaged modules. On the
other hand, the fact that the output voltage is limited to a maximum of 86% of the
utility supply voltage means that applications in the commercial industrial market,
where standard motors predominate, remain largely problematic. However, there
appear to be good prospects in some aerospace applications and possibly in some
speciﬁc areas of the industrial drives market, notably integrated motors (where the
drive is built into the motor, the windings of which can therefore be designed to suit
the voltage available).
7.6 PWM voltage source inverter with small d.c.
smoothing capacitance
For a 3-phase rectiﬁer, the d.c. link capacitance value can be much reduced
provided that the modulation strategy in the inverter is adapted to compensate for
the resulting voltage ripple. The input current waveform is then improved, as
compared with the very peaky waveform seen in Figure 8.5. This is a useful
technique for cost-sensitive applications where harmonic current is a critical factor.
However, there are disadvantages resulting from the reduced capacitance, in that
the d.c. link voltage becomes more sensitive to transient conditions, both from
rapid variations in load and from supply disturbances. This approach is therefore
most attractive in applications where the load does not exhibit highly dynamic
behavior.
Another practical factor is that the capacitor now has a disproportionately high
ripple current, so that a conventional aluminum electrolytic capacitor cannot be
used and a more expensive capacitor with a plastic dielectric is required.
Converter circuits with zero d.c. link capacitance exist in the literature. They
have no energy storage, so it is evident that this topology is another form of matrix
converter, with the output voltage being made up of ‘chunks’ of the utility supply
waveform.
7.7 Current source induction motor drives
The majority of inverters used in motor drives are voltage source inverters (VSIs), in
which the output voltage to the motor is controlled to suit the operating conditions
of the motor. Current source inverters (CSIs) are still sometimes used, particularly
for high-power applications, and warrant a brief mention.
The forced-commutated current-fed induction motor drive, shown in
Figure 8.16, was strongly favored for single motor applications for a long period,
and was available at power levels in the range 50–3500 kW at voltages normally up
to 690 V. High-voltage versions at 3.3/6.6 kV were also developed but they have
not proved to be economically attractive. Today it is not seen as having merit and
278
Electric Motors and Drives

has virtually disappeared from the portfolios of most companies. A brief description
is included here for interest only.
The d.c. link current Id, taken from a ‘stiff’ current source (usually in the form of
a thyristor bridge and a series inductor in the d.c. link), is sequentially switched at
the required frequency into the stator windings of the induction motor. The
capacitors and extra series diodes provide the mechanism for commutating the
thyristors by cleverly exploiting the reversal of voltage resulting from resonance
between the capacitor and the motor leakage reactance. The resultant motor
voltage waveform is, perhaps somewhat surprisingly, approximately sinusoidal apart
from the superposition of voltage spikes caused by the rise and fall of machine
current at each commutation.
The operating frequency range is typically 5–60 Hz, the upper limit being set by
the relatively slow commutation process. Below 5 Hz, torque pulsations can be
problematic but PWM control of the current can be used at low frequencies to ease
the problem.
This system was most commonly used for single motor applications such as fans,
pumps, extruders, and compressors, where very good dynamic performance is not
necessary and a supply power-factor which decreases with speed is acceptable.
Figure 8.16 Forced-commutated current-fed induction motor drive (motor converter
only shown).
Inverter-fed Induction Motor Drives
279

CHAPTER NINE
Synchronous and Brushless
Permanent Magnet Machines
and Drives
1. INTRODUCTION
Chapters 6 to 8 have described the virtues of the induction motor and how, when
combined with power electronic control, it is capable of meeting the performance
and efﬁciency requirements of many of the most demanding applications. In this
chapter another group of a.c. motors is described. In all of them the electrical power
that is converted to mechanical power is fed into the stator, so, as with the induction
motor, there are no sliding contacts in the main power circuits. All also have stators
that are identical (or very similar) to the induction motor, although some new
constructional and winding techniques involving segmented construction are being
applied at the lower-power end to improve the power density of the machine and/
or reduce cost.
It has to be admitted that the industrial and academic communities have served
to make life confusing in this area by giving an array of different names to essentially
the same machine, so we begin by looking at the terminology. The names we will
encounter include:
1. Conventional synchronous machine with its rotor ﬁeld winding (excited-rotor).
This is the only machine that may have brushes, but even then they will only
carry the rotor excitation current, not the main a.c. power input.
2. Permanent magnet synchronous machine with permanent magnets replacing the
rotor ﬁeld winding.
3. Brushless permanent magnet synchronous motor (same as (2)). The preﬁx ‘brushless’ is
superﬂuous.
4. Brushless a.c. motor (same as (2)).
5. Brushless d.c. motor (same as (2) except for detailed differences in the ﬁeld
patterns). This name was coined in the 1970s to describe ‘inside-out’ motors that
were intended as direct replacements for conventional d.c. motors, and in this
sense it has some justiﬁcation.
6. Permanent magnet servo motor (same as (2)).
We begin by looking at motors that are intended, or at least have the capability,
to be operated directly off the utility supply, usually at either 50 or 60 Hz. These are
known as ‘synchronous’ motors, and they operate at a speciﬁc and constant speed
Electric Motors and Drives
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-098332-5.00009-7
 2013 Austin Hughes and William Drury.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
281j

for a wide range of loads, and therefore can be used in preference to induction
motors when precise (within the tolerance of the utility frequency), constant speed
operation is essential: there is no load-dependent slip as is unavoidable with the
induction motor. These machines are available over a very wide range from tiny
single-phase versions in domestic clocks to multi-megawatt machines in large
industrial applications such as gas compressors. The clock application means that
utility companies have a responsibility to ensure that the average frequency over
a 24-hour period always has to be precisely the rated frequency of the supply in
order to keep us all on time. Ironically, in order to do this, they control the speed of
very large, turbine-driven, synchronous machines that generate the vast majority of
the electrical power throughout the world.
To overcome the ﬁxed-speed limitation that results from the constant
frequency of the utility supply, inverter-fed synchronous motor drives have been
developed. We will see that all forms of this generic technology use a variable-
frequency inverter to provide for variation of the synchronous speed, but that in
almost all cases, the switching pattern of the inverter (and hence the frequency) is
determined by the rotor position and not by an external oscillator. In such so-called
self-synchronous drives, the rotor is incapable of losing synchronism and stalling
(which is one of the main drawbacks of the utility-fed machine).
We will also see how ﬁeld-oriented control can be applied to synchronous
machines to achieve the highest levels of performance and efﬁciency with machines
which have higher inherent power densities than the equivalent induction motors.
Finally, reluctance motors will be considered brieﬂy. Their simple rotor
construction appears to offer great opportunity, but we will see that their low
operating power-factor restricts their star rating. It does, however, remain
a commercially available product and warrants review. For completeness hysteresis
motors also get a mention.
2. SYNCHRONOUS MOTORS
In Chapter 5 we saw that the 3-phase stator windings of an induction motor
produce a sinusoidal rotating magnetic ﬁeld in the air-gap. The speed of rotation of
the ﬁeld (the synchronous speed) was shown to be directly proportional to the
supply frequency, and inversely proportional to the pole-number of the winding.
We also saw that in the induction motor the rotor is dragged along by the ﬁeld, but
that the higher the load on the shaft, the more the rotor has to slip with respect to
the ﬁeld in order to induce the rotor currents required to produce the torque. Thus
although at no-load the speed of the rotor can be close to the synchronous speed, it
must always be less; and as the load increases, the speed has to fall.
In the synchronous motor, the stator windings are essentially the same as in the
induction motor, so when connected to the 3-phase supply, a rotating magnetic
282
Electric Motors and Drives

ﬁeld is produced. However, instead of having a cylindrical rotor with a cage
winding, the synchronous motor has a rotor with either a d.c. excited winding
(supplied via sliprings, or on larger machines an auxiliary exciter1), or permanent
magnets, designed to cause the rotor to ‘lock on’ or ‘synchronize with’ the rotating
magnetic ﬁeld produced by the stator. Once the rotor is synchronized, it will run at
exactly the same speed as the rotating ﬁeld despite load variation, so under constant-
frequency operation the speed will remain constant as long as the supply frequency
is stable.
As previously shown, the synchronous speed (in rev/min) is given by the
expression
Ns ¼ 120f
p
where f is the supply frequency and p is the pole-number of the winding. Hence for
2-, 4- and 6-pole industrial motors the running speeds on a 50 Hz supply are 3000,
1500 and 1000 rev/min, while on a 60 Hz supply they become 3600, 1800 and
1200 rev/min, respectively. At the other extreme, the little motor in a timeswitch
with its cup-shaped rotor with 20 axially projecting ﬁngers and a circular coil in the
middle is a 20-pole reluctance (synchronous) motor that will run at 300 rev/min
when fed from a 50 Hz supply. Users who want speeds different from these discrete
values will be disappointed, unless they are prepared to invest in a variable-
frequency inverter.
With the synchronous machine, we ﬁnd that there is a limit to the maximum
(pull-out) torque which can be developed before the rotor is forced out of
synchronism with the rotating ﬁeld. This ‘pull-out’ torque will typically be 1.5
times the continuous rated torque but can be designed to be as high as 4 or even 6
times higher in the case of high-performance permanent magnet motors where, for
example, high accelerating torques are needed for relatively short periods. For all
torques below pull-out the steady running speed will be absolutely constant. The
torque–speed curve is therefore simply a vertical line at the synchronous speed, as
shown in Figure 9.1. We can see from Figure 9.1 that the vertical line extends into
quadrant 2, which indicates that if we try to force the speed above the synchronous
speed the machine will act as a generator.
Traditionally, utility-fed synchronous motors were used where a constant speed
is required, high efﬁciency desirable, and power-factor controllable. They were also
used in some applications where a number of motors were required to run at
1 An auxiliary exciter is simply a second, smaller machine with a 3-phase stator and rotor winding,
mounted on the same shaft. A 3-phase supply on the stator is ‘transformer coupled’ to the rotor
winding. The induced e.m.f. in the rotor is rectiﬁed and fed to the main motor ﬁeld winding. The
phase rotation of the supply to the auxiliary stator is opposite to that of the main motor so that when
the motor comes to high speed the induced rotor e.m.f. remains high.
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
283

precisely the same speed. However, a group of utility-fed synchronous motors
could not always replace mechanical shafting2 because while their rotational speed
would always be matched, the precise relative rotor angle of each motor would vary
depending on the load on the individual motor shafts.
We will now look brieﬂy at the various types of synchronous motor,
mentioning the advantages and disadvantages of each. The excited-rotor type is
considered ﬁrst because of its importance in large sizes but also because its behavior
can be readily analyzed, and its mechanism of operation illuminated, by means of
a relatively simple equivalent circuit. We then consider the permanent magnet type
that is the most numerous in the drives arena, from which we can also beneﬁt by
dint of the use of the same equivalent circuit. Parallels are drawn with both the d.c.
motor and the induction motor to emphasize that despite their obvious differences,
most electrical machines also have striking similarities.
2.1 Excited-rotor motors
The rotor of a conventional synchronous machine carries a ‘ﬁeld’ winding which is
supplied with direct current either via a pair of sliprings on the shaft, or via an
auxiliary brushless exciter on the same shaft. The ﬁeld winding is designed to
produce an air-gap ﬁeld of the same pole-number and spatial distribution (usually
sinusoidal) as that produced by the stator winding. The rotor may be more or less
cylindrical, with the ﬁeld winding distributed in slots (Figure 9.2(a)), or it may have
Figure 9.1 Steady-state torque–speed curve for a synchronous motor supplied at
constant frequency.
2 Drive shafts were used in early textile factories and the like. A single mechanical shaft would be fed
through the factory or machine and various functions would be connected to the same shaft via belts.
The connected equipment would then run up and down together. With toothed belts, position
synchronism could be achieved.
284
Electric Motors and Drives

projecting
(‘salient’)
poles
around
which
the
winding
is
concentrated
(Figure 9.2(b)). A cylindrical-rotor motor has little or no reluctance (self-aligning)
torque, so it can only produce torque when current is fed into the rotor. On the
other hand, the salient-pole type also produces some reluctance torque even when
the rotor winding has no current. In both cases, however, the rotor ‘excitation’
power is relatively small, since all the mechanical output power is supplied from the
stator side.
Excited-rotor motors are used in sizes ranging from a few kW up to many MW.
The large ones are effectively alternators (as used for power generation) but used as
motors. Wound-rotor induction motors (see Chapter 6) can also be made to
operate synchronously by supplying the rotor with d.c. through the sliprings.
The simplest way to visualize the mechanism of torque production is to focus on
a static picture, and consider the alignment force between the stator and rotor ﬁeld
patterns. When the two are aligned with N facing S, the torque is zero and the
system is in stable equilibrium, with any displacement to right or left causing
a restoring torque to come into play. If the ﬁelds are distributed sinusoidally in
space, the restoring torque will reach a maximum when the poles are misaligned by
half a pole-pitch, or 90. Beyond 90 the torque reduces with angle, giving an
unstable region, zero torque being reached again when N is opposite N.
When the motor is running synchronously, we can use much the same mental
picture because the ﬁeld produced by the 3-phase alternating currents in the stator
windings rotates at precisely the same speed as the ﬁeld produced by the d.c. current
in the rotor. At no-load there is little or no angular displacement between the ﬁeld
patterns, because the torque required to overcome friction is small. But each time
the load increases, the rotor slows momentarily before settling at the original speed
but with a displacement between the two ﬁeld patterns that is sufﬁcient to furnish
the torque needed for steady-state running. This angle is known as the ‘load angle’,
and we can actually see it when we illuminate the shaft of the motor with a supply-
frequency stroboscope: a reference mark on the shaft is seen to drop back by a few
degrees each time the load is increased. (Note that this is a characteristic of
a synchronous machine when connected directly to the utility supply. We will see
Figure 9.2 Rotors for synchronous motors. (a) 2-pole cylindrical, with ﬁeld coils
distributed in slots; (b) 2-pole salient pole with concentrated ﬁeld winding.
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
285

later in this chapter that when under inverter control with position feedback, precise
angular position can be maintained regardless of load, which is important when
coordinated motion is required, for example in X–Y tables where a precise path/
contour must be followed.)
2.2 Permanent magnet motors
The synchronous machines considered so far require two electrical supplies, the
ﬁrst to feed the ﬁeld/excitation and the second to supply the stator. Brushless
permanent magnet machines have magnets attached to the rotor to provide the
ﬁeld, and so only a stator supply is required. The principle is illustrated for 2-pole
and 4-pole surface-mounted versions in Figure 9.3, the direction in which the
magnets have been magnetized being represented by the arrows. Motors of this
sort have typical output ranging from about 100 W up to perhaps 500 kW, though
substantially higher ratings have been made. (We should also mention that the
magnets are sometimes buried within the rotor iron, which gives rise to an
additional reluctance torque component. Although we discuss reluctance motors
brieﬂy later in this chapter, we will only deal with surface-mounted permanent
magnet motors here.)
The advantages of the permanent magnet type are that no supply is needed for
the rotor and the rotor construction can be robust and reliable. The disadvantage is
that the excitation is inherently ﬁxed, so the designer must either choose the shape
and disposition of the magnets to match the requirements of one speciﬁc load, or
seek a general-purpose compromise. Control of power-factor via excitation is of
course no longer possible. Within these constraints the brushless permanent
magnet synchronous motor behaves in very much the same way as its excited-
rotor sister.
We will defer further discussion of some important constructional details of
permanent magnet motors to a later section, and concentrate now on the tools
available to help us understand the operating characteristics of synchronous motors.
Figure 9.3 Permanent magnet synchronous motor rotors: 2-pole (left); 4-pole (right).
286
Electric Motors and Drives

3. EQUIVALENT CIRCUITS OF SYNCHRONOUS MOTORS
Predicting the current and power-factor drawn from the supply by a cylindrical-
rotor or permanent magnet synchronous motor is possible by means of the per-
phase a.c. equivalent circuit shown in Figure 9.4. To arrive at such a simple circuit
inevitably means that approximations have to be made, but we are seeking only
a broad-brush picture, so the circuit is perfectly adequate.
In this circuit X (known as the synchronous reactance, or simply the reactance)
represents the effective inductive reactance of the stator phase winding; R is the stator
winding resistance; V is the applied voltage; and E is the e.m.f. induced in the stator
winding by the rotating ﬁeld produced either by the d.c. current on the rotor or by the
permanent magnet. (For the beneﬁt of readers who are familiar with the parameters of
the induction motor, it should be pointed out that X is equal to the sum of the
magnetizing and leakage reactances, but because the effective air-gap in synchronous
machines is usually larger than in induction motors, their per-unit synchronous reac-
tance is usually lower than that of an induction machine with the same stator winding.)
The similarity between this circuit and that of the d.c. machine (Figure 3.6) and
the induction motor (Figure 5.8) is clear, and it stems from the fact that these
machines all produce torque by the interaction of a magnetic ﬁeld and current-
carrying conductors (the so-called ‘BIl’ effect). In the case of the d.c. machine
the inductance was seen not to be important under steady-state conditions because
the current was steady (i.e. d.c.), and the resistance emerged as the dominant
parameter. In the case of the synchronous motor the current is alternating, so not
surprisingly we ﬁnd that the reactance is the dominant impedance and resistance
plays only a minor role, except in the case of small motors.
4. OPERATION FROM CONSTANT-VOLTAGE,
CONSTANT-FREQUENCY (UTILITY) SUPPLY
At this point, readers who are not familiar with a.c. circuit theory can be reassured
that they will not be seriously disadvantaged by skipping the rest of this section. But
Figure 9.4 Equivalent circuit for synchronous machine.
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
287

although no seminal truths are to follow, discussion of the equivalent circuit and the
associated phasor diagram greatly assists the understanding of motor behavior,
especially its ability to operate over a range of power-factors.
4.1 Excited-rotor motor
Our aim is to ﬁnd what determines the current drawn from the supply, which from
Figure 9.4 clearly depends on all the parameters therein. But for a given machine
operating from a constant-voltage, constant-frequency supply, the only indepen-
dent variables are the load on the shaft and the d.c. current (the excitation) fed into
the rotor, so we will look at the inﬂuence of both, beginning with the effect of the
load on the shaft.
The speed is constant and therefore the mechanical output power (torque times
speed) is proportional to the torque being produced, which in the steady state is
equal and opposite to the load torque. Hence if we neglect the losses in the motor,
the electrical input power is also determined by the load on the shaft. The input
power per phase is given by VI cos f where I is the current and the power-factor
angle is f. But V is ﬁxed, so the in-phase (or real) component of input current I
cos f is determined by the mechanical load on the shaft. We recall that, in the same
way, the current in the d.c. motor (Figure 3.6) was determined by the load. This
discussion reminds us that although the equivalent circuits in Figures 9.4 and 3.6 are
very informative, they should perhaps carry a ‘health warning’ to the effect that the
single most important determinant of the current (the load torque) does not actually
appear explicitly on the diagrams.
Turning now to the inﬂuence of the d.c. excitation current, at a given supply
frequency (i.e. speed) the utility-frequency e.m.f. (E) induced in the stator is
proportional to the d.c. ﬁeld current fed into the rotor. If we wanted to measure this
e.m.f. we could disconnect the stator windings from the supply, drive the rotor at
synchronous speed by an external means, and measure the voltage at the stator
terminals, performing the so-called open-circuit test. If we were to vary the speed at
which we drove the rotor, keeping the ﬁeld current constant, we would of course
ﬁnd that E was proportional to the speed. We discovered a very similar state of
affairs when we studied the d.c. machine (Chapter 3): its induced motional or ‘back’
e.m.f. (E) turned out to be proportional to the ﬁeld current, and to the speed of
rotation of the armature. The main difference between the d.c. machine and the
synchronous machine is that in the d.c. machine the ﬁeld is stationary and the
armature rotates, whereas in the synchronous machine the ﬁeld system rotates while
the stator windings are at rest: in other words, one could describe the synchronous
machine, loosely, as an ‘inside-out’ d.c. machine.
We also saw in Chapter 3 that when the unloaded d.c. machine was connected
to a constant-voltage d.c. supply, it ran at a speed such that the induced e.m.f. was
(almost) equal to the supply voltage, so that the no-load current was almost zero.
288
Electric Motors and Drives

When a load was applied to the shaft, the speed fell, thereby reducing E and
increasing the current drawn from the supply until the motoring torque produced
was equal to the load torque. Conversely if we applied a driving torque to the shaft
of the machine, the speed rose, E became greater than V, current ﬂowed out to the
supply and the machine acted as a generator. These ﬁndings are based on the
assumption that the ﬁeld current remains constant, so that changes in E are
a reﬂection of changes in speed. Our overall conclusion was the simple statement
that if E is less than V, the d.c. machine acts as a motor, while if E is greater than V, it
acts as a generator.
The situation with the synchronous motor is similar, but now the speed is
constant and we can control E independently via control of the d.c. excitation
current fed to the rotor. We might again expect that if E was less than V the
machine would draw in current and act as a motor, and vice versa if E was greater
than V. But we are no longer dealing with simple d.c. circuits in which phrases such
as ‘draw in current’ have a clear meaning in terms of what it tells us about power
ﬂow. In the synchronous machine equivalent circuit the voltages and currents are
a.c., so we have to be more careful with our language and pay due respect to the
phase of the current, as well as its magnitude. Things turn out to be rather different
from what we found in the d.c. motor, but there are also similarities.
4.2 Phasor diagram and power-factor control
To see how the magnitude of the e.m.f. inﬂuences behavior we can examine the
phasor diagrams of a synchronous machine operating as a motor, as shown in
Figure 9.5.
The ﬁrst point to clarify is that our sign convention is such that motoring
corresponds to positive electrical input power to the machine. The power is given
by VI cos f, so when the machine is motoring (positive power) the angle f lies in
Figure 9.5 Phasor diagrams for synchronous motor operating with constant load
torque, for three different values of the rotor (excitation) current.
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
289

the range 90. If the current lags or leads the voltage by more than 90 the
machine will be generating.
Figure 9.5 shows three phasor diagrams corresponding to low, medium and
high values of the induced e.m.f. (E), the shaft load (i.e. mechanical power) being
constant. As discussed above, if the mechanical power is constant, so is I cos f, and
the locus of the current is therefore shown by the horizontal dashed line. The load
angle (d), discussed earlier, is the angle between V and E in the phasor diagram. In
Figure 9.5, the voltage phasor diagram embodies Kirchhoff’s law as applied to the
equivalent circuit in Figure 9.4, i.e. V ¼ E þ IR þ jIX, but for the sake of simplicity
R is neglected so the phasor diagram simply consists of the volt-drop IX (which
leads the current I by 90) added to E to yield V.
Figure 9.5(a) represents a condition where the ﬁeld current has been set so that
the magnitude of the induced e.m.f. (E) is less than V. This is called an ‘under-
excited’ condition, and as can be seen the current is lagging the terminal voltage
and the power-factor is cos fa, lagging. When the ﬁeld current is increased
(increasing the magnitude of E) the magnitude of the input current reduces and it
moves more into phase with V: the special case shown in Figure 9.5(b) shows that
the motor can be operated at unity power-factor if the ﬁeld current is suitably
chosen. Finally, in Figure 9.5(c), the ﬁeld current is considerably higher (the
‘overexcited’ case), which causes the current to increase again but this time the
current leads the voltage and the power-factor is cos fc, leading. We see that we
can obtain any desired power-factor by appropriate choice of rotor excitation: this
is a freedom not afforded to users of induction motors, and arises because in the
synchronous machine there is an additional mechanism for providing excitation,
as we will now discuss.
When we studied the induction motor we discovered that the magnitude and
frequency of the supply voltage V governed the magnitude of the resultant ﬂux
density wave in the machine, and that the current drawn by the motor could be
considered to consist of two components. The real (in-phase) component repre-
sented the real power being converted from electrical to mechanical form, so this
component varied with the load. On the other hand, the lagging reactive (quad-
rature) component represented the ‘magnetizing’ current that was responsible for
producing the ﬂux, and it remained constant regardless of load.
The stator winding of the synchronous motor is the same as the induction
motor, so it is to be expected that the resultant ﬂux will be determined by the
magnitude and frequency of the applied voltage. This ﬂux will therefore remain
constant regardless of the load, and there will be an associated requirement for
magnetizing m.m.f. But now we have two possible means of providing the exci-
tation m.m.f, namely the d.c. current fed into the rotor and the lagging component
of current in the stator.
When the rotor is underexcited, i.e. the induced e.m.f. E is less than V
(Figure 9.5(a)), the stator current then has a lagging component to make up for the
290
Electric Motors and Drives

shortfall in excitation needed to yield the resultant ﬁeld that must be present as
determined by the terminal voltage V. With more ﬁeld current (Figure 9.5(b)),
however, the rotor excitation alone is sufﬁcient and no lagging current is drawn by
the stator. And in the overexcited case (Figure 9.5(c)), there is so much rotor
excitation that there is effectively some reactive power to spare and the leading
power-factor represents the export of lagging reactive power that could be used to
provide excitation for induction motors elsewhere on the same system.
To conclude our look at the excited-rotor motor we can now quantify the
qualitative picture of torque production we talked about earlier, by noting from
the phasor diagrams that if the mechanical power (i.e. load torque) is constant, the
variation of the load angle (d) with E is such that E sin d remains constant. As the
rotor excitation is reduced, and E becomes smaller, the load angle increases until it
eventually reaches its maximum of 90, at which point the rotor will lose
synchronism and stall. This means that there will always be a lower limit to the
excitation required for the machine to be able to transmit the speciﬁed torque. This
is just what our simple mental picture of torque being developed between two
magnetic ﬁelds, one of which becomes very weak, would lead us to expect.
4.3 Permanent magnet motor
Although the majority of permanent magnet motors are supplied from variable-
frequency inverters, some are directly connected to the utility supply, and we can
explore their behavior using the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 9.4. Because the
permanent magnet acts as a source of constant excitation, we no longer have control
over the magnitude of the induced e.m.f. E, which now depends on the magnet
strength and the speed, the latter being ﬁxed by the utility frequency. So now we
only have the load torque as an independent variable, and, as we saw earlier, because
the supply voltage is constant, the load torque determines the in-phase or work
component of the stator current I cos f, as indicated in the phasor diagrams in
Figure 9.5.
In order to identify which of the three diagrams in Figure 9.5 applies to
a particular motor we need to know the motional e.m.f. (E) with the rotor spinning
at synchronous speed and the stator open-circuited. If E is less than the utility
voltage, diagram (a) applies; the motor is said to be underexcited; and it will have
a lagging power-factor that worsens with load. Conversely, if E is greater than V
(the overexcited case), diagram (b) or (c) is typical, and the power-factor will be
leading.
4.4 Starting
It should be clear from the discussion of how torque is produced that unless the
rotor is running at the same speed as the rotating ﬁeld, no steady torque can be
produced. If the rotor is running at a different speed, the two ﬁelds will be sliding
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
291

past each other, giving rise to a pulsating torque with an average value of zero.
Hence a basic synchronous machine is not self-starting, and some alternative
method of producing a run-up torque is required.
Most synchronous motors, designed for direct connection to the utility supply,
are therefore equipped with some form of rotor cage, similar to that of an induction
motor, in addition to the main ﬁeld winding. When the motor is switched onto the
supply, it operates as an induction motor during the run-up phase, until the speed is
just below synchronous. The excitation is then switched on, and as long as the load
is not too high, the rotor is able to make the ﬁnal acceleration and ‘pull in’ to
synchronism with the rotating ﬁeld. Because the cage is only required during
starting, it can be short-time rated, and therefore comparatively small. Once the
rotor is synchronized, and the load is steady, no currents are induced in the cage,
because the slip is zero. The cage does, however, come into play when the load
changes, when it provides an effective method for damping out the oscillations of
the rotor as it settles at its new steady-state load angle.
Large motors will tend to draw a very heavy current during run-up, perhaps six
or more times the rated current, for many tens of seconds, or longer, so some form
of reduced voltage starter is often required (see Chapter 6). Sometimes, a separate
small or ‘pony’ motor is used simply to run up the main motor prior to synchro-
nization, but this is only feasible where the load is not applied until after the main
motor has been synchronized.
5. VARIABLE-FREQUENCY OPERATION
Just as we have seen in Chapters 7 and 8 for the induction motor, once we interpose
a power electronic converter between the utility supply and the machine we
introduce new levels of performance and lose most of the inherent drawbacks
which we ﬁnd when the motor is directly connected to the utility supply.
Most obviously, a variable-frequency converter frees the synchronous machine
from the ﬁxed-speed constraint imposed by utility-frequency operation. The
obvious advantage over the inverter-fed induction motor is that the speed of
the synchronous motor is exactly determined by the supply frequency whereas the
induction motor always has to run with a ﬁnite slip. On the down side, we lose the
ability of the excited-rotor motor to vary the power-factor as seen by the utility
supply.
In principle, a precision frequency source (oscillator) controlling the inverter
switching is all that is necessary to give precise speed control with a synchronous
motor, while speed feedback is essential to achieve accuracy with an induction
motor. In practice, however, we seldom use open-loop control, where the voltage
and frequency are generated within the inverter and are independent of what the
motor does. Instead, ﬁeld-oriented control, almost identical to that described for the
292
Electric Motors and Drives

inverter-fed induction motor, predominates. The principal advantage of ﬁeld-
oriented control is that it allows us to control the torque and ﬂux components of the
stator current independently, and in the case of the synchronous motor it prevents
the motor from losing synchronism with the traveling ﬁeld by locking the supply
frequency to the speed of the rotor.
However, in the steady state, an observer looking at the stator voltage and
current would see steady-state sinusoidal waveforms, and would be unaware of the
underlying control mechanism. We can therefore study the steady-state behavior
using the equivalent circuit in much the same way as we did with the utility-fed
permanent magnet motor. We will continue to ignore resistance because this makes
the phasor diagrams much simpler to understand without seriously compromising
our conclusions.
The approach that we take differs somewhat from our previous discussion in this
chapter by laying more emphasis on the relation between the torque and the ﬂuxes
in the motor. We imagine the ﬂux produced by the magnet and the ﬂux produced
by the stator as if they existed independently, although in reality there is only one
resultant ﬂux. Intuitively we can see that because the ﬂuxes rotate in synchronism,
the magnitude of the torque will depend on the product of the two ﬁeld strengths
and the angle between them: when aligned, the torque is zero, and when
perpendicular, it is maximum. This is equivalent to saying that the torque is
maximum when the stator current wave is aligned with the magnet ﬂux wave,
which is the traditional ‘BIl’ picture.
Because both ﬂux distributions are sinusoidal, the torque depends on the sine of
the angle between them (l). The stator ﬁeld strength depends on the current, so
maximum torque will be obtained when the current is perpendicular to the magnet
ﬂux in the phasor diagram, as shown in later ﬁgures (9.7) and (9.8).
When we discussed the utility-connected excited-rotor motor in section 4, we
were reminded that with the voltage and frequency ﬁxed, the resultant (stator) ﬂux
was constant, and that if the rotor excitation was low, extra magnetizing current
would be drawn from the utility supply, and the power-factor would be lagging.
When the rotor excitation was high there was a surplus of excitation and a leading
current would be exported to the utility. By suitable adjustment of the rotor current
we could achieve a power-factor of unity for any value of the load torque. We then
saw that for a utility-fed permanent magnet motor, in which the rotor excitation is
constant, the stator current adjusted itself to satisfy the requirement for the resultant
ﬂux to be constant, but as a result we had no control over the power-factor.
With an inverter-fed motor we gain control of both the stator voltage and
frequency, so that together with the load torque we now have three independent
variables in the case of the permanent magnet motor, or four for the excited-rotor
machine. The majority of inverter-fed synchronous motor drives, and almost all
below 200 kW, employ permanent magnet motors, so we will concentrate on their
behavior for the remainder of this section.
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
293

5.1 Phasor diagram – nomenclature and basic relationships
The general diagram (Figure 9.6) is for an underexcited case; i.e. at the speed in
question, the open-circuit e.m.f. (E) is less than the terminal voltage. We will
discuss what each phasor represents ﬁrst, and then turn to the relationships that
allow the diagram to be produced.
E is the open-circuit e.m.f. produced by the magnet ﬂux (fmag): it is propor-
tional to the magnet ﬂux and the speed, which is proportional to the stator
frequency u. It is convenient for us to use this as our reference phasor because once
the frequency is speciﬁed, the magnitude of E is known, so we can start the phasor
diagram with the known E.
Recalling that phasors rotate anticlockwise, and that the projection of any
phasor onto the vertical axis represents the instantaneous value, we can deduce that
at the instant shown in Figure 9.6, the induced e.m.f. is at its maximum. We also
know from Faraday’s law that the induced e.m.f. depends on the rate of change of
the ﬂux, which is greatest when the ﬂux is passing through zero, so in Figure 9.6 the
instantaneous ﬂux is zero, as shown. In general, therefore, the ﬂux lags the corre-
sponding induced e.m.f. by 90, as shown.
farm is the ﬂux that would be set up if the armature (stator) current existed
alone. We are assuming no saliency, so the magnitude and direction of this ﬂux
depend only on the magnitude and phase of the stator current.
fres is the resultant (‘the’) ﬂux. With resistance ignored, this ﬂux is effectively
determined by the applied voltage and frequency, as we have seen several times
earlier in this book, so in the phasor diagram, the magnitude of this ﬂux is
proportional to, and in quadrature with, V.
The self-induced e.m.f. from the stator ﬂux is modeled in the equivalent circuit
by means of the voltage across the stator inductive reactance X, equal to uL, where
L is the self inductance of the winding. In the phasor diagram the voltage IX leads
Figure 9.6 Phasor diagram for permanent magnet synchronous motor.
294
Electric Motors and Drives

the current by 90. The e.m.f. could equally well have been represented by an
e.m.f. source similar to the E that represents the magnet-induced e.m.f., but
historically the circuit representation is preferred because it is a compact way of
representing both the magnitude and time-phase of the induced voltage with
respect to the current.
V is the applied stator voltage, here regarded as an independent variable, and
I is the resulting stator current. The stator phasor equation is V ¼ E þ IX (or
V ¼ E þ jIX for those who prefer the complex notation).
The other independent variable is the load torque, which is our next consid-
eration in developing the diagram.
In the steady state, the motor torque must equal the load torque. The motor
torque is proportional to the product of the current, the magnet ﬂux fmag, and the
sine of the angle between them, so, knowing the magnet strength, we can ﬁnd the
in-phase or torque component of the stator current (IT). The locus of the current I is
then the horizontal dashed line, and the locus of V then becomes the vertical dotted
line as shown in Figure 9.6. So when we ﬁnally specify the magnitude of V (shown
by the dotted arc), the intersection of the arc and vertical line ﬁxes the phase of the
stator current and ﬁnalizes the diagram.
The current has two components as shown on the right in Figure 9.6. The
component in phase with E is the useful or torque component IT, while the
component in phase with the magnet ﬂux is the ﬂux component IF. The area of
the ﬂux triangle is proportional to the product of IT and fmag, and thus the area
provides an immediate visual indication of the torque.
We note that by control of V, we can alter the ﬂux component (IF), but the
steady-state torque component is determined by the load. In particular, we can
adjust V so that the stator current is in phase with E (i.e. the ﬂux component is zero),
so that we get the maximum value of torque per ampere of stator current. In this
condition the armature (stator) ﬂux is perpendicular to the magnet ﬂux, as discussed
above, and is explored in the next section.
Before we move on, we should note that because we speciﬁed an applied
voltage just a bit bigger than E, the current turned out to be of modest amplitude
and at a reasonable power-factor angle. However, if we had speciﬁed a much higher
V, we would ﬁnd that the current would have had a much larger lagging ﬂux
component (with the same torque component, determined by the load), and
a much worse power-factor. And conversely, a much smaller applied voltage would
result in a large leading power-factor current. Neither of these conditions is
desirable because of the increased copper loss.
5.2 Field-oriented control
In a later section we will look at the torque–speed capabilities of the inverter-fed
permanent magnet motor, and we will ﬁnd that, as with the d.c. drive and the
induction motor drive, there is a so-called constant torque region that extends up to
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
295

base speed, within which full rated torque is available on a continuous basis. And in
common with the other drives, at higher speeds there is a ﬁeld weakening region
where the maximum available torque is reduced. However, the usual constraints
imposed by the maximum supply voltage and allowable continuous stator current may
result in more serious restrictions on operation in this region than we have seen with
other drives, including the likelihood that only intermittent operation will be possible.
Given the number of parameters involved and their variation between motor
designs, it is only possible for us paint a broad picture, so we will look at one
hypothetical machine and use it to provide an insight into some of the issues
involved. We will focus on three conditions, two in the constant-torque region and
one in ﬁeld weakening. All three phasor diagrams are to the same scale to allow easy
comparisons to be made.
We discussed ﬁeld-oriented control in the context of the induction motor in
Chapter 7. In principle for both induction and permanent magnet motors the strategy
involves independent control over the torque and ﬂux components of the stator
current. But whereas the induction motor has to have both components (because it
has no other source of ﬂux), the permanent magnet motor only needs the torque
component because its ﬂux is provided by the magnets on the rotor. At speeds up to
base speed, therefore, ﬁeld control of the permanent magnet motor involves control
of the stator current (via control of the stator voltage) to keep the ﬂux component
zero, while at the same time the torque component matches the input torque demand
to the controller (see later Figure 9.10). During acceleration or deceleration, the
torque demand will be high, and the controller will maintain the correct torque
component while the speed is changing, until the target speed is reached when the
torque component will be reduced to the appropriate steady-state value.
For convenience in calculations in relation to the phasor diagrams we will take
the open-circuit e.m.f. E at the base speed (uB) to be 1 p.u. (per-unit). (In practice,
the rated applied voltage is usually taken as 1 p.u., but there is no reason why any
other value should not be chosen.) We will assume that the reactance of the
winding (X) at the base speed is 0.3 p.u. (which means that at rated current (and
rated frequency) the voltage across the reactance is 0.3 times the rated voltage).
5.3 Full-load
By full-load we mean that the machine is running at base speed and delivering its
full rated torque. We saw above that the current depended on the applied voltage,
and that, in particular, if we apply the right voltage, we can minimize the current.
This is what we do in ﬁeld-oriented control, so the diagram (Figure 9.7) represents
this condition.
We should note that the stator current has zero ﬂux component, and so the
armature ﬂux is perpendicular to the magnet ﬂux, i.e. in the optimum torque-
producing position. We will deﬁne the current in this situation as 1 p.u., so the
296
Electric Motors and Drives

volt-drop across the reactance is 1  0.3 ¼ 0.3 p.u. From the property of the right-
angled triangle, V turns out to be 1.044 p.u., and because we have deﬁned this as the
rated power condition, we will regard 1.044 V as the maximum voltage that the
inverter can produce. This condition is the most efﬁcient state for the given current
and torque, because the stator copper loss is minimized.
5.4 Full torque at half base speed (half power)
The phasor diagram is shown in Figure 9.8, again with the voltage optimized to give
the most efﬁcient stator current. The magnet ﬂux is the same as in Figure 9.7 of
course, and so for the same (rated) torque the stator current has to be 1 p.u., as
before. However, the frequency is now only half (uB/2) so the open-circuit e.m.f. is
reduced to 0.5. The stator reactance is proportional to frequency, so it has also
Figure 9.7 Permanent magnet motor phasor diagram – ﬁeld-oriented control – full
(rated) torque at base speed.
Figure 9.8 Permanent magnet motor phasor diagram – ﬁeld-oriented control – full
(rated) torque at half base speed.
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
297

halved, to 0.15 p.u., and the volt-drop IX becomes 0.15 p.u. also. In view of the
similarity between the diagrams it is no surprise that the applied voltage turns out to
be half, i.e. 0.52 p.u., and given the emphasis we have previously placed on the fact
that the ﬂux in an a.c. machine is determined by the V/f ratio, we will not be
surprised to see that this is again conﬁrmed by these results.
The angle q between V and I (the power-factor angle) is the same at full and half
speed, and since the input power is given by VI cos q, it is clear that the input power
at half speed is half of that at full speed. This is what we would expect because with
resistance neglected the input power equals the mechanical power, which is half in
Figure 9.8 because the torques are the same but the speed is half of that in
Figure 9.7.
The two previous examples have shown how the motor can be operated to
produce full rated torque up to a speed at which the full available voltage is applied;
i.e. this is what we have referred to previously as the ‘constant torque region’. In this
region, the permanent magnet motor with ﬁeld-oriented control behaves, in the
steady state, in a very similar manner to a d.c. motor drive, in that the applied
voltage (and frequency) is proportional to the speed and the stator current is
proportional to the torque.
We saw with the d.c. drive and the induction motor drive that once we had
reached full voltage and current, any further increase in speed could only be ach-
ieved at the expense of a corresponding reduction in torque, because the input
power was already at its maximum or rated value. In both cases, higher speeds were
obtained by entering the aptly named ‘ﬁeld weakening’ region.
For the d.c. motor, the ﬁeld ﬂux is under our direct control, so we reduce the
current in the ﬁeld circuit. In the induction motor, the ﬁeld is determined
indirectly by the V/f ratio, so if f increases while V remains constant, the ﬁeld ﬂux
reduces. The permanent magnet motor behaves in a somewhat similar fashion to
the induction motor, in that if the voltage is constant at speeds above base speed,
the V/f ratio reduces as the frequency (speed) is increased, so the resultant ﬂux
also reduces. However, whereas the only source of excitation in the induction
motor is the stator winding, the magnet in the permanent magnet motor remains
a constant (and potent!) source of excitation at all times, and so we can anticipate
that in order to arrive at a reduced ﬂux to satisfy the V/f condition, the stator
current will have to nullify some of the inﬂuence of the magnet. We must
therefore expect less than ideal behavior in the ﬁeld weakening region, which we
now examine.
5.5 Field weakening – operation at half torque, twice base
speed (full power)
We will consider a situation well into the ﬁeld weakening region; i.e. we will
assume that in line with other drives we can expect full power, and so settle for
operation at twice base speed and half rated torque. We will see that while this is
298
Electric Motors and Drives

achievable on an intermittent basis, it is not possible without exceeding the rated
current, a conclusion that we must expect to apply to the whole of the ﬁeld
weakening region with a permanent magnet drive.
The condition is represented by the phasor diagram shown in Figure 9.9. The
frequency is twice the base value, i.e. 2 uB, and so the open-circuit e.m.f. is 2 p.u. As
in other drives, above base speed we apply the maximum possible stator voltage, in
this case 1.04 p.u. Because the voltage cannot be greater, it is not possible for us to
arrange for the current to be in phase with E, and we are obliged to settle for a rather
poor second-best.
The load torque is half rated, which means that the torque component is
0.5 p.u. However, we note that the very large difference in voltage between E and
V results in a very large stator volt-drop of IX ¼ 1.044 p.u. The reactance is twice as
large as at base speed because the frequency is doubled, so the current is given by
1.044/0.6 ¼ 1.74 p.u., which is 74% above its continuously rated value. The copper
loss will therefore be increased by a factor of 1.742, i.e. to three times the rated
value. Clearly continuous operation will not be possible because the stator will
Figure 9.9 Permanent magnet motor phasor diagram – twice base speed, half rated
torque, full power.
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
299

overheat, so in this ﬁeld weakening condition only intermittent operation at half
torque will be possible.
By comparing the ﬂux triangles in Figures 9.7 and 9.9 we can see why the latter
is referred to as ﬁeld weakening. In Figure 9.7 our freedom to adjust V allowed us to
ensure that the stator or armature ﬂux is in quadrature with the magnet ﬂux (i.e. the
torque angle l is 90), leading to a slightly higher resultant ﬂux, and maximizing
efﬁciency by minimizing the current for the given torque.
In contrast the constraint on V means that the armature ﬂux has a large
component which is in opposition to the magnet ﬂux, leading to a resultant ﬂux
that is much less than the magnet ﬂux, and a very low torque angle (l) of only 16.8.
In a sense, therefore, most of the stator current is ‘wasted’ in being used to oppose
the magnet ﬂux. Clearly this is not a desirable operating condition, but it is the best
that we can get with the limited voltage at our disposal.
As a ﬁnal check we can calculate the input power. The angle q is given by
90  2l ¼ 56.4, so the input power (VI cos q) is 1.044  1.74  0.553 ¼ 1 p.u., as
expected since we assumed that the mechanical power was at rated value (twice base
speed, half rated torque) and we ignored resistance in our calculations.
At this point we should recall that the aim throughout section 5 has been to
discover how the motor parameters determine the steady-state behavior when the
voltage, frequency and load vary over a range that is representative of a typical
inverter-fed drive. Few readers will ﬁnd it necessary to retain all of the detail
(although a general awareness of the broad picture is always helpful) so those who
have found it hard going can take comfort from the fact that in practice the drive
will take care of everything for them. This is discussed in the next section.
6. SYNCHRONOUS MOTOR DRIVES
Inverter-fed operation of synchronous machines plays a very important and
growing role in the overall drives market, as customers seek higher efﬁciency and
higher power density than can be achieved with induction motors. We will also
see later when we consider some of the available permanent magnet motor
designs and control strategies that very high dynamic performance can be ach-
ieved, making this the motor of choice in many of the most demanding
applications.
Inverter-fed synchronous motor drives are well established in two distinct
guises. At one extreme, large (multi-MW) excited-rotor synchronous motors are
used, particularly where high speeds are required or when the motor must operate
in a hazardous atmosphere (e.g. in a large gas compressor). At the other (100 W to
500 kW), permanent magnet synchronous motors are used in a wide range of
applications. Each of these groupings has distinct converter and control strategies
and so we will look at each, beginning with the latter.
300
Electric Motors and Drives

6.1 Permanent magnet motor drives
Permanent magnet motor drives are a very important and rapidly growing sector of
the drives market, which is why we have devoted a large section of this chapter to
a theoretical study aimed at understanding what determines their steady-state
behavior. In terms of their application in drives we have little new to introduce
because the converter circuits used are exactly as we have already discussed in
Chapters 7 and 8 for the induction motor, and the control is also very similar.
Our discussion of ﬁeld-oriented control in Chapter 7 focused heavily on the
ability to control the torque-producing and ﬁeld-producing components of the
stator current (iT and iF) independently and rapidly, in order to provide virtually
instantaneous control of torque. We do exactly the same for the permanent magnet
synchronous machine except we normally set the demand for iF to zero, as there is
no need to provide the working ﬂux from the stator side because it is provided by
the rotor magnets.
The arrangement of a typical ﬁeld-oriented control system is shown in
Figure 9.10.
As with the induction motor drive the motor is supplied from a voltage source
inverter, and again we are therefore controlling the stator currents via the voltage.
The control strategy and the inverter are essentially the same as for an induction
motor – indeed some manufacturers make life easier for users by offering a single
inverter product suitable for both types of motor.
As with the induction motor control strategy, the critical issue is determining
the ﬂux position (qRef), but in this case the task is very much easier as the ﬂux is
aligned to the rotor position. In high-performance systems a high-resolution
absolute encoder would be ﬁtted to the motor shaft to provide an accurate rotor
position signal so that the ﬂux position is known precisely at all times. However, if
a position sensor is not used then the reference frame angle, qRef, can be derived
from computed motor voltages and currents in the same way as for the induction
motor, but in this case we no longer have the complication of the temperature-
dependent rotor time-constant.
Figure 9.10 Field-oriented control scheme for permanent motor synchronous motor.
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
301

As we have discussed before, model-based schemes break down at very low
frequencies because the voltage components become very small. For low-speed
operation it is therefore necessary to supplement the approach with an alternative
such as a position-sensing scheme using injected high-frequency currents. Or, in
systems where the load is reasonably predictable, such as in a domestic washing
machine, the motor can be brought up to a particular speed using open-loop
switching in much the same fashion as a stepping motor (see Chapter 10) until the
motional e.m.f. is large enough to be used as the control signal.
We have said with some satisfaction that because we have magnets on the rotor,
we do not need to provide current to develop the ﬁeld, and consequently the ﬁeld
current demand in Figure 9.10 is set to zero. However, if the ﬁeld current demand
were not set to zero, the control system would provide a ﬂux component of stator
current that could either increase or decrease the magnet’s ﬂux, depending on the
polarity of the reference signal. Clearly there will be an upper limit on the ﬂux
because of saturation of the magnetic circuit, and in practice, reducing the ﬂux is
a more attractive proposition because it allows us to operate in a ﬁeld weakening
mode and so extend the speed range into a constant power region, as discussed at
the end of section 5.
6.2 Converter-fed synchronous machine (multi-MW,
excited-rotor) drive
The basic components of the drive system are shown in Figure 9.11. Current in the
top of the d.c. link always ﬂows from left to right (as shown by the direction of the
thyristors), but the link voltage can be positive or negative so that energy can ﬂow in
either direction. The labels ‘rectiﬁer’ and ‘inverter’ in Figure 9.11 indicate how each
converter operates when the machine is operating as a motor, their roles being
reversed when the machine is generating. An additional attraction of this set-up is
that the direction of rotation of the machine is determined electronically by the
switching sequence within the machine converter, and hence full four-quadrant
operation is available without extra hardware.
In view of what we have read so far, we might have expected the switching
devices in the motor inverter to be IGBTs, and to see PWM control of the output
Figure 9.11 Converter-fed large synchronous machine drive.
302
Electric Motors and Drives

voltage waveform, but in these large sizes, IGBT devices are prohibitively expen-
sive, and this explains why the motor converter is exactly like that used on the
supply side of a d.c. motor drive. The reason why we can use this cheaper inverter
lies in the fact that, once rotating, a synchronous machine generates a.c. voltages,
which can be used for the natural commutation of a converter connected to its
terminals. This is why it is frequently referred to as a load commutated inverter
(LCI).
In effect the motor converter behaves in the same way as it does when con-
nected to the utility supply, and as such it is inherently capable of power ﬂow in
both directions. On the down side, we have no means of proﬁling the output
voltage waveform, and as a result we have to accept waveforms for the motor
current that are less than the perfect sinusoids that we would like.
We have already likened the combination of an inverter and synchronous
motor (enclosed by the dashed line in Figure 9.11) to an ‘inside-out’ d.c. machine,
and this view is instructive to help us to understand how this particular drive
operates. We can begin by focusing on the motional-induced e.m.f.
In the synchronous motor the moving rotor carries the d.c. ﬁeld winding. The
rotating ﬂux induces a sinusoidal e.m.f. in the three stator windings that is
proportional to speed and ﬁeld current. The ﬁring of the devices in the motor
converter is locked to the angular position of the rotor, so that each phase is
connected in sequence to the d.c. link. The d.c. link therefore ‘sees’ a rectiﬁed
3-phase voltage that, although unidirectional, is not smooth d.c.
Conversely, the d.c. motor ﬁeld is stationary, and its ﬂux induces an alternating
e.m.f. in the (many) armature coils on the rotor. The mechanical commutator and
its sliding brushes rectify the e.m.f. so that at the armature terminals we get a smooth
d.c.-induced voltage.
So when viewed from the d.c. link, the two are essentially the same. It is
therefore not surprising that, as with a d.c. motor, the no-load speed of the
synchronous motor depends on the d.c. link voltage provided by the supply-side
converter, while when load is applied and speed tends to fall, the d.c. link current
automatically increases until the steady state is reached. The effects of varying the
d.c. excitation of the synchronous machine also mirror those in the d.c. motor, so
that ﬁeld weakening will lead to higher speed but reduced torque.
Of course, the ripple frequency of the rectiﬁed d.c. on the motor side of the d.c.
link depends on the speed of the motor, while that on the supply side of the d.c. link
will be 300 or 360 Hz depending on whether the supply is 50 or 60 Hz. So in order
to prevent unwanted harmonic currents and to smooth the d.c. link current, a series
inductor is included, as shown in Figure 9.11. The reactance of the inductor (uL) is
high at the ripple frequencies, but zero at d.c.
The switching strategy of the motor converter is synchronized to the back e.m.f.
of the machine, each switch conducting for 120 (elect), so that the current
waveform in each phase of the motor is roughly constant for 120, and zero for the
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
303

next 60, and this pattern is repeated in the negative half-cycle. Ideally, the
waveform should be sinusoidal, but the presence notably of the ﬁfth and seventh
harmonics (which leads to some unwelcome torque pulsations at six times the
fundamental frequency) is the price to be paid for having a relatively unsophisticated
inverter. Happily, resonances excited by the torque ripple are rare and can usually be
overcome by preventing steady/continuous operation at particular speeds associated
with the resonance.
It is necessary to maintain an approximately constant angular relationship
between the rotor and stator m.m.f.s and hence automatically maintain the correct
inverter frequency. This is an important point: the inverter does not impose
a frequency upon the machine, rather the machine itself determines the frequency,
and so the motor cannot lose synchronism (pole-slip). As already mentioned, the
drive is accelerated by increasing the current fed to the motor, increasing the motor
torque and acceleration, which thereby increases the frequency.
Once rotating, the motor terminal voltage (or better the calculated back e.m.f.)
can be used to determine the rotor position, but at start-up and at very low speeds
the magnitude of the voltage signals is too small to be used for control purposes or to
commutate the current. A shaft-mounted absolute position sensor is therefore used
to provide position information to determine when the current should be
commutated from one switch to the next. The commutation itself is usually ach-
ieved by momentarily switching off the d.c. link current (by phase control of the
utility-side converter) every sixth of a cycle. This allows the thyristors in the inverter
to turn off so that the next pair can be ﬁred. Above approximately 5% of rated speed
the machine generates sufﬁcient voltage for natural commutation, and subsequent
control is undertaken in a similar manner to that of a d.c. drive.
As we saw earlier with the permanent magnet drive, where the load is
predictable some systems actually impose a predetermined sequence of current
pulses (applied sequentially to the motor phases) to ‘crank’ the motor up to a speed
at which the back e.m.f. becomes of sufﬁcient magnitude to be used for position
sensing and commutation.
As in the d.c. drive, the a.c. supply power-factor is poor at low speeds, but on
the plus side, full four-quadrant operation is possible without additional mechanical
switching.
Applications for this type of drive fall into two main categories: ﬁrst, as a starting
mechanism for very large synchronous machines, the converter then being rated
only for a fraction of the machine rating – the main motor is started off load,
synchronized to the utility supply and then the load is applied; and secondly, as large
high-power (and sometimes high-speed) variable-speed drives for a variety of
applications. Power ratings, typically from 2 to 100 MW at speeds up to 8000 r.p.m.
are available, though at powers up to 5 MW voltage source inverters are now
proving to be more popular. It is also important to note that with the advent of very
high-voltage thyristors, high-voltage drives can be readily designed. Supply voltages
304
Electric Motors and Drives

up to 12 kV are typical, but systems over 25 kV are in service where the high voltage
converter technology is similar to that used for HVDC power-system converters. As
powers increase, in order to keep both motor windings and interconnecting power
cabling manageable it is important to increase operating voltages and thereby
moderate the current levels.
Some manufacturers of synchronous machines of much more modest ratings
(e.g. a few tens of kW) also offer this type of converter technology, but they tend to
be niche products.
The detailed design of this type of high-power drive is highly specialized and
well outside the scope of this book. The impact on the supply of such high-power
converters is also an area where a great deal of detailed consideration is necessary.
7. PERFORMANCE OF BRUSHLESS MOTORS
Throughout this section we will use the terms ‘brushless’ and ‘permanent magnet’
to be synonymous when they are applied to an electric motor. We will also avoid
the confusing term ‘brushless d.c. motor’ because, as already mentioned, such
motors are always supplied with alternating currents.
However, we should mention that the inherent electromagnetic properties of
a permanent magnet motor can be quantiﬁed by its ‘motor constant’ in much
the same way as a d.c. motor (Chapter 3). If we spin the rotor of a permanent
magnet machine at angular velocity u, the r.m.s. value of the sinusoidal e.m.f.
induced in each phase is given by E ¼ ku, and if we supply balanced currents of
r.m.s value Ia to the 3-phase windings in quadrature to the ﬁeld, the torque is
given by T ¼ kIa, where k is the machine constant, expressed in the SI units of
volts per radian per second or the equivalent newton-meters per ampere. (In
practice, manufacturers usually quote k in terms of volts per thousand revs per
min.) These relationships are identical to those we discussed earlier for the d.c.
machine, and once again they underline the unity of machines that operate on
the ‘BIl’ principle.
We have hinted previously that permanent magnet motors offer outstanding
performance in terms of power density and performance in comparison with
induction and d.c. machines, and in this section we look brieﬂy at the underlying
reasons. We then discuss the limitations that govern performance and ﬁnally give an
example that illustrates the impressive results that can be obtained.
7.1 Advantages of permanent magnet motors
The stator windings of permanent magnet motors do not have to carry the exci-
tation or magnetizing current required by the induction motor, so a given winding
can carry a higher work current without generating more heat, thereby increasing
the electric loading and the speciﬁc power output (as discussed in Chapter 1).
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
305

Cooling the rotor is difﬁcult in any enclosed machine because ultimately the
heat has to get to the stator, so the absence of current on the rotor not only improves
efﬁciency by reducing the total copper loss, but also eases the cooling problem.
Historically, brushless permanent magnet motors only became practicable with
the advent of power electronics, so it became normal for them to be supplied via
power electronics with the associated expectation that they would operate in
a speed-controlled drive. The majority were therefore not expected to operate
directly off the utility supply, and as a result their designers had much greater
freedom to produce bespoke designs, tailored to a speciﬁc purpose.
For example, suppose we require a motor that can accelerate very quickly,
which implies that the ratio of torque to inertia should be maximized. We saw in
Chapter 1 that with given values of the speciﬁc magnetic and electric loadings, the
torque is broadly dependent on the volume of the rotor, so we are free to choose
long and thin or short and fat. The inertia of a homogeneous rotor is proportional to
the fourth power of its radius, so clearly for this application we want to minimize the
rotor radius, so a long thin design is required. Fortunately, there is considerable
ﬂexibility in regard to the shape and size of the rotor magnets, so no serious
constraint applies in relation to rotor diameter. Many so-called servo motors (see
later) have this proﬁle, as illustrated in Figure 9.12.
A different application with the same continuous torque and power require-
ments would require the same rotor volume, but if, for example, the application
requires that unwanted changes in speed caused by step changes in load torque must
be minimized, the inertia should clearly be maximized, with a short rotor of larger
diameter.
A section through a high inertia permanent magnet motor typically rated up to
100 Nm and 3000 rev/min is shown in Figure 9.13 and Plate 9.1. It is interesting to
Figure 9.12 Permanent magnet servo motors. (Courtesy of Emerson – Control Tech-
niques Dynamics.) (See Plate 9.12)
306
Electric Motors and Drives

note how little of the volume of the motor is actually taken up with active material,
namely the stator and rotor laminations and the surface-mounted magnets on the
rotor. The end regions of the stator windings are seen to contribute signiﬁcantly to
the overall volume of the motor illustrated. (The move to using segmented stator
windings reduces the impact of the end winding and can lead to signiﬁcant
reductions in total motor volume.) Most permanent magnet motors employ rare-
earth magnets which have much higher energy product (in effect a measure of their
magnetizing ‘power’) than traditional materials such as alnico, so they are very small,
as shown in Figure 9.13.
As in other motors the heat dissipated in the stator diffuses into the air through
the frame to the ﬁnned case and hence to the surrounding air. However, the design
of some motors of this type is based on the requirement that a substantial proportion
(perhaps 40%) of the loss is conducted through the mounting ﬂange to a suitable
heatsink, so this is an area where great care needs to be taken with the thermal
properties of the mounting.
7.2 Industrial permanent magnet motors
In the preceding section we mentioned that bespoke design of permanent magnet
motors has long been considered unexceptional, but recent years have seen the
emergence of permanent magnet motors packaged in the same industrial motor
(IEC or NEMA) housings that are being used for induction motors, as shown in
Figure 9.14.
This type of motor is now marketed as a direct competitor of the induction
motor in variable-speed applications. They are targeted at general applications
Figure 9.13 Typical high inertia brushless permanent magnet motor.
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
307

where the higher initial cost is offset by their higher efﬁciency and relatively high
power density. The heat loss in the permanent magnet rotor is much less than in the
corresponding induction motor, so the rotor runs cooler, which may also be an
advantage in aspects such as bearing life.
7.3 Summary of performance characteristics
Permanent magnet motors with low inertia rotors are used in high-performance
servo applications such as machine tools or pick and place applications where fast,
precise movements are required, and motors with high inertia rotors (and high pole-
numbers) suit low-speed applications such as gearless lift systems.
The performance characteristics of these drives are summarized below:
•
They have excellent dynamic performance at speeds down to standstill when
position feedback is used.
•
For precision positioning the position feedback must deﬁne the absolute posi-
tion uniquely within an electrical revolution of the motor. This can be provided
with a position sensor or alternatively a sensorless scheme can be used. The
performance of a sensorless scheme will be lower than when a position sensor is
used.
•
Field weakening of permanent magnet motors is possible to extend their speed
range, but (as shown in section 5) this requires additional motor current, and so
the motor becomes less efﬁcient in the ﬁeld weakening range. This form of
control also increases the rotor losses and raises the temperature of the magnet
material, thereby increasing the risk of demagnetization. Care is also needed in
Figure 9.14 Permanent magnet industrial motor in standard IEC frame. (Courtesy of
Emerson Leroy Somer.) (See Plate 9.14)
308
Electric Motors and Drives

such applications to avoid overvoltage at the motor and drive terminals in the
event of a loss of control: at high speeds, the open-circuit voltage will exceed the
rated value (see Figure 9.9).
•
Permanent magnet motors exhibit an effect called cogging that results in torque
ripple. It is caused by magnetic reluctance forces acting mainly in the teeth of the
stator, and can be minimized by good motor design, but can still be a problem in
sensitive applications.
•
Permanent magnet motors can be very efﬁcient as the rotor losses are very small.
To give an impression of the outstanding performance that can be achieved by
a brushless permanent magnet motor, Figure 9.15 shows the results from a bench test
in which the speed reference begins with a linear ramp from zero to 6000 rev/min
in 0.06 s, followed shortly by a demand for the speed to reverse to 6000 rev/min,
then back to full forward speed and ﬁnally to rest, the whole process lasting less than
one second.
The motor was coupled to a high-inertia load of 78 times the rotor inertia,
which makes the fact that the speed reversal is accomplished in only 120 ms even
more remarkable. It takes only three revolutions to come to rest and a further three
to accelerate in reverse. In common with many high-performance applications, the
drive control is actually implemented in the form of position control, with the shaft
angle being incremented at a rate equivalent to the required speed. The dotted trace
in Figure 9.15 shows that the maximum position error of the motor shaft
throughout the speed reversal is less than 0.05, so by any standard this is truly
impressive. It is no wonder that the brushless permanent magnet motor is frequently
chosen for applications where closely coordinated motion control is called for.
Figure 9.15 Permanent magnet motor drive performance under rapid reversal test.
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
309

Finally, on a matter of terminology, it is worth pointing out that brushless
permanent magnet motors are sometimes referred to as ‘servo’ motors. The name
‘servo’ originates from ‘servomechanism’, deﬁned as a mechanical or electrical system
for control of speed or position. The term tends to be used loosely, but broadly
speaking when it is applied to a motor it implies superior levels of performance.
7.4 Limits of operation of a brushless permanent
magnet motor
We have previously talked about the limits of operation that determine the rating
and operating envelope of other types of electrical machine, so we will conclude
this section by taking a closer look at the limits of operation for a brushless
permanent magnet servo motor (which usually has no external cooling ﬁns or fan).
A typical torque–speed characteristic is shown in Figure 9.16.
The individual limits shown in Figure 9.16 are discussed below, but the most
striking feature is clearly the very large area where operation above rated torque is
possible (albeit on an intermittent basis). This provision clearly reﬂects the potential
application areas, such as rapid positioning systems, where high acceleration is
needed for relatively short periods.
The continuously rated region is, as usual, limited by the allowable temperature
rise of the motor. At standstill the predominant source of loss is the stator copper loss
(shown as I2R limit in Figure 9.16), but at higher speeds the iron loss becomes
signiﬁcant and the full-load torque at rated speed is therefore less than the standstill
torque.
Figure 9.16 Limits of operation of a typical brushless permanent magnet servo motor.
310
Electric Motors and Drives

The upper boundary on the intermittent torque region is usually determined by
the maximum current that the drive converter can supply: only intermittent
operation is possible otherwise the motor overheats.
Continuous operation is not possible when ﬁeld weakening either, because, as
explained in section 5, the stator current is large in order to reduce the magnet ﬂux.
For this thermal reason region A shown in Figure 9.16 can be somewhat truncated
compared with the characteristic ﬁeld weakening region of the induction motor.
Operation of permanent magnet motors at excessive temperatures can lead to
demagnetization of the rare earth magnets in the motor, as well as the hazards
common to all other electrical machines such as loss of robustness of insulation.
Good thermal protection is therefore necessary. Below base speed, for applications
involving few excursions outside the continuous operating region, a relatively
simple motor thermal model in the drive control scheme may be adequate. For
applications involving signiﬁcant operation in the intermittent torque region, and
certainly where ﬁeld weakening operation is used, more complex thermal models
would be needed and these are usually supplemented by thermistors embedded in
the stator windings.
One ﬁnal note of warning in relation to operating permanent magnet motors in
the ﬁeld weakening region: the maximum motor speed must be selected with due
consideration of what may happen if the drive were to trip. In such a case the stator
voltage could rise to a dangerously high level, as discussed previously, causing damage
to the drive, the motor itself or indeed the cables or connectors. Crowbar circuits can
be designed to provide protection against overvoltages, but the motor and drive
system must be designed to withstand the short circuit currents that result.
7.5 Brushless permanent magnet generators
As with almost all forms of electrical machines the permanent magnet motor can be
operated as a generator, with mechanical energy supplied to the shaft being con-
verted to electrical energy. The advantages of high power density and efﬁciency
offered by the permanent magnet motor of course apply equally when the machine
is being used as a generator.
The majority of commercial wind generators up to 75 kW use permanent
magnet synchronous machines. Much larger wind generators are also in service with
some multi-pole, multi-MW motors being applied in utility-scale turbines with
direct drive systems, i.e. systems which do not employ a gearbox between the wind
turbine and the generator.
8. RELUCTANCE AND HYSTERESIS MOTORS
There are a number of synchronous motors which have niche applications and so
a brief introduction is appropriate.
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
311

8.1 Reluctance motors
The reluctance motor is arguably the simplest synchronous motor of all, the rotor
consisting simply of a set of laminations shaped so that it tends to align itself with
the ﬁeld produced by the stator. This ‘reluctance torque’ action is discussed in
Chapter 10, which deals with stepping and switched reluctance motors.
Here we are concerned with utility-frequency reluctance motors, which differ
from steppers in that they only have saliency on the rotor, the stator being identical
with that of a 3-phase induction motor. In fact, since induction motor action is
required in order to get the rotor up to synchronous speed, a reluctance-type rotor
resembles a cage induction motor, with parts of the periphery cut away in order to
force the ﬂux from the stator to enter the rotor in the remaining regions where the
air-gap is small, as shown in Figure 9.17(a). Alternatively, the ‘preferred ﬂux paths’
can be imposed by removing iron inside the rotor so that the ﬂux is guided along the
desired path, as shown in Figure 9.17(b).
The rotor will tend to align itself with the ﬁeld, and hence is able to remain
synchronized with the traveling ﬁeld set up by the 3-phase winding on the stator in
much the same way as a permanent magnet rotor. Early reluctance motors were
invariably one or two frame sizes bigger than an induction motor for a given power
and speed, and had low power-factor and poor pull-in performance. As a result they
fell from favor except for some special applications such as textile machinery where
cheap constant speed motors were required. Understanding of reluctance motors is
now much more advanced, though their fundamental performance still lags the
induction motor as regards power output, power-factor and efﬁciency.
Historically, reluctance motors were frequently used in large numbers con-
nected in parallel to large ‘bulk’ power electronic inverters. The fact that the motors
were locked in synchronism was a great advantage over the induction motor for
synchronized/coordinated applications, notably in the textile industry. However,
the falling cost of power electronics and advances in control saw such applications
being addressed by means of individual inverters with dedicated induction motors
and overarching control. Recently, however, some drives companies are once again
promoting reluctance motor drives utilizing off-the-shelf converter and control
Starting cage
Flux guide
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.17 Reluctance motor rotors (4-pole) – (a) salient type, (b) ﬂux-guided type.
312
Electric Motors and Drives

hardware, perhaps stretched to the limit, to obtain performance comparable to that
of an induction motor.
8.2 Hysteresis motors
Whereas most motors can be readily identiﬁed by inspection when they are
dismantled, the hysteresis motor is likely to bafﬂe anyone who has not come across it
before. The rotor consists simply of a thin-walled cylinder of what looks like steel,
while the stator has a conventional single-phase or 3-phase winding. Evidence of
very weak magnetism may just be detectable on the rotor, but there is no hint of any
hidden magnets as such, and certainly no sign of a cage. Yet the motor runs up to
speed very sweetly and settles at exactly synchronous speed with no sign of a sudden
transition from induction to synchronous operation.
These motors (the operation of which is quite complex) rely mainly on the
special properties of the rotor sleeve, which is made from a hard steel which exhibits
pronounced magnetic hysteresis. Normally in machines we aim to minimize
hysteresis in the magnetic materials, but in these motors the effect (which arises from
the fact that the magnetic ﬂux density B depends on the previous ‘history’ of the
m.m.f.) is deliberately accentuated to produce torque. There is actually also some
induction motor action during the run-up phase, and the net result is that the
torque remains roughly constant at all speeds.
Small hysteresis motors were once used extensively in ofﬁce equipment, fans,
etc. The near constant torque during run-up and the very modest starting current
(of perhaps 1.5 times rated current) mean that they are also suited to high inertia
loads such as gyro compasses and small centrifuges.
Synchronous and Brushless Permanent Magnet Machines and Drives
313

CHAPTER TEN
Stepping and Switched-
reluctance Motors
1. INTRODUCTION
In previous editions of this book, switched-reluctance motors were included with
one of their direct industrial competitors, brushless permanent magnet motors,
which appear in Chapter 9 in this edition. In this edition we have decided that
because the fundamental mechanism of torque production is the same in both
switched-reluctance and stepping motors, there is a strong argument for grouping
them together. We will see that there are substantial differences between the modes
of operation (and the power ratings), but both have projecting ‘iron’ poles or teeth
on both stator and rotor, and produce torque by reluctance action, rather than by
the ‘BIl’ mechanism we have encountered hitherto. Stepping motors are considered
ﬁrst as they provide useful groundwork for the switched-reluctance material that
follows.
2. STEPPING MOTORS
Stepping (or stepper) motors became attractive because they can be controlled
directly by computers or microcontrollers.1 Their unique feature is that the output
shaft rotates in a series of discrete angular intervals, or steps, one step being taken
each time a command pulse is received. When a deﬁnite number of pulses has been
supplied, the shaft will have turned through a known angle, and this makes the
motor well suited for open-loop position control.
The idea of a shaft progressing in a series of steps might conjure up visions of
a ponderous device laboriously indexing until the target number of steps has been
reached, but this would be quite wrong. Each step is completed very quickly,
usually in less than a millisecond; and when a large number of steps is called for the
step command pulses can be delivered rapidly, sometimes as fast as several thousand
steps per second. At these high stepping rates the shaft rotation becomes smooth,
and the behavior resembles that of an ordinary motor. Typical applications include
disc head drives, and small numerically controlled machine tool slides, where the
1 Many servo drives now have digital pulse train inputs, so the uniqueness of the stepper has somewhat
diminished.
Electric Motors and Drives
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-098332-5.00010-3
 2013 Austin Hughes and William Drury.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
315j

motor would drive a lead screw; and print feeds, where the motor might drive
directly, or via a belt.
Most stepping motors look much like conventional motors, and as a general
guide we can assume that the torque and power of a stepping motor will be
similar to the torque and power of a conventional totally enclosed motor of the
same dimensions and speed range. Step angles are mostly in the range 1.8–90,
with torques ranging from 1 mNm (in a tiny wristwatch motor of 3 mm
diameter) up to perhaps 40 Nm in a motor of 15 cm diameter suitable for
a machine tool application where speeds of 500 rev/min might be called for, but
the majority of applications use motors which can be held comfortably in the
hand.
2.1 Open-loop position control
A basic stepping motor system is shown in Figure 10.1.
The drive contains the electronic switching circuits which supply the motor,
and is discussed later. The output is the angular position of the motor shaft, while
the input consists of two low-power digital signals. Every time a pulse occurs on
the step input line, the motor takes one step, the shaft remaining at its new
position until the next step pulse is supplied. The state of the direction line (‘high’
or ‘low’) determines whether the motor steps clockwise or anticlockwise. A given
number of step pulses will therefore cause the output shaft to rotate through
a deﬁnite angle.
This one-to-one correspondence between pulses and steps is the great attraction
of the stepping motor: it provides position control, because the output is the angular
position of the output shaft. It is a digital system, because the total angle turned
through is determined by the number of pulses supplied; and it is open-loop because
no feedback need be taken from the output shaft.
2.2 Generation of step pulses and motor response
The step pulses may be produced by a digital controller or microprocessor (or
even an oscillator controlled by an analogue voltage). When a given number of
Figure 10.1 Open-loop position control using a stepping motor.
316
Electric Motors and Drives

steps are to be taken, the step pulses are gated to the drive and the pulses are
counted, until the required number of steps is reached, when the pulse train is
gated off. This is illustrated in Figure 10.2, for a six-step sequence. There are six
step command pulses, equally spaced in time, and the motor takes one step
following each pulse.
Three important general features can be identiﬁed with reference to
Figure 10.2. First, although the total angle turned through (six steps) is governed
only by the number of pulses, the average speed of the shaft (which is shown by the
slope of the broken line in Figure 10.2) depends on the frequency. The higher the
frequency, the shorter the time taken to complete the six steps.
Secondly, the stepping action is not perfect. The rotor takes a ﬁnite time to
move from one position to the next, and then overshoots and oscillates before
ﬁnally coming to rest at the new position. Overall single-step times vary with motor
size, step angle and the nature of the load, but are commonly within the range
5–100 ms. This is often fast enough not to be seen by the unwary newcomer,
though individual steps can usually be heard; small motors ‘tick’ when they step, and
larger ones make a satisfying ‘click’ or ‘clunk’.
Thirdly, in order to be sure of the absolute position at the end of a stepping
sequence, we must know the absolute position at the beginning. This is because
a stepping motor is an incremental device. As long as it is not abused, it will always
take one step when a drive pulse is supplied, but in order to keep track of absolute
position simply by counting the number of drive pulses (and this is after all the main
virtue of the system) we must always start the count from a known datum position.
Normally the step counter will be ‘zeroed’ with the motor shaft at the datum
position, and will then count up for clockwise direction and down for anticlockwise
rotation. Provided no steps are lost (see later) the number in the step counter will
then always indicate the absolute position.
Figure 10.2 Typical step response to low-frequency train of step command pulses.
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
317

2.3 High-speed running and ramping
The discussion so far has been restricted to operation when the step command pulses
are supplied at a constant rate, and with sufﬁciently long intervals between the
pulses to allow the rotor to come to rest between steps. Very large numbers of small
stepping motors in watches and clocks do operate continuously in this way, stepping
perhaps once every second, but most commercial and industrial applications call for
a more exacting and varied performance.
To illustrate the variety of operations which might be involved, and to intro-
duce high-speed running, we can look brieﬂy at a typical industrial application. A
stepping motor-driven table feed on a numerically controlled milling machine
nicely illustrates both of the key operational features discussed earlier. These are the
ability to control position (by supplying the desired number of steps) and the ability
to control velocity (by controlling the stepping rate).
The arrangement is shown diagrammatically in Figure 10.3. The motor turns
a leadscrew connected to the worktable, so that each motor step causes a precise
incremental movement of the workpiece relative to the cutting tool. By making the
increment small enough, the fact that the motion is discrete rather than continuous
will not cause any difﬁculties in the machining process in most applications. We will
assume that we have selected the step angle, the pitch of the leadscrew, and any
necessary gearing so as to give a table movement of 0.01 mm per motor step. We
will also assume that the necessary step command pulses will be generated by
a digital controller or computer, programmed to supply the right number of pulses,
at the right speed for the work in hand.
If the machine is a general-purpose one, many different operations will be
required. When taking heavy cuts, or working with hard material, the work will
have to be offered to the cutting tool slowly, at say 0.02 mm/s. The stepping rate
will then have to be set to 2 steps/s. If we wish to mill out a slot 1 cm long, we will
therefore program the controller to put out 1000 steps, at a uniform rate of 2 steps/s,
and then stop. On the other hand, the cutting speed in softer material could be
much higher, with stepping rates in the range 10–100 steps/s being in order. At the
Figure 10.3 Application of stepping motor for open-loop position control.
318
Electric Motors and Drives

completion of a cut, it will be necessary to traverse the work back to its original
position, before starting another cut. This operation needs to be done as quickly as
possible, to minimize unproductive time, and a stepping rate of perhaps 2000 steps/s
(or even higher) may be called for.
It was mentioned earlier that a single step (from rest) takes upwards of several
milliseconds. It should therefore be clear that if the motor is to run at 2000 steps/s
(i.e. 0.5 ms/step), it cannot possibly come to rest between successive steps, as it does
at low stepping rates. Instead, we ﬁnd in practice that at these high stepping rates,
the rotor velocity becomes quite smooth, with hardly any outward hint of its
stepwise origins. Nevertheless, the vital one-to-one correspondence between step
command pulses and steps taken by the motor is maintained throughout, and the
open-loop position control feature is preserved. This extraordinary ability to
operate at very high stepping rates (up to 20,000 steps/s in some motors), and yet to
remain fully in synchronism with the command pulses, is the most striking feature of
stepping motor systems.
Operation at high speeds is referred to as ‘slewing’. The transition from single-
stepping (as shown in Figure 10.2) to high-speed slewing is a gradual one and is
indicated by the plots in Figure 10.4. Roughly speaking, the motor will ‘slew’ if its
stepping rate is above the frequency of its single-step oscillations. When motors are
in the slewing range, they generally emit an audible whine, with a fundamental
frequency equal to the stepping rate.
Naturally, a motor cannot be started from rest and expected to ‘lock on’ directly
to a train of command pulses at say 2000 steps/s, which is well into the slewing
range. Instead, it has to be started at a more modest stepping rate, before being
accelerated (or ‘ramped’) up to speed: this is discussed more fully in section 6. In
undemanding applications, the ramping can be done slowly, and spread over a large
number of steps; but if the high stepping rate has to be reached quickly, the timings
of individual step pulses must be very precise.
Figure 10.4 Position–time responses at low, medium and high stepping rates.
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
319

We may wonder what will happen if the stepping rate is increased too quickly.
The answer is simply that the motor will not be able to remain ‘in step’ and will stall.
The step command pulses will still be delivered, and the step counter will be
accumulating what it believes are motor steps, but, by then, the system will have
failed completely. A similar failure mode will occur if, when the motor is slewing,
the train of step pulses is suddenly stopped, instead of being progressively slowed.
The stored kinetic energy of the motor (and load) will cause it to overrun, so that
the number of motor steps will be greater than the number of command pulses.
Failures of this sort are prevented by the use of closed-loop control, as discussed
later.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that stepping motors are designed to operate for
long periods with their rotor held in a ﬁxed (step) position, and with rated current in
the winding (or windings). We can therefore anticipate that overheating after
stalling is generally not a problem for a stepping motor.
3. PRINCIPLE OF MOTOR OPERATION
The principle on which stepping motors are based is very simple. When a bar of iron
or steel is suspended so that it is free to rotate in a magnetic ﬁeld, it will align itself
with the ﬁeld. If the direction of the ﬁeld is changed, the bar will turn until it is again
aligned, by the action of the so-called reluctance torque. (The mechanism is similar
to that of a compass needle, except that if a compass had an iron needle instead of
a permanent magnet it would settle along the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld but it might be
rather slow and there would be ambiguity between N and S!)
Before exploring constructional details, it is worth saying a little more about
reluctance torque, and its relationship with the torque-producing mechanism we
have encountered so far in this book. The alert reader will be aware that, until this
chapter, there has been little mention of reluctance torque, and might therefore
wonder if it is entirely different from what we have considered so far.
The answer is that in the vast majority of electrical machines torque is produced
by the interaction of a magnetic ﬁeld (produced by either the stator or rotor) with
current-carrying conductors on either the rotor or the stator. We based our
understanding of how d.c. and induction motors produce torque on the simple
formula F ¼ BIl for the force on a conductor of length l carrying a current I
perpendicular to a magnetic ﬂux density B (see Chapter 1). There was no mention
of reluctance torque because (with very few exceptions) machines which exploit the
‘BIl’ mechanism do not have reluctance torque.
As mentioned above, reluctance torque originates in the tendency of an iron bar
to align itself with magnetic ﬁeld: if the bar is displaced from its alignment position it
experiences a restoring torque. The rotors of machines that produce torque by
reluctance action are therefore designed so that the rotor iron has projections or
320
Electric Motors and Drives

‘poles’ (see Figure 10.5) that align with the magnetic ﬁeld produced by the stator
windings. All the torque is then produced by reluctance action, because, with no
conductors on the rotor to carry current, there is obviously no ‘BIl’ torque. In
contrast, the iron in the rotors of d.c. and induction motors is (ideally) cylindrical, in
which case there is no ‘preferred’ orientation of the rotor iron, i.e. no reluctance
torque.
Because the two torque-producing mechanisms appear to be radically different,
the approaches taken to develop theoretical models have also diverged. As we have
seen, simple equivalent circuits are available to allow us to understand and predict
the behavior of mainstream ‘BIl’ machines such as d.c. and induction motors, and
this is fortunate because of the overwhelming importance of these machines.
Unfortunately, no such simple treatments are available for stepping and other
reluctance-based machines. Circuit-based numerical models for performance
prediction are widely used by manufacturers but they are not really much of use for
illuminating behavior, so we will content ourselves with building up a picture of
behavior from a study of typical operating characteristics.
The two most important types of stepping motor are the variable-reluctance
(VR) type and the hybrid type. Both types utilize the reluctance principle, the
difference between them lying in the method by which the magnetic ﬁelds are
produced. In the VR type the ﬁelds are produced solely by sets of stationary
current-carrying windings. The hybrid type also has sets of windings, but the
addition of a permanent magnet (on the rotor) gives rise to the description ‘hybrid’
for this type of motor. Although both types of motor work on the same basic
principle, it turns out in practice that the VR type is attractive for the larger step
angles (e.g. 15, 30, 45), while the hybrid tends to be best suited when small
angles (e.g. 1.8, 2.5) are required.
3.1 Variable-reluctance motor
A simpliﬁed diagram of a 30/step VR stepping motor is shown in Figure 10.5. The
stator is made from a stack of steel laminations, and has six equally spaced projecting
poles, or teeth, each carrying a separate coil. The rotor, which may be solid or
laminated, has four projecting teeth, of the same width as the stator teeth. There is
a very small air-gap – typically between 0.02 and 0.2 mm – between rotor and stator
teeth. When no current is ﬂowing in any of the stator coils, the rotor will therefore
be completely free to rotate.
Diametrically opposite pairs of stator coils are connected in series, such that
when one of them acts as a north pole, the other acts as a south pole. There are thus
three independent stator circuits, or phases, and each one can be supplied with
direct current from the drive circuit (not shown in Figure 10.5).
When phase A is energized (as indicated by the thick lines in Figure 10.5(a)),
a magnetic ﬁeld with its axis along the stator poles of phase A is created. The rotor is
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
321

therefore attracted into a position where the pair of rotor poles distinguished by the
marker arrow line up with the ﬁeld, i.e. in line with the phase A pole, as shown in
Figure 10.5(a). When phase A is switched off, and phase B is switched on instead,
the second pair of rotor poles will be pulled into alignment with the stator poles of
phase B, the rotor moving through 30 clockwise to its new step position, as shown
in Figure 10.5(b). A further clockwise step of 30 will occur when phase B is
switched off and phase C is switched on. At this stage the original pair of rotor poles
comes into play again, but this time they are attracted to stator poles C, as shown in
Figure 10.5(c). By repetitively switching on the stator phases in the sequence
ABCA, etc. the rotor will rotate clockwise in 30 steps, while if the sequence is
ACBA, etc. it will rotate anticlockwise. This mode of operation is known as ‘1-
phase-on’, and is the simplest way of making the motor step. Note that the polarity
of the energizing current is not signiﬁcant: the motor will be aligned equally well
regardless of the direction of current.
3.2 Hybrid motor
A cross-sectional view of a typical 1.8 hybrid motor is shown in Figure 10.6. The
stator has eight main poles, each with ﬁve teeth, and each main pole carries a simple
coil. The rotor has two steel end-caps, each with 50 teeth, and separated by
a permanent magnet. The rotor teeth have the same pitch as the teeth on the stator
poles, and are offset so that the centerline of a tooth at one end-cap coincides with
a slot at the other end-cap. The permanent magnet is axially magnetized, so that one
set of rotor teeth is given a north polarity, and the other a south polarity. Extra
torque is obtained by adding more stacks, as shown in Plate 10.2.
When no current is ﬂowing in the windings, the only source of magnetic ﬂux
across the air-gap is the permanent magnet. The magnet ﬂux crosses the air-gap
from the N end-cap into the stator poles, ﬂows axially along the body of the stator,
and returns to the magnet by crossing the air-gap to the S end-cap. If there were no
offset between the two sets of rotor teeth, there would be a strong periodic
alignment torque when the rotor was turned, and every time a set of stator teeth was
in line with the rotor teeth we would obtain a stable equilibrium position.
Figure 10.5 Principle of operation of 30/step variable-reluctance stepping motor.
322
Electric Motors and Drives

However, there is an offset, and this causes the alignment torque due to the magnet
to be almost eliminated. In practice a small ‘detent’ torque remains, and this can be
felt if the shaft is turned when the motor is de-energized: the motor tends to be held
in its step positions by the detent torque. This is sometimes very useful: for example,
it is usually enough to hold the rotor stationary when the power is switched off, so
the motor can be left without fear of it being accidentally nudged into a new
position.
The eight coils are connected to form two phase-windings. The coils on poles
1, 3, 5 and 7 form phase A, while those on 2, 4, 6 and 8 form phase B. When phase
A carries positive current stator poles 1 and 5 are magnetized as south, and poles 3
and 7 become north. The teeth on the north end of the rotor are attracted to poles 1
and 5 while the offset teeth at the south end of the rotor are attracted into line with
the teeth on poles 3 and 7. To make the rotor step, phase A is switched off, and
phase B is energized with either positive current or negative current, depending on
the sense of rotation required. This will cause the rotor to move by one-quarter of
a tooth pitch (1.8) to a new equilibrium (step) position.
Figure 10.6 Hybrid (200 step/rev) stepping motor. The detail shows the rotor and
stator tooth alignments, and indicates the step angle of 1.8.
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
323

The motor is continuously stepped by energizing the phases in the sequence
þA, B, A, þB, þA (clockwise) or þA, þB, A, B, þA (anticlockwise). It
will be clear from this that a bipolar supply is needed (i.e. one which can furnish þve
or ve current). When the motor is operated in this way it is referred to as ‘2-phase,
with bipolar supply’.
If a bipolar supply is not available, the same pattern of pole energization may be
achieved in a different way, as long as the motor windings consist of two identical
(‘biﬁlar wound’) coils. To magnetize pole 1 north, a positive current is fed into one
set of phase A coils. But to magnetize pole 1 south, the same positive current is fed
into the other set of phase A coils, which have the opposite winding sense. In total,
there are then four separate windings, and when the motor is operated in this way it
is referred to as ‘4-phase, with unipolar supply’. Since each winding only occupies
half of the space, the m.m.f. of each winding is only half of that of the full coil, so the
thermally rated output is clearly reduced as compared with bipolar operation (for
which the whole winding is used).
We round off this section on hybrid motors with a comment on identifying
windings, and a warning. If the motor details are not known, it is usually possible to
identify biﬁlar windings by measuring the resistance from the common to the two
ends. If the motor is intended for unipolar drive only, one end of each winding may
be commoned inside the casing; for example, a 4-phase unipolar motor may have
only ﬁve leads, one for each phase and one common. Wires are also usually color
coded to indicate the location of the windings; for example, a biﬁlar winding on
one set of poles will have one end red, the other end red and white, and the
common white. Finally, it is not advisable to remove the rotor of a hybrid motor
because rotors are magnetized in situ: removal typically causes a 5–10% reduction in
magnet ﬂux, with a corresponding reduction in static torque at rated current.
3.3 Summary
The construction of stepping motors is simple and robust, the only moving part
being the rotor, which has no windings, commutator or brushes. The rotor is held at
its step position solely by the action of the magnetic ﬂux between stator and rotor.
The step angle is a property of the tooth geometry and the arrangement of the stator
windings, and accurate punching and assembly of the stator and rotor laminations is
therefore necessary to ensure that adjacent step positions are exactly equally spaced.
Any errors due to inaccurate punching will be non-cumulative, however.
The step angle is obtained from the expression
Step angle ¼
360
ðrotor teethÞ  ðstator phasesÞ
The VR motor in Figure 10.5 has four rotor teeth, three stator phase-windings,
and the step angle is therefore 30, as already shown. It should also be clear from the
324
Electric Motors and Drives

equation why small angle motors always have to have a large number of rotor teeth.
The most widely used motor is the 200 step/rev hybrid type (see Figure 10.6). This
has a 50-tooth rotor, 4-phase stator, and hence a step angle of 1.8 (¼360/
(50  4).
The magnitude of the aligning torque clearly depends on the magnitude of the
current in the phase-winding. However, the equilibrium position itself does not
depend on the magnitude of the current, because it is simply the position where the
rotor and stator teeth are in line. This property underlines the digital nature of the
stepping motor.
4. MOTOR CHARACTERISTICS
4.1 Static torque–displacement curves
From the previous discussion, it should be clear that the shape of the torque–
displacement curve, and the peak static torque, will depend on the internal elec-
tromagnetic design of the rotor. In particular the shapes of the rotor and stator teeth,
and the disposition of the stator windings (and permanent magnet(s)), all have to be
optimized to obtain the maximum static torque.
We now turn to a typical static torque–displacement curve, and look at how it
determines motor behavior. Several aspects will be discussed, including the
explanation of basic stepping (which has already been looked at in a qualitative
way); the inﬂuence of load torque on step position accuracy; the effect of the
amplitude of the winding current; and half-step and mini-stepping operation. For
the sake of simplicity, the discussion will be based on the 30/step 3-phase VR
motor introduced earlier, but the conclusions reached apply to any stepping motor.
Typical static torque–displacement curves for a 3-phase 30/step VR motor are
shown in Figure 10.7. These show the torque that is developed by the motor
when the rotor is displaced from its aligned position. Because of the rotor/stator
symmetry, the magnitude of the restoring torque when the rotor is displaced by
a given angle in one direction is the same as the magnitude of the restoring torque
when it is displaced by the same angle in the other direction, but of opposite sign.
There are three curves in Figure 10.7, one for each of the three phases, and for
each curve we assume that the relevant phase-winding carries its full (rated) current.
If the current is less than rated, the peak torque will be reduced, and the shape of the
curve is likely to be somewhat different. The convention used in Figure 10.7 is that
a clockwise displacement of the rotor corresponds to a movement to the right,
while a positive torque tends to move the rotor anticlockwise.
When only one phase, say A, is energized, the other two phases exert no torque,
so their curves can be ignored and we can focus attention on the solid line in
Figure 10.7. Stable equilibrium positions (for phase A excited) exist at q ¼ 0, 90,
180 and 270. They are stable (step) positions because any attempt to move the
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
325

rotor away from them is resisted by a counteracting or restoring torque. These
points correspond to positions where successive rotor poles (which are 90 apart) are
aligned with the stator poles of phase A, as shown in Figure 10.5(a). There are also
four unstable equilibrium positions (at q ¼ 45, 135, 225 and 315) at which the
torque is also zero. These correspond to rotor positions where the stator poles are
mid-way between two rotor poles, and they are unstable because if the rotor is
deﬂected slightly in either direction, it will be accelerated in the same direction until
it reaches the next stable position. If the rotor is free to turn, it will therefore always
settle in one of the four stable positions.
4.2 Single-stepping
If we assume that phase A is energized, and the rotor is at rest in the position q ¼ 0
(Figure 10.7) we know that if we want to step in a clockwise direction, the phases
must be energized in the sequence ABCA, etc., so we can now imagine that phase A
is switched off, and phase B is energized instead. We will also assume that the decay
of current in phase A and the build-up in phase B take place very rapidly, before the
rotor moves signiﬁcantly.
The rotor will ﬁnd itself at q ¼ 0, but it will now experience a clockwise
torque (see Figure10.7) produced by phase B. The rotor will therefore accelerate
clockwise, and will continue to experience clockwise torque, until it has turned
through 30. The rotor will be accelerating all the time, and it will therefore
overshoot the 30 position, which is of course its target (step) position for phase B.
As soon as it overshoots, however, the torque reverses, and the rotor experiences
a braking torque, which brings it to rest before it accelerates back towards the 30
position. If there was no friction or other cause of damping, the rotor would
continue to oscillate; but in practice it comes to rest at its new position quite quickly
Figure 10.7 Static torque–displacement curves for 30/step variable-reluctance step-
ping motor.
326
Electric Motors and Drives

in much the same way as a damped second-order system. The next 30 step is
achieved in the same way, by switching off the current in phase B, and switching on
phase C.
In the discussion above, we have recognized that the rotor is acted on
sequentially by each of the three separate torque curves shown in Figure 10.7.
Alternatively, since the three curves have the same shape, we can think of the rotor
being inﬂuenced by a single torque curve which ‘jumps’ by one step (30 in this
case) each time the current is switched from one phase to the next. This is often the
most convenient way of visualizing what is happening in the motor.
4.3 Step position error and holding torque
In the previous discussion the load torque was assumed to be zero, and the rotor was
therefore able to come to rest with its poles exactly in line with the excited stator
poles. When load torque is present, however, the rotor will not be able to pull fully
into alignment, and a ‘step position error’ will be unavoidable.
The origin and extent of the step position error can be appreciated with the aid
of the typical torque–displacement curve shown in Figure 10.8. The true step
position is at the origin in the ﬁgure, and this is where the rotor would come to
rest in the absence of load torque. If we imagine the rotor is initially at this
position, and then consider that a clockwise load (TL) is applied, the rotor will
move clockwise, and as it does so it will develop progressively more anticlockwise
torque. The equilibrium position will be reached when the motor torque is equal
and opposite to the load torque, i.e. at point A in Figure 10.8. The corresponding
angular displacement from the step position (qe in Figure 10.8) is the step position
error.
The existence of a step position error is one of the drawbacks of the stepping
motor. The motor designer attempts to combat the problem by aiming to produce
Figure 10.8 Static torque–angle curve showing step position error (qe) resulting from
load torque TL.
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
327

a steep torque–angle curve around the step position, and the user has to be aware of
the problem and choose a motor with a sufﬁciently steep curve to keep the error
within acceptable limits. In some cases this may mean selecting a motor with
a higher peak torque than would otherwise be necessary, simply to obtain a steep
enough torque curve around the step position.
As long as the load torque is less than Tmax (see Figure 10.8), a stable rest position
is obtained, but if the load torque exceeds Tmax, the rotor will be unable to hold its
step position. Tmax is therefore known as the ‘holding’ torque. The value of the
holding torque immediately conveys an idea of the overall capability of any motor,
and it is – after step angle – the most important single parameter which is looked for
in selecting a motor. Often, the adjective ‘holding’ is dropped altogether: for
example, ‘a 1 Nm motor’ is understood to be one with a peak static torque (holding
torque) of 1 Nm.
4.4 Half-stepping
We have already seen how to step the motor in 30 increments by energizing
the phases one at a time in the sequence ABCA, etc. Although this ‘1-phase-
on’ mode is the simplest and most widely used, there are two other modes
which are also frequently employed. These are referred to as the ‘2-phase-on’
mode and the ‘half-stepping’ mode. The 2-phase-on can provide greater
holding torque and a much better damped single-step response than the
1-phase-on mode; and the half-stepping mode permits the effective step angle
to be halved – thereby doubling the resolution – and produces a smoother shaft
rotation.
In the 2-phase-on mode, two phases are excited simultaneously. When phases
A and B are energized, for example, the rotor experiences torques from both phases,
and comes to rest at a point midway between the two adjacent full-step positions. If
the phases are switched in the sequence AB, BC, CA, AB, etc., the motor will take
full (30) steps, as in the 1-phase-on mode, but its equilibrium positions will be
interleaved between the full-step positions.
To obtain ‘half-stepping’ the phases are excited in the sequence A, AB, B, BC,
etc., i.e. alternately in the 1-phase-on and 2-phase-on modes. This is sometimes
known as ‘wave’ excitation, and it causes the rotor to advance in steps of 15, or half
the full-step angle. As might be expected, continuous half-stepping usually
produces a smoother shaft rotation than full-stepping, and it also doubles the
resolution.
We can see what the static torque curve looks like when two phases are excited
by superposition of the individual phase curves. An example is shown in
Figure 10.9, from which it can be seen that for this machine, the holding torque (i.e.
the peak static torque) is higher with two phases excited than with only one excited.
The stable equilibrium (half-step) position is at 15, as expected. The price to be
328
Electric Motors and Drives

paid for the increased holding torque is the increased power dissipation in the
windings, which is doubled as compared with the 1-phase-on mode. The holding
torque increases by a factor less than two, so the torque per watt (which is a useful
ﬁgure of merit) is reduced.
A word of caution is needed in regard to the addition of the two separate
1-phase-on torque curves to obtain the 2-phase-on curve. Strictly, such a procedure
is only valid where the two phases are magnetically independent, or the common
parts of the magnetic circuits are unsaturated. This is not the case in most motors, in
which the phases share a common magnetic circuit which operates under highly
saturated conditions. Direct addition of the 1-phase-on curves cannot therefore be
expected to give an accurate result for the 2-phase-on curve, but it is easy to do, and
provides a reasonable estimate.
Apart from the higher holding torque in the 2-phase-on mode, there is another
important difference which distinguishes the static behavior from that of the
1-phase-on mode. In the 1-phase-on mode, the equilibrium or step positions are
determined solely by the geometry of the rotor and stator: they are the positions
where the rotor and stator are in line. In the 2-phase-on mode, however, the rotor
is intended to come to rest at points where the rotor poles are lined up midway
between the stator poles. This position is not sharply deﬁned by the ‘edges’ of
opposing poles, as in the 1-phase-on case; and the rest position will only be exactly
midway if (a) there is exact geometrical symmetry and, more importantly, (b) the
two currents are identical. If one of the phase currents is larger than the other, the
rotor will come to rest closer to the phase with the higher current, instead of half-
way between the two. The need to balance the currents to obtain precise half-
stepping is clearly a drawback to this scheme. Paradoxically, however, the properties
of the machine with unequal phase currents can sometimes be turned to good
effect, as we now see.
Figure 10.9 Static torque curve (thick line) corresponding to 2-phase-on excitation.
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
329

4.5 Step division – mini-stepping
There are some applications where very ﬁne resolution is called for, and a motor
with a very small step angle – perhaps only a fraction of a degree – is required. We
have already seen that the step angle can only be made small by increasing the
number of rotor teeth and/or the number of phases, but in practice it is inconve-
nient to have more than four or ﬁve phases, and it is difﬁcult to manufacture rotors
with more than 50–100 teeth. This means it is rare for motors to have step angles
below about 1. When a smaller step angle is required, a technique known as mini-
stepping (or step division) is used.
Mini-stepping is a technique based on 2-phase-on operation which provides for
the subdivision of each full motor step into a number of ‘substeps’ of equal size. In
contrast with half-stepping, where the two currents have to be kept equal, the
currents are deliberately made unequal. By correctly choosing and controlling the
relative amplitudes of the currents, the rotor equilibrium position can be made to lie
anywhere between the step positions for each of the two separate phases.
Closed-loop current control is needed to prevent the current from changing as
a result of temperature changes in the windings, or variations in the supply voltage;
and if it is necessary to ensure that the holding torque stays constant for each mini-
step both currents must be changed according to a prescribed algorithm. Despite the
difﬁculties referred to above, mini-stepping is used extensively, especially in
photographic and printing applications where a high resolution is needed. Schemes
involving between three and 10 mini-steps for a 1.8 step motor are numerous, and
there are instances where up to 100 mini-steps (20,000 mini-steps/rev) have been
achieved.
So far, we have concentrated on those aspects of behavior which depend only
on the motor itself, i.e. the static performance. The shape of the static torque curve,
the holding torque, and the slope of the torque curve about the step position have
all been shown to be important pointers to the way the motor can be expected to
perform. All of these characteristics depend on the current(s) in the windings,
however, and when the motor is running the instantaneous currents will depend on
the type of drive circuit employed.
5. STEADY-STATE CHARACTERISTICS – IDEAL
(CONSTANT-CURRENT) DRIVE
In this section we will look at how the motor would perform if it were supplied by
an ideal drive circuit, which turns out to be one that is capable of supplying rect-
angular pulses of current to each winding when required, and regardless of the
stepping rate. Because of the inductance of the windings, no real drive circuit will be
able to achieve this, but the most sophisticated (and expensive) ones achieve near-
ideal operation up to very high stepping rates.
330
Electric Motors and Drives

5.1 Requirements of drive
The basic function of the complete drive is to convert the step command input
signals into appropriate patterns of currents in the motor windings. This is achieved
in two distinct stages, as shown in Figure 10.10, which relates to a 3-phase motor.
The ‘translator’ stage converts the incoming train of step command pulses into
a sequence of on/off commands to each of the three power stages. In the 1-phase-
on mode, for example, the ﬁrst step command pulse will be routed to turn on phase
A, the second will turn on phase B, and so on. In a very simple drive, the translator
will probably provide for only one mode of operation (e.g. 1-phase-on), but most
commercial drives provide the option of 1-phase-on, 2-phase-on and half-stepping.
Single-chip ICs with these three operating modes and with both 3-phase and
4-phase outputs are readily available.
The power stages (one per phase) supply the current to the windings. An
enormous diversity of types are in use, ranging from simple ones with one switching
transistor per phase, to elaborate chopper-type circuits with four transistors per
phase, and some of these are discussed in section 6. At this point, however, it is
helpful to list the functions required of the ‘ideal’ power stage. These are ﬁrst that
when the translator calls for a phase to be energized, the full (rated) current should
be established immediately; secondly, the current should be maintained constant (at
its rated value) for the duration of the ‘on’ period; and ﬁnally, when the translator
calls for the current to be turned off, it should be reduced to zero immediately.
Figure 10.10 General arrangement of drive system for 3-phase motor, and winding
currents corresponding to an ‘ideal’ drive.
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
331

The ideal current waveforms for continuous stepping with 1-phase-on opera-
tion are shown in the lower part of Figure 10.10. The currents have a square proﬁle
because this leads to the optimum value of running torque from the motor. But
because of the inductance of the windings, no real drive will achieve the ideal
current waveforms, though many drives come close to the ideal, even at quite high
stepping rates. Drives which produce such rectangular current waveforms are (not
surprisingly) called constant-current drives. We now look at the running torque
produced by a motor when operated from an ideal constant-current drive. This will
act as a yardstick for assessing the performance of other drives, all of which will be
seen to have inferior performance.
5.2 Pull-out torque under constant-current conditions
If the phase currents are taken to be ideal, i.e. they are switched on and off
instantaneously, and remain at their full rated value during each ‘on’ period, we can
picture the axis of the magnetic ﬁeld to be advancing around the machine in a series
of steps, the rotor being urged to follow it by the reluctance torque. If we assume
that the inertia is high enough for ﬂuctuations in rotor velocity to be very small, the
rotor will be rotating at a constant rate which corresponds exactly to the stepping
rate.
Now if we consider a situation where the position of the rotor axis is, on
average, lagging behind the advancing ﬁeld axis, it should be clear that, on average,
the rotor will experience a driving torque. The more it lags behind, the higher will
be the average forward torque acting on it, but only up to a point. We already know
that if the rotor axis is displaced too far from the ﬁeld axis, the torque will begin to
diminish, and eventually reverse, so we conclude that although more torque will be
developed by increasing the rotor lag angle, there will be a limit to how far this can
be taken.
Turning now to a quantitative examination of the torque on the rotor, we will
make use of the static torque–displacement curves discussed earlier, and look at
what happens when the load on the shaft is varied, the stepping rate being kept
constant. Clockwise rotation will be studied, so the phases will be energized in the
sequence ABC. The instantaneous torque on the rotor can be arrived at by
recognizing that (a) the rotor speed is constant, and it covers one step angle (30)
between step command pulses, and (b) the rotor will be ‘acted on’ sequentially by
each of the set of torque curves.
When the load torque is zero, the net torque developed by the rotor must be
zero (apart from a very small torque required to overcome friction). This condition
is shown in Figure 10.11(a). The instantaneous torque is shown by the thick line,
and it is clear that each phase in turn exerts ﬁrst a clockwise torque, then an anti-
clockwise torque while the rotor angle turns through 30. The average torque is
zero, the same as the load torque, because the average rotor lag angle is zero.
332
Electric Motors and Drives

When the load torque on the shaft is increased, the immediate effect is to cause
the rotor to fall back in relation to the ﬁeld. This causes the clockwise torque to
increase, and the anticlockwise torque to decrease. Equilibrium is reached when the
lag angle has increased sufﬁciently for the motor torque to equal the load torque.
The torque developed at an intermediate load condition like this is shown by the
thick line in Figure 10.11(b). The highest average torque that can possibly be
developed is shown by the thick line in Figure 10.11(c): if the load torque exceeds
this value (which is known as the pull-out torque) the motor loses synchronism and
stalls, and the vital one-to-one correspondences between pulses and steps are lost.
Since we have assumed an ideal constant-current drive, the pull-out torque will
be independent of the stepping rate, and the pull-out torque–speed curve under
ideal conditions is therefore as shown in Figure 10.12. The shaded area represents
the permissible operating region: at any particular speed (stepping rate) the load
torque can have any value up to the pull-out torque, and the motor will continue to
run at the same speed. But if the load torque exceeds the pull-out torque, the motor
will suddenly pull out of synchronism and stall.
Figure 10.11 Static torque curves indicating how the average steady-state torque (TL)
is developed during constant-frequency operation.
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
333

As mentioned earlier, no real drive will be able to provide the ideal current
waveforms, so we now turn to look brieﬂy at the types of drives in common use,
and at their pull-out torque–speed characteristics.
6. DRIVE CIRCUITS AND PULL-OUT TORQUE–SPEED
CURVES
Users often ﬁnd difﬁculty in coming to terms with the fact that the running
performance of a stepping motor depends so heavily on the type of drive circuit
being used. It is therefore important to emphasize that in order to meet a speciﬁ-
cation, it will always be necessary to consider the motor and drive together, as
a package.
There are three commonly used types of drive. All use transistors which are
operated as switches, i.e. they are either turned fully on, or they are cut off. A brief
description of each is given below, and the pros and cons of each type are indicated.
In order to simplify the discussion, we will consider one phase of a 3-phase VR
motor and assume that it can be represented by a simple series R–L circuit in which R
and L are the resistance and self-inductance of the winding, respectively. (In practice
the inductance will vary with rotor position, giving rise to motional e.m.f. in the
windings, which, as we have seen previously in this book, is an inescapable mani-
festation of an electromechanical energy-conversion process. If we needed to analyze
stepping motor behavior fully we would have to include the motional e.m.f. terms.
Fortunately, we can gain a pretty good appreciation of how the motor behaves if we
model each winding simply in terms of its resistance and self-inductance.)
6.1 Constant-voltage drive
This is the simplest possible drive: the circuit for one of the three phases is shown
in the upper part of Figure 10.13, and the current waveforms at low and high
Figure 10.12 Steady-state operating region with ideal constant-current drive. (In such
idealized circumstances there would be no limit to the stepping rate, but as shown in
Figure 10.16 a real drive circuit imposes an upper limit.)
334
Electric Motors and Drives

stepping rates are shown in the lower part of the ﬁgure. The d.c. voltage V is
chosen so that when the switching device (usually a MOSFET although a BJT is
shown) turns on, the steady current is the rated current as speciﬁed by the motor
manufacturer.
The current waveforms display the familiar rising exponential shape that
characterizes a ﬁrst-order system: the time-constant is L/R, the current reaching its
steady state after several time-constants. When the transistor switches off, the stored
energy in the inductance cannot instantaneously reduce to zero, so although the
current through the transistor suddenly becomes zero, the current in the winding is
diverted into the closed path formed by the winding and the freewheel diode, and it
then decays exponentially to zero, again with time-constant L/R: in this period the
stored energy in the magnetic ﬁeld is dissipated as heat in the resistance of the
winding and diode.
At low stepping rates (low speed), the drive provides a reasonably good
approximation to the ideal rectangular current waveform. (We are considering
a 3-phase motor, so ideally one phase should be on for one step pulse and off for
the next two, as in Figure 10.10.) But at higher frequencies (right-hand waveform
in Figure 10.13), where the ‘on’ period is short compared with the winding time-
constant, the current waveform degenerates, and is nothing like the ideal rect-
angular shape. In particular the current never gets anywhere near its full value
during the ‘on’ pulse, so the torque over this period is reduced; and even worse,
a substantial current persists when the phase is supposed to be off, so during this
period the phase will contribute a negative torque to the rotor. Not surprisingly all
this results in a very rapid fall-off of pull-out torque with speed, as shown later in
Figure 10.16(a).
Figure 10.13 Basic constant-voltage drive circuit and typical current waveforms.
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
335

Curve (a) in Figure 10.16 should be compared with the pull-out torque under
ideal constant-current conditions shown in Figure 10.12 in order to appreciate the
severely limited performance of the simple constant-voltage drive.
6.2 Current-forced drive
The initial rate of rise of current in a series R–L circuit is directly proportional to the
applied voltage, so in order to establish the current more quickly at switch-on,
a higher supply voltage (Vf) is needed. But if we simply increased the voltage, the
steady-state current (Vf/R) would exceed the rated current and the winding would
overheat.
To prevent the current from exceeding the rated value, an additional ‘forcing’
resistor has to be added in series with the winding. The value of this resistance (Rf)
must be chosen so that Vf/(R þ Rf) ¼ I, where I is the rated current. This is shown
in the upper part of Figure 10.14, together with the current waveforms at low and
high stepping rates. Because the rates of rise and fall of current are higher, the
current waveforms approximate more closely to the ideal rectangular shape, espe-
cially at low stepping rates, though at higher rates they are still far from ideal, as
shown in Figure 10.14. The low-frequency pull-out torque is therefore maintained
to a higher stepping rate, as shown in Figure 10.16(b). Values of Rf from 2 to 10
times the motor resistance (R) are common. Broadly speaking, if Rf ¼ 10R, for
example, a given pull-out torque will be available at 10 times the stepping rate,
compared with an unforced constant-voltage drive.
Some manufacturers call this type of drive an ‘R/L’ drive, while others call it an
‘L/R’ drive, or even simply a ‘resistor drive’. Sets of pull-out torque–speed curves in
Figure 10.14 Current-forced (L/R) drive and typical current waveforms.
336
Electric Motors and Drives

catalogues are labeled with values R/L (or L/R) ¼ 5, 10, etc. This means that the
curves apply to drives where the forcing resistor is ﬁve (or 10) times the winding
resistance, the implication being that the drive voltage has also been adjusted to
keep the static current at its rated value. Obviously, it follows that the higher Rf is
made, the higher the power rating of the supply; and it is the higher power rating
which is the principal reason for the improved torque–speed performance.
The major disadvantage of this drive is its inefﬁciency, and the consequent
need for a high power-supply rating. Large amounts of heat are dissipated in the
forcing resistors, especially when the motor is at rest and the phase current is
continuous, and disposing of the heat can lead to awkward problems in the siting
of the forcing resistors. These drives are therefore only used at the low-power end
of the scale.
It was mentioned earlier that the inﬂuence of the motional e.m.f. in the winding
would be ignored. In practice, however, the motional e.m.f. always has
a pronounced inﬂuence on the current, especially at high stepping rates, so it must
be borne in mind that the waveforms shown in Figures 10.13 and 10.14 are only
approximate. Not surprisingly, it turns out that the motional e.m.f. tends to make
the current waveforms worse (and the torque less) than the discussion above
suggests. Ideally, therefore, we need a drive which will keep the current constant
throughout the ‘on’ period, regardless of the motional e.m.f. The closed-loop
chopper-type drive (below) provides the closest approximation to this, and also
avoids the waste of power which is a feature of R/L drives.
6.3 Constant-current (chopper) drive
The basic circuit for one phase of a VR motor is shown in the upper part of
Figure 10.15 together with the current waveforms. A high-voltage power supply is
used in order to obtain very rapid changes in current when the phase is switched on
or off.
The lower transistor is turned on for the whole period during which current is
required. The upper transistor turns on whenever the actual current falls below the
lower threshold of the hysteresis band (shown dashed in Figure 10.15) and it turns
off when the current exceeds the upper threshold. The chopping action leads to
a current waveform which is a good approximation to the ideal (see Figure 10.10).
At the end of the ‘on’ period both transistors switch off and the current freewheels
through both diodes and back to the supply. During this period the stored energy in
the inductance is returned to the supply, and because the winding terminal voltage
is then Vc, the current decays as rapidly as it is built up.
Because the current-control system is a closed-loop one, distortion of the
current waveform by the motional e.m.f. is minimized, and this means that the ideal
(constant-current) torque–speed curve is closely followed up to high stepping rates.
Eventually, however, the ‘on’ period reduces to the point where it is less than the
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
337

current rise time, and the full current is never reached. Chopping action then ceases,
the drive reverts essentially to a constant-voltage one, and the torque falls rapidly as
the stepping rate is raised even higher, as in Figure 10.16(c). There is no doubt of the
overall superiority of the chopper-type drive, and it is now the standard drive.
Single-chip chopper modules can be bought for small (say 1–2 A) motors, and
complete plug-in chopper cards, rated up to 10 A or more, are available for larger
motors. (See Plates 10.3 and 10.5)
The discussion in this section relates to a VR motor, for which unipolar current
pulses are sufﬁcient. If we have a hybrid or other permanent magnet motor we will
need a bipolar current source (i.e. one that can provide positive or negative current),
and for this we will ﬁnd that each phase is supplied from a four-transistor H-bridge,
as discussed in Chapter 2.
Figure 10.15 Constant-current chopper drive and typical current waveforms.
Figure 10.16 Typical pull-out torque–speed curves for a given motor with different
types of drive circuit. (a) Constant-voltage drive; (b) current-forced drive; (c) chopper
drive.
338
Electric Motors and Drives

6.4 Resonances and instability
In practice, measured torque–speed curves frequently display severe dips at or
around certain stepping rates: a typical measured characteristic for a hybrid motor
with a voltage-forced drive is shown as curve (a) in Figure 10.17. Manufacturers are
not keen to stress this feature, so it is important for the user to be aware of the
potential difﬁculty.
The magnitude and location of the torque dips depend in a complex way on the
characteristics of the motor, the drive, the operating mode and the load. We will
not go into detail here, apart from mentioning the underlying causes and remedies.
There are two distinct mechanisms which cause the dips. The ﬁrst is
a straightforward ‘resonance-type’ problem which manifests itself at low stepping
rates, and originates from the oscillatory nature of the single-step response.
Whenever the stepping rate coincides with the natural frequency of rotor oscilla-
tions, the oscillations can be enhanced, and this in turn makes it more likely that the
rotor will fail to keep in step with the advancing ﬁeld.
The second phenomenon occurs because at certain stepping rates it is possible
for the complete motor/drive system to exhibit positive feedback, and become
unstable. This instability usually occurs at relatively high stepping rates, well above
the ‘resonance’ regions discussed above. The resulting dips in the torque–speed
curve are extremely sensitive to the degree of viscous damping present (mainly in
the bearings), and it is not uncommon to ﬁnd that a severe dip which is apparent on
a warm day (such as that shown at around 1000 steps/s in Figure 10.17) will
disappear on a cold day.
The dips are most pronounced during steady-state operation, and it may be
that their presence is not serious provided that continuous operation at the rele-
vant speeds is not required. In this case, it is often possible to accelerate through
the dips without adverse effect. Various special drive techniques exist for elimi-
nating resonances by smoothing out the stepwise nature of the stator ﬁeld, or by
modulating the supply frequency to damp out the instability, but the simplest
Figure 10.17 Pull-out torque–speed curves for a hybrid stepping motor showing (curve
a) low-speed resonance dips and mid-frequency instability at around 1000 steps/s;
and improvement brought about by adding an inertial damper (curve b).
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
339

remedy in open-loop operation is to ﬁt a damper to the motor shaft. Dampers of
the Lanchester type or of the viscously coupled inertia (VCID) type are used.
These consist of a lightweight housing which is ﬁxed rigidly to the motor shaft,
and an inertia which can rotate relative to the housing. The inertia and the
housing are separated either by a viscous ﬂuid (VCID type) or by a friction disc
(Lanchester type). Whenever the motor speed is changing, the assembly exerts
a damping torque, but once the motor speed is steady, there is no drag torque from
the damper. By selecting the appropriate damper, the dips in the torque–speed
curve can be eliminated, as shown in Figure 10.17(curve b). Dampers are also
often essential to damp the single-step response, particularly with VR motors,
many of which have a highly oscillatory step response. Their only real drawback is
that they increase the effective inertia of the system, and thus reduce the maximum
acceleration.
7. TRANSIENT PERFORMANCE
7.1 Step response
It was pointed out earlier that the single-step response is similar to that of a damped
second-order system. We can easily estimate the natural frequency un in rad/s from
the equation
u2
n ¼ Slope of torque  Angle curve
Total inertia
Knowing un, we can judge what the oscillatory part of the response will look like,
by assuming the system is undamped. To reﬁne the estimate, and to obtain the
settling time, however, we need to estimate the damping ratio, which is much more
difﬁcult to determine as it depends on the type of drive circuit and mode of
operation as well as on the mechanical friction. In VR motors the damping ratio can
be as low as 0.1, but in hybrid types it is typically 0.3–0.4. These values are too low
for many applications where rapid settling is called for.
Two remedies are available, the simplest being to ﬁt a mechanical damper of the
type mentioned above. Alternatively, a special sequence of timed command pulses
can be used to brake the rotor so that it reaches its new step position with zero
velocity and does not overshoot. This procedure is variously referred to as ‘elec-
tronic damping’, ‘electronic braking’ or ‘back phasing’. It involves re-energizing the
previous phase for a precise period before the rotor has reached the next step
position, in order to exert just the right degree of braking. It can only be used
successfully when the load torque and inertia are predictable and not subject to
change. Because it is an open-loop scheme it is extremely sensitive to apparently
minor changes such as day-to-day variation in friction, which can make it
unworkable in many instances.
340
Electric Motors and Drives

7.2 Starting from rest
The rate at which the motor can be started from rest without losing steps is known
as the ‘starting’ or ‘pull-in’ rate. The starting rate for a given motor depends on the
type of drive, and the parameters of the load. This is entirely as expected since the
starting rate is a measure of the motor’s ability to accelerate its rotor and load and
pull into synchronism with the ﬁeld. The starting rate thus reduces if either the load
torque or the load inertia is increased. Typical pull-in torque–speed curves, for
various inertias, are shown in Figure 10.18. The pull-out torque–speed curve is also
shown, and it can be seen that for a given load torque, the maximum steady
(slewing) speed at which the motor can run is much higher than the corresponding
starting rate. (Note that only one pull-out torque is usually shown, and is taken to
apply for all inertia values. This is because the inertia is not signiﬁcant when the
speed is constant.)
It will normally be necessary to consult the manufacturer’s data to obtain the
pull-in rate, which will apply only to a particular drive. However, a rough assess-
ment is easily made: we simply assume that the motor is producing its pull-out
torque, and calculate the acceleration that this would produce, making due
allowance for the load torque and inertia. If, with the acceleration as calculated, the
motor is able to reach the steady speed in one step or less, it will be able to pull in; if
not, a lower pull-in rate is indicated.
7.3 Optimum acceleration and closed-loop control
There are some applications where the maximum possible accelerations and
decelerations are demanded, in order to minimize point-to-point times. If the load
parameters are stable and well deﬁned, an open-loop approach is feasible, and this is
discussed ﬁrst. Where the load is unpredictable, however, a closed-loop strategy is
essential, and this is dealt with later.
To achieve maximum possible acceleration calls for every step command
pulse to be delivered at precisely optimized intervals during the acceleration
Figure 10.18 Typical pull-in and pull-out curves showing effect of load inertia on the
pull-in torque. (JM ¼ motor inertia; JL ¼ load inertia.)
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
341

period. For maximum torque, each phase must be on whenever it can produce
positive torque, and off when its torque would be negative. Since the torque
depends on the rotor position, the optimum switching times have to be calcu-
lated from a full dynamic analysis. This can usually be accomplished by making
use of the static torque–angle curves (provided appropriate allowance is made for
the rise and fall times of the stator currents), together with the torque–speed
characteristic and inertia of the load. A series of computations is required to
predict the rotor angle–time relationship, from which the switchover points from
one phase to the next are deduced. The train of accelerating pulses is then pre-
programmed into the controller, for subsequent feeding to the drive in an open-
loop fashion. It is obvious that this approach is only practicable if the load
parameters do not vary, since any change will invalidate the computed optimum
stepping intervals.
When the load is unpredictable, a much more satisfactory arrangement is
obtained by employing a closed-loop scheme, using position feedback from a shaft-
mounted encoder. The feedback signals indicate the instantaneous position of the
rotor, and are used to ensure that the phase-windings are switched at precisely the
right rotor position for maximizing the developed torque. Motion is initiated by
a single command pulse, and subsequent step command pulses are effectively self-
generated by the encoder. The motor continues to accelerate until its load torque
equals the load torque, and then runs at this (maximum) speed until the deceleration
sequence is initiated. During all this time, the step counter continues to record the
number of steps taken.
Closed-loop operation ensures that the optimum acceleration is achieved, but at
the expense of more complex control circuitry, and the need to ﬁt a shaft encoder.
Relatively cheap encoders are, however, now available for direct ﬁtting to some
ranges of motors, and single chip microcontrollers are available which provide all
the necessary facilities for closed-loop control.
An appealing approach aimed at eliminating an encoder is to detect the
position of the rotor by online analysis of the signals (principally the rates of
change of currents) in the motor windings themselves – in other words, to use the
motor as its own encoder. A variety of approaches have been tried, including the
addition of high-frequency alternating voltages superimposed on the excited
phase, so that, as the rotor moves, the variation of inductance results in a modu-
lation of the alternating current component. Some success has been achieved with
particular motors, but the approach has not achieved widespread commercial
exploitation, perhaps because of competition from the brushless permanent
magnet servo drive.
To return ﬁnally to encoders, we should note that they are also used in open-
loop schemes when an absolute check on the number of steps taken is required. In
this context the encoder simply provides a tally of the total steps taken, and
normally plays no part in the generation of the step pulses. At some stage,
342
Electric Motors and Drives

however, the actual number of steps taken will be compared with the number of
step command pulses issued by the controller. When a disparity is detected,
indicating a loss (or gain of steps), the appropriate additional forward or backward
pulses can be added.
8. SWITCHED-RELUCTANCE MOTOR DRIVES
The switched-reluctance drive was developed in the 1980s to offer advantages in
terms of efﬁciency, power per unit weight and volume, robustness and operational
ﬂexibility. The motor and its associated power-electronic drive must be designed as
an integrated package, and optimized for a particular speciﬁcation, e.g. for
maximum overall efﬁciency with a speciﬁc load, or maximum speed range, peak
short-term torque or torque ripple. Despite being relatively new, the technology
has been used in a range of applications which can beneﬁt from its performance
characteristics including general purpose industrial drives, compressors and domestic
appliances.
8.1 Principle of operation
Like the stepping motor, the switched-reluctance motor is ‘doubly-salient’, i.e. it
has projecting poles on both rotor and stator. However, most switched-reluctance
motors are of much higher power than the largest stepper, and it turns out that in
the higher power ranges (where the winding resistances become much less signif-
icant), the doubly-salient arrangement is very effective as far as efﬁcient electro-
magnetic energy conversion is concerned.
A typical switched-reluctance motor is shown in Figure 10.19: this example has
12 stator poles and eight rotor poles, and represents a widely used arrangement, but
other pole combinations are used to suit different applications. The stator carries
Figure 10.19 Typical switched-reluctance motor. Each of the 12 stator poles carries
a concentrated winding, while the eight-pole rotor has no windings or magnets.
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
343

coils on each pole, while the rotor, which is made from laminations in the usual
way, has no windings or magnets2 and is therefore cheap to manufacture and
extremely robust. (See Plate 10.6)
In Figure 10.19 the 12 coils are grouped to form three phases, which are
independently energized from a 3-phase converter.
The motor rotates by exciting the phases sequentially in the sequence A, B, C for
anticlockwise rotation or A, C, B for clockwise rotation, the ‘nearest’ pair of rotor
poles being pulled into alignment with the appropriate stator poles by reluctance
torque action. In Figure 10.19 the four coils forming phase A are shown in black, the
polarities of the coil m.m.f.s being indicated by the letters N and S on the back of the
core. Each time a new phase is excited the equilibrium position of the rotor advances
by 15, so after one complete cycle (i.e. each of the three phases has been excited
once) the angle turned through is 45. The machine therefore rotates once for eight
fundamental cycles of supply to the stator windings, so in terms of the relationship
between the fundamental supply frequency and the speed of rotation, the machine
in Figure 10.19 behaves as a 16-pole conventional machine.
The structure is clearly the same as that of the variable-reluctance stepping
motor discussed earlier in this chapter, but there are important design differences
which reﬂect the different objectives (continuous rotation for the switched reluc-
tance, stepwise progression for the stepper), but otherwise the mechanisms of
torque production are identical. However, while the stepper is designed ﬁrst and
foremost for open-loop operation, the switched-reluctance motor is designed for
self-synchronous operation, the phases being switched by signals derived from
a shaft-mounted rotor position detector. In terms of performance, at all speeds
below the base speed continuous operation at full torque is possible. Above the base
speed, the ﬂux can no longer be maintained at full amplitude and the available
torque reduces with speed. The operating characteristics are thus very similar to
those of the other most important controlled-speed drives, but with the added
advantage that overall efﬁciencies are generally a per cent or two higher.
Given that the mechanism of torque production in the switched-reluctance
motor appears to be very different from that in d.c. machines, induction motors and
synchronous machines (all of which exploit the ‘BIl’ force on a conductor in
a magnetic ﬁeld), it might have been expected that one or other type would offer
such clear advantages that the other would fade away. In fact, there appears to be
little to choose between them overall, and one wonders whether the mechanisms of
operation are really so fundamentally different as our ingrained ways of looking at
things lead us to believe. Perhaps a visitor from another planet would note the
similarity in terms of volume, quantities and disposition of iron and copper, and
2 Recent uncertainties over future supplies of rare-earth magnet materials may renew interest in
switched-reluctance technology.
344
Electric Motors and Drives

overall performance, and bring some fresh enlightenment to bear so that we emerge
recognizing some underlying truth that hitherto has escaped us.
8.2 Torque prediction and control
If the iron in the magnetic circuit is treated as ideal, analytical expressions can be
derived to express the torque of a reluctance motor in terms of the rotor position
and the current in the windings. In practice, however, this analysis is of little real use,
not only because switched-reluctance motors are designed to operate with high
levels of magnetic saturation in parts of the magnetic circuit, but also because,
except at low speeds, it is not practicable to achieve speciﬁed current proﬁles.
The fact that high levels of saturation are involved makes the problem of
predicting torque at the design stage challenging, but despite the highly non-linear
relationships it is possible to compute the ﬂux, current and torque as functions of
rotor position, so that optimum control strategies can be devised to meet particular
performance speciﬁcations. Unfortunately this complexity means that there is no
simple equivalent circuit available to illuminate behavior.
As we saw when we discussed the stepping motor, to maximize the average
torque it would (in principle) be desirable to establish the full current in each phase
instantaneously, and to remove it instantaneously at the end of each positive torque
period. But, as illustrated in Figure 10.13, this is not possible even with a small
stepping motor, and certainly out of the question for switched-reluctance motors
(which have much higher inductance) except at low speeds where current chopping
(see Figure 10.15) is employed. For most of the speed range, the best that can be
done is to apply the full voltage available from the converter at the start of the ‘on’
period, and (using a circuit such as that shown in Figure 10.15) apply full negative
voltage at the end of the pulse by opening both of the switches.
Operation using full positive voltage at the beginning and full negative voltage
at the end of the ‘on’ period is referred to as ‘single-pulse’ operation. For all but
small motors (of less than say 1 kW) the phase resistance is negligible and conse-
quently the magnitude of the phase ﬂux linkage is determined by the applied
voltage and frequency, as we have seen many times previously with other types of
motor.
The relationship between the ﬂux linkage (j) and the voltage is embodied in
Faraday’s law, i.e. v ¼ dj/dt, so with the rectangular voltage waveform of single-
pulse operation the phase ﬂux linkage waveforms have a very simple triangular
shape, as in Figure 10.20 which shows the waveforms for phase A of a 3-phase
motor. (The waveforms for phases B are C are identical, but are not shown: they are
displaced by one-third and two-thirds of a cycle, as indicated by the arrows.) The
upper half of the diagram represents the situation at speed N, while the lower half
corresponds to a speed of 2N. As can be seen, at the higher speed (high frequency)
the ‘on’ period halves, so the amplitude of the ﬂux halves, leading to a reduction in
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
345

available torque. The same limitation was seen in the case of the inverter-fed
induction motor drive, the only difference being that the waveforms in that case
were sinusoidal rather than triangular.
It is important to note that these ﬂux waveforms do not depend on the rotor
position, but the corresponding current waveforms do because the m.m.f. needed
for a given ﬂux depends on the effective reluctance of the magnetic circuit, and this
of course varies with the position of the rotor.
To get the most motoring torque for any given phase ﬂux waveform, it is
obvious that the rise and fall of the ﬂux must be timed to coincide with the rotor
position: ideally, the ﬂux should only be present when it produces positive torque,
and be zero whenever it would produce negative torque, but given the delay in
build-up of the ﬂux it may be better to switch on early so that the ﬂux reaches
a decent level at the point when it can produce the most torque, even if this does
lead to some negative torque at the start and ﬁnish of the cycle.
The job of the torque control system is to switch each phase on and off at the
optimum rotor position in relation to the torque being demanded at the time, and
Figure 10.20 Voltage and ﬂux waveforms for switched-reluctance motor in ‘single-
pulse’ mode.
346
Electric Motors and Drives

this is done by keeping track of the rotor position, possibly using a rotor position
sensor.3 Just what angles constitute the optimum depends on what is to be opti-
mized (e.g. average torque, overall efﬁciency), and this in turn is decided by
reference to the data stored digitally in the controller ‘memory map’ that relates
current, ﬂux, rotor position and torque for the particular machine. Torque control
is thus considerably less straightforward than in d.c. drives, where torque is directly
proportional to armature current, or induction motor drives where torque is
proportional to slip.
8.3 Power converter and overall drive characteristics
An important difference between the switched-reluctance motor and all other self-
synchronous motors is that its full torque capability can be achieved without having
to provide for both positive and negative currents in the phases. This is because the
torque does not depend on the direction of current in the phase-winding. The
advantage of such ‘unipolar’ drives is that because each of the main switching
devices is permanently connected in series with one of the motor windings (as in
Figure 10.15), there is no possibility of the ‘shoot-through’ fault (see Chapter 2)
which necessitates the inclusion of ‘dead time’ in the switching strategies of the
conventional inverter.
Overall closed-loop speed control is obtained in the conventional way with the
speed error acting as a torque demand to the torque control system described above.
However, if a position sensor is ﬁtted the speed can be derived from the position
signal.
In common with other self-synchronous drives, a wide range of operating
characteristics is available. If the input converter is fully controlled, continuous
regeneration and full four-quadrant operation is possible, and the usual constant
torque, constant power and series-type characteristic is regarded as standard. Low-
speed torque can be uneven unless special measures are taken to proﬁle the current
pulses, but the particular merit of the switched-reluctance drive is that continuous
low-speed high-torque operation is usually better than for most competing systems
in terms of overall efﬁciency.
3 As in all drives the use of a position sensor is avoided wherever possible because of the signiﬁcant extra
cost and complexity. Sophisticated software models of the motor are therefore employed to deduce
rotor position from analysis of the current and voltage waveforms.
Stepping and Switched-reluctance Motors
347

CHAPTER ELEVEN
Motor/Drive Selection
1. INTRODUCTION
The selection process often highlights difﬁculties in three areas. First, as we have
discovered in the preceding chapters, there is a good deal of overlap between the
characteristics of the major types of motor and drive. This makes it impossible to lay
down a set of hard and fast rules to guide the user straight to the best solution for
a particular application. Secondly, users tend to underestimate the importance of
starting with a comprehensive speciﬁcation of what they really want, and they
seldom realize how much weight attaches to such things as the steady-state torque–
speed curve, the dynamic performance required, the inertia of the load, the pattern
of operation (continuous or intermittent), the environment and the question of
whether or not the drive needs to be capable of regeneration. And thirdly they may
be unaware of the existence of standards and legislation, and hence can be bafﬂed by
questions from any potential supplier.
The aim in this chapter is to assist the user in taking the ﬁrst steps by giving some
of these matters an airing. We begin by laying out the availability, ratings and speed,
and then the main characteristics of the various motor and drive types that we have
highlighted earlier in the book. We then move on to the questions which need to
be asked about the load and pattern of operation, and ﬁnally look brieﬂy at the
matter of standards. The whole business of selection is so broad that it really warrants
a book to itself, but the cursory treatment here should at least help the user to specify
the drive rating and arrive at a shortlist of possibilities.
2. POWER RATINGS AND CAPABILITIES
The four tables in this section represent an attempt to condense the most important
aspects that will be of interest to the user into a readily accessible form. It will be
evident from the weight given to a.c. drives in the book that they now dominate the
scene, and this is reﬂected in the fact that only the ﬁrst table deals with d.c. drives.
The scope of a.c. drives is too great for a single table, so to aid digestion we have split
them into three.
The ﬁrst (Figure 11.1) covers conventional (brushed) d.c. motor drives, which
remain signiﬁcant despite their diminishing market share. However, the second
table (Figure 11.2 – a.c. drives) is by far the most important because it includes the
inverter-fed induction motor and brushless permanent magnet motor drives which
Electric Motors and Drives
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-098332-5.00011-5
 2013 Austin Hughes and William Drury.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.
349j

are now the most widely used industrial drives. Figure 11.3 deals with (predomi-
nantly large) a.c. drives, which have limited and/or niche application and are
therefore less common; for completeness the static Scherbius drive is included
although it was not discussed. The fourth table (Figure 11.4) contains three unlikely
bedfellows whose conjunction reﬂects the fact that they could not be ﬁtted in
elsewhere.
3. DRIVE CHARACTERISTICS
The successful integration of electronic variable-speed drives into a system depends
upon knowledge of the key characteristics of the application and the site where the
system will be used. The correct drive also has to be selected, but this is often simpler
than it used to be because the voltage source pulse-width modulation (PWM)
inverter has become universally adopted for almost all applications, and its control
characteristics can be adapted to suit most loads with relative ease. It is still important
Figure 11.1 Conventional (brushed) d.c. motor drives.
350
Electric Motors and Drives

to understand the general characteristics of the various types of drive, however, and
these are listed in summary form in the ﬁfth table (Figure 11.5). (Note that the data
on overloads relates to typical industrial equipment, but users will inevitably
encounter a range of different ﬁgures from the various suppliers.) Finally, a summary
of the pros and cons of d.c. and a.c. drives is given in the sixth table (Figure 11.6).
The wealth of information in these tables should be of great value in assisting
prospective users to narrow down their options.
3.1 Maximum speed and speed range
This is an important consideration in many drives, so a few words are appropriate.
We saw in Chapter 1 that, as a general rule, for a given power the higher the base
speed the smaller the motor. In practice there are only a few applications where
motors with base speeds below a few hundred rev/min are attractive, and it is
Figure 11.2 Induction, brushless permanent magnet and excited rotor synchronous
a.c. motor drives.
Motor/Drive Selection
351

Figure 11.3 Slip energy recovery and direct converter drives.
Figure 11.4 Soft start, switched reluctance and stepping motor drives.
352
Electric Motors and Drives

usually best to obtain low ‘maximum’ speeds by means of mechanical speed
reduction often in the form of a gearbox.
Motor speeds above 10,000 rev/min are also unusual except in small universal
motors and special-purpose inverter-fed motors for applications such as aluminum
machining.Themajorityofmotorshavebasespeeds between1500and3000 rev/min:
this range is attractive as far as motor design is concerned since acceptable power/
weight ratios are obtained, and these speeds are also satisfactory as far as mechanical
transmission is concerned. Note, however, that as explained in Chapter 1, the higher
the rated speed the more compact the motor, so there will be instances where a high-
speed motor is preferred when minimizing motor size is of paramount importance.
In controlled-speed applications, the range over which the steady-state speed
must be controlled, the required torque–speed characteristic, the duty cycle and the
accuracy of the speed holding, are signiﬁcant factors in the selection process. In
Chapter 8 we looked at some of these aspects, notably in relation to motor cooling.
For constant torque loads which require operation at all speeds, the inverter-fed
Figure 11.5 Characteristics of the most popular types of drive.
Motor/Drive Selection
353

induction motor, the inverter-fed synchronous machine and the d.c. drive are
possibilities, but only the d.c. drive would come as standard with a force-ventilated
motor capable of continuous operation with full torque at very low speeds.
Fan or pump-type loads (see below), with a wide operating speed range, are
a somewhat easier proposition because the torque is low at low speeds. In most
circumstances, the inverter-fed induction motor (using a standard motor) is the
natural choice.
Figures for accuracy of speed holding can sometimes cause confusion, as they are
usually given as a percentage of the base speed. Hence with a drive claiming a decent
speed holding accuracy of 0.2% and a base speed of 2000 rev/min, the user can
expect the actual speed to be between 1996 rev/min and 2004 rev/min when the
speed reference is 2000 rev/min. But if the speed reference is set for 100 rev/min,
the actual speed can be anywhere between 96 rev/min and 104 rev/min, and still be
within the speciﬁcation.
4. LOAD REQUIREMENTS – TORQUE–SPEED
CHARACTERISTICS
The most important things we need to know about the load are the steady-state
torque–speed characteristics, the effective inertia as seen by the motor and what
Figure 11.6 Advantages and disadvantages of d.c. and a.c. drives.
354
Electric Motors and Drives

dynamic performance is required. At one extreme, for example in a steel rolling
mill, it may be necessary for the speed to be set at any value over a wide ran-
ge, and for the mill to react very quickly when a new target speed is demanded.
Having reached the set speed, it may be essential that it is held very precisely
even when subjected to sudden load changes. At the other extreme, for example
a large ventilating fan, the range of set speed may be quite limited (perhaps
from 80 to 100%); it may not be important to hold the set speed very precisely;
and the times taken to change speeds, or to run up from rest, are unlikely to be
critical.
At full speed both of these examples may demand the same power, and at ﬁrst
sight might therefore be satisﬁed by the same drive system. But the ventilating fan is
obviously an easier proposition, and it would be overkill to use the same system for
both. The rolling mill would call for a regenerative drive with speed or position
feedback, while the fan could quite happily manage with a simple open-loop, i.e.
sensorless, inverter-fed induction motor drive.
Although loads can vary enormously, it is customary to classify them into two
major categories, referred to as ‘constant-torque’ or ‘fan or pump’ types. We will use
the example of a constant-torque load to illustrate in detail what needs to be done to
arrive at a speciﬁcation for the torque–speed curve. An extensive treatment is
warranted because this is often the stage at which users come unstuck.
4.1 Constant-torque load
A constant-torque load implies that the torque required to keep the load running is
the same at all speeds. A good example is a drum-type hoist, where the torque
required varies with the load on the hook, but not with the speed of hoisting. An
example is shown in Figure 11.7.
The drum diameter is 0.5 m, so if the maximum load (including the cable) is say
1000 kg, the tension in the cable (mg) will be 9810 N, and the torque applied by the
load at the drum will be given by force  radius ¼ 9810  0.25 z 2500 Nm.
When the speed is constant (i.e. the load is not accelerating), the torque provided by
the motor at the drum must be equal and opposite to that exerted at the drum by
the load. (The word ‘opposite’ in the last sentence is often omitted, it being
Figure 11.7 Motor driven hoist – a constant-torque load.
Motor/Drive Selection
355

understood that steady-state motor and load torque must necessarily act in
opposition.)
Suppose that the hoisting speed is to be controllable at any value up to
a maximum of 0.5 m/s, and that we want this to correspond with a maximum
motor speed of around 1500 rev/min, which is a reasonable speed for a wide range
of motors. A hoisting speed of 0.5 m/s corresponds to a drum speed of 19 rev/min,
so a suitable gear ratio would be say 80:1, giving a maximum motor speed of
1520 rev/min.
The load torque, as seen at the motor side of the gearbox, will be reduced by
a factor of 80, from 2500 to 31 Nm at the motor. We must also allow for friction in
the gearbox, equivalent to perhaps 20% of the full-load torque, so the maximum
motor torque required for hoisting will be 37 Nm, and this torque must be available
at all speeds up to the maximum of 1520 rev/min.
We can now draw the steady-state torque–speed curve of the load as seen by the
motor, as shown in Figure 11.8.
The steady-state motor power is obtained from the product of torque (Nm) and
angular velocity (rad/s). The maximum continuous motor power for hoisting is
therefore given by
Pmax ¼ 37  1520  2p
60 ¼ 5:9 kW
(11.1)
At this stage it is always a good idea to check that we would obtain roughly the same
answer for the power by considering the work done per second at the load. The
force (F) on the load is 9810 N, and the velocity (v) is 0.5 m/s, so the power (Fv) is
4.9 kW. This is 20% less than we obtained above, because here we have ignored the
power lost in the gearbox.
Figure 11.8 Torque requirements for motor in hoist application (Figure 11.7).
356
Electric Motors and Drives

So far we have established that we need a motor capable of continuously
delivering 5.9 kW at 1520 rev/min in order to lift the heaviest load at the maximum
required speed. However, we have not yet addressed the question of how the load is
accelerated from rest and brought up to the maximum speed. During the accel-
eration phase the motor must produce a torque greater than the load torque, or else
the load will descend as soon as the brake is lifted. The greater the difference
between the motor torque and the load torque, the higher the acceleration.
Suppose we want the heaviest load to reach full speed from rest in say 1 second, and
suppose we decide that the acceleration is to be constant. We can calculate the
required accelerating torque from the equation of motion, i.e.
Torque ðNmÞ ¼ Inertia

kg m2
 Angular acceleration
 rad
sec2

(11.2)
We usually ﬁnd it best to work in terms of the variables as seen by the motor, and
therefore we ﬁrst need to ﬁnd the effective total inertia as seen at the motor shaft,
then calculate the motor acceleration, and ﬁnally use equation (11.2) to obtain the
accelerating torque.
The effective inertia consists of the inertia of the motor itself, the referred inertia
of the drum and gearbox, and the referred inertia of the load on the hook. The term
‘referred inertia’ means the apparent inertia, viewed from the motor side of the
gearbox. If the gearbox has a ratio of n:1 (where n is greater than 1), an inertia of J on
the low-speed side appears to be an inertia of J/n2 at the high-speed side. (This
formula is the same as that for ﬁnding the referred impedance as seen at the primary
of an ideal transformer, as discussed in Appendix 2.)
In this example the load actually moves in a straight line, so we need to ask
what the effective inertia of the load is, as ‘seen’ at the drum. The geometry here is
simple, and it is not difﬁcult to see that as far as the inertia seen by the drum is
concerned the load appears to be ﬁxed to the surface of the drum. The load inertia
at the drum is then obtained by using the formula for the inertia of a mass m
located at radius r, i.e. J ¼ mr2, yielding the effective load inertia at the drum as
1000 kg  (0.25 m)2 ¼ 62.5 kg m2.
The
effective
inertia
of
the
load
as
seen
by
the
motor
is
1/
(80)2  62.5 z 0.01 kg m2. To this must be added ﬁrst the motor inertia which we
can obtain by consulting the manufacturer’s catalogue for a 5.9 kW, 1520 rev/min
motor. This will be straightforward for a d.c. motor, but a.c. motor catalogues tend
to give ratings at utility frequencies only, and here a motor with the right torque
needs to be selected, and the possible torque–speed curve for the type of drive
considered. For simplicity let us assume we have found a motor of precisely the
required rating which has a rotor inertia of 0.02 kg m2. The referred inertia of the
drum and gearbox must be added and this again we have to calculate or look up.
Suppose this yields a further 0.02 kg m2. The total effective inertia is thus
0.05 kg m2, of which 40% is due to the motor itself.
Motor/Drive Selection
357

The acceleration is straightforward to obtain, since we know the motor speed is
required to rise from zero to 1520 rev/min in 1 second. The angular acceleration is
given by the increase in speed divided by the time taken, i.e.

1520  2p
60

O1 ¼ 160 rad=sec2
We can now calculate the accelerating torque from equation (11.2) as
T ¼ 0:05  160 ¼ 8 Nm
Hence in order to meet both the steady-state and dynamic torque requirements,
a drive capable of delivering a torque of 45 Nm (¼37 þ 8) at all speeds up to
1520 rev/min is required, as indicated in Figure 11.8.
In the case of a hoist, the anticipated pattern of operation may not be known,
but it is likely that the motor will spend most of its time hoisting rather than
accelerating. Hence, although the peak torque of 45 Nm must be available at all
speeds, this will not be a continuous demand, and will probably be within the short-
term overload capability of a drive which is continuously rated at 5.9 kW.
We should also consider what happens if it is necessary to lower the fully loaded
hook. We allowed for friction of 20% of the load torque (31 Nm), so during descent
we can expect the friction to exert a braking torque equivalent to 6.2 Nm. But in
order to prevent the hook from running away, we will need a total torque of
31 Nm, so to restrain the load, the motor will have to produce a torque of 24.8 Nm.
We would naturally refer to this as a braking torque because it is necessary to
prevent the load on the hook from running away, but in fact the torque remains in
the same direction as when hoisting. The speed is, however, negative, and in terms
of a ‘four-quadrant’ diagram (e.g. Figure 3.12) we have moved from quadrant 1 into
quadrant 4, and thus the power ﬂow is reversed and the motor is regenerating, the
loss of potential energy of the descending load being converted back into electrical
form (and losses). Hence if we wish to cater for this situation we must go for a drive
that is capable of continuous regeneration: such a drive would also have the facility
for operating in quadrant 3 to produce negative torque to drive down the empty
hook if its weight was insufﬁcient to lower itself.
In this example the torque is dominated by the steady-state requirement, and
the inertia-dependent accelerating torque is comparatively modest. Of course if we
had speciﬁed that the load was to be accelerated in one-ﬁfth of a second rather than
1 second, we would require an accelerating torque of 40 Nm rather than 8 Nm, and
as far as torque requirements are concerned the acceleration torque would be more
or less the same as the steady-state running torque. In this case it would be necessary
to consult the drive manufacturer to determine the drive rating, which would
depend on the frequency of the start/stop sequence.
The question of how to rate the motor when the loading is intermittent is
explored more fully later, but it is worth noting that if the inertia is appreciable
358
Electric Motors and Drives

the stored rotational kinetic energy (½ J u2) may become very signiﬁcant,
especially when the drive is required to bring the load to rest. Any stored energy
has either to be dissipated in the motor and drive itself, or returned to the supply.
All motors are inherently capable of regenerating, so the arrangement whereby
the kinetic energy is recovered and dumped as heat in a resistor within the drive
enclosure is the cheaper option, but is only practicable when the energy to be
absorbed is modest. If the stored kinetic energy is large, the drive must be capable
of returning energy to the supply, and this inevitably pushes up the cost of the
converter.
In the case of our hoist, the stored kinetic energy is only
1
2  0:05

1520  2p
60
2
¼ 633 joules
or about 1% of the energy needed to heat up a mug of water for a cup of coffee.
Such modest energies could easily be absorbed by a resistor, but given that in this
instance we are providing a regenerative drive, this energy would also be returned
to the supply.
4.2 Inertia matching
There are some applications where the inertia dominates the torque requirement,
and the question of selecting the right gearbox ratio has to be addressed. In this
context the term ‘inertia matching’ often causes confusion, so it is worth explaining
what it means.
Suppose we have a motor with a given torque, and we want to drive an inertial
load via a gearbox. As discussed previously, the gear ratio determines the effective
inertia as ‘seen’ by the motor: a high step-down ratio (i.e. load speed much less than
motor speed) leads to a very low referred inertia, and vice versa.
If the speciﬁcation calls for the acceleration of the load to be maximized, it turns
out that the optimum gear ratio is that which causes the referred inertia of the load
to be equal to the inertia of the motor. Applications in which load acceleration is
important include all types of positioning drives, e.g. in machine tools and
phototypesetting. This explains why brushless permanent magnet synchronous
motors, discussed in Chapter 9, are available from a wide range of manufacturers
with different inertias. (There is an electrical parallel here – to get the most power
into a load from a source with internal resistance R, the load resistance must be
made equal to R.)
It is important to note, however, that inertia matching only maximizes the
acceleration of the load. Frequently it turns out that some other aspect of the spec-
iﬁcation (e.g. the maximum required load speed) cannot be met if the gearing is
chosen to satisfy the inertia matching criterion, and it then becomes necessary to
accept reduced acceleration of the load in favor of higher speed.
Motor/Drive Selection
359

4.3 Fan and pump loads
Fans and centrifugal pumps have steady-state torque–speed characteristics which
generally have the shape shown in Figure 11.9.
These characteristics are often approximately represented by assuming that the
torque required is proportional to the square of the speed, and thus power is
proportional to the cube of the speed. We should note, however, that the
approximation is seldom valid at low speeds because most real fans or pumps have
a signiﬁcant static friction or breakaway torque (as shown in Figure 11.9) which
must be overcome when starting.
When we consider the power–speed relationships the striking difference
between the constant-torque and fan-type load is underlined. If the motor is rated
for continuous operation at the full speed, it will be very lightly loaded (typically
around 12% rated power) at half speed, whereas with the constant-torque load the
power rating will be 50% at half speed. Fan-type loads which require speed control
can therefore be handled by drives such as the inverter-fed cage induction motor,
which can run happily at reduced speed and very much reduced torque without the
need for additional cooling. If we assume that the rate of acceleration required is
modest, the motor will require a torque–speed characteristic which is just a little
greater than the load torque at all speeds. This deﬁnes the operating region in the
torque–speed plane, from which the drive can be selected.
Many fans, which are required to operate almost continuously at rated speed, do
not require speed control of course, and are well served by utility-frequency
induction motors.
5. GENERAL APPLICATION CONSIDERATIONS
5.1 Regenerative operation and braking
All motors are inherently capable of regenerative operation, but in drives the basic
power converter as used for the ‘bottom of the range’ version will not normally be
Figure 11.9 Torque–speed characteristics for fan-type load.
360
Electric Motors and Drives

capable of continuous regenerative operation. The cost of providing for fully
regenerative operation is usually considerable, and users should always ask the
question ‘do I really need it?’
In most cases it is not the recovery of energy for its own sake which is of prime
concern, but rather the need to achieve a speciﬁed dynamic performance. Where
rapid reversal is called for, for example if kinetic energy has to be removed quickly,
and, as discussed in the previous section, this implies that the energy is either returned
to the supply (regenerative operation) or dissipated (usually in a braking resistor). An
important point to bear in mind is that a non-regenerative drive will have an asym-
metrical transient speed response, so that when a higher speed is demanded, the extra
kinetic energy can be provided quickly, but if a lower speed is demanded, the drive
can do no better than reduce the torque to zero and allow the speed to coast down.
5.2 Duty cycle and rating
This is a complex matter, which in essence reﬂects the fact that whereas all motors
are governed by a thermal (temperature rise) limitation, there are different patterns
of operation which can lead to the same ultimate temperature rise.
Broadly speaking the procedure is to choose the motor on the basis of the root
mean square of the power cycle, on the assumption that the losses (and therefore the
temperature rise) vary with the square of the load. This is a reasonable approxi-
mation for most motors, especially if the variation in power is due to variations in
load torque at an essentially constant speed, as is often the case, and the thermal
time-constant of the motor is long compared with the period of the loading cycle.
(The thermal time-constant has the same signiﬁcance as it does in relation to any
ﬁrst-order linear system, e.g. an R/C circuit. If the motor is started from ambient
temperature and run at a constant load, it takes typically four or ﬁve time-constants
to reach its steady operating temperature.) Thermal time-constants vary from more
than an hour for the largest motors (e.g. in a steel mill) through tens of minutes for
medium-power machines down to minutes for fractional-horsepower motors and
seconds for small stepping motors.
To illustrate the estimation of rating when the load varies periodically, suppose
a constant-frequency cage induction motor is required to run at a power of 4 kW
for 2 minutes, followed by 2 minutes running light, then 2 minutes at 2 kW, then 2
minutes running light, this 8-minute pattern being repeated continuously. To
choose an appropriate power rating we need to ﬁnd the r.m.s. power, which means
exactly what it says, i.e. it is the square root of the mean (average) of the square of
the power. The variation of power is shown in the upper part of Figure 11.10,
which has been drawn on the basis that when running light the power is negligible.
The ‘power squared’ is shown in the lower part of the ﬁgure.
The average power is 1.5 kW, the average of the power squared is 5 kW2, and
the r.m.s. power is therefore O5 kW, i.e. 2.24 kW. A motor that is continuously
Motor/Drive Selection
361

rated at 2.24 kW would therefore be suitable for this application, provided of course
that it is capable of meeting the overload torque associated with the 4 kW period.
The motor must therefore be able to deliver a torque that is greater than the
continuous rated torque by a factor of 4/2.25, i.e. 178%: this would be within the
capability of most general-purpose induction motors.
Motor suppliers are accustomed to recommending the best type of motor for
a given pattern of operation, and they will typically classify the duty type in one of
eight standard categories which cover the most commonly encountered modes of
operation. As far as rating is concerned the most common classiﬁcations are
maximum continuous rating, where the motor is capable of operating for an
unlimited period, and short time rating, where the motor can only be operated for
a limited time (typically 10, 30 or 60 minutes) starting from ambient temperature.
NEMA, in the USA, refer to motor duty cycles in terms of continuous, intermittent
or special duty. IEC 60034-1 deﬁnes duty cycles in eight ratings S1.S8.
It is important to add that in controlled-speed applications, the duty cycle also
impacts the power electronic converter and here the thermal time constants are very
much shorter than in the motor. The duty cycle can be very important in some
applications, and should be clearly stated in a torque and speed–time proﬁle to
ensure that there is no ambiguity that could lead to subsequent disappointment.
5.3 Enclosures and cooling
There is clearly a world of difference between the harsh environment faced by
a winch motor on the deck of an ocean-going ship and the comparative comfort
enjoyed by a motor driving the drum of an ofﬁce photocopier. The former must be
Figure 11.10 Calculation of r.m.s. power rating for periodically varying load.
362
Electric Motors and Drives

protected against the ingress of rain and sea water, while the latter can rely on a dry
and largely dust-free atmosphere.
Classifying the extremely diverse range of environments poses a potential
problem, but fortunately this is one area where international standards have been
agreed and are widely used. The International Electrotechnical Committee (IEC)
standards for motor enclosures are now almost universal and take the form of
a classiﬁcation number preﬁxed by the letters IP, and followed by two digits. The
ﬁrst digit indicates the protection level against ingress of solid particles ranging from
1 (solid bodies greater than 50 mm diameter) to 5 (dust), while the second relates to
the level of protection against ingress of water ranging from 1 (dripping water)
through 5 (jets of water) to 8 (submersible). A zero in either the ﬁrst or second digit
indicates no protection.
Methods of motor cooling have also been classiﬁed and the more common
arrangements are indicated by the letters IC followed by two digits, the ﬁrst of
which indicates the cooling arrangement (e.g. 4 indicates cooling through the
surface of the frame of the motor) while the second shows how the cooling circuit
power is provided (e.g. 1 indicates motor-driven fan).
The most common motor enclosures for standard industrial electrical machines
are IP21 and 23 for d.c. motors; IP44 and 54 for induction motors; and IP65 and 66
for brushless permanent magnet synchronous motors. These classiﬁcations are
known in the United States, but it is common practice for manufacturers there to
adopt less formal designations, for example the following:
Open drip proof (ODP): Motors with ventilating openings, which permit passage
of external air over and around the windings. (Similar to IP23)
Totally enclosed fan cooled (TEFC): A fan is attached to the shaft to push air over
the frame during operation to enhance the cooling process. (Similar to IP54)
Washdown duty (W): An enclosure designed for use in the food processing
industry and other applications routinely exposed to washdown, chemicals,
humidity and other severe environments. (Similar to IP65)
5.4 Dimensional standards
Standardization is improving in this area, though it remains far from universal. Such
matters as shaft diameter, center height, mounting arrangements, terminal box
position, and overall dimensions are fairly closely deﬁned for the mainstream motors
(induction, d.c.) over a wide size range, but standardization is relatively poor at the
low-power end because so many motors are tailor-made for speciﬁc applications.
Standardization is also poor in relation to brushless permanent magnet motors.
Paradoxically, the lack of standardization, particularly in terms of frame size,
mounting arrangements and shaft dimensions, has been cited as a signiﬁcant driver
of innovation in these machines, whereas the induction motor has been handi-
capped by its universal success and resulting standardization!
Motor/Drive Selection
363

5.5 Supply interaction and harmonics
As we have seen in section 5 of Chapter 8, most converter-fed drives cause
distortion of the mains voltage which can upset other sensitive equipment,
particularly in the immediate vicinity of the installation. We have also discussed
some of the options available to mitigate such effects. This is, however, a complex
subject area and one which, in most cases, requires a systems overview rather than
consideration of a single drive or even group of drives. It requires an intimate
knowledge of the supply system, particularly its impedances.
With more and larger drives being installed, the problem of mains distortion is
increasing, and supply authorities therefore react by imposing increasingly stringent
statutory limits governing what is allowable.
The usual pattern is for the supply authority to specify the maximum amplitude
and spectrum of the harmonic currents at the point of supply to a particular
customer. If the proposed installation exceeds these limits, appropriate ﬁlter circuits
must be connected in parallel with the installation. These can be costly, and their
design is far from simple because the electrical characteristics of the supply system
need to be known in advance in order to avoid unwanted resonance phenomena.
Users need to be alert to the potential problem and, where appropriate, ensure that
the drive supplier takes responsibility for handling it.
Measurement of harmonic currents is not straightforward and here the standards
help, with IEC 61000-4-7:2002 providing valuable guidance.
364
Electric Motors and Drives

APPENDIX ONE
Introduction to Closed-loop
Control
A1.1. OUTLINE OF APPROACH
The aim of this Appendix is to help readers who are not familiar with closed-loop
control and feedback to feel conﬁdent when they meet such ideas in the drives
context. In line with the remainder of the book, the treatment avoids mathematics
where possible, and in particular it makes only passing reference to transform
techniques. This approach is chosen deliberately, despite the limitations it imposes,
in the belief that it is more useful for the reader to obtain a sound grasp of what really
matters in a control system, rather than to become adept at detailed analysis or
design.
Traditionally, control ideas are introduced at the same time as the Laplace
transform technique. The Laplace approach to the analysis and design of linear
systems (i.e. those that obey the principle of superposition) is unchallenged for the
very good reason that it works wonderfully well. It allows the differential equations
that describe the dynamic behavior of the systems we wish to control to be recast
into algebraic form. Instead of having to solve differential equations in the time
domain, we are able to transform the equations and emerge in a parallel universe in
which algebraic equations in the complex frequency or ‘s’ domain replace differ-
ential equations in time. For modeling control systems this approach is ideal because
we can draw simple block diagrams containing algebraic ‘s-domain transfer func-
tions’ that fully represent both the steady-state and dynamic (transient) relationships
of elements such as motors, ampliﬁers, ﬁlters, and transducers. We can assess
whether the performance of a proposed system will be satisfactory by doing simple
analysis in the s-domain, and decide how to improve matters if necessary. When we
have completed our studies in the s-domain, we have a set of inverse transforms to
allow us to ‘beam back’ to our real time domain.
Despite the undoubted power of the transform method, the fact that the
newcomer has ﬁrst to learn what amounts to a new language presents a real chal-
lenge. And in the process of concentrating on developing transfer functions,
understanding how system order inﬂuences transient response, and other supporting
matters, some of the key ideas that are central to successful control systems can easily
be overlooked.
In addition to having to come to grips with new mathematical techniques, the
newcomer has to learn many new terms (e.g. bandwidth, integrator, damping
365j

factor, dB/octave), and is expected to divine the precise meaning of other casually
used terms (e.g. gain, time-constant) by reference to the particular context in which
they are used.
Our aim here is to avoid these potential pitfalls by restricting our analytical
exploration to steady-state performance only. In the context of a speed-controlled
drive, for example, this means that although our discussion will reveal the factors
that determine how well the actual steady-state speed corresponds with the target
speed, we will have to accept that it will not tell us how the speed gets from one
value to another when the speed reference is changed (i.e. the transient response).
By accepting this limitation we can avoid the need to use transform techniques, and
concentrate instead on understanding what makes the system tick.
A1.2. CLOSED-LOOP (FEEDBACK) SYSTEMS
A closed-loop system is one where there is feedback from the output, feedback
being deﬁned by the Oxford English Dictionary as ‘the modiﬁcation of a process by its
results or effects, especially the difference between the desired and actual result’. We
will begin by looking at some examples of feedback systems and identify their key
features.
A1.2.1 Error-activated feedback systems
An everyday example of a feedback system is the traditional lavatory cistern (Figure
A1.1), where the aim is to keep the water level in the tank at the full mark. The
valve through which water is admitted to the tank is controlled by the position of
the arm carrying a ball that ﬂoats in the water. The steady-state condition is shown
in diagram (a), the inlet valve being closed when the arm is horizontal.
When the WC is ﬂushed (represented by the bottom valve being opened – see
diagram (b)), the water level falls rapidly. As soon as the water level falls the ball
drops, thereby opening the inlet valve so that fresh water enters the tank in an effort
to maintain the water level. Given that the purpose of the system is to maintain the
water level at the target level, it should be clear from diagram (b) why, in a control
Figure A1.1 Simple closed-loop regulating system.
366
Electric Motors and Drives

systems context, the angle qe is referred to as the ‘error angle’: when the water is at
the desired level, the error is zero.
This is an example of an ‘error-activated’ system, because any error automati-
cally initiates corrective action. The fact that the water level has fallen is commu-
nicated or fed back to the valve, which responds by admitting more water to
combat the ‘error’. In traditional cisterns the inlet water rate is proportional to the
angle qe, so when the tank is empty it ﬁlls at a high rate and the water level rises
rapidly. As the level rises the valve begins to close and the rate at which the tank
reﬁlls reduces until ﬁnally when the target level is reached the valve is fully closed
and the water level is restored to its target value (i.e. full). In this particular example
the ‘feedback’ of the ball position takes the form of a direct mechanical connection
between the water level detector (the ﬂoating ball) and the inlet valve. Most of the
control systems that we meet in a drives context are also error-activated, though in
the majority of cases the feedback is less direct than in this example.
Alert readers will have spotted that although the aim of the system is to maintain
a constant water level, the level must change every time corrective action is required.
The only time that the system can have no error is when it reaches the steady state,
with no water going out and the inlet valve fully closed. If there were a leak in the
tank, causing water to drain away, the water level would stabilize at a lower level, at
which the inlet valve was just open sufﬁciently wide to admit water at the same rate
as it was leaking away. Clearly, an inlet valve that yields a high ﬂow rate for a very
small angle will be better able to maintain the correct level than one that needs
a large angle error to yield the same ﬂow rate. In control terms, this is equivalent to
saying that the higher the ‘gain’ (expressed as ﬂow rate/error angle), the better.
Another important observation is that although it is essential that there is a supply
of water available at the inlet valve, the water pressure itself is not important as far as
the target level is concerned: if the pressure is high the tank will ﬁll up more quickly
than if the pressure is low, but the ﬁnal level will be the same. This is because the
amount of water admitted depends on the integral with respect to time of the inlet
ﬂow rate, so the target level will ultimately be reached regardless of the inlet pressure.
In fact this example illustrates the principal advantage of ‘integral control’, in that the
steady-state error ultimately becomes zero. We will return to this later.
Finally, it is worth pointing out that this is an example of a regulator, i.e.
a closed-loop system where the target level does not change, whereas in most of the
systems we meet in drives the target or reference signal will vary. However, if it was
ever necessary to alter the target level in the cistern, it could be accomplished by
adjusting the distance between ball and arm, as in diagram (c).
A1.2.2 Closed-loop systems
To illustrate the origin and meaning of the term ‘closed loop’ we will consider
another familiar activity, that of driving a car, and in particular we will imagine that
Introduction to Closed-loop Control
367

we are required to drive at a speed of exactly 50 km/h, the speed to be veriﬁed by an
auditor from the bureau of standards.
The ﬁrst essential is an accurate speedometer, because we must measure the
output of the ‘process’ if we are to control it accurately. Our eyes convey the ‘actual
speed’ signal (from the speedometer dial) to our brain, which calculates the
difference or error between the target speed and the actual speed. If the actual speed
was 30 km/h, the brain would conclude that we were 20 km/h too slow and
instruct our foot to press much harder on the accelerator. As we see the speed rising
towards the target, the brain will decide that we can ease off the accelerator a little so
that we don’t overshoot the desired speed. If a headwind springs up, or we reach
a hill, any drop in speed will be seen and we will press harder on the gas pedal;
conversely, if we ﬁnd speed is rising due to a following wind or a falling gradient, we
apply less accelerator, or even apply the brake. This set of interactions can be
represented diagrammatically as in Figure A1.2.
Diagrams of this sort – known as block diagrams – are widely used in control
system studies because they provide a convenient pictorial representation of the
inter-relationships between the various elements of the system. The signiﬁcance of
the lines joining the blocks depends on the context: for example, the line entering
the speedometer represents the fact that there is a hardware input from the wheels
(perhaps a mechanical one, or more likely a train of electronic pulses whose
frequency corresponds to speed), while the line leaving the speedometer represents
the transmission of information via reﬂected light to the eyes of the driver. In many
instances (e.g. an electronic ampliﬁer) the output from a block is directly propor-
tional to the input, but in others (for example, the ‘vehicle dynamics’ block in
Figure A1.2) the output depends on the integral of the input with respect to time.
The lower part of the block diagram represents the speed feedback path; the
upper part (known as the forward path) represents the process itself. The fact that all
the blocks are connected together so that any change in the output of one affects all
the others, gives rise to the name closed-loop system.
Figure A1.2 Block diagram representation of driving a car at a target speed.
368
Electric Motors and Drives

The circles represent summing junctions, i.e. points where signals are added or
subtracted. The output signal from the summing junction is the sum of the input
signals, or the difference if one is negative. The most important summing junction is
the one on the left (inside the driver’s brain!) where the actual speed (via the eyes) is
subtracted from the reference speed (stored in the brain) to obtain the speed error.
The negative sign on the speed feedback signal indicates that a subtraction is
required, and it is this that gives rise to the term negative feedback.
Factors that clearly have a bearing on whether we will be able to achieve the
desired speed are the ability of the car to achieve and maintain the speed; the extent
to which the driver’s eyes can detect movements in the speedometer pointer; the
need for the brain to subtract the actual speed from the desired speed; and the
requirement for the brain to instruct the muscles of the leg and foot, and their ability
to alter the pressure on the accelerator pedal. But all of these will be of no
consequence if the speedometer is not accurate, because even if the driver thinks he
is doing 50 km/h, the man from the standards bureau will not be impressed. A VW
beetle with an accurate speedometer is potentially better than a Rolls-Royce with
an inaccurate one – a fact that underlines the paramount importance of the feedback
path, and, in particular, highlights the wisdom of investing in a good transducer to
measure the quantity that we wish to control. This lesson will emerge again when
we look at what constitutes a good closed-loop system.
Returning to how the speed-control system operates, we can identify the driver as
the controller, i.e. the part of the system where the error is generated, and corrective
action initiated, and it should be clear that an alert driver with keen eyesight will be
better at keeping the speed constant than one whose eyesight is poor and whose
actions are somewhat sluggish. We will see that in most automatic control systems
expressions such as ‘alert’ and ‘keen eyesight’ translate into the ‘gain’ of the controller:
a controller with a high gain gives a large output in response to a small change at its
input. Finally, we should also acknowledge that the block diagram only accounts for
some of the factors that inﬂuence the human driver: when the car approaches a hill, for
example, the driver knows from experience that he will need more power and acts on
this basis without waiting for the speedometer to signal a drop in speed. Although this
is a fascinating aspect of control it is beyond our current remit.
A1.3. STEADY-STATE ANALYSIS OF CLOSED-LOOP SYSTEMS
A typical closed-loop system is shown in block diagram form in Figure A1.3. As
explained in the introduction, our aim is to keep the mathematical treatment as
simple as possible, so each of the blocks contains a single symbol that represents the
ratio of output to input under steady-state conditions, i.e. when any transients have
died out and all the variables have settled.
Introduction to Closed-loop Control
369

A useful question to pose whenever a new block diagram is encountered is
‘What is this control system for?’ The answer is that the variable that is sensed and
fed back (i.e. the output of the block labeled ‘process’ in Figure A1.3) is the quantity
we wish to control.
For example, the ‘process’ block might represent say an unloaded d.c. motor,
the input being the armature voltage and the output being the speed. We would
then deduce that the system was intended to provide closed-loop control of the
motor speed. The gain G1 is simply the ratio of the steady-state speed to the
armature voltage, and it would typically be expressed in rev/min/volt. The trian-
gular symbol usually represents an analogue electronic ampliﬁer, in which case it has
a (dimensionless) gain of A, i.e. the input and output are both voltages. We
conclude from this that the reference input must also be a voltage, because the
inputs and output from a summing junction must necessarily be of the same type. It
also follows that the signal fed back into the summing junction must also be
a voltage, so that the block labeled H (the feedback transducer) must represent the
conversion of the output (speed, in rev/min) to voltage. In this case we know that
the speed feedback will indeed be obtained from a tachogenerator, with, in this case,
an e.m.f. constant of H volts/rev/min.
In electronic systems where the summing junction is usually an integral part of
the ampliﬁer, the combination forms the controller, as shown by the dashed line in
Figure A1.3.
At this point we should pause and ask what we want of a good control
system. As has already been mentioned, the output of the summing junction is
known as the error signal: its pejorative name helps us to remember that we
want the error to be as small as possible. Because the error is the difference
between the reference signal and the fed-back signal, we deduce that in an
ideal (error-free) control system the fed-back signal should equal the reference
signal.
The sharp-witted reader will again wonder how the system could possibly
operate if the error was zero, because then there would be no input to the forward
path and unless the gain of the controller was inﬁnite there would be nothing going
into the process to produce the output that we are trying to control. So for the
present let us assume that the gain of the controller is very high, and make the
Figure A1.3 Typical arrangement of negative-feedback closed-loop control system.
370
Electric Motors and Drives

justiﬁable assumption that we have a good system and that therefore the feedback
signal is almost, but not quite, equal to the reference signal.
In terms of the symbols in Figure A1.3, the almost-zero-error condition is
represented by approximating the reference signal (r) to the fed-back signal (Hy), i.e.
r ¼ Hy; or y ¼ 1
H r
(A1.1)
This equation is extremely important because it indicates that in a good control
system, the output is proportional to the input, with the constant of proportionality
or ‘gain’ of the closed-loop system depending only on the feedback factor (H ). We
came to the same conclusion when we looked at the example of driving a car at
a given speed, when we concluded the most important aspect was that we had
a reliable speedometer to provide accurate feedback.
Of course we must not run away with the idea that the forward path is of no
consequence, so next we will examine matters in a little more detail to see what
conditions have to be satisﬁed in order for the steady-state performance of a closed-
loop system to be considered good. For this analysis we will assume that all the
blocks in the forward path are combined together as a single block, as shown in
Figure A1.4, where the gain G represents the product of all the gains in the forward
path. (For example, if we want to reduce Figure A1.3 to the form shown in Figure
A1.4, we put G ¼ AG1.)
The signals in Figure A1.4 are related as follows:
y ¼ Ge and e ¼ r  Hy
(A1.2)
To establish the relationship between the output and input we eliminate e, to yield
y ¼

G
1 þ GH

r
(A1.3)
This shows us that the output is proportional to the input, with the closed-loop
gain (output y over input r) being given by G/(1 + GH). Note that so far we
have made no approximations, so we should not be surprised to see that the
gain of the closed-loop system does in fact depend not only on the feedback,
but also on the forward path. This result is summarized in Figure A1.4, where
the single block on the right behaves exactly the same as the complete closed-
loop system on the left.
Figure A1.4 Closed-loop system (left) and its representation by a single equivalent
block.
Introduction to Closed-loop Control
371

It is worth mentioning that if we had been using the Laplace transform method
to express relationships in the s-domain, the forward and feedback paths would be
written G(s) and H(s), where G(s) and H(s) represent algebraic functions describing –
in the s-domain – both steady-state and dynamic properties of the forward and
feedback paths, respectively. These functions are known as ‘transfer functions’ and
although the term strictly relates to the s-domain, there is no reason why we cannot
use the same terminology here, provided that we remember that we have chosen to
consider only steady-state conditions, and therefore what we mean by transfer
function is simply the gain of the block in the steady state. In the context of Figure
A1.4, we note that the transfer function (i.e. gain) of the single block on the right is
the same as the gain of the closed-loop system on the left.
Returning to equation (A1.3), it is easy to see that if the product GH (which
must always be dimensionless) is very much greater than 1, we can ignore the 1 in
the denominator and then equation (A1.3) reduces to equation (A1.1), derived
earlier by asking what we wanted from a good control system. This very important
result is shown in Figure A1.5, where the single block on the right approximates the
behavior of that on the left, which itself precisely represents the complete system
shown in Figure A1.4.
So now we can be precise about the conditions we seek to obtain a good system.
First, we need the product GH to be much greater than 1, so that overall the
performance is not dependent on the forward path (i.e. the process), but instead
depends on the gain of the feedback path.
The product GH is called the ‘loop gain’ of the system, because it is the gain that
is incurred by a signal passing once round the complete loop. In electronic control
systems there is seldom any difﬁculty in achieving enough loop gain because the
controller will be based on an ampliﬁer whose gain can be very high. In drive
systems (e.g. speed control) it would be unusual for the overall loop gain (error
ampliﬁer, power stage, motor, tacho feedback) to be less than 10, but unlikely to be
over a thousand. We will see later, however, that if we use integral control, the
steady-state loop gain will be inﬁnite.
Secondly, having ensured, by means of a high loop gain, that the overall gain of
the closed-loop system is given by 1/H, it is clearly necessary to ensure that the
feedback gain (H) can be precisely speciﬁed and guaranteed. If the value of H is not
correct for the closed-loop gain we are seeking, or if it is different on a hot day from
a cold day, we will not have a good closed-loop system. This underlines again the
importance of spending money on a good feedback transducer.
Figure A1.5 Simpliﬁcation of closed-loop system model when loop gain (GH) is much
greater than 1.
372
Electric Motors and Drives

A1.3.1 Importance of loop gain – example
To illustrate the signiﬁcance of the forward and feedback paths with regard to the
overall gain of a closed-loop system we will use as an example an operational ampliﬁer
of the type frequently used in traditional analogue control. In their basic form these
ampliﬁers typically have very high gains, but the gain can vary considerably even
among devices from a single batch. We will see that as normally employed (with
negative feedback) the unpredictability of the open-loop gain is not a problem.
The op-amp itself is represented by the triangle in Figure A1.6(a). Voltages
applied to the non-inverting input are ampliﬁed without sign change, while
voltages applied to the inverting input are ampliﬁed and the sign is changed. If the
open-loop gain of the ampliﬁer is A, and the input voltages on the positive and
negative inputs are v1 and v2, respectively, the output voltage will be A(v1  v2).
The two inputs therefore perform the differencing function that we have seen is
required in a negative feedback system.
In Figure A1.6(a), we can see that a potential divider network of two high-
precision resistors has been connected across the output voltage, with resistors
chosen so that a fraction (0.2) of the output voltage can be fed back to the inverting
input terminal. In block diagram terms the circuit can therefore be represented as
shown in Figure A1.6(b), where r is the input or reference voltage, y is the output
voltage, and e represents the error signal.
We will assume that because of variations between ampliﬁers, the gain of the
forward path (G in control systems terms) could vary between 100 and 10,000
(though for an op-amp the lower limit is unlikely to be as low as 100), and the
feedback gain (H) is 0.2.
If the feedback system is good, equation (A1.1) will apply and we would expect
the overall (closed-loop) gain to be given by 1/0.2, i.e. 5. Table A1.1 shows that the
actual closed-loop gain is close to 5, the discrepancy reducing as the loop gain
increases. When the loop gain is 2000 (corresponding to a forward gain of 10,000),
the closed loop gain of 4.9975 is within 0.05% of the ideal, while even a loop gain as
low as 20 still gives a closed-loop gain that is only 4.8% below the ideal.
Figure A1.6 Operational ampliﬁer with negative feedback: (a) circuit diagram, (b)
equivalent block diagram.
Introduction to Closed-loop Control
373

The important point to note is that the closed-loop gain is relatively insensitive
to the forward path gain, provided that the loop gain remains large compared with
1, so if our op-amp happens to need replacing and we change it for one with
a different gain, there will be very little effect on the overall gain of the system. On
the other hand, it is very important for the gain of the feedback path to be stable, as
any change is directly reﬂected in the closed-loop gain; for example, if H were to
increase from 0.20 to 0.22 (i.e. a 10% increase), the closed-loop gain would fall by
almost 10%. This explains why high-precision resistors with excellent temperature
stability are used to form the potential divider.
We should conclude this example by acknowledging that we have had to
sacriﬁce the high inherent open-loop gain for a much lower overall closed-loop
gain in the interests of achieving an overall gain that does not depend on the
particular op-amp we are employing. But since such circuits are very cheap, we can
afford to cascade them if we require more gain.
A1.3.2 Steady-state error – integral control
An important criterion for any closed-loop system is its steady-state error, which
ideally should be zero. We can return to the op-amp example studied above to
examine how the error varies with loop gain, the error being the difference
between the reference signal and the feedback signal. If we make the reference
signal unity for the sake of simplicity, the magnitudes of the output and error signals
will be as shown in Figure A1.7, for the three values of forward gain listed in Table
A1.1. At the highest loop gain the error is only 0.05%, rising to only 4.8% at the
lowest loop gain. These ﬁgures are impressive, but what if even a very small error
cannot be tolerated? It would seem that we would need inﬁnite loop gain, which at
ﬁrst sight seems unlikely. So how do we eliminate steady-state error?
The clue to the answer lies in the observation above, that in order to have
zero error we need inﬁnite loop gain, i.e. at some point in the forward path we
need a block that gives a steady output even when its input is zero. This is far less
fanciful than it sounds, because all we need is for the forward path to contain
a block that represents an element or process whose output depends not simply
on its input at that time, but on the integrated effect of the input up to the time
in question.
Table A1.1 Closed-loop gain is relatively insensitive to forward-path gain provided that
the loop gain is much greater than 1.
Forward
gain, G
Feedback
factor, H
Loop
gain, GH
1 + GH
Closed-loop gain
G/(1 + GH)
100
0.2
20
21
4.7619
1000
0.2
200
201
4.9751
10,000
0.2
2000
2001
4.9975
374
Electric Motors and Drives

An example that is frequently encountered in drives is a block whose input is
torque and whose output represents angular velocity. The torque (T ) determines
the rate of change of the angular velocity, the equation of motion being
du
dt ¼ T
J
where J is the inertia. So the angular velocity is given by
u ¼ 1
J
Z
Tdt;
i.e. the speed is determined by the integral with respect to time of the torque, not by
the value of torque at any particular instant. The block diagram for this is shown in
Figure A1.8: the presence of the integral sign alerts us to the fact that at any instant,
the value of the angular speed depends on the past history of the torque to which it
has been subjected.
To illustrate the variation in the ‘effective gain’ of a block containing an inte-
grator, we can study a simple example of an inertia of 0.5 kgm2, initially at rest, that
Figure A1.7 Diagram showing how the magnitude of the error signal (e) reduces as the
gain of the loop increases.
Figure A1.8 Block diagram representing the integration of torque to obtain angular
velocity.
Introduction to Closed-loop Control
375

is subjected to a torque of 2 Nm for 1 second, followed by a torque of 1 Nm for
a further second, and zero torque thereafter. Plots of the input torque and the
corresponding output angular speed with time are shown in Figure A1.9.
For the ﬁrst second the acceleration is 4 rad/s/s, so the speed is 4 rad/s after 1
second. For the next second the torque is negative and the deceleration is 2 rad/s/s,
so the speed after 2 seconds has fallen to 2 rad/s. Subsequently the torque and
acceleration are zero so the speed remains constant.
If we examine the graphs, we see that the ratio of output (speed) to input
(torque), i.e. the quantity that hitherto we have referred to as gain, varies. For
example, just before t ¼ 1, the gain is 4/2 ¼ 2 rad/s/Nm, whereas just after t ¼ 1 it is
4/1 ¼ 4 rad/s/Nm. Much more importantly, however, we see that from t ¼ 2
onwards, the output is constant at 2 rad/s, but the input is zero, i.e. the gain is
inﬁnite when the steady state is reached.
The fact that the gain changes until the steady state is reached means that we can
only use the simple ‘gain block’ approach to represent an integrator when condi-
tions have settled into the steady state, i.e. all the variables are constant. The output
of an integrator can only remain constant if its input is zero: if the input is positive,
the output will be increasing, and if the input is negative the output will be
decreasing. So in the steady state, an integrator has inﬁnite gain, which is just what
we need to eliminate steady-state error.
The example discussed above includes an integration that reﬂects physical
properties, i.e. the fact that the angular acceleration is proportional to the torque,
and hence the angular velocity is proportional to the integral of torque. Another
‘natural’ integration applies to the water tank we looked at earlier, where the
level of water is proportional to the integral of the ﬂow rate with respect
to time.
Figure A1.9 Variation of angular velocity (u) resulting from application of torque (T).
376
Electric Motors and Drives

In many systems there is no natural integration in the forward-path process, so if
it is important to achieve zero steady-state error, an integrating term is included in
the controller. This is discussed next.
A1.3.3 PID controller
We saw earlier that the simplest form of controller is an ampliﬁer, the output of
which is proportional to the error signal. A control system that operates with this
sort of controller is said to have ‘proportional’ or ‘P’ control. An important feature
of proportional control is that as soon as there is any change in the error, propor-
tionate action is initiated immediately.
We have also seen that in order to completely eliminate steady-state error we
need to have an integrating element in the forward path, so we may be tempted to
replace the proportional controller in Figure A1.3 by a controller whose output is
the integral of the error signal with respect to time. This is easily done in the case of
an electronic ampliﬁer, yielding an ‘integral’ or ‘I’ controller.
However, unlike the proportional controller where the output responds
instantaneously to changes in the error, the output of an integrating controller takes
time to respond. For example, we see from Figure A1.9 that the output builds
progressively when there is a step input. If we were to employ integral control
alone, the lag between output and input signals may well cause the overall (closed-
loop) response to be unacceptably sluggish.
To obtain the best of both worlds (i.e. a fast response to changes and elimination
of steady-state error), it is common to have both proportional and integral terms in
the controller, which is then referred to as a PI controller. The output of the
controller (y(t)) is then given by the expression
yðtÞ ¼ AeðtÞ þ k
Z
eðtÞdt
where e(t) is the error signal, A is the proportional gain and k is a parameter that
allows the rate at which the integrator ramps up to be varied. The latter adjustment
is also often – and rather confusingly – referred to as integrator gain.
We can easily see that because raising the proportional gain causes a larger
output of the controller for a given error, we generally get a faster transient
response. On the other hand, the time-lag associated with an integral term generally
makes the transient response more sluggish, and increases the likelihood that the
output will overshoot its target before settling.
Some controllers also provide an output term that depends on the rate of change
or differential of the error. This has the effect of increasing the damping of the
transient response, an effect similar to that demonstrated in Figure 4.16. PI
controllers that also have this differential (or D) facility are known as PID
controllers.
Introduction to Closed-loop Control
377

A1.3.4 Stability
So far we have highlighted the beneﬁts of closed-loop systems, but not surprisingly
there is a potential negative side that we need to be aware of. This is that if the d.c.
loop gain is too high, some closed-loop systems exhibit self-sustaining oscillations,
i.e. the output ‘rings’ – generally at a high frequency – even when there is no input
to the system. When a system behaves in this way it is said to be unstable, and clearly
the consequences can be extremely serious, particularly if large mechanical elements
are involved. (It is worth mentioning that whereas in control systems instability is
always undesirable, if we were in the business of designing electronic oscillators we
would have an entirely different perspective, and we would deliberately arrange our
feedback and loop gain so as to promote oscillation at the desired frequency.)
A familiar example of spontaneous oscillation is a public address system (perhaps
in the village hall) that emits an unpleasantly loud whistle if the volume (gain) is
turned too high. In this case the closed loop formed by sound from the loudspeaker
feeding back to the microphone is an unwanted but unavoidable phenomenon, and
it may be possible to prevent the instability by shielding the microphone from the
loudspeakers (i.e. lowering the loop gain by reducing the feedback), or by reducing
the volume control.
Unstable behavior is characteristic of linear systems of third or higher order and
is well understood, though the theory is beyond our scope. Whenever the closed-
loop system has an inherently oscillatory transient response, increasing the
proportional gain and/or introducing integral control generally makes matters
worse. The amplitude and frequency of the ‘ringing’ of the output response may
become larger, and the settling time may increase. If the gain increases further the
system becomes unstable and oscillation grows until limited by saturation of one or
more elements in the loop.
As far as we are concerned it is sufﬁcient to accept that there is a potential
drawback to raising the gain in order to reduce error, and to take comfort from the
fact that there are well-established design criteria that are used to check that a system
will not be unstable before the loop is closed. Stability of the closed-loop system can
be checked by examining the frequency response of the open-loop system, the gain
being adjusted to ensure (by means of design criteria known as gain and phase
margins) that, when the loop is closed for the ﬁrst time, there is no danger of
instability.
A1.3.5 Disturbance rejection – example using d.c. machine
We will conclude our brief look at the beneﬁts of feedback by considering an
example that illustrates how a closed-loop system combats the inﬂuence of inputs
(or disturbances) that threaten to force the output of the system from its target value.
We already referred to the matter qualitatively when we looked at how we would
drive a car at a constant speed despite variations in wind or gradients.
378
Electric Motors and Drives

Throughout this book the self-regulating properties of electric motors have
been mentioned frequently. All electric motors are inherently closed-loop systems,
so it is ﬁtting that we ﬁnish by revisiting one of our ﬁrst topics (the d.c. machine),
but this time we take a control-systems perspective to offer a fresh insight as to why
the performance of the machine is so good.
The block diagram of a separately excited d.c. machine (with armature
inductance neglected) is shown in Figure A1.10.
This diagram is a pictorial representation of the steady-state equations devel-
oped in Chapter 3, together with the dynamic equation relating resultant torque,
inertia and angular acceleration. This set of equations is repeated here for
convenience.
Motor torque; Tm ¼ kI
Motional e:m:f:; E ¼ ku
Armature circuit; V ¼ E þ IR
Equation of motion; Tm  TL ¼ Tres ¼ J du
dt or u ¼ 1
J
Z
Tresdt
Each section of the diagram corresponds to one of the equations: for example, the
left-hand summing junction and the block labeled 1/R yield the armature current,
by implementing the rearranged armature circuit equation, i.e.
I ¼ V  E
R
The summing junction in the middle of the forward path allows us to represent
a ‘disturbance’ entering the system: in this case the disturbance is the load torque
(including any friction), and is shown as being subtracted from the motor torque as
this is usually what happens.
A control person who was unfamiliar with motors would look at Figure A1.10
and describe it as a closed-loop speed-control system designed to make the speed u
Figure A1.10 Block diagram of separately excited d.c. motor.
Introduction to Closed-loop Control
379

track the reference voltage V. Examination of the forward path (and ignoring the
disturbance input for the moment) would reveal an integrating element, and this
would signal that the loop gain was inﬁnite under steady-state conditions. The
control specialist would then say that when the loop gain is inﬁnite, the closed-loop
gain is 1/H, where, in this case, H ¼ k. Hence the speed at any voltage V is given by
u ¼ 1
kV
We obtained this result in Chapter 3 by arguing that if there was no friction or load
torque, and the speed was steady (i.e. the acceleration was zero), the motor torque
would be zero, and therefore the current would have to be zero, and hence the back
e.m.f. must equal the applied voltage. We then equated V ¼ E ¼ ku to obtain the
result above.
Turning now to the effect of the load torque (the ‘disturbance’), we will focus
on the steady-state condition. When the speed is steady, the signal entering the
integrator block must be zero, i.e. the resultant torque must be zero, or in other
words the motor torque must be equal and opposite to the load torque. But from
the diagram the motor torque is directly proportional to the error signal (i.e.
V  E). So we deduce that as the load torque increases, the steady-state error
increases in proportion, i.e. the speed (E ) has to fall in order for the motor to
develop torque. It follows that in order to reduce the drop in speed with load, the
gain of section G1 in Figure A1.10 must be as high as possible, which in turn
underlines the desirability of having a high motor constant (k) and a low armature
resistance (R). As expected, this is exactly what we found in Chapter 3.
We can see that the mechanism whereby the closed-loop system minimizes the
effect of disturbances is via the feedback path: as the speed begins to fall following an
increase in the disturbance input, the feedback reduces, the error increases, and
more motor torque is produced to compensate for the load torque.
To quantify matters, we can develop a model that allows us to ﬁnd the steady-
state output due to the combined effect of the reference input (V ) and the load
torque (TL), using the principle of superposition. We ﬁnd the outputs when each
input acts alone, and then sum them to ﬁnd the output when both are acting
simultaneously.
If we let G1 and G2 denote the steady-state gains of the two parts of the forward
path shown in Figure A1.10, we can see that as far as the reference input (V ) is
concerned the gain of the forward path is G1G2, and the gain of the feedback path is
k. Hence, using equation (A1.3), the output is given by
uV ¼

G1G2
1 þ G1G2k

V
From the point of view of the load torque, the forward path consists only of G2,
with the feedback consisting of k in series with G1. Hence, again using equation
380
Electric Motors and Drives

(A1.3) and noting that the load torque will usually be negative, the effect of the load
on the output is given by
uL ¼

G2
1 þ G1G2k

ðTLÞ ¼ 

G2
1 þ G1G2k

TL
Hence the speed (u) is given by
u ¼

G1G2
1 þ G1G2k

V 

G2
1 þ G1G2k

TL
The second term represents the inﬂuence of the disturbance – in this case the
amount that the speed falls due to the load torque TL. Looking at the block diagram,
we see that in the absence of feedback, the effect on the output of an input TL
would simply be G2TL. Comparing this with the second term in the equation above
we see that the feedback reduces the effect of the disturbance by a factor of
1
1 þ G1G2k
so if the loop gain (G1G2k) is high compared with 1, the disturbance is attenuated by
a factor of 1/loop gain.
We can simplify these expressions in the case of the d.c. motor example by
noting that
G1 ¼ k
R
and, because of the integration, G2 is inﬁnite. Hence the steady-state speed is
given by
u ¼ V
k  R
k2 TL
which is the same result as we obtained in equation (3.10). The ﬁrst term conﬁrms
that when the load torque is zero the speed is directly proportional to the armature
voltage, while the second term is the drop in speed with load, and is minimized by
aiming for a low armature resistance.
Introduction to Closed-loop Control
381

APPENDIX TWO
Induction Motor Equivalent
Circuit
A2.1. INTRODUCTION
This appendix explores the steady-state equivalent circuit of the induction motor,
and the reasons for including it are that it provides a simple method for quantitative
performance predictions; the parameters that appear (e.g. leakage reactance,
magnetizing reactance) are common currency in any discussion of induction
motors, and understanding what they mean is necessary if we wish to engage
effectively with those who use the language; and ﬁnally a knowledge of the
behavior of the circuit with slip brings a new perspective to support the ‘physical’
basis followed in Chapters 5 and 6.
It has to be admitted that the superiority of digital simulation packages that
model both transient and steady-state behavior has meant that the traditional
equivalent circuit has fallen from favor. We think this is a pity, because it has a lot to
offer. It provides relatively simple explanations for many of the most important
aspects of induction motor behavior, not least of which is the inﬂuence of
frequency, historically seen as constant, but now perhaps the most important
variable.
A2.1.1 Outline of approach
Physically, the construction of the wound-rotor induction motor has striking
similarities with that of the 3-phase transformer, with the stator and rotor windings
corresponding to the primary and secondary windings of a transformer, so it is not
surprising that the induction motor equivalent circuit can be derived from that of
the transformer.
We begin with the ‘ideal’ transformer, for which the governing equations are
delightfully simple. We then extend the equivalent circuit to include the modest
imperfections of the real transformer. In the course of this discussion we will
establish the meaning of the terms magnetizing reactance and leakage reactance,
which also feature in the induction motor equivalent circuit. And perhaps even
more importantly for what comes later, we will be in a position to appreciate the
beneﬁt of being able to assess what effect a load connected to the secondary winding
has on the primary winding by making use of the concept of a ‘referred’ load
impedance.
383j

The emphasis throughout will be on how good a transformer is, and how for
most purposes a very simple equivalent circuit is adequate. The approach taken differs
from that taken in many textbooks, which begins with the all-singing, all-dancing
circuit which not only looks frighteningly complicated, but also tends to give the
erroneous impression that the transformer is riddled with serious imperfections.
When we reach the induction motor equivalent circuit, a really clever leap of
the imagination is revealed. We saw in Chapter 5 that the magnitude and frequency
of the rotor currents depend on the slip, and that they interact with the air-gap ﬂux
to produce torque. So how are we to represent what is going on in the rotor in
a single equivalent circuit that must necessarily also include the stator variables, and
in which all the voltages and currents are at supply frequency? We will discover that,
despite the apparent complexity, all of the electromechanical interactions can be
represented by means of a transformer equivalent circuit, with a hypothetical slip-
dependent ‘electromechanical resistance’ connected where the secondary ‘load’
would normally be. The equivalent circuit must have created quite a stir when it
was ﬁrst developed, but is now taken for granted: this is a pity because it represents
a major intellectual achievement.
A2.1.2 Similarity between induction motor and transformer
The development of a wound-rotor induction motor from a single-phase trans-
former is depicted in Figure A2.1.
In most transformers there will be many turns on both windings, but for the sake
of simplicity only four coils are shown. The purpose of a transformer is to take in
electrical power at one voltage and supply it at a different voltage. When an a.c.
supply is connected to the primary winding, a pulsating magnetic ﬂux (shown by
the hashed lines in Figure A2.1) is set up. The pulsating ﬂux links the secondary
winding, inducing a voltage in each turn, so by choosing the number of turns in
series the desired output voltage is obtained. Because no mechanical energy
conversion is involved there is no need for an air-gap in the magnetic circuit, which
therefore has an extremely low reluctance.
In Figure A2.1(b), we see a hypothetical set-up in which two small air-gaps have
been introduced into the magnetic circuit to allow for the essential motion in the
induction motor. Needless to say we would not do this deliberately in a transformer
as it would cause an unnecessary increase the reluctance of the ﬂux path (though the
effect on performance would be much less than we might fear). The central core
and winding space have also been enlarged somewhat (anticipating the need for two
more phases), without materially altering the functioning of the transformer.
Finally, in Figure A2.1(c) the two sets of coils are arranged as they would be in
a 2-pole wound-rotor induction motor with full-pitched coils.
The most important points to note are ﬁrst that the ﬂux produced by the
stator (primary) winding links the rotor (secondary) winding in much the same
384
Electric Motors and Drives

way as it did in Figure A2.1(a), i.e. the two windings remain tightly coupled by
the magnetic ﬁeld. Secondly, only one-third of the slots are taken up because the
remaining two-thirds will be occupied by the windings of the other two phases.
Thirdly, the magnetic circuit has two air-gaps, and because of the slots that
accommodate the coils, the ﬂux threads its way down the teeth, so that it not
only fully links the aligned winding, but also partially links the other two phase-
windings.
If the two windings highlighted in Figure A2.1(c) were used as primary and
secondary, this set-up would work perfectly well as a single-phase transformer.
A2.2. THE IDEAL TRANSFORMER
A quasi-circuit model is shown diagrammatically in Figure A2.2. This represents the
most common application of the transformer, with the primary drawing power
from an a.c. constant-voltage source (V1) and supplying it to a load impedance (Z2)
at a different voltage (V2).
Figure A2.1 Diagrams showing similarity between transformer and induction motor.
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
385

The primary winding has N1 turns with total resistance R1, and the secondary
winding has N2 turns with total resistance R2; they share a common magnetic
circuit with no air-gap and therefore very low reluctance.
A2.2.1 Ideal transformer – no-load condition – ﬂux
and magnetizing current
We begin with the primary connected to the voltage source as shown in Figure
A2.2, but the secondary is open-circuited – the no-load condition. The secondary
has no current so it cannot inﬂuence matters. What we want to know is what
determines the magnitude of the ﬂux in the core, and how much current (known
for obvious reasons as the magnetizing current, Im) will be drawn from the voltage
source to set up the ﬂux.
We apply Kirchhoff’s voltage law to relate the applied voltage (V1) to the
voltage induced in the primary winding by the pulsating ﬂux (E1) and to the volt-
drop across the primary resistance, yielding
V1 ¼ E1 þ ImR1
(A2.1)
We also apply Faraday’s law to obtain the induced e.m.f. in terms of the ﬂux, i.e.
E1 ¼ N1
df
dt
(A2.2)
We can simplify equation (A2.1) further in the case of the ‘ideal’ transformer, which
not unexpectedly is assumed to have windings with zero resistance, i.e. R1 ¼ 0. So
we deduce that for an ideal transformer, the induced e.m.f. is equal to the applied
voltage, i.e. E1 ¼ V1. This is very important and echoes the discussion in Chapter 5:
but what we really want is to ﬁnd out what the ﬂux is doing, so we recast equation
(A2.2) in the form
df
dt ¼ E1
N1
¼ V1
N1
(A2.3)
Equation (A2.3) shows that the rate of change of ﬂux at any instant is determined by
the applied voltage, so if we want to know how the ﬂux behaves in time we must
Figure A2.2 Single-phase transformer supplying secondary load Z2.
386
Electric Motors and Drives

specify the nature of the applied voltage. We will look at two cases: the ﬁrst voltage
waveform is good for illustrative purposes because it is easy to derive the ﬂux
waveform, while the second represents the commonplace situation, i.e. use on
a sinusoidal a.c. supply.
First, we suppose that the applied voltage is a square wave. The rate of change of
ﬂux is then positive and constant while V1 is positive, so the ﬂux increases linearly
with time; conversely, when the applied voltage is negative the ﬂux ramps down, so
overall the voltage and ﬂux waves are as shown in the upper half of Figure A2.3.
From Figure A2.3 we see that the maximum ﬂux in the core (fm) is determined
not only by the magnitude of the applied voltage (which determines the slope of
the ﬂux/time plot) but also by the frequency (which determines for how long the
positive slope continues). Normally we want to utilize the full capacity of the
magnetic circuit, so we must adjust the voltage and frequency together in order to
keep fm at its rated value. So both voltage and frequency have been doubled in (b)
to keep fm the same as in (a).
Turning now to the everyday situation in which the transformer is connected to
a sinusoidal voltage of peak value bV and frequency f, we can integrate equation
(A2.3), to yield the maximum ﬂux as
fm ¼
1
2pN1
bV
f
(A2.4)
Figure A2.3 Flux and voltage waveforms for ideal transformer operating with square-
wave (upper) and sinusoidal (lower) primary voltage. (The voltage and frequency in (b)
are doubled compared with (a), but the peak ﬂux remains the same.)
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
387

Typical primary voltage and ﬂux waves are shown in the lower part of Figure A2.3.
Equation (A2.4) shows that the amplitude of the ﬂux wave is proportional to the
applied voltage, and inversely proportional to the frequency. As mentioned above,
we normally aim to keep the peak ﬂux constant in order fully to utilize the magnetic
circuit, and this means that changes to voltage or frequency must be done so that the
ratio of voltage to frequency (V/f) is maintained. This is shown in Figure A2.3
where, to keep the peak ﬂux (fm) in (a) the same when the frequency is doubled to
that in (b), the voltage must also be doubled. We drew the same conclusion in
relation to the induction motor, in Chapters 5 and 7.
Although equation (A2.4) was developed for an ideal transformer, it is also
applicable with very little error to the real transformer, and is in fact a basic design
equation.
The important message to take from this analysis is that under sinusoidal
conditions at a ﬁxed frequency, the ﬂux in a given transformer is determined by the
applied voltage. Interestingly, however, the only assumption we have to make to
arrive at this result is that the resistance of the windings is zero: the argument so far is
independent of the magnetic circuit, so we must now see how the reluctance of the
transformer core makes its presence felt.
We know that although the amplitude of the ﬂux waveform is determined by
the applied voltage, frequency and turns, there will need to be an m.m.f. (i.e.
a current in the primary winding) to drive the ﬂux around the magnetic circuit: the
‘magnetic Ohm’s’ law tells us that the m.m.f. required to drive ﬂux f around
a magnetic circuit that has reluctance R is given by m.m.f. ¼ R f.
But in this section we are studying an ideal transformer, so we can assume that
the magnetic circuit is made of inﬁnitely permeable material, and therefore has zero
reluctance. This means that no m.m.f. is required, so the current drawn from the
supply (the ‘magnetizing current’ Im) in the ideal transformer is zero.
To sum up, the ﬂux in the ideal transformer is determined by the applied
voltage, and the no-load current is zero. This hypothetical situation is never ach-
ieved in practice, but real transformers (especially large ones) come close to it.
Viewed from the supply, the ideal transformer at no-load looks like an open circuit,
as it draws no current. (A real transformer at no-load draws a small current, lagging
the applied voltage by almost 90, and from the supply viewpoint it therefore
has a high inductive reactance, known for obvious reasons as the ‘magnetizing
reactance’.) An ideal transformer is thus seen to have an inﬁnite magnetizing
reactance.
A2.2.2 Ideal transformer – no-load condition – voltage ratio
We now consider the secondary winding, but leave it disconnected from the load so
that its current is zero, in which case it can clearly have no inﬂuence on the ﬂux.
Because the magnetic circuit is perfect, none of the ﬂux set up by the primary leaks
out, and all of it therefore links the secondary winding. We can therefore apply
388
Electric Motors and Drives

Faraday’s law and make use of equation (A2.2) to obtain the secondary induced
e.m.f. as
E2 ¼ N2
df
dt ¼ N2
V1
N1
¼ N2
N1
V1
(A2.5)
There is no secondary current, so there is no volt-drop across R2 and therefore the
secondary terminal voltage V2 is equal to the induced e.m.f. E2. Hence the voltage
ratio is given by
V1
V2
¼ N1
N2
(A2.6)
This equation shows that any desired secondary voltage can be obtained simply by
choosing the number of turns on the secondary winding. It is worth mentioning
that equation (A2.6) applies regardless of the nature of the waveform, so if we
applied a square wave voltage to the primary, the secondary voltage would also be
a square wave with amplitude scaled according to the turns ratio.
We will see later that when the transformer supplies a load, the primary and
secondary currents are inversely proportional to their respective voltages: so if the
secondary voltage is lower than the primary there will be fewer secondary turns but
the current will be higher and therefore the cross-sectional area of the wire used will
be greater. The net result is that the total volumes of copper in primary and
secondary are virtually the same, as is to be expected since they both handle the
same power.
A2.2.3 Ideal transformer on load
We now consider what happens when we connect the secondary winding to
a load impedance Z2. We have already seen that the ﬂux is determined solely
by the applied primary voltage, so when current ﬂows to the load it can have no
effect on the ﬂux, and hence because the secondary winding resistance is zero,
the secondary voltage remains as it was at no-load, given by equation (A2.6).
(If the voltage were to change when we connected the load we could be
forgiven for beginning to doubt the validity of the description ‘ideal’ for such
a device!)
The current drawn by the load will be given by I2 ¼ V2/V2 and the secondary
winding will therefore produce an m.m.f. of N2I2 acting around the magnetic
circuit. If this m.m.f. went unchecked it would tend to reduce the ﬂux in the core,
but, as we have seen, the ﬂux is determined by the applied voltage, and cannot
change. We have also seen that because the core is made of ideal magnetic material
it has no reluctance, and therefore the resultant m.m.f. (due to both the primary
and secondary windings) is zero. These two conditions are met by the primary
winding drawing a current such that the sum of the primary and secondary m.m.f.s
is zero, i.e.
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
389

N1I1 þ N2I2 ¼ 0; or I1
I2
¼  N2
N1
(A2.7)
In other words, as soon as the secondary current begins to ﬂow, a primary current
automatically springs up to neutralize the demagnetizing effect of the secondary
m.m.f. The minus sign in equation (A.7) serves to remind us that primary and
secondary m.m.f.s act in opposition. It has no real meaning until we deﬁne what we
mean by the positive direction of winding the turns around the core, so since we are
not concerned with transformer manufacture we can afford to ignore it from
now on.
The current ratio in equation (2.7) is seen to be the inverse of the voltage ratio in
equation (A.6). We could have obtained the current ratio by a different approach if
we had argued from a power basis, by saying that in an ideal transformer, the
instantaneous input power and the instantaneous output power must be equal. This
would lead us to conclude that V1I1 ¼ V2I2 and hence from equation (A.6) that
V1
V2
¼ N1
N2
¼ I2
I1
(A2.8)
To conclude our look at the ideal transformer, we should ask what the primary
winding of an ideal transformer ‘looks like’ when the secondary is connected to
a load impedance Z2. As far as the primary supply is concerned, the apparent
impedance looking into the primary of the transformer is simply the ratio V1/I1,
which can be expressed in secondary terms as
V1
I1
¼
N1
N2
2V2
I2
¼
N1
N2
2
Z2 ¼ Z
0
2
(A2.9)
So when we connect an impedance Z2 to the secondary, it appears from the primary
side as if we have connected an impedance Z
0
2 across the primary terminals. This
equivalence is summed up diagrammatically in Figure A2.4.
The ideal transformer effectively ‘scales’ the voltages by the turns ratio and the
currents by the inverse turns ratio, and from the point of view of the input terminals,
the ideal transformer and its secondary load (inside the shaded area in Figure
A2.4(a)) is indistinguishable from the circuit in Figure A2.4(b), in which the
impedance Z
0
2 (known as the ‘referred’ impedance) is connected across the supply.
We should note that when we use referred impedances, the equivalent circuit of the
ideal transformer simply reduces to a link between primary and referred secondary
circuits: this point has been stressed by showing the primary and secondary terminals
in Figure A2.4, even though there is nothing between them. When we model the
real transformer we will ﬁnd that there are circuit elements between the input and
output terminals.
Finally we should note that although both windings of an ideal transformer have
inﬁnite inductance, there is not even a vestige of inductance in the equivalent
circuit. This remarkable result is due to the perfect magnetic coupling between the
390
Electric Motors and Drives

windings. As we will see shortly, the real transformer can come very close to the
ideal, but for reasons which will also become apparent, ultimate perfection is not
usually what we seek.
A2.3. THE REAL TRANSFORMER
Real transformers behave much like ideal ones (except in very small sizes), and the
approach is therefore to extend the model of the ideal transformer to allow for the
imperfections of the real one.
We will establish the so-called ‘exact’ equivalent circuit on a step-by-step basis
ﬁrst; it can be used to predict all aspects of transformer performance, but we will ﬁnd
that it looks rather fearsome. Fortunately, we are not seeking great accuracy, so we
can retreat to the much less daunting ‘approximate’ circuit which is perfectly
adequate for our purposes.
A2.3.1 Real transformer – no-load condition – ﬂux
and magnetizing current
Here we take account of the ﬁnite resistances of the primary and secondary
windings; the ﬁnite reluctance of the magnetic circuit; and the losses due to the
pulsating ﬂux in the iron core.
The winding resistances are included by adding resistances R1 and R2, respec-
tively, in series with the primary and secondary of the ideal transformer, as shown in
Figure A2.5.
The transformer in Figure A2.5 is shown without a secondary load; i.e. it is
under no-load conditions. As previously explained, the component of the current
drawn from the supply that sets up the ﬂux in this condition is known as the
magnetizing current (Im). Because the ideal transformer (within the dotted line in
Figure A2.5) is on open-circuit, the secondary current is zero and so the primary
current must also be zero. So to allow for the fact that the real transformer has
Figure A2.4 Equivalent circuits of ideal transformer.
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
391

a no-load magnetizing current we add an inductive branch (known as the
‘magnetizing reactance’) in parallel with the primary of the ideal transformer, as
shown in Figure A2.5. In most transformers the reluctance of the core is small, and
as a result the magnetizing current is much smaller than the normal full-load (rated)
primary current. The magnetizing reactance is therefore high, and we will see that it
can be neglected for many purposes.
The next reﬁnement of the no-load model takes account of the fact that the
pulsating ﬂux induces eddy current and hysteresis losses in the core. The core is
laminated to reduce the eddy current losses, but the total loss is often signiﬁcant in
relation to overall efﬁciency and cooling, and we need to allow for it in our model.
The iron losses depend on the square of the peak ﬂux density, and they are therefore
proportional to the square of the induced e.m.f. This means that we can model the
losses simply by including a resistance (Rc – where the subscript denotes ‘core loss’)
in parallel with the magnetizing reactance, as shown in Figure A2.5.
The no-load current (I0) consists of the reactive magnetizing component (Im)
lagging the applied voltage by 90, and the core-loss (power) component (Ic) that is
in phase with the induced voltage.
The magnetizing component is usually much greater than the core-loss
component, so the real transformer looks predominantly reactive under open-
circuit (no-load) conditions.
A2.3.2 Real transformer – leakage reactance
In the ideal transformer it was assumed that all the ﬂux produced by the primary
winding linked the secondary, but in practice some of the primary ﬂux will exist
outside the core (see Figure 1.8) and will not link with the secondary. This
leakage ﬂux, which is proportional to the primary current, will induce a voltage
in the primary winding whenever the primary current changes, and it can
therefore be represented by a ‘primary leakage inductance’ (l1) in series with the
primary winding of the ideal transformer. We will be using the equivalent circuit
under steady-state operating conditions at a given frequency (f), in which case we
are more likely to refer to the ‘primary leakage reactance’ (X1 ¼ ul1 ¼ 2pﬂ1) as in
Figure A2.5.
Figure A2.5 Development of equivalent circuit of unloaded transformer.
392
Electric Motors and Drives

The induced e.m.f. in the secondary winding arising from the secondary leakage
ﬂux is modeled in a similar way, and this is represented by the ‘secondary leakage
reactance’ (X2) shown in Figure A2.5
It is important to point out that under no-load conditions when the primary
current is small, the volt-drop across X1 will be much less than V1, so all our
previous arguments relating to the relationship between ﬂux, turns and frequency
can be used in the design of the real transformer.
Because the leakage reactances are in series, their presence is felt when the
currents are high, i.e. under normal full-load conditions, when the volt-drops across
X1 and X2 may not be negligible, and especially under extreme conditions (e.g.
when the secondary is short-circuited) when they provide a vitally important
current-limiting function.
Looking at Figure A2.5 the conscientious reader could be forgiven for beginning
to feel a bit downhearted to discover how complex matters appear to be getting, so it
will come as good news to learn that we have reached the turning point. The circuit
in Figure A2.5 represents all aspects of transformer behavior, but it is more elaborate
than we need, so from now on things become simpler, particularly when we take the
usual step and refer all secondary parameters to the primary.
A2.3.3 Real transformer on load – exact equivalent circuit
The equivalent circuit showing the transformer supplying a secondary load
impedance Z2 is shown in Figure A2.6(a). This diagram has been annotated to show
Figure A2.6 ‘Exact’ equivalent circuit of real transformer supplying load impedance Z2.
(The circuit in (a) includes the actual secondary parameters, while in (b) the parameters
have been ‘referred’ to the primary side.)
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
393

how the ideal transformer at the center imposes the relationships between primary
and secondary currents. Provided that we know the values of the transformer
parameters we can use this circuit to calculate all the voltages, currents and powers
when either the primary or secondary voltage is speciﬁed.
However, we seldom use the circuit in this form, as it is usually much more
convenient to work with the referred impedances, as discussed previously and
shown in Figure A2.6(b). Note that we have not only referred the secondary load
impedance Z2 but also the secondary resistance and leakage reactance of the
transformer itself: as before, the referred or effective load impedance, secondary
resistance and leakage reactance as seen at the primary are denoted by Z
0
2, R
0
2 and
X
0
2, respectively. When circuit calculations have been done using this circuit, the
actual secondary voltage and current are obtained from their referred counterparts
using the equations
V2 ¼ V
0
2  N2
N1
and I2 ¼ I
0
2  N1
N2
(A2.10)
At this point we should recall the corresponding circuit of the ideal transformer, as
shown in Figure A2.4(b). There we saw that the referred secondary voltage V
0
2 was
equal to the primary voltage V1. For the real transformer, however (Figure A2.6(b)),
we see that the imperfections of the transformer are reﬂected in circuit elements
lying between V1 and V
0
2, i.e. between the input and output terminals.
In the ideal transformer the series elements (resistances and leakage reac-
tances) are zero, while the parallel elements (magnetizing reactance and core-loss
resistance) are inﬁnite. The principal effect of the non-zero series elements of the
real transformer is that, because of the volt-drops across them, the secondary
voltage V
0
2 will be less than it would be if the transformer were ideal. And the
principal effect of the parallel elements is that the real transformer draws
a (magnetizing) current and consumes (a small amount of) power even when the
secondary is open-circuited.
Although the circuit of Figure A2.6(b) represents a welcome simpliﬁcation
compared with that in Figure A2.6(a), calculations are still cumbersome, because for
a given primary voltage, every volt-drop and current changes whenever the load on
the secondary alters. Fortunately, for most practical purposes a further gain in terms
of simplicity (at the expense of only a little loss of accuracy) is obtained by
simplifying the ‘exact’ circuits to obtain the so-called approximate equivalent
circuit.
A2.3.4 Real transformer – approximate equivalent circuit
The justiﬁcation for the approximate equivalent circuit (Figure A2.7) rests on the
fact that for all transformers except very small ones (i.e. for all transformers that
would cause serious harm if they fell on one’s foot) the series elements in Figure
A2.6 are of low impedance and the parallel elements are of high impedance.
394
Electric Motors and Drives

Actually, to talk of low or high impedances without qualiﬁcation is nonsense:
what the rather loose language in the paragraph above really means is that under
normal conditions, the volt-drop across R1 and X1 will be a small fraction of the
applied voltage V1. Hence the voltage across the magnetizing branch is almost equal
to V1: so by moving the magnetizing branch to the left-hand side, the magnetizing
current will be almost unchanged. Keen eyed readers will have spotted that the
core-loss resistance has been omitted: the justiﬁcation is that the losses in the iron are
only of interest when we are calculating efﬁciency, which is not our concern here.
Moving the magnetizing branch brings massive simpliﬁcation in terms of circuit
calculations. First because the current and power in the magnetizing branch are
independent of the load current, and secondly because primary and referred
secondary impedances now carry the same current (I
0
2) so it is easy to calculate V
0
2
from V1 or vice versa. Further simpliﬁcation results if we combine the primary and
secondary resistances and leakage reactances to yield total resistance (RT) and total
leakage reactance (XT), as shown in Figure A2.7(b).
Given the difference in the numbers of turns and wire thickness between
primary and secondary windings it is not surprising that the actual primary and
secondary resistances are sometimes very different. But when referred to the
primary, the secondary resistance is normally of similar value to the primary resis-
tance, so both primary and secondary contribute equally to the total effective
resistance. This is in line with common sense: since both windings contain the same
quantities of copper and handle the same power, both would be expected to have
similar inﬂuence on the overall performance.
When leakage reactances are quoted separately for primary and secondary they
too may have very different ohmic values, but again when the secondary is referred
Figure A2.7 ‘Approximate’ equivalent circuits of real transformer.
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
395

its value will normally be the same as that of the primary. (In fact, the validity of
regarding leakage reactance as something that can be uniquely apportioned between
primary and secondary is questionable, as they cannot be measured separately, and
for most purposes all that we need to know is the total leakage reactance XT.)
A2.3.5 Measurement of parameters
Two simple tests are used to measure the transformer parameters – the open-circuit
or no-load test and the short-circuit test. We will see later that very similar tests are
used to measure induction motor parameters. In the open-circuit test, the secondary
is left disconnected and with rated voltage applied to the primary winding, the input
current and power are measured. From these, the values of Xm and Rc are calcu-
lated. In the short-circuit test the secondary terminals are shorted together and a low
voltage is applied to the primary – just sufﬁcient to cause rated current in both
windings. The voltage, current and input power are measured, and from these the
parameters RT and XT are calculated.
A great advantage of the open-circuit and short-circuit tests is that neither
requires more than a few per cent of the rated power, so both can be performed
from a modestly rated supply.
A2.3.6 Signiﬁcance of equivalent circuit parameters
If it were possible to choose whatever values we wished for the parameters, we
would probably look back at the equivalent circuit of the ideal transformer, and try
to emulate it by making the parallel elements inﬁnite, and the series elements zero.
And if we only had to think about normal operation (from no-load up to rated load)
this would be a sensible aim, as there would then be no magnetizing current, no
iron losses, no copper losses, and no drop in secondary voltage when the load is
applied.
Most transformers do come close to this ideal when viewed from an external
perspective. At full-load the input power is only slightly greater than the output
power (because the losses in the resistive elements are a small fraction of the rated
power); and the secondary voltage falls only slightly from no-load to full-load
conditions (because the volt-drop across ZT at full-load is only a small fraction of the
input voltage).
But in practice we have to cope with the abnormal as well as the normal, and in
particular we need to be aware of the risk of a short-circuit at the secondary
terminals. If the transformer primary is supplied from a constant-voltage source, the
only thing that limits the secondary current if the secondary is inadvertently short-
circuited is the series impedance ZT. But we have already seen that the volt-drop
across ZT at rated current is only a small fraction of the rated voltage, which means
that if rated voltage is applied across ZT, the current will be many times rated value.
So the lower the impedance of the transformer, the higher the short-circuit current.
396
Electric Motors and Drives

From the transformer viewpoint, a current of many times rated value will soon
cause the windings to melt, to say nothing of the damaging inter-turn electro-
magnetic forces produced. And from the supply viewpoint the fault current must be
cleared quickly to avoid damaging the supply cables, so a circuit breaker will be
required with the ability to interrupt the short-circuit current. The higher the fault
current, the higher the cost of the protective equipment, so the supply authority will
normally specify the maximum fault current that can be tolerated.
As a transformer designer we then face a dilemma: if we do what seems obvious
and aim to reduce the series impedance to improve the steady-state performance,
we ﬁnd that the short-circuit current increases and there is the problem of
exceeding the permissible levels dictated by the supply authority. Clearly the so-
called ideal transformer is not what we want after all, and we are obliged to settle for
a compromise. We deliberately engineer sufﬁcient impedance (principally via the
control of leakage reactance) to ensure that under abnormal (short-circuit) condi-
tions the system does not self-destruct!
In Chapters 5 and 6 we mentioned something very similar in relation to the
induction motor: we saw that when the induction motor is started direct-on-line it
draws a heavy current, and limiting the current requires compromises in the motor
design. We will see shortly that this behavior is exactly like that of a short-circuited
transformer.
We have developed our ideas in relation to a single-phase transformer, but the
equivalent circuit is also applicable on a per-phase basis to a 3-phase transformer
operating under balanced conditions.
A2.4. DEVELOPMENT OF THE INDUCTION MOTOR
EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT
A2.4.1 Stationary conditions
We saw earlier that on a per-phase basis, the stationary induction motor is very
much like a transformer, so to model the induction motor at rest we can use any of
the transformer equivalent circuits we have looked at so far.
We can represent the cage induction motor at rest (the so-called locked rotor
condition) simply by setting Z
0
2 ¼ 0 in Figure A2.7. Given the applied voltage we
can calculate the current and power that will be drawn from the supply, and if we
know the effective turns ratio we can also calculate the rotor current and the power
being supplied to the rotor. But although our induction motor resembles a trans-
former, its purpose in life is very different because it is designed to convert electrical
power to mechanical power, which of necessity involves movement. Our locked-
rotor calculations will therefore be of limited use unless we can calculate the starting
torque developed. Far more importantly, we need to be able to represent the
electromechanical processes that take place over the whole speed range, so that we
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
397

can predict the input current, power and developed torque at any speed. The
remarkably simple and effective way that this can be achieved is discussed next.
A2.4.2 Modeling the electromechanical energy conversion
process
A very important observation in relation to what we are now seeking to do is that
we recognized earlier that although the rotor currents were at slip frequency, their
effect (i.e. their m.m.f.) was always reﬂected back at the stator windings at the supply
frequency. This suggests that it must be possible to represent what takes place at slip
frequency on the rotor by referring the action to the primary (ﬁxed-frequency) side,
using a transformer-type model; and it turns out that we can indeed model the
entire energy-conversion process in a very simple way. All that is required is to
replace the referred rotor resistance (R
0
2) with a ﬁctitious slip-dependent resistance
((R20)/s) in the short-circuited secondary of our transformer equivalent circuit.
Hence if we build from the exact transformer circuit in Figure A2.6, we obtain
the induction motor equivalent circuit shown in Figure A2.8.
At any given slip, the power delivered to this ﬁctitious ‘load’ resistance repre-
sents the power crossing the air-gap from rotor to stator. We can see straight away
that because (R20)/s is inversely proportional to slip, it reduces as the slip increases,
thereby causing the power across the air-gap to increase and resulting in more
current and power being drawn in from the supply. This behavior is of course in line
with what we already know about the induction motor. We can check the
extremes by putting s ¼ 1 to represent locked rotor, as discussed above, in which
case the current becomes very large, as expected; and s / 0 to represent no-load
running, in which case the rotor current and power are very small, again as
expected.
We will see how to use the equivalent circuit to predict and illuminate motor
behavior in the next section, but ﬁrst there are two points worth making. First,
given the complexity of the spatial and temporal interactions in the induction motor
it is extraordinary that everything can be properly represented by such a simple
Figure A2.8 ‘Exact’ per-phase equivalent circuit of induction motor. The secondary
(rotor) parameters have been referred to the primary (stator) side.
398
Electric Motors and Drives

equivalent circuit, and it has always seemed a pity to the authors that something so
elegant receives little by way of commendation in the majority of textbooks.
Secondly, the following brief discussion is offered for the beneﬁt of readers who are
seeking at least some justiﬁcation for introducing the ﬁctitious resistance (R20)/s,
though it has to be admitted that full treatment is beyond our scope.
The key to developing the representation lies in ensuring that the magnitude
and phase of the referred rotor current (at supply frequency) in the transformer
model is in agreement with the actual current (at slip frequency) in the rotor. We
argued in Chapter 5 that the induced e.m.f. in the rotor at slip s would be sE2 at
frequency sf, where E2 is the e.m.f. induced under locked-rotor (s ¼ 1) conditions,
when the rotor frequency is the same as the supply frequency, i.e. f. This e.m.f. acts
on the series combination of the rotor resistance R2 and the rotor leakage reactance,
which at frequency sf is given by sX2, where X2 is the rotor leakage reactance at
supply frequency. Hence the magnitude of the rotor current is given by
I2 ¼
sE2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
R2
2 þ s2X2
2
q
(A2.11)
In the supply-frequency equivalent circuit, e.g. Figure A2.6, the secondary e.m.f. is
E2, rather than sE2, so in order to obtain the same current in this model as given by
equation (A2.11), we require the slip-frequency rotor resistance and reactance to be
divided by s, in which case the secondary current would be correctly given by
I2 ¼
E2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
R2
s
2
þX2
s
¼
sE2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
R2
2 þ s2X2
2
q
(A2.12)
A2.5. PROPERTIES OF INDUCTION MOTORS
We have started with the exact circuit in Figure A2.8 because the air-gap in the
induction motor causes its magnetizing reactance to be lower than for a transformer
of similar rating, while its leakage reactance will be higher. We therefore have to be
a bit more cautious before we make major simpliﬁcations, though we will ﬁnd later
that for many purposes the approximate circuit (with the magnetizing branch on the
left) is adequate. In this section we concentrate on what can be learned from a study
of the rotor section, which is the same in exact and approximate circuits, so our
conclusions from this section are completely general.
Of the power that is fed across the air-gap into the rotor, some is lost as heat in the
rotor resistance, and the remainder (hopefully the majority!) is converted to useful
mechanical output power. To represent this in the referred circuit we split the ﬁcti-
tious resistance (R20)/s into two parts, R
0
2 and R20((1  s)/s), as shown in Figure A2.9.
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
399

The rotor copper loss is represented by the power in R
0
2, and the useful
mechanical output power is represented by the power in the ‘electromechanical’
resistance R20((1  s)/s), shown shaded in Figure A2.9. To further emphasize the
intended function of the motor – the production of mechanical power – the
electromechanical element is shown in Figure A2.9 as the secondary ‘load’ would
be in a transformer. For the motor to be a good electromechanical energy
converter, most of the power entering the circuit on the left must appear in the
electromechanical load resistance. This is equivalent to saying that for good
performance, the output voltage V
0
2 must be as near as possible equal to the input
voltage V1. And if we ignore the current in the center magnetizing branch, the
‘good’ condition simply requires that the load resistance is large compared with the
other series elements. This desirable condition is met under normal running
condition, when the slip is small and hence R20((1  s)/s) is large.
Our next step is to establish some important general formulae, and draw some
broad conclusions.
A2.5.1 Power balance
From Figure A2.8, the total power entering the rotor (the ‘air-gap’ power P2) is
given by
P2 ¼

I
0
2
2 R
0
2
s
(A2.13)
And from Figure A2.9, the power lost as heat in the rotor conductors is given by
PLoss ¼

I
0
2
2
R
0
2 ¼ sP2
(A2.14)
while the mechanical power output is given by
PMech ¼

I
0
2
2
R
0
2
1  s
s

¼ ð1  sÞP2
(A2.15)
Figure A2.9 Exact equivalent circuit with effective rotor resistance (R20/s) split into R
0
2
and R20(1  s)/s. The power dissipated in R
0
2 represents the rotor copper loss per phase,
while the power in the shaded resistance R20(1  s)/s corresponds to the mechanical
output power per phase, when the slip is s.
400
Electric Motors and Drives

The rotor efﬁciency is therefore given by
PMech
P2
¼ ð1  sÞ  100%
These relationships were mentioned in Chapters 5 and 6, and they are of funda-
mental importance and universal applicability. They show that of the power
delivered across the air-gap, a fraction s is inevitably lost as heat, leaving the fraction
(1 – s) as useful mechanical output. Hence an induction motor can only operate
efﬁciently at low values of slip.
Throughout this book we have emphasized that all electrical machines can act as
motors or generators, so it is appropriate to mention that the induction machine
equivalent circuit is valid in the generating mode, i.e. when the slip s is negative.
The effective rotor resistance simply becomes negative, which in circuit terms
indicates that it is a source of power, and all the other expressions presented here are
equally applicable with negative slip.
A2.5.2 Torque
Returning to the motoring mode, we can now obtain the relationship between the
power entering the rotor and the torque developed. Mechanical power is torque
times speed, and when the slip is s the speed is (1  s)us, where us is the
synchronous speed. Hence from the power equations above we obtain
Torque ¼ Mechanical power
Speed
¼ ð1  sÞP2
ð1  sÞus
¼ P2
us
(A2.16)
Again this is of fundamental importance, showing that the torque developed is
proportional to the power entering the rotor.
All of the relationships derived in this section are universally applicable and do
not involve any approximations. Further useful deductions can be made when we
simplify the equivalent circuit, but ﬁrst we will look at an example of performance
prediction based on the exact circuit.
A2.6. PERFORMANCE PREDICTION – EXAMPLE
The per-phase equivalent circuit parameters (referred to the stator) of a 4-pole,
60 Hz, 440 V, 3-phase, delta-connected induction motor are as follows:
Stator resistance; R1 ¼ 0:2 U; Stator and rotor leakage reactances;
X1 ¼ X2 ¼ j1:0 U; Rotor resistance; R
0
2 ¼ 0:3 U;
Magnetizing reactance; Xm ¼ j40 U; Iron loss resistance; Rc ¼ 250 U
The mechanical frictional losses at normal speed amount to 2.5 kW.
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
401

We will calculate the input line current, the output power and the efﬁciency at
the full-load speed of 1728 rev/min.
The per-phase equivalent circuit, with all values in ohms, is shown in Figure
A2.10. The synchronous speed is 1800 rev/min and the slip speed is thus 1800 –
1728 ¼ 72 rev/min, giving a slip of 72/1800 ¼ 0.04. The electromechanical resis-
tance of 7.2 U is calculated from the expression R20((1  s)/s), with R
0
2 ¼ 0:3 U.
Given that the power in this resistor represents the mechanical output power, we
will see that, as expected, it dominates our calculations.
Although the various calculations in this example are straightforward, they are
not for the faint-hearted as they inevitably involve frequent manipulation of
complex numbers, so most of the routine calculations will be omitted and we will
concentrate on the results and their interpretation.
A2.6.1 Line current
To ﬁnd the line current we must ﬁnd the effective impedance looking in from the
supply, so we ﬁrst ﬁnd the impedances of the rotor branch and the magnetizing (air-
gap) branches. Expressed in ‘real and imaginary’ and also ‘modulus and argument’
form these are:
Rotor branch impedance ¼ 7:5 þ j1 U ¼ 7:57:7:6U
Magnetizing branch impedance ¼ 6:25 þ j39:0 U ¼ 39:5:80:9U
The parallel combination of these two branches has an effective impedance of
6.74 + j2.12 U or 7:07:17:5 U. At roughly 7 U, and predominantly resistive, this is
in line with what we would expect: the magnetizing branch impedance is so much
higher than for the rotor branch that the latter remains dominant. We must now
add the stator impedance of 0.2 + j1 U to yield the total motor impedance per phase
as 6.94 + j3.12 U, or 7:61:24:2U.
The motor is mesh connected so the phase voltage is equal to the line voltage,
i.e. 440 V. We will use the phase voltage as the reference for angles, so the phase
current is given by
Figure A2.10 Exact equivalent circuit for exemplar induction motor, under full-load
conditions (i.e. slip s ¼ 0.04). All of the impedance values are in ohms.
402
Electric Motors and Drives

I1 ¼
440:0
7:61:24:2 ¼ 57:82:  24:2 A
The line current is O3 times the phase current, i.e. 100 A.
A2.6.2 Output power
The output power is the power converted to mechanical form, i.e. the power in the
ﬁctitious load resistance of 7.2 U, so we must ﬁrst ﬁnd the current through it.
The input current I1 divides between the rotor (I
0
2Þ and magnetizing branches
(Im);
and
straightforward
calculation
yields
I
0
2 ¼ 53:99:  14:38A,
and
Im ¼ 10:35:  87:7A.
Again we see that these currents line up with our expectations. Most of the
input current ﬂows in the rotor branch, which is predominantly resistive and the
phase lag is small; conversely relatively little current ﬂows in the magnetizing
branch and its large phase lag is to be expected from its predominantly inductive
nature.
The
power
in
the
load
resistor
is
given
by
PMech ¼ (53.99)2 
7.2 ¼ 20,987 W/phase; there are three phases so the total mechanical power
developed is 62.96 kW.
The generated torque follows by dividing the power by the speed in rad/s,
yielding torque as 348 Nm, or 116 Nm/phase.
We are told that the windage and friction power is 2.5 kW, so the useful output
power is 62.96 – 2.5 ¼ 60.46 kW.
A2.6.3 Efﬁciency
We can proceed in two alternative ways, so we will do both to act as a check. First,
we will ﬁnd the total loss per phase by summing the powers in the winding
resistances and the iron-loss resistor in Figure A2.10. The losses in the two winding
resistances are easy to ﬁnd because we already know the currents through both of
them: the losses are I2
1R1 ¼ ð57:82Þ2  0:2 ¼ 668 W/phase and I
0
2R
0
2 ¼
ð53:99Þ2  0:3 ¼ 874:5 W/phase, for the stator and rotor, respectively.
The iron loss is a bit more tricky, as ﬁrst we need to ﬁnd the voltage across the
magnetizing branch (sometimes called the gap voltage Vg, as in Figure A2.10). We
can get this from the product of the rotor current and the rotor impedance, which
yields
Vg ¼ 53:99:  14:38  7:57:7:6 ¼ 408:5:  6:8V
The power in the 250 U iron loss resistor is now given by (408.5)2/250 ¼ 667 W/
phase.
The total loss (including the windage and friction) is then given by
Total loss ¼ 3ð668 þ 874:5 þ 667Þ þ 2500 ¼ 9:13 kW
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
403

The efﬁciency is given by
Efficiency ¼ PMech
Pin
¼
PMech
PMech þ losses ¼
60:46
60:46 þ 9:13 ¼ 60:46
69:59
¼ 0:869 or 86:9%
Alternatively we could have found the input power directly from the known
input voltage and current, using Pin ¼ 3ðV1I1cos f1Þ ¼ 3  440  57:82 
cos 24:3 ¼ 69:59 kW, which agrees with the result above.
A2.6.4 Phasor diagram
It is instructive to ﬁnish by looking at the phasor diagrams showing the principal
voltages and currents under full-load conditions, as shown in Figure A2.11, which is
drawn to scale.
From the voltage phasor diagram, we note that in this motor the volt-drop due
to the stator leakage reactance and resistance is signiﬁcant, in that the input voltage
of 440 V is reduced to 408.5 V, i.e. a reduction of just over 7%.
The voltage across the magnetizing branch determines the magnetizing current
and hence the air-gap ﬂux density, so in this motor the air-gap ﬂux density will fall
by about 7% between no-load and full-load. (At no-load the slip is very small and
the impedance of the rotor branch is high, so that there is negligible rotor current
Figure A2.11 Phasor diagrams, drawn to scale, for exemplar induction motor under
full-load conditions.
404
Electric Motors and Drives

and very little volt-drop due to the stator impedance, leaving almost the full 440 V
across the magnetizing branch.)
A similar volt-drop occurs across the rotor impedance, leaving just under 390 V
applied at the effective load. Note, however, that because the stator and rotor
impedances are predominantly reactive, the appreciable volt-drops are not
responsible for corresponding power losses.
These signiﬁcant volt-drops reﬂect the fact that this motor is suitable for direct-
on-line starting from a comparatively weak supply, where it is important to limit the
starting current. The designer has therefore deliberately made the leakage reactances
higher than they would otherwise be in order to limit the current when the motor is
switched on.
To estimate the starting current we ignore the magnetizing branch and put the
slip s ¼ 1, in which case the rotor branch impedance becomes 0.3 + j1, so that the
total impedance is 0.5 + j2 or 2.06 U. When the full voltage is applied the phase
current will be 440/2.06 ¼ 214 A. The full-load current is 57.8 A, so the starting
current is 3.7 times the full-load current. This relatively modest ratio is required
where the supply system is weak: a stiff supply might be happy with a ratio of 5 or 6.
We have already seen that the torque is directly proportional to the power into
the rotor, so it should be clear that when we limit the starting current to ease the
burden on the supply, the starting torque is unavoidably reduced. This is discussed
further in the following section.
The current phasor diagram underlines the fact that when the motor is at full-
load, the magnetizing current is only a small fraction of the total. The total current
lags the supply voltage by 24.3, so the full-load power-factor is cos 24.3 ¼ 0.91,
i.e. very satisfactory.
A2.7. APPROXIMATE EQUIVALENT CIRCUITS
This section is devoted to what can be learned from the equivalent circuit in
simpliﬁed form, beginning with the circuit shown in Figure A2.12, in which the
magnetizing branch has been moved to the left-hand side. This makes calculations
very much easier because the current and power in the magnetizing branch are
Figure A2.12 Approximate equivalent circuit for induction motor.
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
405

independent of the load branch. The approximations involved in doing this are
greater than in the case of a transformer because for a motor the ratio of magnetizing
reactance to leakage reactance is lower, but algebraic analysis is much simpler and
the results can be illuminating.
A cursory examination of electrical machines textbooks reveals a wide variety in
the approaches taken to squeeze value from the study of the approximate equivalent
circuit, but there are often so many formulae that the reader becomes over-
whelmed. So here we will focus on two simple messages. First, we will develop an
expression that neatly encapsulates the fundamental behavior of the induction
motor, and illustrates the trade-offs involved in design; and secondly, we will
examine how the relative values of rotor resistance and reactance inﬂuence the
shape of the torque–speed curve.
A2.7.1 Starting and full-load relationships
Straightforward circuit analysis of the circuit in Figure A2.12, together with
equation (A2.16) for the torque, yields the following expressions for the load
component of current and for the torque per phase:
I
0
2 ¼
V1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ

R1 þ R
0
2
s
2
þX2
T
s
and T ¼ 1
us
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
V 2
1

R1 þ R
0
2
s
2
þX2
T
9
>
>
=
>
>
;
R
0
2
s
(A2.17)
The second expression (with the square of voltage in the numerator) reminds us of
the sensitivity of torque to voltage variation, in that a 5% reduction in voltage gives
a little over 10% reduction in torque.
If we substitute s ¼ 1 and s ¼ sﬂ(full-load slip) in these equations we obtain
expressions for the starting current, the full-load current, the starting torque and the
full-load torque. Each of these quantities is important in its own right, and they all
depend on the rotor resistance and reactance. But by combining the four expres-
sions we obtain the very far-reaching result given by equation (A2.18):
Tst
Tfl
¼
Ist
Ifl
2
sfl
(A2.18)
The remarkable thing about equation (A2.18) is that it does not contain the rotor or
stator resistances, or the leakage reactances. This underlines the fact that this result,
like those given in equations (A2.15) and (A2.16), reﬂects fundamental properties
that are applicable to any induction motor.
The left-hand side of equation (A2.18) is the ratio of starting torque to full-load
torque, an important parameter for any (direct-on-line) application as it is clearly no
good having a motor that can drive a load once up to speed, but either has
406
Electric Motors and Drives

insufﬁcient torque to start the load from rest, or (perhaps less likely) more starting
torque than is necessary leading to a too-rapid acceleration.
On the right-hand side of equation (A2.18), the importance of the ratio of starting
to full-load current has already been emphasized: in general it is desirable to minimize
this ratio in order to prevent voltage regulation at the supply terminals during a direct-
on-line start. The other term is the full-load slip, which, as we have already seen,
should always be as low as possible in order to maximize the efﬁciency of the motor.
The inescapable design trade-off faced by the designer of a constant-frequency
machine is revealed by equation (A2.18). We usually want to keep the full-load slip
as small as possible (to maximize efﬁciency), and for direct starting the smaller the
starting current, the better. But if both terms on the right side are small, we will be
left with a low starting torque, which is generally not desirable, and we must
therefore seek a compromise between the starting and full-load performances, as
was explained in Chapter 6.
(It has to be acknowledged that the current ratio in equation (A2.18) relates the
load (rotor branch) currents, the magnetizing current having been ignored, so there
is inevitably a degree of approximation. But for the majority of machines (i.e. 2-pole
and 4-pole) equation (A2.18) holds good, and in view of its simplicity and value it is
surprising that it does not ﬁgure in many ‘machines’ textbooks.)
A2.7.2 Torque vs slip and pull-out torque
The aim here is to quantify the dependence of the maximum or pull-out torque on
the rotor parameters, for which we make use of the simplest possible (but still very
useful) model shown in Figure A2.13. The magnetizing branch and the stator
resistance are both ignored, so that there is only one current, the referred rotor
current I
0
2 being the same as the stator current I1.
To obtain the torque/slip relationship we will make use of equation (A2.16),
which shows that the torque is directly proportional to the total rotor power. The
total rotor power per phase is given by
P2 ¼ Protor ¼

I
0
2
2 R
0
2
s
¼ V 2
1
(
sR
0
2
R
0
2
2 þ s2X2
T
)
(A2.19)
Figure A2.13 Equivalent circuit for induction motor with magnetizing branch
neglected.
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
407

The bracketed expression on the right-hand side of equation (A2.19) indicates how
the torque varies with slip.
At low values of slip (i.e. in the normal range of continuous operation) where
sXT is much less than the rotor resistance R
0
2, the torque becomes proportional to
the slip and inversely proportional to the rotor resistance. This explains why the
torque–speed curves we have seen in Chapters 5 and 6 are linear in the normal
operating region, and why the curves become steeper as the rotor resistance is
reduced.
At the other extreme, when the slip is 1 (i.e. at standstill), we usually ﬁnd that
the reactance is larger than the resistance, in which case the right-hand bracketed
term in equation (A2.19) reduces to (R20)/(XT
2). The starting torque is then
proportional to the rotor resistance, a result also discussed in Chapters 5 and 6.
By differentiating this bracketed expression in equation (A2.19) with respect to
the slip, and equating the result to zero, we can ﬁnd the slip at which the maximum
torque occurs. The slip for maximum torque turns out to be given by
s ¼ R
0
2
XT
(A2.20)
(A circuit theorist could have written down this expression by inspection of Figure
A2.13, provided that he knew that the condition for maximum torque was that the
power in the rotor was at its peak.)
Substituting the slip for maximum torque we obtain an expression for the
maximum torque per phase as:
Tmax ¼ V 2
1
us
1
2XT
(A2.21)
From these two equations we see that the slip at which maximum torque is
developed is directly proportional to the rotor resistance, but that the peak torque
itself is independent of the rotor resistance, and depends inversely on the leakage
reactance.
A2.8. MEASUREMENT OF INDUCTION MOTOR PARAMETERS
The tests used to obtain the equivalent circuit parameters of a cage induction
motor are essentially the same as those described for the transformer. To simulate
the ‘open-circuit’ test we would need to run the motor with a slip of zero, so
that the secondary (rotor) referred resistance ((R20)/s) became inﬁnite and the
rotor current was absolutely zero, but because the motor torque is zero at
synchronous speed, the only way we could achieve zero slip would be to drive
the rotor from another source, e.g. a synchronous motor. This is hardly ever
necessary because when the shaft is unloaded the no-load torque is usually very
408
Electric Motors and Drives

small and the slip is sufﬁciently close to zero that the difference does not matter.
From readings of input voltage, current and power (per phase), the parameters of
the magnetizing branch are derived as described earlier. The no-load friction and
windage losses will be combined with the iron losses and represented in the
parallel resistor – a satisfactory practice as long as the voltage and/or frequency
remain(s) constant.
The short-circuit test of the transformer becomes the locked-rotor test for the
induction motor. By clamping the rotor so that the speed is zero and the slip is
one, the equivalent circuit becomes the same as the short-circuited transformer.
The total resistance and leakage reactance parameters are derived from voltage,
current and power measurements as already described. With a cage motor the
rotor resistance clearly cannot be measured directly, but the stator resistance can
be obtained from a d.c. test and hence the referred rotor resistance can be
obtained.
A2.9. EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT UNDER VARIABLE-FREQUENCY
CONDITIONS
More and more induction motors now operate from variable-frequency inverters,
the frequency (and voltage) being varied not only to control steady-state speed, but
also to proﬁle torque during acceleration and deceleration. Two questions that we
might therefore ask are (a) does the equivalent circuit remain valid for other than 50
or 60 Hz operation; and (b) if so, do the approximations that have been developed
remain useful?
The answer to question (a) is that the form of the equivalent circuit is inde-
pendent of the supply frequency. This is to be expected because we are simply
representing in circuit form the linking of the electric and magnetic circuits that
together constitute the motor, and these physical properties do not depend on the
excitation frequency.
The answer to the question of the validity of approximations is less straight-
forward, but broadly speaking all that has so far been said is applicable except at low
frequencies, say below about 10 Hz for 50 or 60 Hz motors. As the frequency
approaches zero, the volt-drop due to stator resistance becomes important, as the
example below demonstrates.
Consider the example studied previously, and suppose that we reduce the
supply frequency from 60 to 6 Hz. All the equivalent circuit reactances reduce by
a factor of 10, as shown in Figure A2.14, which assumes operation at the same
(rated) torque for both cases. We can see immediately that whereas at 60 Hz the
stator and rotor leakage reactances are large compared with their respective resis-
tances, the reverse is true at 6 Hz, so we might immediately expect signiﬁcant
differences in the circuit behavior. (It should be pointed out that the calculations
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
409

required to derive the voltages at 6 Hz are not trivial, as the reader may like to
verify.)
We saw in Chapter 7 that to get the best out of the motor we need the ﬂux to be
constant and the slip speed (in rev/min) to be the same when the motor is required
to develop full-load torque.
To keep the air-gap ﬂux constant we need to ensure that the magnetizing
current remains the same when we reduce the frequency. We know that at 6 Hz the
magnetizing reactance is one-tenth of its value at 60 Hz, so the voltage Vm must be
reduced by a factor of 10, from 408.5 to 40.85 V, as shown in Figure A2.14. (We
previously established that the condition for constant ﬂux in an ideal transformer
was that the V/f ratio must remain constant: here we see that the so-called air-gap
voltage (Vm) is the one that matters.)
Previously we considered operation at 60 Hz, for which the synchronous speed
was 1800 rev/min and the rated speed 1728 rev/min. This gave a slip speed of
72 rev/min and a slip of 0.04. At 6 Hz the synchronous speed is 180 rev/min, so for
the same slip speed of 72 rev/min the new slip is 0.4. This explains why the ‘load’
resistance of 7.2 U at 60 Hz becomes only 0.45 U at 6 Hz, while the total referred
rotor resistance reduces from 7.5 U at 60 Hz to 0.75 U at 6 Hz.
The 60 Hz voltages shown in the upper half of Figure A2.14 were calculated
previously. To obtain the same torque at 6 Hz as at 60 Hz, we can see from equation
(A2.16) that the rotor power must reduce in proportion to the frequency, i.e. by
a factor of 10. The rotor resistance has reduced by a factor of 10 so we would expect
the rotor voltage to also reduce by a factor of 10. This is conﬁrmed in Figure A2.14,
Figure A2.14 Comparison of equivalent circuit parameters at 60 and 6 Hz.
410
Electric Motors and Drives

where the rotor voltage at 6 Hz is 38.9 V. (This means the rotor current (51.9 A) at
6 Hz is the same as it was at 60 Hz, which is what we would expect given that for
the same torque we would expect the same active current). Working backwards
(from Vm) we can derive the input voltage required, i.e. 49 V.
Had we used the approximate circuit, in which the magnetizing branch is
moved to the left-hand side, we would have assumed that to keep the amplitude of
the ﬂux wave constant, we would have to change the voltage in proportion to the
frequency, in which case we would have decided that the input voltage at 6 Hz
should be 44 V, not the 49 V really needed. And if we had supplied 44 V rather than
49 V, the torque at the target speed would be almost 20% below our expectation,
which is clearly signiﬁcant and underlines the danger of making unjustiﬁed
assumptions when operating at low frequencies.
In this example the volt-drop of 10 V across the stator resistance is much more
signiﬁcant at 6 Hz than at 60 Hz, for two reasons. First, at 6 Hz the useful (load)
voltage is 38.9 V whereas at 60 Hz the load voltage is 389 V: so a ﬁxed drop of 10 V
that might be considered negligible compared with 389 V is certainly not negligible
in comparison with 38.9 V. And secondly, when the load is predominantly resistive,
as here, the reduction in the magnitude of the supply voltage due to a given series
impedance is much greater if the impedance is resistive than if it is reactive. This
matter was discussed in section 1 of Chapter 6.
Induction Motor Equivalent Circuit
411

FURTHER READING
Acarnley PP. Stepping Motors: A Guide to Modern Theory and Practice. 4th ed. London:
IET; 2002.
A comprehensive treatment at a level which will suit both students and users.
Beaty HW, Kirtley JL. Electric Motor Handbook. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1998.
Comprehensive analytical treatment including chapters on motor noise and servo controls.
Bose BK. Power Electronics and Variable Frequency Drives: Technology and Applications.
Wiley-Blackwell; 1996.
Authorative book covering many key areas of motor drive analysis, performance and design.
Contains many references to key books and technical papers on the subject.
Chaisson J. Modeling and High-Performance Control of Electrical Machines. John Wiley &
Sons, IEEE Press series on power engineering; 2005.
A good book for anyone wanting to model an electrical machine as part of a simulation package or in
a control system. Good treatment of a number of practical issues including noise on feedback signals.
Drury W. The Control Techniques Drives and Controls Handbook. 2nd ed. London: IET;
2009.
A practical guide to the technology underlying drives and motors and consideration of many of the
design issues faced with their use in many applications and environments.
Hendershot JR, Miller TJE. Design of Brushless Permanent-Magnet Motors. LLC: Motor
Design Books; 2010.
A comprehensive guide to the design and performance of brushless permanent magnet motors.
Hindmarsh J, Renfrew A. Electrical Machines and Drives: Worked Examples. 3rd ed.
Butterworth-Heinemann; 1996.
Worked examples, which put theory in context. Good discussion of engineering implications.
Numerous problems are also provided, with answers supplied!
Jordan HE. Energy-Efﬁcient Motors and their Applications. 2nd ed. New York: Springer;
1994.
Clearly written specialist text.
Kenjo T. Electric Motors and their Controls. New York: Oxford Science Publications;
1991.
A general (basic) introduction with beautiful illustrations, and covering many small and special
purpose motor types.
Mohan N, Undeland TM, Robbins WP. Power Electronics: Converters, Applications, and
Design. 3rd ed. John Wiley & Sons; 2002.
Cohesive presentation of power electronics fundamentals for applications and design. Lots of worked
examples.
Neale M, Needham P, Horrell R. Couplings and Shaft Alignment. Professional Engineering
Publishing Limited; 1991.
A practical guide to coupling selection and problems of shaft alignment.
Vas P. Electrical Machines and Drives. Oxford University Press; 1992.
A deﬁnitive, highly analytical, book on space vector theory of electrical machines.
Vas P. Sensorless Vector and Direct Torque Control. Oxford University Press; 1998.
Comprehensive analytical treatment of ﬁeld orientation and direct torque control of a.c. machines.
Wu B. High Power Converters and AC Drives. John Wiley & Sons; 2006.
Good practical design book on high-power a.c. drive topologies.
413j

INDEX
Note: Page numbers with ‘f ’ denote ﬁgures.
A
2-pole motors, concepts, 284–286
4-pole motors, concepts, 142–154,
191–193, 207–209, 284–286
50/60 Hz supplies, 142–154, 159–160,
169–204, 207–209, 255–262,
281–314
a.c. motor drives, motor/drive selection
issues, 349–364
a.c. motors, 39–41, 48, 75, 141–313,
349–364
see also induction motors; permanent-
magnet synchronous motors
motor/drive selection issues, 349–364
poles, 75, 143, 284–286
a.c. output from a.c.
see also cycloconverters; matrix converters
concepts, 64–65
a.c. output from d.c.
see also inverters
concepts, 59–63, 66–68
a.c. reluctance motors, 110, 282, 286,
311–313
acceleration from rest, 244–246, 354–360
acoustic noise, 19, 23–24, 62, 69, 71,
262–266
concepts, 69, 262–266
inverter-fed induction motor drives, 262
solutions, 69
active front end converters, concepts,
274
air path, 7, 9–11
see also reluctance
air-gap ﬂux density, 11–13, 17–19, 60,
142–162, 229–230
air-gaps, 10–14, 10f, 17–19, 60, 142–162,
178–180, 185–187, 203–204,
229–230
deﬁnition, 11
harmonic air-gap ﬁeld, 178–179
aluminium heatsinks, 70–71
aluminium rotor bars, 154–162
analogue control signals, 126–133
angular distance, work concepts, 22–23,
302–305
anode terminals, 46–47, 50–57
applications
see also individual motors
motor/drive selection issues, 349–364
area parameter, air-gap ﬂux densities, 11–13
armature conductors, 73–112
armature reaction, 14, 93–94, 99–103
armature time-constants, 96–98
autotransformer starter, induction motors,
173
axial current see current
B
see magnetic ﬂux density; tesla
deﬁnition, 4–5, 20–21, 36
back e.m.f., 28, 83–108, 115–117,
187–193, 287–292
see also motional e.m.f.
deﬁnition, 28, 83–84
‘bang-bang’ ﬂux and torque control,
248–253
bar magnets, 1–7, 2f
base speed, 73–75, 91–93, 104–106, 132,
209–215, 296–298, 343–347,
351–354
d.c. motors, 73–75, 91–93, 104–106,
132
deﬁnition, 91–93, 132
synchronous motors, 296–298
batteries, 34–35, 38, 41–50, 99–103,
133–136
voltage control, 41–50
bearing currents, inverter-fed induction
motor drives, 264–265
bearings, 17, 307–308
bi-directional energy converter concept, 36
BIl force equation, 6, 15, 17–18, 23–28, 36,
111, 159–160, 287, 293, 305, 315,
320–325, 344
415j

bipolar junction transistor (BJT), 43–44, 67,
334–336
see also inverters
circuit symbols, 67
concepts, 43–44, 67
deﬁnition, 43–44, 67
BJT see bipolar junction transistor
boost converters, 48–50, 133–136
braking force, 26–28, 83, 87–91,
99–103, 121–124, 132, 187–195,
272–273, 339–343, 360–364
dynamic braking, 103, 272–273
energy conversion, 26–28, 83,
87–91
full-speed regenerative reversals,
101–103, 121–124, 193–195
induction motors, 187–195, 213–215,
272–273
inverter-fed induction motor drives,
272–273
regenerative braking, 99–103,
121–124, 132, 187–195, 360–364
brushed d.c. motors, 2, 73–112,
141–142, 281–282, 349–350, 350f,
352f
see also d.c. motors
concepts, 73–112, 349–350
deﬁnition, 76
structure, 73–76
brushes, 2, 73–112, 141–142, 281–282,
349–350, 350f–352f
see also commutators
concepts, 73–111, 281–282, 349–350
deﬁnition, 76
servicing requirements, 76
structure, 73–75
brushless a.c. motors see permanent-magnet
synchronous motors
brushless d.c. motors
see also permanent-magnet synchronous
motors
deﬁnition, 281–282, 305
brushless motors, 139, 281–313
see also permanent-magnet synchronous
motors
brushless permanent-magnet synchronous
motors see permanent-magnet
synchronous motors
buck converters, 48–50, 133–136
see also step-down converters
deﬁnition, 48
C
C-core magnetic circuits, evolution, 14, 15f
cable problems, inverter-fed induction
motor drives, 262–263
cage rotors, 154–162, 165–167, 169–204,
224–225, 282–286, 291–292,
312–313
see also rotors
concepts, 154–162, 169–176, 181–195,
200–201, 224–225, 291–292
deﬁnition, 155–156
capacitor run induction motors, 201–202
capacitors, 48–50, 56–57, 201–202
chopper circuits
concepts, 41f, 42–45, 113, 126–136, 249,
350f
deﬁnition, 42
inductive loads, 45–48
overvoltage protection, 45–48,
272–273
chopper drives, stepping motors, 249,
337–338
chopper-fed d.c. drives, 113, 126–136, 350f
see also d.c. motor drives
concepts, 133–136, 350f
control systems, 126–133, 136
performance calculations, 133–135
torque–speed characteristics, 135–136
Clarke transformation, 220–222
class F insulation, 37
closed-loop control systems, concepts,
33, 39–41, 96, 113–133, 136,
138–139, 174–176, 205–206,
240–243, 258–262, 330, 341–343
closed-loop induction motor drives,
260–261
closed-loop permanent magnet motors,
259
clutches, 172
cogging effects, torque ripple, 308–310
coils of wire, 3–4, 7–14, 8f, 73–75, 78–84,
142–154, 203–204, 321–322
see also magnetomotive force; number of
turns
416
Index

commutation, 55–56, 56f, 73–125,
302–305
see also thyristors
concepts, 55–56, 56f, 76–78
commutators, 73–125, 136–138,
141–142, 258–262, 302–305
see also brushes
d.c. motors, 73–125, 136–138, 141–142,
258–262
deﬁnition, 76–78
functions, 76–80, 141–142
interpoles, 78–80
operation, 78–80
compound-wound d.c. motors, 74–75
constant power, 91–93, 132, 211–212
constant rotor ﬂux linkages, 230–234
constant speed conductor motion, 26–28,
30–36
constant torque, 62, 77–78, 84–95, 132,
211–212, 295–296, 354–360
control systems, 132, 211–212
d.c. motors, 77–78, 84–95, 132
deﬁnition, 62, 91–92, 132
induction motors, 211–212
motor/drive selection issues, 354–360
constant voltage operation, 30–36, 48–50,
73–112, 169–176, 287–292, 330–340
behavior with a mechanical load, 32–34,
287–292
behavior with no mechanical load, 30–32
concept, 30–36, 287–292
efﬁciency, 34–35, 38
relative magnitudes of V and E, 34–35
stepping motors, 330–340
synchronous motors, 287–292
constant-torque region, deﬁnition, 62
‘continuous current’ mode, 54–57,
117–120, 135–136
control circuit part of converters, 39–41
control systems
see also ﬁeld-oriented control
armature voltage feedback, 132, 138–139
closed-loop control systems, 33, 39–41,
96, 113–133, 136, 138–139, 174–176,
205–206, 240–243, 258–262, 330,
341–343
concepts, 126–133, 174–176
constant torque regions, 132, 211–212
current limits and protection, 127–129,
272–279
d.c. motor drives, 126–133, 136,
138–140, 151–153, 240–243
digital control signals, 126, 139–140,
174–176, 246–248
drives without current control, 132–133
induction motors, 151–153, 169,
174–176, 200–201, 205–215,
234–237, 240–243, 248–253, 258–262
open-loop control systems, 174–176,
209–215, 246–248, 258–262,
301–302, 316, 318–320
permanent-magnet synchronous motors,
300–305, 308–310
speed controls, 126–127, 127f–128f,
130–132, 169, 195–198, 209–215,
240–243, 351–354
synchronous motors, 300–305, 308–310
torque, 126–133, 127f, 206, 234–237,
240–243, 248–253, 345–347
volt-drop compensation, 132
controlled rectiﬁers, 50–59, 83–84,
113–125
see also converters; rectiﬁers
converter-fed synchronous machine
(multi-MW, excited-rotor) drives,
302–305
see also synchronous motors
converters, 39–204, 207–209, 255–258,
272–279, 292–305, 349–364
see also braking.; inverters; matrix.;
rectiﬁers; switching
a.c. output from a.c., 64–65
a.c. output from d.c., 59–63, 66–68
active front end converters, 274
alternative topologies, 272–279
boost converters, 48–50, 133–136
concepts, 39–72, 113–140, 207–209,
255–258, 272–279, 349–364
cooling systems, 69–71, 113–125
current source inverters, 278–279
cycloconverters, 64–65, 276–277
d.c. output from a.c. supply, 50–59,
73–140, 272–279
d.c. output from d.c. supply, 41–50,
133–136
double-converter reversing drives, 124
Index
417

converters (Continued)
energy storage shortfalls, 40–41, 255–258
ﬁring circuits, 59, 113–125
functions, 39–41, 48, 207–209, 255–258
heat generation, 43–45, 69–71, 113–125
inverter-fed induction motor drives,
272–279
motor/drive selection, 349–364
multi-level converters, 274–276
output impedance – overlap phenomenon,
120–121, 124–125
output voltage and control, 52–59,
61–65
power electronic converters for motor
drives, 39–72, 103, 207–209
single-converter reversing drives, 122–124
single-phase fully controlled converters,
52–59, 113–125, 266–270
step-down converters, 48–50, 133–136,
359
supply power-factor, 124–125
three-phase fully controlled converters,
57–58, 113–125
voltage controls, 39–50
waveform concepts, 68–71, 113–140,
255–258
cooling systems, 20–21, 37, 69–71, 71f, 89,
113–125, 212–213, 263–264,
351–354, 360, 362–363
see also heat.
arrangements, 70–71, 71f, 89, 113–125,
212–213, 263–264
concepts, 69–71, 113–125, 263–264,
351–354, 360, 362–363
converters, 69–71, 113–125
forced-air cooling, 70–71, 71f, 113–125,
212–213
motor/drive selection, 351–354, 360,
362–363
copper loss, 28–29, 34–35, 263–264
see also heat generation
copper wires, 11, 19–22, 28–29, 34–38,
103–108, 141–142, 154–162,
181–185
see also current.
coupled circuits, induction motors,
222–223
CSIs see current source inverters
current
‘continuous current’ mode, 54–57,
117–120, 135–136
‘discontinuous current’ mode, 47–48,
117–120, 135–136
four quadrants of the torque–speed plane,
99–103, 121–122, 135–136, 213–215
large slip effects on rotor currents and
torque, 160–165
rotor currents, 159–165, 207–209,
225–230
small slip effects on rotor currents and
torque, 159–160, 207–209
starting induction motors, 169–176
transient current surges, 84–85,
95–98
current source inverters (CSIs), 278–279
current-carrying conductors, 1–7, 2f,
15–28, 75–80, 84–98, 113–125
see also copper wires; heat generation
concepts, 1–7, 15–19, 95–98
Fleming’s left-hand rule, 5–7
magnetic ﬁeld produced by rotor
conductors, 15–19
rotation concepts, 1–7, 15–19
torque production, 15–19, 75–80, 84–95
current-error ampliﬁers, control systems,
126–133
current-fed conditions, steady-state torque,
215–216, 226–230, 336–337
current-forced drives, stepping motors,
336–338
‘cut-off’ condition, transistors, 43–45
cycloconverters, 64–65, 276–277, 352f
see also matrix converters; thyristors
deﬁnition, 64–65, 276–277
D
dampers, stepping motors, 339–343
‘d.c. link’, inverters, 59–62
d.c. motor drives, 73–75, 113–140,
212–213, 258–262, 302–305,
346–347, 349–359, 350f, 351f, 352f,
353f
see also chopper-fed.; induction.;
servo-type.; thyristor-fed.
concepts, 113–140, 349–354, 350f, 351f,
352f, 353f, 354f
418
Index

control systems, 126–133, 136, 138–140,
151–153, 240–243
digital control signals, 126, 139–140
double-converter reversing drives, 124
generating, 121–122, 162, 188–189
motor/drive selection, 349–354, 350f,
351f, 352f, 353f, 354f
reversing drives, 122–124, 132
single-converter reversing drives, 122–124
structure, 113–125
types, 113, 353f
d.c. motors
see also self-excited.; separately
excited.; series.; shunt.
applications, 73, 89, 103–108, 260–261,
349–354, 350f, 351f, 352f, 353f, 354f
armature reaction, 93–94, 99–103
base speed, 73–75, 91–93, 104–106, 132
classiﬁcations, 74–75
concepts, 73–142, 349–354, 350f, 351f,
352f, 362–363
conventional brushed types, 2, 73–112
declining importance, 73–75
deﬁnition, 141–142
dynamic behaviors, 96–98, 103, 272–273
dynamic braking, 103
equivalent circuits, 73–75, 83–84, 222
evolution of magnetic circuits, 14, 15f
excitation, 2, 165–167
four quadrants of the torque–speed plane,
99–103, 121–122, 135–136
full-speed regenerative reversals,
101–103, 121–124
induction motor contrasts, 141–142,
189–191, 246, 258–262
loaded behavior, 87–91, 95–98, 117–120
magnets, 75–80, 110–111, 122–124
maximum output power, 94–95, 122–124
motional e.m.f., 80–95, 115–117,
133–135
motor/drive selection, 349–354, 350f,
351f, 352f, 353f, 354f, 362–363
no-load speed, 84–95, 117
performance calculations, 85–86,
133–135, 141–142, 258–262,
349–350, 350f, 351f, 352f, 353f, 354f
poles, 73–75, 77–80, 110–111
power-electronic supplies, 74–75
regenerative braking, 99–103, 121–124,
132
standards, 362–363
steady-state characteristics, 73–75,
83–108, 126–133
structure, 73–75
time-constants, 96–98
torque, 73–95, 99–108, 113–133
toy motors, 110–111
transient current surges, 84–85, 95–98
voltage, 73–75, 80–84, 95–108,
113–125
d.c. output from a.c. supply, concepts,
50–59, 73–140, 266–270, 272–279
d.c. output from d.c. supply, concepts,
41–50, 103–108, 133–136
decoupled axes, deﬁnition, 234
deep bar rotors, 183–184
see also rotors
‘detent’ torque, 110
digital control signals, 126, 139–140,
174–176, 246–248
advantages, 140
concepts, 139–140, 174–176
dimensional standards, motor/drive
selection, 363
diode rectiﬁers, 39–40, 50–59, 113–125,
255–258, 272–279
see also rectiﬁers
diodes, 39–40, 45–48, 50–63, 113–125,
133–135, 255–258, 272–279
deﬁnition, 46–47
direct axis, concepts, 234
direct starting problems, induction motors,
169–176
direct torque controls
induction motors, 206, 248–253,
261–262
inverter-fed induction motor drives,
261–262
direct-on-line starting (DOL), 171–174,
266–272
direct-to-line starting (DTL), 171
direction of rotations, induction motors,
150
‘discontinuous current’ mode, 47–48,
117–120, 135–136
dot(.) symbol, conventions, 7–19
Index
419

double cage rotors
see also rotors
concepts, 183–184
double-converter reversing drives, 124
‘doubly-salient’ motors, 343–347
see also stepping motors; switched-
reluctance motors
doubly-fed induction machines,
wind-power generation, 188,
191–193
drives, 22–24, 36–37, 39–75, 113–140,
255–280, 300–305, 330–340,
343–347, 349–364
see also d.c. motor.; inverter-fed
induction.; synchronous motor.
a.c. output from a.c., 64–65
a.c. output from d.c., 59–63, 66–68
concepts, 39–72, 113–140, 255–280,
300–305, 330–340, 349–364
d.c. output from a.c. supply, 50–59,
73–140, 266–270, 272–279
d.c. output from d.c. supply, 41–50,
103–108, 133–136
general arrangements, 39–41
motor/drive selection, 349–364
performance limitations, 50–59, 85–86,
133–135
power electronic converters for motor
drives, 39–72, 103, 207–209
single pulse rectiﬁers, 51–52, 113–125
single-phase fully controlled converters,
52–59, 113–125
stepping motors, 330–340
switched-reluctance motor drives,
343–347, 352f
three-phase fully controlled converters,
57–58, 113–125, 266–270
voltage controls, 41–50
dump resistors, 272
duty cycle and rating, motor/drive selection
issues, 361–362
duty ratio, deﬁnition, 49
dynamic behaviors, d.c. motors, 96–98,
103, 272–273
dynamic braking, 103, 272–273
see also braking force
dynamic torque control, induction motors,
234–237
E
efﬁciency, 34–35, 37–38, 41–50, 180,
196–197, 205–209, 334–340,
343–347, 349–364
see also performance calculations
comparisons, 35, 37–38
concepts, 34–35, 37, 180, 196–197,
205–209
constant voltage operation,
34–35
induction motors, 180, 196–197,
205–209
electric circuits, 1, 3–4, 9–11
deﬁnition, 3–4, 9–11
equations, 9–11
electric loading, 19–24
electric motors, 1–38, 90, 349–364
see also individual motors
the basics, 1–38
general principles, 1, 36–38
motor/drive selection, 349–364
short-term overload, 38, 213–215
electric traction, 23, 103–108, 113–125
electrical input power, power balance
equation, 26–29, 87–93, 185–187,
255–258, 287–300
electromechanical time-constant, concepts,
96–98
electromotive force (e.m.f.), 1, 9–11,
24–28, 30–36, 80–95, 99–103,
108–110, 141–280, 287–292
see also motional e.m.f.; voltage
deﬁnition, 9–11, 24–26, 80–84, 222–224
torque, 80–84, 154–162
electronic current limiting, control systems,
127–129
e.m.f. see electromotive force
emitter, 41–50, 41f
see also transistors
enclosures and cooling, motor/drive
selection, 362–363
encoder, 341–343
end-rings, rotor, 154–162
energy conversion, 1–7, 24–28, 36, 180
see also motional e.m.f.; power
relationships
bi-directional energy converter concepts,
36
420
Index

concepts, 1–7, 24–28, 36
induction motor efﬁciency, 180
energy optimizations, induction motors,
198–199
energy storage shortfalls, converters, 40–41,
255–258
equivalent circuits, 24, 26, 28–29, 73–75,
83–84, 151–153, 169–176, 181–185,
222, 224–225, 287
d.c. motors, 73–75, 83–84, 222
induction motors, 151–153, 169–176,
181–185, 215–216, 222, 224–225
motoring and generating, 29
synchronous motors, 287
excitation, 1–7, 17, 73–112, 153–154,
165–167, 187–193, 203–204,
281–314
see also magnetic ﬁelds
concepts, 1–7, 17, 73–112, 153–154,
165–167
excited-rotor synchronous motors,
284–300, 302–305, 351f
see also synchronous motors
concepts, 284–300, 302–305, 351f
converter-fed synchronous machine
(multi-MW, excited-rotor) drives,
302–305
operation from constant-voltage/constant-
frequency supply, 287–292
variable-frequency operation, 292–300
F
F see force
fan and pump loads, motor/drive selection,
355, 360
fans, 70–71, 71f, 87–91, 199–203,
212–213, 313, 354–360, 362–363
Faraday’s law, 27–28, 222–223, 232
feedback systems
negative-speed feedback, 33, 39–41, 96,
113–133, 136, 138–139, 151–153,
174–176, 200–201, 205–209,
240–243, 341–343
positive feedback, 200–201
ﬁeld weakening, 32–34, 32f, 91–93,
104–106, 172, 207–209, 298–300,
308–311
deﬁnition, 92
ﬁeld windings, 73–112, 142–154,
189–191, 199–203, 218–220,
225–226, 281–286, 330–340
see also magnetomotive force
ﬁeld-oriented control, 142, 206, 215–248,
258–262, 281–282, 295–297
acceleration from rest, 244–246
concepts, 215–248, 281–282, 295–297
coupled circuits, 222–223
deﬁnition, 215, 235–236
direct torque control (DTC), 206,
248–253
dynamic torque control, 234–237
equivalent circuits, 215–216, 222,
224–225
ﬂux linkages, 215–216, 222–224,
226–237, 250–253
implementation methods, 237–248
induced e.m.f., 222–224
induction motors, 142, 206, 215–248,
258–262, 295–296
inverter-fed induction motor drives,
261–262
PWM, 237–253, 300–305
rotor currents, 225–234
rotor ﬂux reference angles, 240–243,
246–248
self and mutual ﬂux linkages, 215–216,
223–234
space phasor representation of m.m.f.
waves, 215–216, 218–220, 226–248,
250–253
stator ﬂux and torque controls, 250–253
steady-state torque under current-fed
conditions, 215–216, 226–234,
250–253
synchronous motors, 281–282, 295–298,
301–302
torque controls, 234–237, 240–243,
248–253
transformation of reference frames,
215–216, 220–222
transient operations, 216–218,
243–244
ﬁring circuits, 59, 113–125, 174–176
Fleming’s left-hand rule
see also force
deﬁnition, 5–7
Index
421

‘ﬂux-cutting’ form of Faraday’s law,
27–28
see also motional e.m.f.
ﬂux see magnetic ﬂux
ﬂux components, concepts, 231–234,
240–243
ﬂux density, 4–5, 5f, 7–14, 19–28, 30–36,
73–112, 141–280, 287
see also magnetic ﬁelds; magnetomotive
force; reluctance; speciﬁc magnetic
loading
air-gap ﬂux densities, 11–13, 17–19, 60,
142–162
concepts, 4–5, 5f, 7–14, 30–36, 80–84,
142–154
deﬁnition, 4–5, 5f, 12–13, 81–82
design considerations, 7–14, 17,
19–24
equations, 4, 12–13, 81–82, 151–153
ﬁeld weakening, 32–34, 32f, 91–93
Fleming’s left-hand rule, 5–7
quantiﬁcation methods, 4–5, 9–13
reluctance, 11–13, 17–19
saturation, 13–14, 19–21
ﬂux linkages, induction motors, 215–216,
222–224, 226–237
force, 1–7, 15–19, 23–28, 36, 75–80, 287,
293, 315, 320–325, 344
see also electromotive.; motional e.m.f.;
torque
concepts, 1–7, 15–19, 75–80
deﬁnition, 5–7, 15, 36
equations, 6, 15, 17–18, 23–28, 36, 287,
293, 305, 315, 320–325, 344
Fleming’s left-hand rule, 5–7
quantiﬁcation, 5–7
forced-air cooling, 70–71, 71f, 113–125,
212–213
see also cooling systems
four quadrants of the torque–speed plane,
99–103, 121–122, 135–136, 213–215
freewheel (ﬂywheel) diodes, 45–48,
59–62, 133–135, 334–336
concepts, 45–48, 59–61
deﬁnition, 46–47
friction, 19, 30–32, 85
full-ﬂux motors, 32–34, 32f, 91–93,
207–215
full-speed regenerative reversals, braking
force, 101–103, 121–124, 193–195
G
gearboxes, 22–24, 37, 176–181, 351–360
high-speed motors, 22–24, 37, 176–181,
351–360
referred inertia, 177, 354–360
general principles of electric motors, 1,
36–38
general-purpose industrial cage motors,
torque–speed curves, 184, 184f
generating, 29, 34–35, 89–90, 108–110,
113, 121–122, 162, 169, 187–193,
213–215, 282–286, 311
d.c. motor drives, 121–122, 162, 188–189
induction motors, 162, 169, 187–193,
213–215
negative slip, 162, 187–193, 213–215
permanent-magnet synchronous motors,
311
self-excited d.c. motors, 108–110
self-excited induction generators, 189–191
synchronous motors, 282–286, 311
wind-power generation, 188, 191–193,
311
H
half-ﬂux motors, ﬁeld weakening, 32–34,
32f
half-stepping, stepping motors, 328–329,
331–332
harmonics, 178–179, 255–258, 262–272,
276–277, 302–305, 364
heat generation, 10–11, 20–21, 26–29,
34–35, 37–38, 43–45, 73–125,
179–181, 185–187, 193–195,
203–204, 212–213, 263–264, 272,
305–307, 351–354, 360, 362–363
see also cooling systems; current.;
resistance
converters, 43–45, 69–71, 113–125
induction motors, 179–181, 185–187,
193–195, 203–204, 212–213,
263–264, 272, 305–307
overheating high inertia loads, 179–181,
185–187
transistors, 43–45
422
Index

heatsinks, 45, 69–71
see also cooling systems
arrangements, 70–71, 71f
concepts, 69–71
‘live’ problems, 70
high-resistance cage motors, voltage
control, 196–197
high-speed motors, 22–24, 36–37,
107–108, 255–258, 276–277,
318–320, 351–354
holding torque, stepping motors, 328–329
hybrid stepping motors, 321–324, 337–340
see also stepping motors
hysteresis, 88, 154, 199, 248–253,
272–279, 282, 313
hysteresis motors, 88, 154, 199, 248–253,
272–279, 282, 313
see also synchronous motors
advantages, 313
I
IC classiﬁcation numbers, 331–332,
362–363
IEC standards, 263–264, 266, 307, 362–364
IGBT see insulated gate bipolar transistor
impedance, 120–121, 124–125, 143,
169–176, 255–258, 354–360, 364
inductance, 30, 45–48, 54–58, 78–80,
83–84, 87–91, 113–125, 141–280
equation, 46, 83–84, 87–91
(motor) load, 54–58, 62–63
single-phase fully controlled converters,
54–57
induction motor drives, 113, 207–209,
255–280, 349–354, 351f, 352f
see also inverter-fed.
concepts, 255–280, 349–350, 351f, 352f
motor/drive selection issues, 349–354,
351f, 352f
induction motors see inverter-fed.
50/60 Hz supplies, 142–154, 159–160,
169–204, 207–209, 255–262
advantages, 141–142, 205–206, 255,
292–300
applications, 141–142, 169, 184–185,
199–204, 249, 255–262, 272–279,
349–350, 351f, 352f
autotransformer starter, 173
braking force, 187–195, 213–215,
272–273
capacitor run induction motors,
201–202
circuit modelling, 224–225
concepts, 141–254, 282–286, 349–354,
351f, 352f, 362–363
constant power, 211–212
constant torque, 211–212
control systems, 151–153, 169, 174–176,
200–201, 205–215, 234–237,
240–243, 248–253, 258–262
costs, 141–142, 205–206, 255
coupled circuits, 222–223
d.c. motor contrasts, 141–142, 189–191,
246, 258–262
deﬁnition, 141–142, 282–286
design considerations, 142, 150–151,
154–162, 169–204, 212–213, 255–258
direct starting problems, 169–176
direct torque control, 206, 248–253,
261–262
direction of rotation, 150–151
disadvantages, 141–142, 205–206, 255,
292–300, 305–307
doubly-fed induction machines for
wind-power generation, 188, 191–193
dynamic torque control, 234–237
efﬁciency, 180, 196–197, 205–209
e.m.f., 151–153
energy optimization, 198–199
equivalent circuit, 151–153, 169–176,
181–185, 215–216, 222, 224–225
excitation power, 153–154, 165–167,
187–193, 203–204
ﬁeld-oriented control, 142, 206,
215–248, 258–262, 295–296
ﬁelds produced by each phase-winding,
145–148
generating, 162, 169, 187–193, 213–215
harmonics, 178–179, 255–258, 262–272
heat generation, 179–181, 185–187,
193–195, 203–204, 212–213,
263–264, 272, 305–307
inertia, 176–181, 213–215
injection braking, 194–195
‘inverter grade’ induction motors, 213,
265–266
Index
423

induction motors (Continued)
inverter-imposed limitations, 211–213,
262–272
large slip effects on rotor currents and
torque, 160–165
leakage ﬂux, 150–151, 165–167,
183–184, 278–279
loaded behavior, 165–167, 176–187,
198–199, 205–215
magnitude of rotating ﬂux wave,
151–153, 218–220, 234–237, 243–244
main (air-gap) ﬂux, 150–151
motor/drive selection, 349–354,
351f, 352f, 362–363
negative slip, 162, 187–193, 213–215
operation modes, 142–154, 159–160,
169–258, 292–300, 349–350,
351f, 352f
overheating – high inertia loads, 179–181,
185–187
overview, 142
performance calculations, 141–142,
165–167, 169–255, 258–262,
305–311, 349–350, 351f, 352f
plug braking, 193–195
plug reversals, 193–195
pole-changing motors, 195–198
pole-numbers, 142–154, 195–198
poles, 142–154, 157–158, 191–193,
195–198, 207–209, 218–220
power range, 203–204
power-factor, 165–167, 169–176,
198–199, 203–204, 266, 270–272
production of rotating magnetic ﬁelds,
145, 163–165
pull-out torque, 180–185, 209–215,
282–286
PWM, 142, 206, 206f, 237–253,
255–279, 350–354, 351f
resistance/reactance starter, 174, 181–185
rotating magnetic ﬁeld, 142–154,
163–165, 169–254
rotor current – inﬂuences on ﬂux,
163–165
rotor currents, 159–165, 207–209,
225–234
rotor parameter inﬂuences on torque–
speed curves, 181–185, 187–193
rotor types, 154–162
rotor-induced e.m.f. and current, 157–158
run-up, 174–181, 184–185
scaling down excitation problems,
203–204
shaded pole induction motors, 202–203
single-phase induction motors, 169,
199–203
slip, 154–167, 180–185, 187–193,
197–198, 207–209, 213–215, 229–230
slip-energy recovery, 197–198, 352f
small slip effects on rotor currents and
torque, 159–160, 207–209
solid-state soft starting, 174–176, 352f
space phasor representation of m.m.f.
waves, 215–216, 218–220, 226–248,
250–253
speed control, 169, 195–198, 209–215,
240–243
speed, 154–162, 165–167, 169–187,
189–191, 193–198, 205–206,
209–215, 240–243, 255–258,
262–266, 351–354
split-phase induction motors, 202
stable operating region, 176–181
stalling, 180–181
standards, 362–363
star/delta (wye/mesh) starter, 172–174,
270
starting methods, 169–176, 184–185,
199–203, 205–206, 244–246
stator current-speed characteristics,
165–167, 243–244
stator ﬂux and torque control, 250–253
steady-state characteristics, 141–142,
176–181, 196–197, 205–209,
216–218, 226–234, 237–248,
250–253
steady-state torque under current-fed
conditions, 215–216, 226–234,
250–253
supply system, 142–154, 159–160,
169–280
supply voltage inﬂuences on torque–speed
curves, 185–187
three-phase motors, 62–63, 142–154,
169–176, 185–187, 199–203,
218–220, 237–248, 255–258, 282–286
424
Index

torque, 142, 154–162, 165–167, 169–198,
205–215, 224–237, 240–243, 248–253,
258–262
torque controls, 206, 234–237, 240–243,
248–253
torque–speed characteristics, 159–160,
165–167, 176–195, 201–202, 205–215
torque–speed curves, 176–195, 184f,
201–202, 205–206, 209–215
undesirable characteristics, 205–206
V/f ratio, 151–153, 208–215, 261–262
variable frequency operation, 176,
191–193, 205–258, 266–272, 292–300
variable-frequency inverters, 176,
191–193, 205–258, 266–272
voltage control of high-resistance cage
motors, 196–197
wind-power generation, 188, 191–193
inductive loads, chopper circuits, 45–48
industrial permanent-magnet synchronous
motors, 307–308
see also permanent-magnet synchronous
motors
inertia, 176–181, 213–215, 306–307, 313,
339–343, 349–364
inertia matching, deﬁnition, 359
injection braking, induction motors,
194–195
insulated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT), 43,
59–63, 67f, 68, 133–136, 255–258,
274–278, 302–305
circuit symbols, 67f
deﬁnition, 43, 67f, 68
insulation, 20–21, 36–38, 262–263
heat generation, 20–21, 37
inverter-fed induction motor drives,
262–263
interpoles, commutators, 78–80
‘inverter grade’ induction motors, 213,
265–266
inverter-fed induction motor drives, 113,
207–209, 255–280, 349–354,
351f–352f
see also induction motor.
acoustic noise, 262
alternative converter topologies, 272–279
bearing currents, 264–265
braking, 272–273
cable problems, 262–263
closed-loop induction motor drives,
260–261
commercially available drives, 255
concepts, 255–280, 349–354, 351f, 352f
converter alternatives, 272–279
direct torque control (DTC), 261–262
effects on the induction motor, 211–212,
222–223, 262–266
effects on the utility supply, 266–272
ﬁeld orientation constraints, 261–262
harmonics, 255–258, 262–272, 276–277
insulation problems, 262–263
motor-rating losses and impacts, 263–264
motor/drive selection, 349–354, 351f,
352f
open-loop induction motor drives, 260
performance calculations, 255, 258–262
power-factor, 266, 270–272
problems, 262–279
protection methods, 272–279
PWM, 255–279, 350–354, 351f
voltage source inverter, 255–258, 278
waveform concepts, 255–258, 261–272
inverter-fed induction motors, 145,
150–151, 165, 169, 176, 191–193,
205–280, 349–350, 351f, 352f
see also induction motors; variable-
frequency inverters
concepts, 207–209
inverter-fed synchronous motor drives,
281–282, 292–305
see also synchronous motors
concepts, 300–305
inverters, 59–63, 66–68, 73, 107–108,
121–122, 142, 145, 176, 191–193,
205–282, 292–305
see also a.c. output from d.c.; converters;
induction motors; pulse-width
modulation; single-phase.;
three-phase.
deﬁnition, 59
device types, 66–68, 107–108, 205–254
output voltage and control, 61–63
variable-frequency inverters, 176,
191–193, 205–258, 266–272, 283
IP classiﬁcation numbers, 362–363
IR, see volt-drops
Index
425

iron
see also ﬂux density
reluctance concepts, 9–13, 286,
320–325
saturation, 13–14, 19–21, 189–191
iron loss, 263–264, 310–311
ironless rotor d.c. motor, 136–138
J
joule ( J), concepts, 22–23, 82
K
Kirchhoff’s voltage law, 28–29, 152–153,
290
Kramer drive, 191–193, 352f
L
leakage ﬂux, 10f, 11, 18, 150–151,
165–167, 183–184, 278–279
legislation requirements, 349
see also standards, motor/drive selection
length of conductor (l), 6, 15, 17–18,
21–22, 36, 81–82
Lenz’s law, 232
lifting magnets, 16
linear systems, 22–29, 36, 83–85
‘live’ problems, heatsinks, 70
load angle, deﬁnition, 285–286
load commutated inverters (LCIs), 302–305
loaded behavior
d.c. motors, 87–91, 95–98, 117–120
induction motors, 165–167, 176–187,
198–199, 205–215
motor/drive selection, 349–364
synchronous motors, 292–300
low-speed motors, 22–24, 36–37, 64–65,
209–215, 255–258, 276–277, 347,
351–354
M
machines
see also electric motors; generating
deﬁnition, 90
magnetic circuits, 1, 3–4, 7–14
concepts, 3–4, 7–14
deﬁnition, 3–4, 7–14
design considerations, 7–14, 17, 19–24
motors, 15–19
magnetic ﬁelds, 1–7, 9–13, 73–112,
141–314, 343–347
see also excitation; ﬂux density
concepts, 1–7, 73–112
deﬁnition, 2–4
Fleming’s left-hand rule, 5–7
magnetic ﬂux, 1–4, 7–14, 73–112,
141–280, 320–325
see also ﬂux; magnetomotive force
concepts, 2–4, 7–14, 80–84
coupled circuits, 222–223
deﬁnition, 2–4
quantiﬁcation methods, 4–5, 9–13
magnetic ﬂux density
see also ﬂux density; tesla
deﬁnition, 4–5, 20–21, 36
magnetic loading, 19–24
‘magnetic’ Ohm’s law, 9–13
see also magnetic ﬂux; magnetomotive
force; reluctance
magnetism phenomenon, 2–4
magnetomotive force (m.m.f.), 9–13,
73–112, 141–280, 343–347
see also coils of wire; ﬂux density
concepts, 9–13, 73–75, 93–94, 218–220,
226–237
deﬁnition, 9
space phasor representation of m.m.f.
waves, 215–216, 218–220, 226–248,
250–253
magnets, 75–80, 110–111, 122–124, 204,
281–314
see also permanent-magnet synchronous
motors
magnitude of force, 1–7, 151–153,
198–199
see also ﬂux density
concepts, 1–7, 151–153
deﬁnition, 2–4
equation, 6
main (air-gap) ﬂux, induction motors,
150–151
matrix converters
see also cycloconverters
concepts, 64, 277–278, 352f
maximum output power, 94–95, 122–124
mechanical loads, energy conversion,
24–28, 30–34, 36
426
Index

mechanical output power, power balance
equation, 26–29, 87–93, 185–187,
255–258, 287–300
metal oxide semi-conductor ﬁeld transistor
(MOSFET), 43, 67–68, 67f, 133–136,
255–258, 334–336
see also inverters
circuit symbols, 67f
deﬁnition, 43, 67–68, 67f
microcontrollers, stepping motors,
315–320, 341–343
microprocessors, 44–45, 315–320
mini-stepping, stepping motors, 330
m.m.f. see magnetomotive force
MOSFET see metal oxide semi-conductor
ﬁeld transistor
motional e.m.f., 1, 24–36, 80–95, 99–103,
108–110, 115–117, 133–135,
141–254, 287–292, 334–340
see also back e.m.f.; electromotive force;
energy conversion
concepts, 24–36, 80–84, 115–117,
133–135
d.c. motors, 80–95, 115–117,
133–135
deﬁnition, 27–28, 31, 36, 81–82
equations, 27–28, 31, 36, 81–82, 86
motor cable problems, inverter-fed
induction motor drives, 262–263
motor insulation problems, inverter-fed
induction motor drives, 262–263
motor volume, 19–24, 37–38
rotor volume, 22, 37
torque, 19–24, 37–38
motor/drive selection, 349–364
advantages/disadvantages, 349–354
constant torque, 354–360
cooling systems, 351–354, 360,
362–363
dimensional standards, 363
drive characteristics, 350–354,
353f, 354f
duty cycle and rating, 361–362
enclosures and cooling, 362–363
fan and pump loads, 355, 360
general application considerations,
360–364
harmonics, 364
inertia matching, 359
load requirements, 354–360
power ratings and capabilities, 349–350,
350f, 351f, 352f
regenerative operation and braking, 349,
360–364
standards, 349, 362–364
supply interactions, 364
torque–speed characteristics, 354–360
motoring and generating, 29, 162, 169,
187–193, 213–215, 282–286, 311
see also generating
equivalent circuits, 29
motors; see also individual motors
general principles, 1, 36–38
magnetic circuits, 15–19
selection, 349–364
short-term overload, 38, 213–215
multi-level converters, concepts,
274–276
multi-motor systems, induction motors,
261–262
mutual ﬂux linkages, induction motors,
215–216, 223–234
N
N pole, 2–4, 2f, 3f, 15–19, 73–112,
142–154, 157–158, 195–198,
284–286
negative slip, induction motors, 162,
187–193, 213–215
negative-speed feedback, closed-loop
control systems, 33, 39–41, 96,
113–133, 136, 138–139, 151–153,
174–176, 200–201, 205–209,
240–243, 341–343
NEMA, 263–264, 266, 307, 362
Newton-meters (Nm), concepts, 22–23,
82
Newton, 6, 22–23
Newton’s law, 26–28
‘no-load’ motor condition, 31, 84–95, 117,
151–153, 165–167, 209–215,
261–262, 284–292
no-load speeds, 31, 84–95, 117, 151–153,
165–167, 209–215, 261–262,
284–292
noisy running, 17
Index
427

number of turns (N), 9–11, 73–75,
151–153, 203–204
see also coils of wire; magnetomotive
force
deﬁnition, 9
O
off-load starting, 172
Ohm’s law, 9–11, 46–47
see also current; resistance; voltage
open drip roof (ODP), deﬁnition, 363
open-loop control systems, 174–176,
209–215, 246–248, 258–262,
301–302, 316, 318–320
open-loop induction motor drives, 260
operating patterns
motor/drive selection issues, 349–364
short-term overload, 38, 213–215
output power see power output
output voltage and control
converters, 52–59, 61–65
inverters, 61–62
overlap phenomenon, converter output
impedance, 120–121, 124–125
overvoltage protection, chopper circuits,
45–48, 272–273
P
Park transformation, 220–222
performance calculations
see also efﬁciency
chopper circuits, 133–135
d.c. motors, 85–86, 133–135, 141–142,
258–262, 349–350, 350f, 351f, 352f,
353f, 354f
induction motors, 141–142, 165–167,
169–255, 258–262, 305–311,
349–350, 351f, 352f
inverter-fed induction motor drives,
255, 258–262
motor/drive selection, 349–364
permanent-magnet synchronous motors,
305–311, 349–350, 351f, 352f
stepping motors, 334–343, 352f
switched-reluctance motors, 343–347,
352f
synchronous motors, 305–313, 349–350,
351f, 352f
permanent magnet servo motors
see permanent-magnet synchronous
motors
permanent-magnet motor drives, 300–305
see also synchronous motors
permanent-magnet synchronous motors,
110–111, 122–124, 204, 258–262,
281–315, 342, 349–350, 351f, 352f,
359, 362–363
see also synchronous motors
advantages, 286, 292–300, 305–307
applications, 305–311, 349–350,
351f, 352f, 359
closed-loop permanent magnet motors,
259
concepts, 281–314, 349–350, 351f, 352f,
359, 362–363
confusing terminology, 281–282
control systems, 300–305, 308–310
deﬁnition, 281–286
design considerations, 300–311
disadvantages, 286, 292–300, 310–311
ﬁeld weakening – operation at half torque,
twice base speed (full power), 298–300,
308–311
ﬁeld-oriented control, 281–282,
295–298, 301–302
full torque at half base speed, 297–298
full-load operations, 296–297
generating, 311
industrial motors, 307–308
limits of operation, 310–311
motor/drive selection, 349–350,
351f, 352f, 362–363
operating characteristics, 291–300,
310–311, 349–350, 351f, 352f
operation from constant-voltage/constant-
frequency supply, 291
performance calculations, 305–311,
349–350, 351f, 352f
poles, 286
position control, 308–310
standards, 362–363
terminology, 281–282
tests of performance, 308–310
variable-frequency operations, 291–300
wind-power generation, 311
phase-locked loops, 140
428
Index

phasor diagrams, 143, 153–154, 154f,
165–167, 169–176, 218–220,
250–253, 289–291, 294–300
plug braking, induction motors, 193–195
plug reversals, induction motors,
193–195
pole amplitude modulation (PAM), 196
pole-changing, speed control, 195–198
pole-changing, induction motors,
195–198
pole-numbers, 142–154, 195–198
poles
a.c. motors, 75, 284–286
d.c. motors, 73–75, 77–80, 110–111
induction motors, 142–154, 157–158,
191–193, 195–198, 207–209,
218–220
permanent-magnet synchronous motors,
286
synchronous motors, 75, 284–286
‘pony’ motors, 292
position controls
permanent-magnet synchronous motors,
308–310
servo-type d.c. drives, 136, 138–139
stepping motors, 138, 316, 327–328
positive feedback, 200–201
power balance equation, 26–29, 87–91,
185–187, 255–258
see also electrical input.; mechanical
output.; power relationships
power density (speciﬁc power output)
concepts, 23–24, 305–307
equation, 23
power electronic converters for motor
drives, 39–72, 103, 207–209
see also converters; drives
power output, 22–28, 30–37, 57–58,
73–75, 80–108, 120–121, 270–272,
305–311, 349–364
concepts, 22–24, 34–35, 37, 120–121,
270–272
equations, 22–24, 270–272
maximum output power, 94–95, 122–124
motor/drive selection, 349–364
speed factors, 22–28, 30–37, 57–58,
73–75, 80–108, 113–125, 154–162,
165–167, 169–176, 349–364
power range, induction motors,
203–204
power relationships, 26–36, 87–91
see also energy conversion
constant speed conductor motion, 26–28,
30–36
power-electronic supplies, d.c. motors,
74–75
power-factor
converter-fed d.c. motor drives,
124–125, 135–136
deﬁnition, 270–272
equations, 270–272
induction motors, 165–167, 169–176,
198–199, 203–204, 266, 270–272
inverter-fed induction motor drives, 266,
270–272
motor/drive selection, 349–364
synchronous motors, 287, 289–300,
311–313
printed armature d.c. motors, 136–138
protection systems, 45–48, 127–129,
272–279
pull-out torque, 180–185, 209–215,
282–286, 332–340
pulse-width modulation (PWM), 42–45,
61–62, 142, 206, 206f, 237–253,
255–279, 300–305, 350–354, 351f
see also inverters
deﬁnition, 42, 237–240
induction motors, 142, 206, 206f,
237–253, 255–279, 350–354,
351f
inverter-fed induction motor drives,
255–279, 350–354, 351f
torque control, 240–243, 248–253
PWM see pulse-width modulation
Q
quasi-square waveform, 62
R
radial magnetic forces, 16–17
ramp-time, 174–176, 213–215,
318–320
rated voltage, 38, 95–98, 117–120,
169–176, 191–193, 255–258,
263–264
Index
429

rectiﬁers, 39–40, 50–59, 83–84, 113–125,
207–209, 255–258, 266–270,
272–279, 302–305
see also controlled.; diode.; single
pulse.
concepts, 50–59, 113–125, 207–209,
255–258, 266–270
d.c. output from a.c. supply, 50–59,
113–140, 266–270
single-phase fully controlled converters,
52–57
three-phase fully controlled converters,
57–58, 266–270
reference frames, transformation of
reference frames, 215–216, 220–222
referred inertia, 177, 349–364
regeneration, 99–103, 121–124, 132,
187–195, 349, 360–364
regenerative braking, 99–103, 121–124,
132, 187–195, 360–364
regenerative reversals, 101–103, 121–124,
193–195, 360–364
reluctance, 9–14, 17–19, 110, 141–204,
282, 286, 311–313, 315–348
see also air paths; saturation
air-gap ﬂux densities, 11–13, 17–19
deﬁnition, 9–13
equations, 11–13
ﬂux density, 11–13, 17–19
iron, 9–13, 286, 320–325
reluctance motors, 110, 282, 286, 311–313,
315
see also stepping motors; switched-
reluctance motors; synchronous motors
concepts, 311–313
types, 312, 312f
reluctance torque action, 312–313, 320–325
resistance
braking force, 103, 272–273
dynamic braking, 103, 272–273
induction motor starter, 174, 181–185
load, 53–54, 181–185
voltage controls, 41–50, 196–197
resonances and instability, stepping motors,
339–340
reversing drives, 122–124, 132
rotating magnetic ﬁelds, induction motors,
142–154, 163–165, 169–280
rotor currents
equation, 230–231
induction motors, 159–165, 207–209,
225–234
rotor volume
motor volume, 22, 37
torque, 21–22, 37
rotors
see also cage.; deep bar.; double
cage.; slip; stators; wound.
armature reaction, 14, 93–94, 99–103
constant rotor ﬂux linkages, 230–234
construction considerations, 83, 154–162,
181–185
design considerations, 17, 19–24, 83,
154–162, 181–185, 255–258
excited-rotor synchronous motors,
284–286
ﬂux linkages, 215–216, 222–224,
226–237, 250–253
ﬂux reference angles, 240–243, 246–248
induction motors, 141–280
slotting, 17–24, 18f, 142–162, 203–204
teeth, 315–348
torque–speed curve inﬂuence, 181–185,
187–193
types, 154–162, 181–185, 284–286
run-up
induction motors, 174–181, 184–185
synchronous motors, 291–292, 313
S
S pole, 2–4, 2f, 3f, 15–19, 73–112, 142–154,
157–158, 195–198, 284–286
saturation, 13–14, 19–21, 93–94, 103–108,
189–191
see also ﬂux density; reluctance
motors, concepts, 13–14, 19
deﬁnition, 13–14
Scherbius drive, 352f
selection of motors/drives see motor/drive
selection
self and mutual ﬂux linkages, induction
motors, 215–216, 223–234
self-excited d.c. motors, 108–110
see also d.c. motors
self-excited induction generators, 189–191
see also induction motors
430
Index

self-inductance, 45–50, 79, 83–84,
334–340
semiconductors
see diodes, IGBT, MOSFET, thyristors,
transistors
separately excited d.c. motors, 73–112
see also d.c. motors
series d.c. motors, 74–75, 103–108
see also d.c. motors
concepts, 103–108
servo motors, 136–139, 281–282
see also permanent-magnet synchronous
motors
servo-type d.c. drives, 113, 136–139
see also d.c. motor drives
concepts, 136–139
position controls, 136, 138–139
shaded pole induction motors, 202–203
shaft-mounted tachogenerators, speed
measurements, 39–41
shoot-through fault conditions, 60–61, 63,
347
short-term overload, 38, 213–215
shunt d.c. motors, 74–75, 103–108, 189–191
see also d.c. motors
concepts, 103–108, 189–191
steady-state characteristics, 104–106
SI units, 4–5, 22–23, 82–83
single pulse rectiﬁers, 51–52, 113–125,
200–201
see also rectiﬁers
single-chip chopper modules, 337–338
single-converter reversing drives, 122–124
single-phase fully controlled converters,
52–59, 113–125
single-phase induction motors, 169,
199–203
see also induction motors
single-phase inverters, 59–61
see also inverters
single-stepping, stepping motors,
326–327, 340–343
skewing, harmonic air-gap ﬁelds, 178–179
skin effect, deﬁnition, 183
slewing, deﬁnition, 319
slip
see also rotors
deﬁnition, 156–157
equation, 156–157
frequency concepts, 229–234
induction motors, 154–167, 180–185,
187–193, 197–198, 207–209,
213–215, 229–230
large slip effects on rotor currents and
torque, 160–165
negative slip, 162, 187–193, 213–215
small slip effects on rotor currents and
torque, 159–160, 207–209
torque, 154–167, 229–234
torque–speed characteristics, 159–160,
165–167
slip-energy recovery, induction motors,
197–198, 352f
slip-rings, 81
slipring motors, 184–185, 191–193
see also wound rotors
slotting, 17–24, 18f, 142–162, 203–204
see also rotors
soft starting, 174–176, 352f
solid-state soft starting, induction motors,
174–176, 352f
space phasor representation of m.m.f.
waves, 143, 153–154, 154f, 165–167,
169–176, 215–216, 218–220,
226–248, 250–253
speciﬁc electric loading, 19–24
speciﬁc magnetic loading, 19–24
see also ﬂux density
speciﬁcations, motor/drive selection,
349–364
speed control, 126–127, 127f, 128f,
130–132, 169, 195–198, 209–215,
240–243, 351–354
induction motors, 169, 195–198,
209–215, 240–243
pole-changing, 195–198
wound rotors, 197
speed
see also high-speed motors; low-speed
motors; steady-state characteristics;
synchronous motors; torque–speed
characteristics
d.c. motor drive control systems,
126–133, 151–153
ﬂux density correlations, 31–32, 32f,
80–95
Index
431

speed (Continued)
four quadrants of the torque–speed
plane, 99–103, 121–122, 135–136,
213–215
induction motors, 154–162, 165–167,
169–187, 189–191, 193–198,
205–206, 209–215, 240–243,
255–258, 262–266
motor/drive selection, 349–364
power output, 22–28, 30–37, 57–58,
73–75, 80–108, 113–125, 154–162,
165–167, 169–176, 349–364
synchronous speeds, 107–108, 154–162,
174–176, 187–193, 207–209,
213–215, 226–234, 281–314
speed-error ampliﬁers, control systems,
126–133
spikes, voltage, 40–41, 255–258
split-phase induction motors, 202
squirrel cage rotors, 155
see also cage rotors
stable operating regions, induction motors,
176–181
stalling, induction motors, 180–181
standards, 263–264, 266, 307, 349,
362–364
dimensional standards, 363
enclosures and cooling, 362–363
harmonics, 364
motor/drive selection, 349, 362–364
supply systems, 364
star/delta (wye/mesh) starter, induction
motors, 172–174, 270
starting methods, 169–176, 184–185,
199–203, 205–206, 244–246,
291–292, 315–320, 341
induction motors, 169–176, 184–185,
199–203, 205–206, 244–246
synchronous motors, 291–292
static Scherbius drive, 352f
static torque–displacement curves, stepping
motors, 325–330,
332–334
stator current–speed characteristics,
induction motors, 165–167,
243–244
stator ﬂux and torque controls, ﬁeld-
oriented control, 250–253
stator, 15–19, 141–204, 215–237,
281–348
see also rotors
equal and opposite reactions, 16,
26–28
teeth, 315–348
steady-state characteristics
d.c. motors, 73–75, 83–108, 126–133,
330–340
induction motors, 141–142, 176–181,
196–197, 205–209, 216–218,
226–234, 237–248, 250–253
motor/drive selection, 349–364
series d.c. motors, 106–107
shunt d.c. motors, 104–106
stepping motors, 330–340
synchronous motors, 292–300
torque under current-fed conditions,
215–216, 226–234, 336–337
step-down converters, 48–50, 133–136,
359
see also buck converters
stepping motors
see also hybrid.; reluctance motors;
variable-reluctance.
applications, 315–320, 352f
chopper drives, 249, 337–338
closed-loop controls, 330, 341–343
concepts, 315–348, 352f
constant voltage operations, 330–340
current-forced drives, 336–338
deﬁnition, 315–320
drives, 330–340
half-stepping, 328–329, 331–332
high-speed running and ramping,
318–320
ideal drives, 330–334
mini-stepping, 330
motor characteristics, 325–330
open-loop control systems, 316, 318–320
operating characteristics, 315–330, 352f
operation principles, 320–325
optimum acceleration and closed-loop
controls, 341–343
performance calculations, 334–343, 352f
position controls, 138, 316, 327–328
pull-out torque under constant-current
conditions, 332–340
432
Index

pulses and motor responses, 316–317,
340–343
resonances and instability, 339–340
single-stepping, 326–327, 340–343
static torque–displacement curves,
325–330, 332–334
steady-state characteristics, 330–340
step position error and holding torque,
327–328
torque, 315–348
torque–speed curves, 332–343
transient performance, 340–343
types, 321–324
stiff supplies, deﬁnition, 171–172
supply impedance, 40–41, 120–121,
124–125, 143, 169–176, 364
supply power-factor
converter-fed d.c. motor drive, 124–125,
135–136
inverter-fed induction motor drive, 266,
270–272
supply systems, 40–41, 120–121, 124–125,
142–154, 159–160, 169–280,
287–300, 364
see also drives
induction motors, 142–154, 159–160,
169–280
inverter-fed induction motor drive effects,
266–272
motor/drive selection, 364
standards, 364
synchronous motors, 287–300
switched-reluctance motor drives, 315,
343–347, 352f
concepts, 315, 343–347, 352f
deﬁnition, 315, 343–347
operating characteristics, 315, 343–347,
352f
performance calculations, 343–347, 352f
power converter and overall drive
characteristics, 347
torque, 315, 345–347
switching, 39–72, 207–209, 250–253
see also converters; IGBT; MOSFET;
thyristors; transistors
control, 41f, 42–43
device types, 39–41, 66–68
problems, 68–69
switching loss, deﬁnition, 45
symmetrical components, deﬁnition,
186–187
synchronous motor drives, 300–305, 347,
349–354, 351f, 352f
see also converter-fed.; inverter-fed.
concepts, 300–305, 349–350, 351f,
352f
motor/drive selection, 349–350,
351f, 352f
synchronous motors
see also excited-rotor.; hysteresis.;
permanent-magnet.; reluctance.
advantages, 286, 292–300, 305–307,
311–313
applications, 305–313, 349–350,
351f, 352f, 359
base speed, 296–298
concepts, 281–314, 349–350, 351f, 352f,
359, 362–363
control systems, 300–305, 308–310
deﬁnition, 281–286
design considerations, 300–311
disadvantages, 286, 292–300, 310–311
equivalent circuits, 287
ﬁeld weakening – operation at half torque,
twice base speed (full power), 298–300,
308–311
ﬁeld-oriented control, 281–282,
295–298, 301–302
full-load operation, 296–297
generating, 282–286, 311
limits of operation, 310–311
loaded behavior, 292–300
motor/drive selection, 349–350,
351f, 352f, 359, 362–363
operating characteristics, 281–300,
310–311, 349–350, 351f, 352f
operation from constant-voltage/constant-
frequency supply, 287–292
performance calculations, 305–313,
349–350, 351f, 352f
phasor diagrams, 289–291, 294–300
poles, 75, 284–286
power-factor, 287, 289–300,
311–313
run-up, 291–292, 313
standards, 362–363
Index
433

synchronous motors (Continued)
starting methods, 291–292
steady-state characteristics, 292–300
supply systems, 287–300
torque, 281–314
torque–speed curves, 282–286
types, 284–286, 311–313
variable-frequency operations,
291–300
synchronous speeds, 107–108, 154–162,
174–176, 187–193, 207–209,
213–215, 226–234, 281–314
systems theory, closed-loop control systems,
33, 39–41, 96, 113–133, 136,
138–139, 151–153, 174–176,
200–201, 205–206, 240–243,
258–262, 330, 341–343
T
tacho feedback, 139, 139f
tangential forces (F), 17, 21–22, 75–84
see also torque
concepts, 17, 21–22, 80–84
equation, 21–22
teeth on stators and rotors, stepping and
switched-reluctance motors,
315–348
Tesla, Nikola, 4–5
tesla (T)
see also ﬂux density
deﬁnition, 4–5, 13
thermal resistance, 69–71, 272
see also cooling systems; heat generation
concepts, 69–71
deﬁnition, 69–70
thermal time constants, 38, 213–215,
361–362
three-phase fully controlled converters,
57–58, 113–125, 266–270
three-phase induction motors, 62–63,
142–154, 169–176, 185–187,
199–203, 218–220, 237–248,
255–258, 282–286
see also induction motors
three-phase inverters, 62–63, 218–220,
237–248, 255–258
see also inverters
concepts, 62–63
thyristor-fed d.c. drives, 113–133,
212–213
see also d.c. motor drives
control systems, 126–133
thyristors
see also switching; triacs
concepts, 50–59, 113–125, 174–176,
212–213
deﬁnition, 50–51
three-phase fully controlled converters,
57–58, 113–125
transistor comparisons, 51
time-constants
see also armature.; electromechanical.
concepts, 96–98
torque
see also force; radius of the rotor;
steady-state characteristics; tangential
force
constant torque, 62, 77–78, 84–95, 132,
211–212, 295–296, 354–360
control systems, 126–133, 127f, 206,
234–237, 240–243, 248–253, 345–347
current-fed conditions, 215–216,
226–234, 336–337
d.c. motor drive control systems,
126–133
d.c. motors, 73–95, 99–108, 113–133
deﬁnition, 15–19, 21–22, 37, 75–84,
103–108, 159–160
equation, 17, 21–22, 77–78, 80–84,
103–108, 159, 224–225
equivalent circuits, 224–225
four quadrants of the torque–speed
plane, 99–103, 121–122, 135–136,
213–215
induction motors, 142, 154–162,
165–167, 169–198, 205–215,
224–237, 240–243, 248–253, 258–262
large slip effects on rotor currents and
torque, 160–165
motor volume, 19–24, 37–38
motor/drive selection issues, 349–364
power output, 22–23
production, 15–19, 73–84
quantiﬁcation methods, 17, 37, 80–84
reluctance torque action, 312–313,
320–325
434
Index

rotor volume, 21–22, 37
slip, 154–167, 229–234
slotting, 17–24, 18f, 142–162,
203–204
small slip effects on rotor currents and
torque, 159–160, 207–209
stepping motors, 315–348
switched-reluctance motors, 315,
345–347
synchronous motors, 281–314
torque components, concepts, 231–234,
240–243
torque–speed characteristics, 84–95,
99–103, 117–122, 135–136,
159–160, 165–167, 176–195,
201–202, 205–215, 332–340,
349–364
torque–speed curves
induction motors, 176–195, 184, 184f,
201–202, 205–206, 209–215
motor/drive selection issues, 349–364
stepping motors, 332–343
synchronous motors, 282–286
total inertia, 176–181, 340–343, 349–364
totally enclosed fan cooled (TEFC),
deﬁnition, 363
toy motors, 110–111
traction, 23, 103–108, 113–125
transducers, 255–258
transformation of reference frames,
induction motors, 215–216,
220–222
transformers, 48–50, 58–59, 266–270
transient current surges, d.c. motors,
84–85, 95–98
transient and steady states in electric circuits,
induction motors, 216–218,
243–244
transistor choppers, concepts, 43–45
transistors, 39–51, 41f, 59–63, 67f, 68,
133–136, 255–258, 274–278,
330–340; see also collectors; emitters;
insulated gate bipolar.; switching
‘cut-off’ condition, 43–45
deﬁnition, 42–43
heat generation, 43–45
‘linear’ region, 43–45
thyristor comparisons, 51
traveling ﬂux waves, 144, 151–153,
189–191, 218–220, 226–237,
243–244
triacs, 108, 174–176
see also thyristors
two-loop control system, 126–133
U
‘unipolar’ drives, 347
see also switched-reluctance motors
universal motors
concepts, 107–108
deﬁnition, 107
utility-frequency e.m.f., 288–289
V
V/f ratio, 151–153, 208–215, 261–262,
297–298
variable frequency operation mode
induction motors, 176, 191–193,
205–258, 266–272, 292–300
synchronous motors, 291–300
variable-frequency inverters, 176,
191–193, 205–258, 266–272, 283,
291–300
see also inverter-fed induction motors
concepts, 176, 191–193, 205–258,
266–272, 291–300
induction motor starters, 176
synchronous motors, 291–300
variable-reluctance (VR) stepping motors,
321–322, 325–330, 334–344
see also stepping motors
concepts, 321–322, 325–330,
334–343
static torque–displacement curves,
325–330, 332–334
transient performance, 340–343
varnish coatings, 20–21, 70–71, 83,
212–213
vector control, 142, 234–237,
246–248
see also ﬁeld-oriented control
vector modulation
see also pulse-width modulation
concepts, 237–248, 262
viscously coupled inertia (VCID),
339–340
Index
435

voltage
see also electromotive force; steady-state
characteristics
concepts, 9–11, 28–36, 41–50, 73–75,
80–95, 103–108, 113–125, 151–153,
185–187
constant voltage operation, 30–36,
48–50, 73–112, 169–176, 287–292,
330–340
control, 39–50
converters, 39–50
d.c. motors, 73–75, 80–84, 95–108,
113–125, 133–136
d.c. output from d.c. supply, 41–50,
133–136
equations, 26–29, 34–35, 83–95,
115–117, 152–153, 246–247
Kirchhoff’s voltage law, 28–29, 152–153,
290
rated voltage, 38, 95–98, 117–120,
169–176, 191–193, 255–258, 263–264
single-phase fully controlled converters,
52–59, 113–125
spikes, 40–41, 255–258
torque–speed curves, 185–187,
209–215
voltage boost, deﬁnition, 210
voltage control, resistance, 41–50,
196–197
voltage source inverter (VSI)
concepts, 278
inverter-fed induction motor drives,
255–258, 278
VR motors see variable-reluctance stepping
motors
VSI see voltage source inverter
W
‘Ward Leonard’ sets, 113
washdown duty (W), deﬁnition, 363
waveform
see also pulse-width modulation
‘continuous current’ mode, 117–120,
135–136
converters, 68–71, 113–140, 255–258
‘discontinuous current’ mode, 117–120,
135–136
inverter-fed induction motor drives,
255–258, 261–272
motor current waveforms, 115–117
weber (Wb)
see also magnetic ﬂux
deﬁnition, 4–5
wind-power generation, 188, 191–193,
311
windings, 73–112, 142–154, 189–191,
199–203, 218–220, 225–226,
281–286, 330–340
wound rotors, 155–156, 181, 184–185,
191–193, 224–225, 284–286
see also rotors; slipring motors
concepts, 184–185, 191–193
speed controls, 197
436
Index

Color Plates
Plate 2.1 Emerson – Control Techniques Unidrive M700 industrial a.c. drives. These
three are from the lower end of the range of seven that extends to 315 kW. The right
hand unit is 4 kW/5 HP (380 mm high), while the left hand unit is 45 kW/60 HP. (Courtesy
of Emerson – Control Techniques)
Plate 3.1 Cutaway view of 4-pole d.c. motor. The skewed armature windings on the
rotor are connected at the right-hand-end via risers to the commutator segments.
There are four sets of brushes, and each brush arm holds four brush-boxes. The
sectioned coils surrounding two of the four poles are visible close to the left-hand
armature end-windings. (Courtesy of ABB)

Plate 4.1 High performance force-ventilated d.c. motor. The motor is of all-laminated
construction and designed for use with a thyristor converter. The small blower motor is an
induction machine that runs continuously, thereby allowing the main motor to maintain
full torque at low speed without overheating. (Courtesy of Emerson – Leroy Somer)
Plate 5.1 Stator of three-phase induction motor. The semi-closed slots of the stator
core obscure the active sides of the stator coils, but the ends of the coils are just visible
beneath the binding tape. (Courtesy of Brook Crompton)

Plate 5.2 Cage rotor for induction motor. The rotor conductor bars and end rings are
cast in aluminum, and the blades attached to the end rings serve as a fan for circulating
internal air. An external fan will be mounted on the non-drive end to cool the ﬁnned
stator casing (as shown in Figure 8.4). (Courtesy of Brook Crompton)
Plate 8.2 Actual voltage and current waveforms for a star-connected, PWM-fed
induction motor. Upper trace – voltage across U and V terminals; lower trace – U phase
motor current.

Plate 9.1 Unimotor fm – 18.4 Nm, 2000 rev/min permanent magnet servo motor. The
holding brake is only used when the windings are not energized. (Courtesy of Emerson –
Control Techniques Dynamics)
Plate 8.4 Typical shaft-mounted external cooling fan on an a.c. induction motor.
(Courtesy of Emerson – Leroy Somer)

Plate 9.12 Permanent magnet servo motors. (Courtesy of Emerson – Control Techniques
Dynamics.)
Plate 9.14 Permanent magnet industrial motor in standard IEC frame. (Courtesy of
Emerson Leroy Somer)

Plate 10.1 Hybrid 1.8 stepping motors, of sizes 34 (3.4 inch diameter), 23, 17 and 11.
(Courtesy of Astrosyn)
Plate 10.2 Rotor of size 34 (3.4 inch or 8 cm diameter) 3-stack hybrid 1.8 stepping
motor. The dimensions of the rotor end-caps and the associated axially-magnetized
permanent magnet are optimized for the single-stack version. Extra torque is obtained
by adding a second or third stack, the stator simply being stretched to accommodate
the longer rotor. (Courtesy of Astrosyn)

Plate 10.4 These injection molded steppers offer improved efﬁciency and reduced
noise, and ﬁnd application in security cameras, stage lighting, medical equipment,
semiconductor manufacture and ofﬁce automation products such as scanners and
printers. (Courtesy of Astrosyn)
Plate 10.3 This bipolar chopper mini-stepping drive with integral heatsink provides
a range of step divisions up to 25,600 steps/rev and allows drive current to be set from
0.25 A to 2.0 A with supply voltage from 14 V to 40 V. (Courtesy of Astrosyn)

Plate 10.6 Switched Reluctance Motor. The toothed rotor does not require windings or
magnets, and is therefore exceptionally robust. (Courtesy of Nidec S R Drives Ltd.)
Plate 10.5 The die-cast aluminum construction of these self-contained mini-stepping
bipolar drivers provides efﬁcient heat dissipation, and they are designed for retroﬁtting
to existing size 17 motors. (Courtesy of Astrosyn)

