
Electric System Operations
Evolving to the Modern Grid

Dr Vadari has a tremendous understanding of both the business and technical implications of 
Electric System Operations. Both business people and technical people need to understand how 
Electric System Operations will fit into the modern Electric Company’s business. Dr Vadari’s 
book provides that perspective.
Phil Crosby, ex-Accenture Partner, Global Utilities Industry
Few people have Mani’s wide experience and the ability to take complexity into simplicity. His 
book explains all these elements, and should be mandatory reading for anyone interested in do­
ing business in the electric industry. 
Brian Dawson, 
Executive VP of Business Development and Chairman of the Board, 
Calico Energy Inc.
Peeling away each layer of complexity, Mani walks the reader through the evolution of electric 
operations. He then puts it all back together methodically to show how all the seemingly dispa­
rate pieces fit together. This is a book for the beginner, the practitioner and the expert.
Dr. Siri Varadan
Vice President Asset Management Solutions UISOL,
Formerly Sr. Principal Consultant, 
Practice Area Coordinator (Asset Management in Utilities) KEMA
Mani Vadari’s book, “Electric Systems Operations” illustrates in detail the importance of system 
operations within an electric utility and how it touches all aspects of the business as we advance 
in modernizing the grid.  Mani maintains a practical approach throughout the book and drives 
home the importance of electric systems operations to the business of keeping the lights on. I 
recommend this book for everyone training or working in the utility business today as a vendor, 
partner, and employee or otherwise.
Michael Atkinson, Alstom Grid, North America, Vice-President
Until now, electric system operations have been more of a black box even within the utility 
and even more so externally.  Dr. Mani Vadari has managed to navigate the reader through 
this complex part of the utility, explaining its evolution starting from the New York blackout, 
through deregulation to become the foundation of the modern grid.  A serious book on the 
business of system operations is long overdue for our industry and Dr. Vadari has delivered to 
that mandate very well.
Guido Bartels, 
Former GM, Energy & Utilities, IBM, 
Chairman, Global Smart Grid Federation and
Immediate Past Chairman, 
GridWise Alliance, Advisor, EnergyAid.org
In “Electric System Operations”, Dr. Vadari provides a remarkably clear and extremely valuable 
guide to power system architecture and operations. This work covers all the key aspects of the 
modern electric grid including: basic definitions, the impact of deregulation, business insights, 
elucidation of the various IT-based management systems that continue to evolve, and concludes 
with his insight on future grid evolution. Dr. Vadari’s work is mandatory reading for anyone 
with an interest in the modern electric grid. 
James A. Misewich, Ph.D.
Associate Laboratory Director for Basic Energy Sciences
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Board of Directors, New York Battery and
Energy Storage Technology Consortium
Brookhaven Representative to Board of Directors,
New York State Smart Grid Consortium

Electric System Operations
Evolving to the Modern Grid
Mani Vadari

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Cover design by Vicki Kane
Cover image courtesy of Midwest ISO.
ISBN 13: 978-1-60807-549-2
© 2013 Mani Vadari
ARTECH HOUSE
685 Canton Street
Norwood, MA 02062
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part of this book 
may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission 
in writing from the publisher.
  All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have been 
appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the accuracy of this information. Use of 
a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark or service 
mark.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To Anu, Mayukha, and Akhi 
I dedicate this book to my wife, Anu, who has patiently supported me in everything 
I have accomplished in my life, and without whom this book could not have 
become a reality. She has been my inspiration and she has even challenged my 
thinking in terms of the flow of information in this book.
Thanks a lot, Anu.

This book is also dedicated to my children, Mayukha and Akhi, who tolerated
me during this entire period of writing this book and continued to shower 
their love and affection


vii
Contents
	
Preface	
xv
	
Acknowledgments	
xvii
	
Foreword	
xix
1	
Introduction	
1
1.1	
Introduction to Utilities	
1
1.2	
Explain the Electric Utility 	
3
1.2.1	
Generation	
3
1.2.2	
Transmission	
7
1.2.3	
Subtransmission	
8
1.2.4	
Distribution	
9
1.2.5	
Customer	
12
1.3	
Electric Utilities: A U.S. Historical Perspective 	
13
1.3.1	
First Came PUHCA	
13
1.3.2	
Along Came Deregulation	
14
1.3.3	
Then Came Smart Grid	
14
1.3.4	
A Global Outlook	
15
1.4	
Utilities and Regulation	
15
	
Endnotes	
17

viii 
Electric System Operations 
2	
Define System Operations	
19
2.1	
System Operations	
20
2.2	
Key Drivers for Systems Operations	
21
2.2.1	
Impact of Drivers on Distribution	
21
2.2.2	
Impact of Drivers on Transmission	
25
2.3	
What Changes from Transmission to Distribution 
	
System Operations?	
27
2.4	
Distribution System Operations: An Introduction	
30
2.5	
Key Challenges Facing System Operations	
31
	
Endnotes	
33
3	
Introduction to Power Systems	
35
3.1	
Basic Electric Components	
35
3.1.1	
Capacitors and Reactors	
35
3.1.2	
Transformers	
36
3.1.3	
Switches	
37
3.1.4	
Relays and Protection Equipment	
39
3.1.5	
Kilovolt Classes or Common Voltage Levels	
40
3.1.6	
Busbars	
40
3.1.7	
Substations	
40
3.2	
Key Power System Physical Concepts Explained	
41
3.2.1	
The Basics: Voltage and Current	
41
3.2.2	
Ohm’s Law	
41
3.2.3	
Kirchhoff’s Law	
42
3.2.4	
DC Versus AC	
43
3.2.5	
Complex Power Representation	
45
3.2.6	
Power Factor	
46
3.2.7	
Three-Phase Versus Single Phase	
46
3.2.8	
Phasors	
47
3.2.9	
Superconductivity in Transmission Lines and 
	
Transformers	
48
3.3	
Key Business Concepts Explained	
48
3.3.1	
Utility Interconnected System	
48
3.3.2	
Control Area or Balancing Authority Areas	
49
3.3.3	
Renewable Energy Zones	
50
	
Endnotes	
50

 
Contents 
 ix
4	
Impact of Deregulation on System Operations	
51
4.1	
A Brief Look at the History of Deregulation in the 
	
United States	
52
4.2	
The New Participants and Their Activities	
53
4.2.1	
Summary Description of the Participants and 
	
How They Interact	
56
4.3	
Architectural Discussion	
60
4.4	
Conclusion	
68
	
Endnotes	
68
5	
Impact of Smart/Modern Grid on System Operations	
71
5.1	
Smart Grid Changes That Impact System Operations	
74
5.2	
Community Changes Impacting System Operations	
75
5.2.1	
Proliferation of Distributed Generation, Renewable, 
	
and Community-Level Storage	
75
5.2.2	
Advent of Electric Transportation	
76
5.2.3	
Introduction of Microgrids	
76
5.2.4	
Introduction of Smart Appliances	
78
5.3	
So What Does This All Mean to the System Operator?	
78
5.4	
Impact of Smart Grid on New Systems	
80
5.4.1	
Meter Data Management System	
80
5.4.2	
Outage Management System 	
80
5.4.3	
Geographic Information System	
81
5.4.4	
Distribution Management System 	
81
5.4.5	
Distributed Energy Management System	
82
	
Endnotes	
83
6	
Business of System Operations	
85
6.1	
Anatomy of a Utility	
85
6.1.1	
Generation Business	
86
6.1.2	
Customer	
87
6.1.3	
Transmission and Distribution	
88

x 
Electric System Operations 
6.1.4	
Anatomy of an RTO	
88
6.2	
T&D Operating Model	
88
6.2.1	
Asset Management	
90
6.2.2	
Asset Owner	
90
6.2.3	
Work and Resource Management	
91
6.2.4	
Field Execution	
92
6.3	
Architecting the Business of System Operations	
93
6.3.1	
Drivers	
93
6.3.2	
Strategy	
95
6.3.3	
People	
95
6.3.4	
Process	
97
6.3.5	
Technology	
98
6.4	
System Operations Processes	
99
6.4.1	
Monitor and Execute Real-Time Operations	
100
6.4.2	
Manage Planned Events	
101
6.4.3	
Manage Unplanned Events	
101
6.4.4	
Coordinate Emergency Response	
102
6.4.5	
Plan Daily Operations	
102
6.4.6	
Perform System Analysis	
103
6.4.7	
Report Operational Performance	
103
	
Endnotes	
105
7	
Control Center: The Hub of System Operations	
107
7.1	
Transmission Control Center Desks	
110
7.1.1	
Transmission Desk	
110
7.1.2	
Generation Desk	
114
7.1.3	
Scheduling Desk	
116
7.1.4	
Other Support Desks	
117
7.2	
Distribution Control Center Desks	
119
7.2.1	
Clearance Desk	
120
7.2.2	
Switching Desk	
121
7.2.3	
Other Support Desks	
121
7.3	
Other Key Aspects of a Control Center	
123
7.4	
Introducing a High-Performing System Operator	
124
	
Endnotes	
126

 
Contents 
 xi
8	
Energy Management Systems	
129
8.1	
How an EMS Supports the System Operator’s Mandate	 131
8.1.1	
Transmission Operator	
131
8.1.2	
Generation Operator	
131
8.1.3	
RTO/ISO	
132
8.1.4	
RTO/Wholesale Market Participant	
133
8.2	
Key Components of an EMS	
134
8.2.1	
EMS Hardware	
134
8.2.2	
EMS Software	
137
8.2.3	
EMS Databases	
141
8.2.4	
EMS UI	
142
8.3	
EMS Application Suites	
143
8.3.1	

143
8.3.2	
Network Apps	
146
8.3.3	
Generation Apps	
147
8.3.4	
Dispatching Training Simulator	
148
8.3.5	
WAMS	
149
8.3.6	
Modeling Apps	
149
	
Endnotes	
151
9	
Outage Management System	
153
9.1	
Types of Outages	
154
9.1.1	
Transmission Outages	
154
9.1.2	
Distribution Outages	
155
9.2	
Origins of the OMS	
156
9.2.1	
The Paper Age	
157
9.2.2	
The Move to an Outage Management System	
157
9.3	
Architecture of an OMS	
158
9.4	
The Business of Managing Outages	
162
9.5	
Impact of Smart Meter on the OMS	
164
9.6	
Future of OMS? 	
165
	
Endnotes	
166

xii 
Electric System Operations 
10	
Distribution Management Systems	
167
10.1	
Introduction to the DMS	
170
10.2	
The Utility Context: Why is a DMS Needed?	
172
10.3	
DMS: An Architectural Description	
176
10.4	
How the DMS Supports the System Operator’s 
	
Mandate	
176
10.5	
How the DMS Supports the Smart Grid	
180
10.6	
Key Component of a DMS	
181
10.6.1	
DMS Hardware	
181
10.6.2	
DMS Software	
183
10.6.3	
DMS Databases	
183
10.6.4	
DMS UI	
184
10.7	
DMS Application Suites	
184
10.7.1	
Core Applications	
184
10.7.2	
Distribution and Substation Automation Applications	
189
10.7.3	
Integrating Applications	
191
10.8	
DMS Models and Its Interface with GIS	
193
10.9	
The Future of DMS	
195
	
Endnotes	
197
11	
Distributed Energy Management System	
199
11.1	
What Is Complicating This Situation? 	
201
11.2	
Distributed Energy Management System	
207
11.2.1	
The Core Components of a DEMS 	
207
11.2.2	
So What Makes DEMS a Necessary System?	
210
11.3	
Who Would Use This System?	
211
11.4	
Service Models That Need to Be Considered	
212
11.5	
Challenges 	
214

 
Contents 
 xiii
11.6	
Does DEMS Have a Future?	
216
	
Endnotes	
216
12	
System Operator Training Simulators	
217
12.1	
Drivers Behind the Need for a System Operator 
	
Training Simulator?	
218
12.2	
What Are the Key Characteristics of a Good System 
	
Operator Training Simulator	
222
12.3	
Architecture of a System Operator Simulator	
225
12.4	
Key Challenges in Setting Up a System Operator 
	
Training Environment	
225
12.4.1	
Hardware/Software Environment	
227
12.4.2	
Training Environment	
228
12.4.3	
Database Models	
228
12.5	
Key Challenges in Setting Up a System Operator 
	
Training Program	
228
12.6	
Training Simulators as a Real-Time Simulation Platform	 230
12.7	
Training Simulators in the Future	
231
	
Endnotes	
232
13	
Conclusions and What Is Coming Next on the Horizon	 233
	
Acronyms and Abbreviations	
239
	
About the Author	
245
	
Index	
247


xv
Preface
I have always been fascinated and passionate about the subject of system op­
erations. My first job was to develop a transient stability application for a dis­
patcher training simulator (DTS) scheduled to be delivered to New York Power 
Pool (NYPP) in 1989. However, when we delivered the DTS to NYPP, I found 
that there was much I needed to know about how DTSs are used to train sys­
tem operators. Learning about system operators and how they do their job got 
me very interested with this important area of the electric utility and led to my 
interest in wanting to write this book.
The systems used by system operators are some of the most sophisticated 
in the utility and appear to be in a continuous state of transition and evolution. 
The system operator is responsible for keeping the grid up and running. Yet 
what happens inside the control center is not that well understood sometimes 
even within the utility.
This book is intended for people who work in a utility, or support the 
industry by providing solutions and services to them. It is also focused on the 
power system engineer who, for the most part will already have knowledge of 
the software systems and the algorithms used. It is designed as an introduction 
to this very important function and the business imperative that it delivers to. 
This book answers several important questions: (1) What is the business of sys­
tem operations and why is it important? (2) What are the various systems that 
support this function and how do they integrate into the rest of the utility? (3) 
How does a utility’s ability to operate its network contribute to sustaining its 
business in a viable and meaningful manner?
This book has been a labor of love for me for a very long time. After spend­
ing the early part of my career delivering energy management system (EMS) 
solutions to utilities, I found a dearth of books covering the entire breadth of 
EMS and associated systems. I started planning to write a book on EMSs from 

xvi 
Electric System Operations  
a technical aspect but going beyond just the algorithms—hardware, databases, 
mapboards, control centers, and so on.
Over time, my thoughts and approach evolved. I felt that I needed to 
expand the scope of the book to a broader focus on all aspects of system op­
erations across the transmission, distribution, deregulation, smart grid, and 
the customer. My thoughts further evolved, moving me away from the purely 
technical to also include the business perspective. These modifications make 
this book somewhat unique in almost all respects. The book draws from my 
experiences and work over time delivering systems and solutions to utilities 
worldwide.
The book is organized in a way that brings the reader into the area of 
system operations by opening one door at a time. Starting with setting the 
stage with a definition of system operations, I follow it up with two chapters in 
which I analyze the impacts of deregulation and smart grid on system opera­
tions. Chapter 6 focuses on the business of system operations in which I present 
the people, process, technology, and strategy behind this area and how it con­
tributes towards the utility’s fundamental mandate of delivering reliable power. 
Chapter 7 defines the control center, which in many ways is the hallmark of 
system operations. The next four chapters focus on four key systems which are 
the foundational tools for the system operator: EMS, outage management sys­
tem (OMS), distribution management system (DMS), and distributed energy 
management system (DEMS). DEMS is a new concept presented for the first 
time and covers the system operator and impact of the customer on this area. 
The book ends with a chapter on system operator training and the training 
simulator.
As a special note to students and practitioners in the field of system op­
erations, this book discusses several powerful algorithms such as power flow, 
optimal power flow, three-phase unbalanced power flow, contingency analysis, 
and so forth. Several books are available in the marketplace that explain these 
algorithms in much more detail. I have specifically chosen to not go into detail 
in these areas because of the broader focus of what this book is trying to achieve.

xvii
Acknowledgments
Significant thanks are also due to Mrudhula Balasubramanyan, who was instru­
mental in doing some of the research that was necessary for the book and also 
for her due diligence with which she proofread every word and every sentence 
in every chapter to make sure they were all consistent in form and content. Her 
contribution has made this book that much better in both form and content 
and I owe a lot to her.
Thanks are also due to Gayle Wooster of Alstom Grid for responding pa­
tiently to all my requests, some of which were not that easy for her to get imme­
diately, and even more so due to her busy schedule. My former colleagues at Ac­
centure, especially David Rouls and Greg Smith, also deserve my thanks for their 
encouragement and support for the writing this book. It is all much appreciated.
No book of this magnitude can be developed without the support of sev­
eral people who have helped me over the years and I will be remiss if I do not 
mention them and recognize their support. I wish to thank Daniela Axinte, 
Omar Al-Juburi, Benjamin Ratcliff, Tahir Paroo, Bud Vos, Teresa Tillman, Mi­
chael Burck, David Luedtke, Kathy Brewer, Brian Dawson, Michael Atkinson, 
and Jesse Berst.
Lastly, I wish to thank several industry veterans all of whom either influ­
enced or supported my love and passion for this area—J. D. Hammerly, Larry 
Winter, Phil Crosby, Fran Shields, Jay Giri, Prof. S. S. Venkata, Tom Athay, and 
Kendall Demaree, 
Thanks are due to the following companies, Accenture, Alstom Grid Cor­
poration, Comverge Inc., and Calico Energy, for providing me with pictures 
of their offerings, which have made this book much richer than it otherwise 
would have been. I must add here that while I am extremely thankful for their 
assistance, this book does not in any way or form endorse their products, offer­
ings, or services. 


xix
Foreword 
Over nearly thirty years in the electricity industry as an executive of a global 
supplier of electrical operations solutions and as the CEO of an entrepreneurial 
venture supplying the electricity industry with innovative technology, I have 
seen our society’s electricity dependence expand exponentially, fueled by the 
demands of our digital society. Every aspect of daily life depends on electricity. 
In fact, our society’s prosperity and security hinges on the instantaneous avail­
ability and unwavering reliability of electricity and central to achieving both is 
the role of electric system operations.  It is the role of system operations to man­
age the volume and flow of electricity from the generators to the customer, 24 
hours a day, every day, controlling production, monitoring and configuring the 
grid, and responding to emergencies.  More than keeping the lights on, electric 
systems operations spans the broad landscape of economics, information tech­
nology, and electricity consumers.  Electric systems operations impacts society’s 
behavior in response to the information it provides on cost and consumption of 
electricity and the impact of the electric industry on the environment.
In recent years, the public’s awareness of its electricity sources increased 
significantly. Many people grasp the tradeoffs between the low cost, abundant, 
fossil-based electricity of the past and more expensive, clean, potentially inter­
mittent, renewable resources of tomorrow. Fewer people, however, understand 
where electrons are generated and how they arrived at the light switch. Even 
fewer people have the depth of understanding of both the economics of to­
day’s electrical system and the complex technology solutions required to insure 
reliability and efficiency of our electricity. Dr. Subramanian Vadari is one 
of these rare individuals. Dr. Vadari and I have been fortunate to spend a 
significant portion of our careers working together to improve system opera­
tions and expanding the knowledge to allow system operations to achieve great­
er efficiency and reliability of electricity supply.

xx 
Electric System Operations  
In over twenty years as industry colleagues, sometimes coworkers, and 
always friends, I have witnessed Dr. Vadari’s foresight on identifying and subse­
quently implementing changes in technology, processes, economics, and poli­
cies enabling the electricity industry to evolve.  Over his career, he maintained 
the unique ability to understand the specific details in the electrical system, 
its technology solutions, and that technology’s evolution, while simultaneously 
grasping the implications of those details on the economics and regulatory strat­
egy that drive electricity supply.  Every change in electricity supply’s technology, 
processes, economics, and policies, effects and likely is implemented by, system 
operations.  Dr. Vadari is one of the few thought leaders possessing both the 
depth and breadth of understanding of system operations to insure our future 
can rely on a clean and efficient supply of electricity.  
Anyone in the electricity industry having responsibility for insuring so­
ciety’s electricity supply, or possessing a desire to comprehend electricity deliv­
ery, must therefore understand system operations and the technology solutions 
system operations uses to deliver electricity with the reliability and low cost 
our society has come to expect. Dr. Vadari’s Readers will discover a clear un­
derstanding of how system operations insures electricity gets to the light switch 
now and how it will continue to do so in the future.
This book provides a comprehensive review of each technology solution 
employed by system operations, their use, and the value delivered by their suc­
cessful deployment. The importance of such an all-inclusive assessment cannot 
be minimized, this author expands the reader’s horizons by examining both the 
business issues surrounding electric system operations and its human side by 
offering approaches for maintaining staff proficiency as system operation’s com­
plexity increases. Further, the author provides a thorough analysis of the impact 
on system operations from current and future investments in Smart Grid, elec­
tric vehicles, distributed energy, and emerging technological transformations. 
Dr. Vadari maintains a clear focus throughout on practicality, economics, and 
value, allowing the reader to understand not only the “what” but the “why.”
J.D. Hammerly
CEO, The Glarus Group
Seattle, WA, June 2012

1
1
Introduction
1.1  Introduction to Utilities
A commonly held definition of a public utility is that of an enterprise that pro­
vides certain classes of services to the public including transportation, telephone 
and telegraph services, power, heat and light, and community facilities for water 
and sanitation.
• Electric: Includes the generation, trading, transmission, distribution, re­
tail, metering, and customer care segments of electricity providers (see 
Figure 1.1).
• Natural gas: Includes the distribution, metering, retail, and customer 
care segments of end use natural gas providers.
• Water and wastewater: Includes the supply, treatment, distribution, me­
tering, and customer care segments of water and wastewater providers.
The utility industry is very geographically focused compared to most 
other industries. Unlike a traditional product or service that can be marketed 
or sold anywhere in the world, utilities are constrained to provide a service only 
to a local region. Because of this, utilities throughout the world have evolved 
independently with different ownership types, product offerings, and varying 
degrees of regulatory oversight.
• With regards to population served, the majority of the world’s utilities 
are owned and operated by local governments. This is especially true in 

2 
Electric System Operations  
nations of the developing world such as China and India, where a single 
or a small number of utilities provide services to the entire population. 
In Western countries, this structure varies widely by country, with many 
combining public ownership with a blend of governmental, private, 
quasi-governmental, municipal, and so forth.
• In some countries, utilities provide more than one commodity or ser­
vice. Often referred to as combination or multiutilities, these entities 
either developed over time or were aggregated from a series of mergers 
and acquisitions.
• In countries where the national or local governments do not operate 
the utilities, the utility industries are often heavily regulated by a gov­
ernmental body. In recent years, due in part to a desire to lower utility 
Figure 1.1  A typical utility energy delivery process.

 
Introduction 
3
expenses for end consumers, many electric and gas markets were opened 
up, allowing for competition among certain segments of the value chain. 
This is most widely seen in the electric industry where the generation of 
power and aspects of the customer supply side is often unregulated rela­
tive to the transmission and distribution segments. Due to the nature of 
the water industry, competition has not yet been an issue.
1.2  Explain the Electric Utility 
The evolution of the electricity industry has been shaped significantly by a 
century of laws and regulations that govern the way electric utilities have done 
business (see Figure 1.2).
• By the early 1900s, the U.S. electric industry structure had evolved into 
vertically integrated (distribution, generation, transmission) utility com­
panies operating under state or local regulation that reinforced the exclu­
sive nature of the local franchise;
• Early electric utilities were inefficient and redundant in the services they 
provided;
• In response to this early chaos, governments developed regulations to 
eliminate redundancies in equipment and service costs;
• As the industry evolved, the individual owners of the early power plants 
gave way to investor-owned companies, which in turn evolved into larg­
er enterprises;
• In the past, geographic lines and borders delineated most electricity 
markets, but thanks to recent developments and changing regulations 
worldwide, utilities increasingly have the capability to cross into each 
other’s territories.
Producing, delivering, and selling electricity to end users involves a set of 
basic processes. The performance of these activities may have moved (in some 
cases) from a vertically integrated utility in which all of the functions were 
performed by one company to a model in which some of the functions may be 
performed by others within a common jurisdiction. 
1.2.1  Generation
Electricity is the flow of electrical power or charge. It is a secondary energy 
source which means that we get it from the conversion of other sources of en­

4 
Electric System Operations  
Figure 1.2  An electric utility delivery value chain.

 
Introduction 
5
ergy, like coal, natural gas, oil, nuclear power and other natural sources, which 
are called primary sources. The energy sources we use to make electricity can be 
renewable or nonrenewable, but electricity itself is neither renewable nor non-
renewable (see Figure 1.3). 
• Electric power generation is the conversion of other forms of energy into 
electric energy. Bulk energy is usually generated from fossil fuels (coal, 
natural gas, and oil), nuclear fuel, geothermal steam, falling water, and 
alternative and renewable energy resources.
• Rotating turbines attached to electrical generators produce most com­
mercially available electricity. Turbines are driven by a fluid such as 
steam, which acts as an intermediate energy carrier.
• A conventional power station uses a turbine, engine, water wheel, or 
other similar machine to drive an electric generator or a device that 
converts mechanical or chemical energy to generate electricity. Steam 
turbines, internal combustion engines, gas combustion turbines, water 
turbines, and wind turbines are the most common methods to generate 
electricity. Most power plants are about 35% efficient. That means for 
every 100 units of energy that go into a plant, only 35 units are con­
verted to usable electrical energy.
• Electrical energy cannot be stored economically, so it must be generated 
and instantaneously delivered based on customer demand. Consequent­
ly, an electric utility company must own production facilities (or procure 
supplies) capable of meeting the maximum demand on its system.
Essentially the classification of generation facilities/power plants can be 
by fuel (Figure 1.4) or by prime mover (turbine).
Classification of power plants by fuel (by primary source of energy):
• Fossil-fuel based;
• Hydroelectric;
Figure 1.3  Electricity generation and its forms.

6 
Electric System Operations  
• Nuclear;
• Cogeneration;
• Other (solar, wind, geothermal, biomass).
Classification of power plants by prime mover (by form of energy that 
drives the turbine)
• Steam turbine;
• Water turbine;
• Gas turbine;
• Combined cycle;
• Other (microturbine, stirling engine, internal combustion reciprocating 
engine).
Generally, large power plants are somewhat centrally located in the elec­
tric grid and can be either coal-, gas-, or oil-fired, nuclear powered, hydro (large 
dams), and so forth. Some of the newer sources of generation also include large 
wind farms or solar farms. 
Generation can also come from distributed sources or locations like home 
PVs, cogenerations (cogens) (within industrial complexes), or diesel generation 
sets (gensets).
After electricity is generated, it must be transmitted and distributed to 
the end user’s specific site. The transmission and distribution system must be 
capable of transporting electricity, in the amount needed, to a wide variety of 
customers—residential, industrial, and commercial.
Figure 1.4  Conceptual view of a fuel-fired generator.

 
Introduction 
7
1.2.2  Transmission
Transmission involves the transportation of bulk quantities of electric energy 
via electric conductors, from generation sources to an electric distribution sys­
tem, load center, or interface with a neighboring control center.
Transmission is the process of conducting the flow of electricity at high 
voltages from the points of generation to the locations of groups of electricity 
users (such as neighborhoods, industrial parks, and commercial centers).
• The electricity produced by a generator travels along cables to a trans­
former substation, which changes electricity from low voltage to high 
voltage. 
• To transmit electricity effectively over long distances while minimiz­
ing power losses, utility companies use high-voltage transmission lines.
  Ohm’s law states that as the transmission voltage increases, the amount 
of current flowing in the conductors reduces (assuming that the power 
transferred is still the same). Given that energy losses are proportional to 
the square of the current flowing (explained in more detail in Chapter 
3), any reduction in current will be followed by a significant reduction 
in power losses. For example, if the current flow is reduced by a factor of 
2 (by increasing the voltage by a multiplier of 2), the energy lost due to 
the flow of power is reduced by a factor of 4. (Figure 1.5).
Figure 1.5  Electric transmission system.

8 
Electric System Operations  
• Transmission lines are used to carry the electricity to a distribution sub­
station. Distribution substations have transformers that change the high 
voltage electricity back into lower voltage electricity. 
• Transmission lines can be supported on large poles or towers or may be 
underground in more urban environments.
• Placing lines underground helps to reduce outages due to weather and 
vegetation; however they cost many times more than above-ground sys­
tems, due primarily to high construction costs.
Engineers design transmission networks to transport the energy as effi­
ciently as feasible, while at the same time taking into account economic factors, 
network safety, and redundancy. These networks use components such as power 
lines, cables, circuit breakers, switches and transformers, and substations, where 
much of this equipment resides.
The transmission system is generally distinguished from other parts of the 
grid based on voltage class. Generally, the voltage class of equipment above 132 
kV is considered as transmission. In some locations 69 to 70 kV is also consid­
ered as transmission.
Key characteristics of transmission systems include:
• Large and high transmission towers carrying large quantities of power 
across long distances.
• Generally networked, meaning there are multiple paths to the deliver 
power to the same location. Provides for higher levels of redundancy on 
outages. 
• Higher voltages used for transmission to reduce losses. 
• Transmission equipment is considered to be of higher criticality due to 
the ability of key outages to spread across larger locational jurisdictions.
1.2.3  Subtransmission
Subtransmission is part of an electric power transmission system that runs at 
relatively lower voltages. It is uneconomical to connect all distribution substa­
tions to the high main transmission voltage, because the equipment is larger 
and more expensive. Typically, only larger substations connect with this high 
voltage. It is stepped down and sent to smaller substations in towns and neigh­
borhoods. Subtransmission circuits are usually arranged in loops so that a single 
line failure does not cut off service to a large number of customers for more 
than a short time. While subtransmission circuits are usually carried on over­
head lines, in urban areas buried cable may be used.

 
Introduction 
9
There is no fixed cutoff between subtransmission and transmission or 
subtransmission and distribution. The voltage ranges overlap somewhat. Volt­
ages of 69, 115, and 138 kV are often used for subtransmission in North Amer­
ica. As power systems evolved, voltages formerly used for transmission were 
used for subtransmission, and subtransmission voltages became distribution 
voltages. Like transmission, subtransmission moves relatively large amounts 
of power, and like distribution, subtransmission covers an area instead of just 
point to point.
1.2.4  Distribution
Electricity distribution is the final stage in the delivery of electricity to end 
users. A distribution system’s network carries electricity from the transmission 
or subtransmission system and delivers it to consumers. Typically, the network 
would include medium-voltage (less than 50 kV) power lines, substations and 
pole-mounted transformers, low-voltage (less than 1 kV) distribution wiring, 
and sometimes meters.
An electric distribution system is tasked with delivering electric energy 
to end users. It links the transmission system with utility customers (see Figure 
1.6).
• The distribution systems begin at the substations, where power trans­
mitted on high-voltage transmission lines is transformed to lower volt­
ages for delivery over low-voltage lines to the consumer sites.
Figure 1.6  Electric distribution system.

10 
Electric System Operations  
• Distribution lines [2] may be above ground or underground depend­
ing on the geography, the weather zone, and the age of the building or 
community.
• At a customer’s site, meters attached to the distribution lines measure 
the amount of electricity used during a particular period so that the util­
ity may charge the appropriate sum to each account.
• Customers buy electricity in units called kilowatt hours (kWh). A kilo­
watt hour is equivalent to a 100-watt lightbulb burning for 10 hours or 
a 10-watt bulb burning for 100 hours.
• Distribution is considered a “natural monopoly” and is likely to remain 
a regulated function because duplicate systems of lines would be imprac­
tical and costly.
• A utility’s field crews are responsible for maintaining the electric trans­
mission and distribution grid through vegetation management and line 
repair.
The distribution network businesses are the owners of the last leg of the 
electrical infrastructure, from the transmission networks to the customer’s me­
ters. They collect electricity from the transmission networks and deliver it to the 
end users. The core business of disseminating electricity is supported by a range 
of field and technical services, including:
• Construction of substations, underground, and overground voltage 
lines;
• Erection of poles and wires to customers’ premises and installation of 
meters;
• Regular inspection, testing, and maintenance of all equipment;
• Erection and maintenance of street lighting.
At the end of a distribution line, an electric meter is located on the cus­
tomer’s premises to measure the customer’s usage in kilowatt hours for billing 
purposes. The business of actually buying electricity from the wholesale market 
and selling to end users is performed by retailers.
Key characteristics of a distribution system include:
• Still distinguished from other parts of the grid based on voltage class. 
Generally, voltage class of equipment below 33 kV is considered distri­
bution. In some locations, 69 to 70 kV is also considered distribution.

 
Introduction 
11
• Smaller towers could even be wood-pole, carrying smaller quantities of 
power across shorter distances.
• Lower amounts of power carried and so losses are less of a concern when 
compared to transmission.
• Generally radial, meaning that the distribution lines go radially from the 
substation to the load (generally a residence or commercial or a small 
industry) with main feeders and tap lines.
• Both in downtown-like areas and other areas of criticality, loops (net­
works) are being introduced to increase reliability of power delivery.
• The distribution equipment is considered to be of lower criticality due 
to limited ability of key outages to spread across larger locational juris­
dictions.
While transmission systems are somewhat similar in their makeup and 
design across most countries and jurisdictions, we find the distribution systems 
to demonstrate a wide variation.
1.2.4.1  Some International Differences
In many areas, delta three-phase service is common. Delta service has no dis­
tributed neutral wire and is therefore less expensive. In North America and 
Latin America, three-phase service is often a Y (wye), in which the neutral is 
directly connected to the center of the generator rotor. The neutral provides a 
low-resistance metallic return to the distribution transformer. Wye service is 
recognizable when a line has four conductors, one of which is lightly insulated. 
Three-phase wye service is excellent for motors and heavy power use.
Many areas in the world also use single-phase 220 or 230V residential and 
light industrial services. In this system, the high-voltage distribution network 
supplies a few substations per area, and the 230V power from each substation 
is directly distributed. A live (hot) wire and neutral are connected to the build­
ing from one phase of the three-phase service. Single-phase distribution is used 
where motor loads are small.
1.2.4.2  Americas
In the United States and parts of Canada and Latin America, split-phase service 
is the most common. Split-phase provides both 120 and 240V service with only 
three wires. The house voltages are provided by local transformers. The neutral 
is directly connected to the three-phase neutral. Socket voltages are only 120V, 
but 240V is available for heavy appliances because the two halves of a phase 
oppose each other.

12 
Electric System Operations  
1.2.4.3  Europe
In Europe, electricity is normally distributed for industry and domestic use by 
the three-phase, four-wire system. This gives a three-phase voltage of 400V and 
a single-phase voltage of 230V. For industrial customers, three-phase 690/400 
volt is also available.
1.2.4.4  Japan
Japan has a large number of small industrial manufacturers, and therefore sup­
plies standard low-voltage three-phase service in many suburbs. Also, Japan 
normally supplies residential service as two phases of a three-phase service, with 
a neutral. These work well for both lighting and motors.
1.2.5  Customer
As in any other market, the customer is the final end user of the product gener­
ated and distributed by the electric utility. In fully regulated environments the 
incumbent utility manages all aspect of power generation and delivery and also 
owns the customer relationship. However, in places where there is competition 
to supply electricity, the customer relationship or the mandate to deliver power 
reside with the retail energy provider [3].
However, in the United States, in most markets the cost of the actual 
commodity (generally the largest segment) is separated out on the customer’s 
electricity bill whether it is supplied by a different entity or the incumbent 
utility.
The utility (or the retail provider) has to follow some key processes to sup­
port the energy delivery process:
• Meter-to-Cash
• Meter reading. Once a meter has recorded a customer’s electricity use, 
the data needs to be collected by the utility in order to produce a bill. 
This has traditionally been done manually by a meter reader viewing 
each customer’s meter and recording the usage. While this is still the 
most common form of data collection, smart meters [4] are enabling 
utilities to collect data remotely over telecommunication lines, elimi­
nating the need for personnel.
• Billing. After the data is collected, a bill is calculated, printed, and 
mailed to the customer. Some utilities offer this electronically as well 
via Web sites or automatic bank drafting.
• Payment and presentment. Once the payment is received from the cus­
tomer, it is processed and credited to the utility’s account.

 
Introduction 
13
• Collections. If payment is not received from the customer within a cer­
tain time frame, it is considered in arrears and various attempts are made 
to collect payment. If the utility is unable to collect past accounts the 
amounts are written off the financials.
• Regulatory affairs. Many utilities, especially in the European Union and 
the United States, are required to submit periodic reports of their opera­
tions and produce documentation for rate increase requests, permission 
for new generation or transmission and distribution (T&D) projects, 
merger and acquisition activities, and the like.
• Customer care. Utilities often offer customer contact centers, Web sites, 
walk-up payment facilities, and other programs designed to create a pos­
itive experience for their customers.
Electricity consumers are divided into classes of service or sectors (residen­
tial, commercial, industrial, and other) based on the type of service they receive:
• Single-family residential;
• Multifamily residential (condominium/apartment complexes);
• Commercial;
• Small industrial;
• Large industrial.
The voltage level coming into the customer’s premises could be anywhere 
from 110/220 to transmission level voltages and is dependent on the type, 
amount of load, and the criticality for uninterrupted levels of power.
Customers (at all levels) also tend to have localized sources of power sup­
ply (gensets, etc.) to drive their business processes during power outages. This 
happens more in third-world countries than in others and is mainly due to lack 
of good reliable power service from the utility.
1.3  Electric Utilities: A U.S. Historical Perspective 
1.3.1  First Came PUHCA
The Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 (PUHCA), was passed by 
the United States Congress to regulate utilities and protect investors and con­
sumers from the economic disadvantages produced by a small number of hold­
ing companies that owned most of the nation’s utilities. This act put a variety 
of limitations on them. A summary of limitations  imposed on them included 

14 
Electric System Operations  
limiting their operations to a single state, subjecting them to effective state 
regulation, or nonutilities, such as oil companies or investment banks, to own 
utilities. The act also prevented utility holding companies engaged in regulated 
businesses from engaging in unregulated businesses.
PUHCA requires public utility holding companies to register with the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The SEC has substantial and 
wide-ranging authority over public utility holding companies. If necessary, the 
SEC may control new stock issues of a PUHCA-registered holding company, 
prevent the buying and selling of holding company assets, and to a large extent 
determine the terms of the acquisition of holding company property and stock.
PUHCA resulted eventually in the reduction of public utility holding 
company influence. For example, holding company control of electricity gen­
eration was reduced from 75% of all generation to just 15% or so. PUHCA, 
by effectively reorganizing the electric and gas industries, facilitated greater fed­
eral and state regulation of utility wholesale and retail prices and conditions of 
service.
1.3.2  Along Came Deregulation
With the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) Order 888/889 
mandating open access of the nation’s transmission network, the electric utility 
industry began its most significant transformation since the creation of PUH­
CA. Once highly regulated and organized into vertically integrated entities, 
the industry is being restructured into a competitive arena made up of veterans 
as well as new players from other industries. They are all facilitating change 
through the establishment of new business processes and information flow and 
in the development of the functions that support a deregulated marketplace.
Deregulation has resulted in major changes to the organization structure 
of most utilities and more importantly resulted in the creation of a new set of 
companies comprised of regional transmission operators/independent system 
operators (RTOs/ISOs) (see Figure 1.7) [6]. Within vertically integrated utili­
ties, Chinese walls needed to be implemented to demonstrate nondiscrimina­
tory access to transmission as well as allowing the distribution company to buy 
power from the most market-competitive generation in the system. As a result, 
even within utilities, the transmission as well as the generation (and/or trad­
ing) group needed to separate themselves from an organizational and business 
process perspective from the rest of the utility creating wires-only businesses.
1.3.3  Then Came Smart Grid
The electricity system in the United States received renewed attention after the 
August 2003 blackout that impacted more than 50 million customers across the 
Northeast United States and caused billions of dollars of damages to the U.S. 

 
Introduction 
15
economy. This blackout became a catalyst to deliver a call to action as the event 
exposed the United States’ dependency on such a vulnerable infrastructure. The 
call to action was that the present situation was felt to be unacceptable and 
change was needed to ensure enhanced safety and reliability across the system. 
The intelligent network is one of the results of that call to action.
1.3.4  A Global Outlook
Much of Section 1.3 has focused on the changes within the electric utility in­
dustry in the United States. However, for much of the rest of the world, elec­
tric utilities are either government owned or heavily controlled by the local 
or federal government in that area. With the advent of deregulation in many 
countries, much of this has changed with clearer delineation between wholesale 
and retail services. In many of these countries (United Kingdom, Australia, the 
Netherlands, etc.), the distribution company is completely private. It is not the 
intent of this book to go into too much detail on the corporate structures of 
every country.
1.4  Utilities and Regulation
Utility industry regulation has historically been the means for local and national 
governments to reap the benefits of these natural monopolies—benefits such 
Figure 1.7  RTO/ISO Map of North America.

16 
Electric System Operations  
as cost advantages and essential energy service—without suffering the conse­
quences of uncontrolled prices.
In order for regulation to be feasible, the cost advantage of the natural mo­
nopoly must be sufficient to justify the cost of regulating the industry (this has 
been the belief about the global utilities industry for most of the 20th century).
Key U.S. utility regulation facts include:
• All types of utilities are subject to regulations whether they are public or 
private (both investor owned and cooperatively owned) utilities.
• There are more public than private gas and electric companies, but pri­
vate gas and electric companies provide the majority of the energy con­
sumed in the United States.
• Although the industry’s regulated status has changed in recent years, 
for the majority of the 20th century U.S. gas and electric industries 
were fully regulated natural monopolies, with protected franchise areas, 
regulated rates, and the obligation to serve the customers in their areas.
• Regulation of interstate transportation of gas and electricity falls under 
national jurisdiction, while distribution to individual customers is gen­
erally a state responsibility.
Utility industry regulation is at the national or local level, each having 
its own jurisdictional responsibilities. Oversight responsibilities of regulatory 
agencies include:
• Approving energy rates;
• Monitoring competition and access;
• Enforcing national or local energy laws;
• Monitoring safety and environmental issues;
• Monitoring system reliability;
• Ensuring that franchise and obligation-to-serve requirements are met.
To maintain reasonable rates of return for utility companies, public utility 
commissions have established procedures for setting and changing rates. The 
process of setting rates includes the following:
• In order to obtain permission to adjust base rates, a utility company 
must submit a rate case to the local public utility commission;

 
Introduction 
17
• The commission reviews the rate case documentation and considers the 
points of view expressed during a public hearing and makes a ruling as 
to the rate adjustment requested by the utility;
• A utility company may or may not attain its expected rate of return 
regardless of approved rates, because other factors, such as mild weather 
or unexpectedly high operating costs may significantly affect the bottom 
line.
At a more general level, utilities are one of the most heavily regulated ser­
vices in most countries with processes somewhat similar to that in the United 
States. However, most of these countries do not have the patchwork of state and 
federal regulatory mechanisms that exist in the United States.
Endnotes
[1]	 Distribution lines when they leave the substation are also called feeders or tap lines, de­
pending on where they are in the system. Generally, feeders leave the substation and tap 
lines tap off the feeders to deliver power to the premise.
[2]	 A retail energy provider (REP) is the nomenclature used in the Texas deregulated market.
[3]	 A smart meter is usually an electrical meter that records consumption of electric energy 
in intervals of an hour or less and communicates that information at least daily back to 
the utility for monitoring and billing purposes. Some smart meters enable two-way com­
munication between the meter and the central system and can also gather data for remote 
reporting. Such an advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) differs from traditional auto­
matic meter reading (AMR) in that it enables two-way communications with the meter.
[4]	 Independent system operators grew out of Order Nos. 888/889 where the Commission 
suggested the concept of an independent system operator as one way for existing tight 
power pools to satisfy the requirement of providing nondiscriminatory access to trans­
mission. Subsequently, in Order No. 2000, the Commission encouraged the voluntary 
formation of regional transmission organizations to administer the transmission grid on a 
regional basis throughout North America (including Canada). Order No. 2000 delineated 
12 characteristics and functions that an entity must satisfy in order to become a regional 
transmission organization.


19
2
Define System Operations
The wide distribution of electrical power in the 20th century brought light 
to the world and power to almost every pursuit and enterprise in modern 
society. Consider its impact on everyday life—lighting, heating and air 
conditioning, refrigeration, computers, transportation, communications, 
medical technologies, food production—the list is endless.  Several 
key engineering innovations made this possible, including the turbine 
generator, the use of alternating current (AC), techniques to obtain 
electrical power from various resources (fossil fuels, water, sunlight, 
nuclear), and the construction and refinement of massive transmission 
systems. Electrification is responsible for innumerable developments that 
have made life safer, healthier, and more convenient; so much so that it is 
hard to imagine our lives without it. It runs the smallest electric appliances 
in homes and offices, the mammoth computers that control power grids 
and telecommunications systems, and the machinery that produces 
consumer goods. Its impact is vast, and it has touched the majority of 
people on the planet [1].
Every day, with clockwork precision at every utility, different generators (some 
hydro, some thermal, some gas, some by other means) transform other forms 
of energy into consumable electricity. Just as surely, a backbone of transmission 
lines then delivers this power to the power-hungry centers of consumption: 
lighting lights, driving industries, powering office buildings, and bringing life 
to various homes all across the land. The electric utility’s system operations 
centers are responsible for safeguarding these assets by providing reliable electric 
power to its customers.
Electric system operations is the entity that is responsible within a utility 
for managing the transmission and distribution grid. In the past, this role was 

20 
Electric System Operations  
purely technical and taken on by a grid operations group within the vertically 
integrated monopoly utility. A typical responsibility was balancing transmis­
sion line energy flows to ensure network stability. In the future, this team will 
need significantly new business capabilities and will be faced with a much more 
complex operational role. On the business side, they will need to perform con­
tract management, develop and maintain customer relationships, and reconcile 
physical energy consumption through financial settlements. On the operational 
side, they will need to coordinate scheduling and manage network congestion 
for an increasingly complex environment where industrials, power marketers, 
and generators alike will all be looking for the best deal.
2.1  System Operations
Like something from a science fiction movie, the electrical grid is a large, com­
plex machine. Nations and economies depend on it and consumers just expect 
it to work. Against these demands, electricity providers must ensure that all of 
the equipment and processes operate together, safely and reliably.
So where does system operations fit into a utility’s overall ability to meet 
customer needs today? The short answer is “everywhere.” Asset management is 
about deploying the right assets at the right time. Work and resource manage­
ment ensure that you get the right work done, at the right cost. And system 
operations has traditionally focused on operating the network to ensure the 
right levels of safety, reliability, and efficiency in everything that relates to real-
time grid management.
While other areas in utilities can be as much as 10 to 15 times larger in 
terms of budget and personnel, system operations is still a significant driving 
force behind energy delivery and customer service. It can also be a bottleneck 
because even if utilities make changes in other critical areas such as asset man­
agement, system operations must support such initiatives for them to work 
effectively (e.g., helping work crews to locate and service outages as well as 
coordinate work safely and cost-effectively).
Market forces are accelerating change in utilities: the workforce is aging, 
skills are becoming more scarce, government and advocacy groups are imposing 
new regulations (and more fines), competition is changing, and the customer 
looms ever more important before an industry that, in many cases, is simply 
trying to keep up. Today’s electrical environment only adds to the complexity 
of the system operator’s job, which requires more work with the same or fewer 
resources. 
Electric system operations in today’s environment is not the same as it was 
a generation ago. There are many new challenges utilities face in the modern en­

 
Define System Operations 
21
vironment from both internal pressures to provide efficiency and performance 
gains and outside pressures that are looking for better service and reliability. 
To summarize, the electric system operations capability is expected to op­
erate the electric T&D network safely and efficiently.
2.2  Key Drivers for Systems Operations
There are a common set of drivers that impact electric system operations in a 
critical manner, driving the need to innovate as well as the need for increased 
efficiencies (see Figure 2.1). They are all focused around a need to demonstrate:
• Transparent operations;
• Rapid restoration from outages;
• Ability to monitor and operate the system reliably;
Do the above steps efficiently.
2.2.1  Impact of Drivers on Distribution
The inability to restore outages in a faster manner coupled with an aging work­
force and aging infrastructure continues to be one of the main issues faced by 
Figure 2.1  Key drivers and factors impacting system operations.

22 
Electric System Operations  
distribution utilities. An ongoing strong focus on industry-wide performance 
metrics like the system average interruption duration index (SAIDI), the cus­
tomer average interruption duration index (CAIDI), and the system average 
interruption frequency index (SAIFI) [2] have made distribution operation a 
business platform with rising costs and unsatisfied customers potentially seek­
ing services from other utilities. Control center consolidation, implementation 
of smart grid and smart meter, extended integration of key systems beyond 
AMI and supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) [3] are some of the 
solutions utilized by the utilities, but views have been mixed due to lower than 
expected performance results. The proper use of a distribution management 
system (DMS) can help to enable the utility to realize full benefits as various 
programs are implemented to deal with their major operating issues.
2.2.1.1  Increased Competition
Utilities are facing significant external pressures that are driving a business mod­
el change for the industry from a customer perspective. States have been in­
creasingly active in promoting competition and market restructuring since the 
approval of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 [4]. Competition is driven from both 
a retail perspective and by the threat of municipalization. In both scenarios, the 
result is the need for the utility to decrease price and increase customer satisfac­
tion to retain customers. State regulators and their constituents no longer toler­
ate substandard service and high prices.
Additionally, advocacy and industry watchdog groups have been high­
lighting the inadequate service provided by electric utilities, and consequently 
state public utility commissions have been reacting by imposing increasingly 
demanding reliability regulations as an alternative means to increase customer 
satisfaction. The noncompliance with reliability metric targets is often coupled 
with monetary fines.
The increased competition to retain and attract customers has escalated 
the need for utilities to improve performance and enhance services in order to 
strengthen existing customer loyalty and attract new customers. Competitive 
pressures and demands for specialized services are compelling utilities to imple­
ment new and more innovative customer service programs. Several consumer 
groups are recommending improvements to service reliability, stronger enforce­
ment of rules, better consumer protection, and mandating public reporting 
processes for various electric utilities across the nation. The newer customer 
satisfaction standards are moving in a direction to ensure all electric utilities 
make service reliability a priority and that the utilities can be held accountable.
2.2.1.2  Load Growth and Aging Infrastructure
Utilities are witnessing rapid expansion of power distribution systems in size 
and complexity coupled with a strict limitation of investment resources that 

 
Define System Operations 
23
severely limits the growth and improvement of the aging infrastructure. Not 
only are there increased customers in a jurisdiction for an operator to manage, 
each customer is now putting more load onto the system with a multitude of 
electronic gadgets (such as computers, televisions, and appliances) amassed in a 
typical home or business. These additional gadgets have a nonlinear operating 
characteristic which, in turn, impacts the power quality in the network. In ad­
dition, this also results in the capacity on the distribution network getting more 
constrained putting increased pressure on the system during an outage or an 
emergency situation.
In addition, operators must manage various equipment types in which 
many can be decades old and each with their own range of device ratings, trip 
settings, and normal/abnormal status. An operator must either remember each 
equipment’s rating (unlikely) or manually look up this information for each 
device on the circuit that is involved in a switching process. This puts additional 
pressure on the distribution operator to find ways to transfer load, or in the 
worst case, shed load.
Historically, the primary approach a utility would employ to mitigate the 
effect of load growth and aging infrastructure would be to spend significant 
dollars to upgrade the electric system. In many cases, the investment could 
have been delayed and the life of the infrastructure in place could have been 
extended by the more efficient operation of the grid.
2.2.1.3  Data Overload
In today’s technology-driven environment, workers often have an overload of 
data forced on them, and a distribution system operator is no exception. The 
distribution system operator of today manages multiple applications to com­
plete their day-to-day responsibilities. Many utilities have separate user inter­
faces for operating SCADA devices, managing outages, interacting with field 
resources, entering outage information for customer communications, and log­
ging and writing switching orders. In storm situations, operators find them­
selves managing multiple outages, toggling back and forth, trying to keep track 
of it all. Many times operators find themselves duplicating work effort and 
entering the same information multiple times into multiple systems. All the 
while, the operator is continuing to receive telemetry data from the field, which 
he or she has not had time to assess.
A distribution system operator is simply overloaded with data and verbal 
commentary. The data comes from different user interfaces and the verbal com­
mentary from field personnel. The operator does not have the time to convert 
the imputs into useful information that can be leveraged to make decisions. 
Without the time or tools to make sense of all the inputs, much of it is wasted, 
leading to an increased potential for less than optimal operation of the distribu­
tion system.

24 
Electric System Operations  
2.2.1.4  Aging Workforce
The aging workforce has and will continue to be a significant issue in the utility 
industry. In the next 10 years, the utility industry expects a significant reduc­
tion in its workforce as the average age of a utility worker is 50 years [5]. For 
some utilities, the number of expected retirements is over 40% of its current 
staff, including supervisory personnel. This departure of key personnel repre­
sents a loss of knowledge capital, experience, and capability and results in a 
huge risk to effectively and efficiently operate the distribution network.
Within distribution system operations, the long lead time required to 
onboard a new hire makes this even more pressing. Depending on the utility 
and the jurisdiction, the lead time can range from 1 to 2 years to be capable of 
operating a network. Developing the proficiency and knowledge of the “traps” 
within the jurisdiction takes an even longer time. All of this intensifies the criti­
cality of the risk to the utility.
If adequate response to this is not planned, as veteran operators retire, the 
utility could be left with a lack of resources and a lack of knowledge and skill to 
manage the grid safely and efficiently.
2.2.1.5  Desire to Reduce Outage Duration and Frequency
Utilities are always working to reduce the frequency and duration of outages. 
With each outage their customer base is less satisfied with the electricity service 
and there have been many cases of cities breaking away from their utility. In 
addition, SAIDI and SAIFI costs are impacting revenues as utilities are paying 
millions in public utility commission (PUC) [6] penalties.
2.2.1.6  Need for Increased Visibility
The manner in which a utility responds during an emergency is critical not 
only for safety but also for customer satisfaction. Paper wall maps are difficult 
to use to pinpoint the location of outages and know the state of equipment and 
location of field crews. After many phone calls and sectionalizing circuits more 
knowledge about the outage is gained but unfortunately only the single control 
center has the information because efficient dissemination of data could not 
be done electronically. Emergency centers are not notified in a quick enough 
manner. In addition, customers need to know the state of the emergency as the 
system is restored. Without an efficient real-time system, customers are not 
updated on the situation, causing them more angst.
2.2.1.7  Reduction of Risk from Disasters
In the current paper wall map environment, there is no backup map in case of 
a regional disaster. Today colored pushpins are inserted onto a map of the net­
work to indicate open or closed switches and crew locations.  Tagging is done 

 
Define System Operations 
25
with markings on a paper hooked onto the location to indicate a location where 
a crew is dispatched. There have been cases where pins and tags fell off the 
paper map during earthquakes. In this scenario there is no other backup map 
to indicate the “as-operated” state of the network. Control centers will spend 
countless hours calling crews and analyzing switching plans to recover from a 
disaster situation. If the disaster is more extreme and knocks out a control cen­
ter completely, there is no way to transfer control of the paper map to another 
control center. Cross-jurisdictional operations is not possible with paper maps.
2.2.1.8  Increased Pressure to Reduce Costs
Just like any other business in these difficult economic times, utilities are also 
facing increased pressure to reduce costs—and this pressure is coming from all 
directions, including regulators, shareholders, and customers. To enable this 
cost reduction, utilities are looking at opportunities by consolidating control 
centers, shutting some of them down at night, bringing more automation into 
the control center, and trying to perform the same amount of work with fewer 
operators.
2.2.2  Impact of Drivers on Transmission
Unlike distribution, which has anticipated a transformation coming in terms 
of major modifications made on the system after decades of neglect, transmis­
sion has always been in a state of flux. The blackout of 2003 brought to bear 
areas of weaknesses, several of which were focused on the transmission system. 
As a result, even though much of the drivers in distribution are still relevant to 
transmission, there are a few new drivers that impact transmission only.
At the transmission level, disturbances have the potential to travel long 
distances at incredibly fast speeds, causing havoc and equipment tripping across 
the interconnected network. This was evident in the 2003 blackout, when the 
incident that originated in Ohio was able to spread across the entire eastern in­
terconnect, leading to a blackout that impacted more than 50 million custom­
ers. In addition, the U.S. Department of Energy sees the following key points 
driving transmission.
Synchrophasor Implementations 
A phasor is a complex number that represents both the magnitude and phase 
angle of the sine waves found in electricity. Phasor measurements that occur at 
the same time are called synchrophasors, as are the PMU devices that allow their 
measurement. In typical applications, phasor measurement units are sampled 
from widely dispersed locations in the power system network and synchronized 
from the common time source of a Global Positioning System (GPS) radio 

26 
Electric System Operations  
clock. Synchrophasor technology provides an accurate tool for system operators 
and planners to measure the state of the electrical system and manage power 
quality. Synchrophasors measure voltages and currents at diverse locations on 
a power grid and can output accurately time-stamped voltage and current pha­
sors. Because these phasors are truly synchronized, synchronized comparison of 
two quantities is possible in real time. These comparisons can be used to assess 
system conditions more accurately and quickly. 
Widespread implementation of PMUs in the western interconnect as well 
as in the eastern interconnect is bringing new levels of visibility into the trans­
mission grid.
Power System Visualization and Situational Awareness
PMUs and a variety of sensors in the power system transmission network are 
bringing tremendous quantities of data into the control center. With this data 
comes the need to provide actionable information for faster and more confi­
dent real-time decision making by offering a unified view across the entire grid 
interconnection.
With advanced visualization comes the ability to provide a wider array of 
situational awareness (SA) capabilities to operators who are nowadays operating 
a more complex grid. SA refers to the capability of efficiently gathering relevant 
information, processing this information to comprehend the current state, and fi­
nally, projecting the future status. Within the utilities industry, lack of SA has 
been identified as a major factor behind massive outages such as the blackouts 
in the United States in 2003 and in Europe in 2006. It allows the operator to 
predict things like imminent collapses before they happen and to take actions 
to prevent the collapse of the system. The Eastern Interconnect Phase Imple­
mentation (EIPI) Project is one of the major projects focused on improving SA 
for utilities.
Figure 2.2 overlays the concept of situational awareness on a typical trans­
mission one-line diagram. This is a fictitious power system and does not rep­
resent any specific utility power system. In this picture, the words in bold are 
transmission substations, the lines connecting them are transmission lines, and 
the arrows on them provide the direction of power flow. The highlighted ar­
eas around the Parkhill and Ceylon stations indicate violations that have been 
identified. There is also a new area of violation forming around the Richview 
station. The intent of the highlighted areas is to focus the operator’s attention 
on the problem that is just forming and that needs their attention. It is possible 
that if the problem is not alleviated soon, it may escalate to something more 
severe, taking the grid to an unstable situation, at which point it may not be 
possible to bring it back to stability.

 
Define System Operations 
27
2.3  What Changes from Transmission to Distribution System 
Operations?
While the term “grid operations” applies mainly to transmission operations, 
distribution is slowly moving out of call centers and emergency trouble-call 
management centers towards more formalized distribution operations centers. 
This is not just a simple extension of the traditional EMS/SCADA systems to 
include distribution systems—numerous attempts at doing this have failed and 
only nowadays, with the advent of DMSs that have been rearchitected from the 
bottom up, have resulted in success. This is because there are some fundamen­
tal differences between the two systems that then impact how they need to be 
managed. 
Level of observability. In transmission, there are generally more measure­
ments than observable states [7]. As a result, we have an application called the 
state estimator. SCADA data comes in a somewhat raw state and is then fed 
into the state estimator, which estimates the states of every node in the network 
system. The estimator uses the connected network model of the power system 
to develop a more accurate understanding of the system state and the rest of the 
EMS uses the state estimator output from then on.
Figure 2.2  Visualization and wide-area monitoring. (From e-Terra Vision, Courtesy of Alstom 
Grid.)

28 
Electric System Operations  
The situation in distribution is different. There are considerably less mea­
surements in the field whether coming from SCADA-like remote terminal unit 
(RTUs) [8] in the field or from other intelligent electrical devices (IEDs) [9]. To 
make up for this lack of field measurements, systems need to start with a power 
system simulation as the underlying engine, which is then fed with SCADA 
data to the extent it is available. This situation is expected to improve over time 
as more and more field measurements are added. Measurements from the field 
could include any voltage, current, power factor, MW, MVARs, and so on.
Connectivity model. Transmission systems tend to be extremely networked, 
which means that there are multiple paths between any two points in the net­
work.  This is done by design because transmission systems drive large amounts 
of power across a larger geography and need to deliver power to multiple load 
locations at the same time. As a result, transmission networks experience two-
way power flow as a basic feature (see Figure 1.3).
Distribution networks generally tend to be radial in nature even though 
loops (networked connections) are slowly becoming more common than before 
mainly in downtown/urban areas where large power delivery requirements exist 
and there is a need for greater reliability. In radial systems, power flow tends to 
be mainly one-way from the distribution substation to the eventual consumer. 
Whether it is one-way or two-way, this specific aspect of power flow has 
a huge impact on a large number of utility processes, many of which are associ­
ated with safety, crew-line management, and so forth. In addition, it also has 
Figure 2.3  An example of a networked system: The IEEE 30Bus power system model.

 
Define System Operations 
29
a significant impact on outage management given that in distribution, there is 
only one way to get power to a specific location in a radial network (Figure 2.4).
Component location. With the exception of lines and their poles (or in 
the case of transmission towers), most components in a transmission system 
exist in a substation. Much of the system between substations in transmission 
is basically transmission lines and towers. In distribution, while there are still 
distribution substations, much of the components in a distribution system exist 
outside the substation. Components defined in the previous paragraph include 
transformers, circuit breakers, fuses, and relays.
The key impact of this issue is that from a system operations perspective, 
it is easier to get communications access to a few substations (whether that is 
in transmission or distribution) as opposed to providing communications ac­
cess to the entire length of every line all the way to the consumer’s premise. 
The extent of the distribution system is so much that providing ubiquitous 
Figure 2.4  Distribution radial feeder example. (Reprinted from An Efficient Hybrid Evolution­
ary Algorithm Based on PSO and HBMO Algorithms for Multi-Objective Distribution Feeder 
Reconfiguration, Taher Niknam. © 2009 with permission from Elsevier.)

30 
Electric System Operations  
communication across the entire extent of the distribution system has been 
a key constraint to bringing more control and observability to a centralized 
location.
Three-phase versus single-phase [10]. Transmission systems tend to gener­
ally function in a three-phase balanced situation. This means that most loads 
tend to be connected at the three-phase level and so the three phases tend to 
be quite balanced. From a system operations perspective, most of the modeling 
is a one-line mode, meaning they tend to treat all three phases [11] as a single 
circuit. This allows a certain amount of simplification in the modeling. 
The situation is dramatically different in distribution systems. Here the 
primary customer (mostly residential and small commercial) tends to consume 
power in a single-phase system. This means that each of the three phases could 
be delivering power to different consumers, causing the systems to be quite 
unbalanced—meaning that there is a different amount of power flow in each 
phase. As a result of this from a system operations perspective, distribution 
applications and mechanisms of control need to look at each phase separately, 
thereby requiring three-phase modeling supported by a three-phase unbalanced 
power flow solution mechanism.
New technologies and integration points. The biggest set of changes coming 
into the transmission system includes the installation of phasor measurement 
units (PMUs) and the associated applications of a wide area monitoring system 
(WAMS) and the advent of large wind and solar farms getting connected into 
the grid. 
Distribution, on the other hand, has seen a tremendous amount of chang­
es including smart meter placements, distributed generation, storage, distribut­
ed renewable, electric vehicles, and a large number of new devices and controls 
coming on to the grid. All of these are putting a tremendous amount of strain 
on the grid, making the distribution operator’s life more difficult with more 
things to observe and control.
2.4  Distribution System Operations: An Introduction
These dramatic changes that are impacting distribution systems all have a seri­
ous impact on distribution operations, leading to the evolution of new systems 
such as the outage management system (OMS) and DMS. OMS, which had 
its humble beginnings in trouble-call management systems, has become more 
and more sophisticated, resulting in systems that are fully integrated with the 
Geospatial Information System (GIS) to provide the graphics and the underly­
ing data and connectivity model, and SCADA to drive operator actions (see 
Figure 2.5).

 
Define System Operations 
31
2.5  Key Challenges Facing System Operations
System operations have seen tremendous changes from the onslaught caused by 
deregulation (mostly in transmission) and smart grid (mostly in distribution). 
These changes have resulted in both the influx of new technologies as well 
as changes to business processes and people-change management. These new 
systems have also resulted in more integration between the various operational 
systems (even between transmission and distribution) and the back office.
Figure 2.5  A substation. ( From http://www.flickr.com/photos/palemoontwilight/3927936717/. 
Used with permission from Tapioca Twilight Media.)

32 
Electric System Operations  
Table 2.1
Key Problems Facing System Operations
Operational: Management and Control
Financial: Support the 
Market
Transmission
Introduction of large wind farms directly into 
the transmission system have greater potential 
to cause instability when wind begins to either 
start/end blowing.
Operational data being made 
available to support settlement 
operations and dispute 
resolution. The challenge here 
is that operational data is not 
designed to be of revenue 
quality.
Increased levels of reliance on interconnection 
leading to increased possibility of a problem in 
one area rapidly spreading to other areas (e.g., 
2003 blackout).
  The main response to this is the introduction 
of synchrophasor measurement unit (or PMU). 
Using PMU output, one can now use WAMSs, 
which have the ability to analyze large amounts 
of data across large geographic areas and even 
predict the extent of damage ahead of time. 
The challenge now is to use this new source of 
data and analysis to drive new solutions to the 
problem.
Increased amounts of data coming (e.g., 
PMUs, as described above), make it difficult 
for operators to perform their monitoring 
and control using existing EMS display 
mechanisms. New methods of visualizing 
existing data needed along with specific 
solutions in the area of situational awareness.
Distribution
Not enough visibility into the grid. Much 
dependence still on human intervention
Advent of AMI into distribution 
could allow states/utilities to 
support retail markets in their 
jurisdictions.
Influx of new loads like EVs can be a significant 
strain on the system if they reach scale.
Distributed generation (mostly solar and some 
wind) creating two-way power flow in a system 
designed for primarily one-way power flow.
Large quantities of AMI/smart meters coming 
in to the grid, causing utilities to receive too 
much data that they do not know what to do 
with.
New applications like IVVC* and FLISR† are 
being brought into the control center to bring a 
greater level of sophistication and control‡ to 
the center. 

 
Define System Operations 
33
Endnotes
[1]	 “The Greatest Engineering Achievements of the 20th Century,” http://www.nationalacad­
emies.org/greatachievements/List.PDF.
[2]	 Industry-standard metrics to measure distribution grid performance. Actual definitions 
provided later.
[3]	 SCADA stands for supervisory control and data acquisition, a real-time system used to get 
measurements from the field into the control center systems like EMS, DMS, and so on 
and also to send controls to the field.
[4]	 Source: http://www.eia.doe.gov/cneaf/electricity/epav1/state.html.
Both
Cybersecurity. The plethora of new devices getting connected to the grid and 
having the ability to either connect or disconnect parts of the system (or loads) 
creates more possibilities for cybersecurity breaches. One of the main challenges 
in protecting these networks is the fact that these systems were not necessarily 
designed with cybersecurity in mind. Rather, the security solutions have been 
layered on in a piecemeal fashion after the networks were operational, leaving 
potential room for attackers to compromise their functionality
Privacy. Until now, the only interaction between the utility and the customer was 
limited to meter readers reading meters once a month (or so) and the bill. The 
advent of smart meters have created a situation in which the utility now not only 
reads the meters remotely but also knows the consumption within the premise 
on a 15-minute (or less) basis. This aspect, along with the introduction of home 
energy managers, leads to the first major insight into customer consumption 
patterns that could also amount to an invasion of privacy. NIST is working on 
developing policies for this.
Interoperability. Interoperability is about to become a significant challenge within 
the smart grid community. This is because of the large number of new vendors 
who are entering this nascent market and making new and innovative solutions. 
From a utility perspective, they need all of these devices and systems to work 
together and seamlessly. NIST§ has been given the mandate to develop a set of 
standards that will allow the devices and systems to be interoperable.
IVVC = integrated volt-VAR control; FLISR = fault location identification and service restoration; NIST = National 
Institute of Standards and Technology.
* Integrated volt/var control (IVVC). IVVC continuously analyzes and controls load tap changers (LTCs), capacitor 
banks, and voltage regulators to manage system power factor and voltage. This allows utilities to flatten each 
feeder’s voltage profile and to lower average voltages. It often results in significant energy savings while simulta­
neously maintaining unity power factor to eliminate technical losses.
†Fault location, isolation, and service restoration (FLISR) software can automatically sense trips (faults) in 
switches that are monitored and controlled by a SCADA, identify the faulted section, isolate the fault, and restore 
power to customers by automatically switching them to nonfaulted sections of the line. FLISR does not “fix” the 
problem. Utilities must continue to send crews to the site of the fault, where they verify it and make permanent 
repairs. But customers experience only a brief, momentary outage.
‡Several terms like feeders, capacitors, and so on are all explained in Chapter 3.
§ Under the Energy Independence and Security Act (EISA) of 2007, the National Institute of Standards and Tech­
nology (NIST) has “primary responsibility to coordinate development of a framework that includes protocols and 
model standards for information management to achieve interoperability of smart grid devices and systems….” 
To carry out its EISA-assigned responsibilities, NIST devised a three-phase plan to rapidly establish an initial set 
of standards, while providing a robust process for continued development and implementation of standards as 
needs and opportunities arise and as technology advances.

34 
Electric System Operations  
[5]	 Source: http://www.eei.org/magazine/editorial_content/nonav_stories/2005-09-01-Aging.htm.
[6]	 PUC stands for the public utilities commission, the state-level regulatory body that regu­
lates the utility. Generally their focus is on distribution only. They may go by different 
names in different states.
[7]	 The state of the power system is defined by the combined values of the voltage magnitude 
and phase angle (see information on phasors). Knowing the state of the network at every 
node can allow us to calculate every other variable in the network.
[8]	 An RTU is an electronic device that is controlled by a microprocessor. The device inter­
faces with physical objects to a DCS or SCADA system by transmitting telemetry data to 
the system.
[9]	 IED is a term used in the electric power industry to describe microprocessor-based con­
trollers of power system equipment, such as circuit breakers, transformers, and capacitor 
banks.
[10]	 The more detailed concepts of three-phase versus single-phase will be described in a 
separate chapter later in this book.

35
3
Introduction to Power Systems
In this chapter, we provide a brief discussion on a set of power system funda­
mentals that are important to the proper understanding of how a utility grid 
actually operates/works.
3.1  Basic Electric Components
Electric components that form a part of the grid are responsible for the way 
the grid behaves under different conditions. Some of them can also be used to 
influence the flow of power in the transmission and distribution lines.
3.1.1  Capacitors and Reactors
In AC power systems, which cover much of today’s power grid and the delivery 
mechanism, there are three components to load:
1.	 Resistance. A pure load (e.g., a regular incandescent light bulb) is a 
resistive load.
2.	 Inductance. Most loads in AC power grids are inductive in nature. 
Examples of devices that have significant electric power loads are re­
frigerators, air conditioners, and industrial motors. Most of these are 
considered inductive loads. Inductive loads are considered to be con­
sumers of reactive power. When a load is called an inductive load, it 
means that the power consumed has two major components—real 
and reactive. This kind of a load also tends to bring the voltage pro­
file of the system down. When there are a lot of inductive loads on a 

36 
Electric System Operations  
feeder, the voltage tends to drop as it goes farther away from the sub­
station. 
3.	 Capacitance. While there aren’t too many examples of capacitive loads 
in a typical power grid, capacitors are generators of reactive power. As 
a result, they are installed to deliver reactive power to the grid. Exam­
ples are power supplies and radio tuning circuits. Given that inductors 
can cause the voltage in a feeder to drop, capacitors are installed in the 
system to raise the voltage profile on the feeder.
Most loads on a grid have a combination of resistance, inductance, and 
capacitance. 
3.1.2  Transformers
The transformer is based on two principles: first, that an electric current can 
produce a magnetic field (electromagnetism), and second, that a changing mag­
netic field within a coil of wire induces a voltage across the ends of the coil 
(electromagnetic induction). Changing the current in the primary coil changes 
the magnetic flux that is developed. The changing magnetic flux induces a volt­
age in the secondary coil.
Figure 3.1 shows an ideal transformer. In this device, there are two sets 
of coils: the primary and secondary, which are wrapped around a core of a 
magnetic material. When alternating current (AC current) passes through the 
primary coil, it creates a magnetic field that flows around the core. When this 
field interacts with the secondary coil, it creates a voltage on that coil. The dif­
ference in the voltage between the primary and the secondary coils is defined 
by the difference in the number of the windings around the core.  If a load is 
connected on the secondary coil (as shown in Figure 3.1), current will also flow 
in the secondary circuit.
The transformer is a fundamental component of the AC-power-based 
power grid. The transformer allows the voltage on the grid to be increased or 
decreased as needed. If we move along the utility value chain, the generator 
generates at a certain voltage. This is then stepped up using a transformer to 
transmission level voltages and transmitted across long distances. Once it comes 
toward a load center, another transformer steps down the voltage. As it gets 
closer to the actual load consumption, a pad-mounted transformer further steps 
down the voltage to the level that allows it to be consumed inside the house.
Losses in a power line are directly proportional to the square of the cur­
rent flowing in the line. So, when power is transmitted over long distances, the 
voltage is stepped up to higher levels to reduce the current flowing through the 
line and as a result reduce the losses. As we get closer to the point of consump­

 
Introduction to Power Systems 
37
tion, step-down transformers allow the voltage to be brought down to a level 
that allows the consumption to take place.
This ability for the voltage to be stepped up and down is a major dis­
criminating factor between AC power and DC power. While newer devices, 
like choppers and boosters, do this quite effectively using power electronics. 
The problem with DC is the ability to break the large currents because there 
are no zero crossings.
3.1.3  Switches
Switches, as the name indicates, are devices that either stop or allow the flow of 
power. In an electric circuit, we can see several types of switches.
• Fuses. Fuses are the simplest of the switches. A fuse is a low-resistance 
component that provides overcurrent protection of either the load or 
source circuit. Its essential component is a metal wire or strip that melts 
when too much current flows, thereby interrupting the circuit in which 
it is connected. To reset the fuse, a new fuse wire of correct rating needs 
to be replaced.
Figure 3.1  Typical transformer internals.

38 
Electric System Operations  
• Disconnects. A disconnect is a safety on/off electrical switch mounted 
on the grid. While it is still a switch, a key differentiator is in the ability 
to physically see the separation, thereby confirming that power cannot 
flow through the circuit. Disconnects are required by electrical code and 
must be opened so that maintenance crew can see the physical separa­
tion around a device (e.g., a transformer) before performing mainte­
nance on it. This is generally a requirement from a safety perspective. 
While most disconnects are operated manually, there are several places 
where motorized disconnects are also used.
• Circuit breakers. A circuit breaker is an automatically operated electrical 
switch designed to protect an electrical circuit from damage caused by 
overload or short circuit. Its basic function is to detect a fault condition, 
and by interrupting continuity, to immediately discontinue electrical 
flow. Unlike a fuse, which operates once and then has to be replaced, 
a circuit breaker can be reset (either manually or automatically) to re­
sume normal operation. Circuit breakers are made in varying sizes, from 
small devices that protect an individual household appliance up to large 
switchgear designed to protect high-voltage circuits feeding an entire city.
  These are fairly sophisticated and complex devices because when 
current is interrupted, an arc is generated. This arc must be contained, 
cooled, and extinguished in a controlled way, so that the gap between 
the contacts can again withstand the voltage in the circuit. Given the 
amount of energy that must be quenched in an incredibly short period 
of time, manufacturers use vacuum, air, insulating gas, or oil as the me­
dium in which the arc forms and the energy is dissipated.
• Reclosers. Reclosers are circuit breakers equipped with a special mecha­
nism designed to assist with temporary faults [2]. Utilities have found 
that most faults in a grid are momentary in nature, meaning that the 
fault may get cleared automatically due to natural causes. Typical causes 
of temporary faults could be a tree branch swinging and causing two of 
the phases of a distribution circuit to touch each other, or by itself acting 
as a conduit to the ground. When this happens, the recloser opens up 
to clear the fault and tests the circuit multiple times to confirm whether 
the circuit is still faulted or not. Anyone who has watched the light bulbs 
flicker on and off multiple times during a storm has experienced the 
reclosed action. If the lights stay steady after one of these episodes, then 
it was a temporary fault, and if they stay out, then that same fault was a 
permanent one.

 
Introduction to Power Systems 
39
3.1.4  Relays and Protection Equipment
Two main points identify the need for relays and protection in an electrical grid: 
(1) the speed of electricity as it flows though the circuits, which is mainly at the 
speed of light, and (2) the high cost of electrical equipment and the longer lead 
times sometimes necessary for their replacement.
These two factors necessitate the need for extremely advanced and sophis­
ticated set of protective equipment in an electrical grid. While electrical protec­
tion has changed a lot over the years, it goes by the general name of relays. These 
devices control the tripping of a circuit breaker to isolate specific parts of the 
grid to save the grid from being further impacted either due to a fault or other 
potentially major issues. There are several types of relays [3] in the network and 
a generic subset is listed below:
• Under/over voltage relays;
• Instantaneous overcurrent;
• Inverse Time overcurrent;
• Under/over frequency;
• Current differential;
• Impedance relays.
There are key points necessary when characterizing how these relays are 
set to perform their job of protecting the system [4]:
• They are generally set for automatic operation with little to no manual 
intervention and for constant monitoring of equipment. Many are also 
collecting data about the equipment that they are monitoring for post-
event analysis.
• It is not uncommon to have multiple sets of relays monitoring the same 
equipment. This is generally done for very important/critical equip­
ment.
• It is also not uncommon for multiple relays to have overlapping areas 
of monitoring and protection. This allows situations where one relay 
monitors one portion of the system and another relay monitors a larger 
portion of the system of which the first one is a part. This is often called 
primary, backup, and tertiary protection.
• Relays have extremely sophisticated settings that are coordinated among 
other relays in the network to ensure that their primary/backup roles are 
appropriately managed.

40 
Electric System Operations  
3.1.5  Kilovolt Classes or Common Voltage Levels
Most electrical equipment is classified by their voltage classification. This 
means that they are rated for a specific voltage level. For example, the class of 
equipment designed for use within a typical U.S. home is 110V class. In other 
countries, similar equipment designed for the home may be of a 220V class.
Liewise, when we see equipment on the grid, it is designated by the ki­
lovolt class of the system where it was installed. The following classes exist but 
there may be more:
• Transmission equipment in the United States is generally in the follow­
ing voltage levels: 765 , 500 , 345 , 230, 161, 138, and 115 kV. Some of 
the newer levels in transmission are in the 1100 kV class.
• Distribution equipment in the United States is generally in the follow­
ing voltage levels: 69, 34.5, 13.8, and 12.47 kV.
These classifications allow the equipment to be designated on how they 
can be used and the level of insulation needed for them.
3.1.6  Busbars
Busbars are essential pieces of equipment used in transmission and distribu­
tion substations. These are basically either a solid strip of copper or aluminum 
that is used to connect different pieces of equipment together to ensure a good 
conductive connection between them. For example, when a transformer is con­
nected to a transmission line, the connection is made through a busbar. Busbars 
can also be made of flexible stranded conductors.
3.1.7  Substations
Substations are where much of an electrical system comes together. This is 
the place where most of the key components of a power system are housed. 
In a transmission substation, we can find key components like transformers, 
busbars, circuit breakers, disconnects, protective relays, and so forth. Much of 
transmission equipment exists within a transmission substation. Key equipment 
outside of a transmission substation are the transmission lines, which mainly 
go from one substation to another. At the transmission level, substations are 
generally classified as based on the kind of action they perform. For example, 
generation substations are designed to take the power output of a generating 
station and step it up to transmission-level voltages. Electric power sometimes 
flows through many substations as it moves from supply to consumption—and 
through each of the substations, the voltages are either stepped up or down.

 
Introduction to Power Systems 
41
Distribution substations are not that different in terms of their capabili­
ties. However, given that the distribution voltages are somewhat lower, these 
substations are also somewhat smaller. 
It is fairly common for most substations to be unattended and relying 
mainly on some level of remote control and monitoring. 
3.2  Key Power System Physical Concepts Explained
The basic electrical components covered in the previous section are very often 
subject to a set of physical concepts that governed their behavior. This section 
defines those physical concepts. 
3.2.1  The Basics: Voltage and Current
The voltage [3] between two ends of a path is the total energy required to move 
a small electric charge along that path, divided by the magnitude of the charge. 
Historically this quantity has also been called “tension” and “pressure.”
Voltage (measured in volts) is defined so that negatively charged objects 
are pulled towards higher voltages, while positively charged objects are pulled 
towards lower voltages. Therefore, the conventional current in a wire or resistor 
always flows from higher voltage to lower voltage. Current can flow from lower 
voltage to higher voltage, but only when a source of energy is present to “push” 
it against the opposing electric field. For example, chemical reactions inside a 
battery provide the energy needed for current to flow from the negative to the 
positive terminal.
Electric current is a flow of electric charge through a medium. This charge 
is typically carried by moving electrons in a conductor such as a wire. Current is 
measured in amperes and is the rate of flow of electric charge flowing through 
a conductor.
3.2.2  Ohm’s Law
Ohm’s law [4] states that the current through a conductor between two points 
is directly proportional to the potential difference across the two points. Intro­
ducing the constant of proportionality, the resistance, one arrives at the usual 
mathematical equation that describes this relationship. 
	
I
V R
=
	
where I is the current through the conductor in units of amperes, V is the po­
tential difference measured across the conductor in units of volts, and R is the 
resistance of the conductor in units of ohms. More specifically, Ohm’s law states 

42 
Electric System Operations  
that the R in this relation is constant, independent of the current (see Figure 
3.2).
The law was named after the German physicist Georg Ohm, who in a 
treatise published in 1827 described measurements of applied voltage and cur­
rent through simple electrical circuits containing various lengths of wire. He 
presented a slightly more complex equation than the one above to explain his 
experimental results. The above equation is the modern form of Ohm’s law.
Following Ohm’s law, we can calculate the losses in an electrical circuit by 
using the following equation:
	
2
Power Loss 
V
I
I
R
=
∗
=
∗
	
This means that power loss is proportional to the square of the current 
flowing in the circuit.
3.2.3  Kirchhoff’s Law
Using Ohm’s law, the next step towards calculating power flow in a circuit is 
through Kirchhoff’s laws [5], of which there are two: Kirchhoff’s current law 
and Kirchhoff’s voltage law 
1.	 Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL): This law starts off from the principle of 
conservation of electric charge, which implies that at any junction in 
an electrical circuit, the sum of currents flowing into that node is equal 
to the sum of currents flowing out of that node (Figure 3.3).
	
The algebraic sum of currents in a network of conductors meeting at 
a point is zero. Recalling that current is a signed (positive or negative) 
quantity reflecting direction towards or away from a junction; this 
principle can be stated as:
Figure 3.2  How voltage, current and resistance relate to each other in a typical electrical 
circuit.

 
Introduction to Power Systems 
43
	
0
1
n
k
K
I
=
=
⋅
∑
	
2.	 Kirchhoff’s voltage law (KVL): This law is based on the conservation 
of energy whereby voltage is defined as the energy per unit charge. 
The total amount of energy gained per unit charge must equal the 
amount of energy lost per unit charge. The conservation of energy 
states that energy cannot be created or destroyed; it can only be trans­
formed from one form to another. The directed sum of the electrical 
potential differences (voltage) around any closed network is zero. Put 
more simply, the sum of the emfs in any closed loop is equivalent to 
the sum of the potential drops in that loop, or the algebraic sum of the 
products of the resistances of the conductors and the currents in them 
in a closed loop is equal to the total emf available in that loop (Figure 
3.4).
3.2.4  DC Versus AC
The simpler definition of DC power (example of DC power is that coming out 
of a battery) is that is stays constant at the same level as it comes out its source of 
supply. AC power on the other hand is (as the name implies) alternates between 
a positive number and an equal and opposite negative number. The inverse 
of the amount of time taken by the AC wave to complete one complete cycle 
is also called the frequency. The frequency of the power supply in the United 
Figure 3.3  Illustration of Kirchhoff’s current law.

44 
Electric System Operations  
States is 60 Hz, which means that the AC wave in the United States completes 
60 cycles per second (Figure 3.5).
In the United States, utilities have tried both types DC and AC—even 
though the beginnings were actually based in DC [6], promoted by Edison.
The main difference between AC and DC leading to why AC pretty much 
took over from DC as the world’s electricity system was in the ability to step up 
and step down voltages. AC could do it and DC could not—this was through 
the use of transformers. Some of this is now changing through the use of new 
technologies aided by power electronics.
Now, why is stepping voltages up and down so important? It is all about 
losses!
For us to understand this, we need to keep in mind two key equations that 
were presented in the section on Ohm’s law.
1.	 Electricity losses are directly proportional the square of the current 
flowing in the circuit.
2.	 Voltage in a circuit is inversely proportion to the current flowing in it. 
Keeping these two equations in mind, one can see that to transmit power 
across large distance, we should step up the voltage as high as possible to de­
crease the current as much as possible, leading to reduced losses in the circuit. 
Transformers allow this to happen in an AC circuit but there is no equivalent to 
a transformer in a DC circuit.
Figure 3.4  Illustration of Kirchhoff’s voltage law.

 
Introduction to Power Systems 
45
3.2.5  Complex Power Representation
Power in an electric circuit is the rate of flow of energy past a given point of the 
circuit. In alternating current circuits, energy storage elements such as induc­
tance and capacitance may result in periodic modifications of the direction of 
energy flow. The portion of power that averaged over a complete cycle of the 
AC waveform that results in net transfer of energy in one direction is known 
as real power. The portion of power due to stored energy, which returns to the 
source in each cycle, is known as reactive power.
In a simple alternating current (AC) circuit, both the current and voltage 
are sinusoidal. If the load is purely resistive, the two quantities reverse their 
polarity at the same time. At every instant the product of voltage and current 
is positive, indicating that the direction of energy flow does not reverse. In this 
case, only real power is transferred (Figure 3.6).
If the loads are purely reactive, then the voltage and current are 90 degrees 
out of phase. For half of each cycle, the product of voltage and current is posi­
tive, but on the other half of the cycle, the product is negative, indicating that 
on average, exactly as much energy flows toward the load as flows back. There 
is no net energy flow over one cycle. In this case, only reactive energy flows—
there is no net transfer of energy to the load.
Practical loads have resistance, inductance, and capacitance, so both real 
and reactive power will flow to real loads. Power engineers measure apparent 
power as the magnitude of the vector sum of real and reactive power. Apparent 
power is the product of the root-mean-square of voltage and current. Engineers 
Figure 3.5  Picture of a sinusoidal wave—AC voltage.

46 
Electric System Operations  
care about apparent power, because even though the current associated with 
reactive power does no work at the load, it heats the wires, wasting energy. Con­
ductors, transformers, and generators must be sized to carry the total current, 
not just the current that does useful work.
3.2.6  Power Factor
The power factor is an indicator of amount of inductive or capacitive load in 
the system. The best power factor value in a feeder is 1.0 and this is the value 
that most system planners strive to achieve. A power factor of 1.0 means that 
the load is completely resistive in nature or that the inductive/capacitive com­
ponent of the load is neutralized.
Generally, given that the average load is more inductive than capacitive, 
the typical power factor of most feeders can vary between 0.8 and 0. 
Bad power factor impacts the grid in several ways but mainly it impacts 
grid capacity because the combination of real and reactive power flows through 
the transmission/distribution lines, transformers, and so on while only real 
power is paid for (for example, in residential loads). In some commericial and 
industrial tariffs there are penalties for bad power factors. Improving the power 
factor allows more real power to flow through the various components thereby 
improving their utilization factors.
3.2.7  Three-Phase Versus Single Phase
The early methods of AC power transmission and distribution were all in single 
phase. This meant that power mainly flowed in one wire and the other wire 
(somewhat similar to a DC circuit) was the return or ground wire. Nowadays 
Figure 3.6  The complex power is the vector sum of real and reactive power. The apparent 
power is the magnitude of the complex power. P = real power; Q = reactive power ; S = com­
plex power; |S| = apparent power; φ = phase of current.

 
Introduction to Power Systems 
47
most power transmission and distribution is three-phase. This is very common 
in all the power grids around the world. 
A three-phase system has three electrical conductors carrying AC currents 
of the same frequency but which reach their instantaneous peak values at dif­
ferent times. The current flowing in each of the conductors is delayed in time 
by one-third of one cycle of the electric current from the next one. This delay 
between phases makes it possible to produce rotating magnetic fields in electric 
motors.
Three-phase power systems have several advantages over single-phase 
power systems:
• Power transfer is balanced, leading to generators and motors that tend to 
run with a lesser amount of vibration;
• Three-phase power systems can actually transfer more power than three 
circuits of single-phase power and use fewer wires;
• They produce a rotating magnetic field that rotates in the direction of 
the phase angle differences, thereby simplifying the design of electric 
motors.
It is important to note that while most transmission and distribution sys­
tems are three-phase in nature, residential load is still mostly single-phase in 
almost all countries.
3.2.8  Phasors
Another very interesting aspect of AC three-phase systems is a physical concept 
called phasors. To truly understand phasors, let us consider a typical three-phase 
system. As explained earlier, this consists of three AC sinusoidal waveforms 
out of synch with each other by one-third of their cycle. This means that the 
waves are actually rotating around a common axis at a speed governed by the 
frequency of the power system that can be either 50 or 60 Hz in most countries. 
With a three-phase system three waveforms are rotating at the same speed but 
separated by a phase angle of 120 degrees.
Phasor angles are an important aspect of the power delivery mechanism 
because of two key points:
1.	 While the phase angle difference between the three phases of voltage 
or current at one point will be generally 120 degrees in a balanced sys­
tem, they will not be in phase across all nodes in a system. This means 
that phase A at one end of the transmission will be different from the 
phase angle of the same phase A at the other end of the same transmis­

48 
Electric System Operations  
sion line. This difference is generally proportional to the amount of 
real power that is transmitted between the lines.
2.	 Just as the voltage phase angle is an indicator of the amount of real 
power transferred in a line, the difference in voltage magnitude is an 
indicator of the amount of reactive power on the same line.
These two values—voltage magnitude and phase angle—are so funda­
mental to a power system that their combined values are also called the state 
of the system. It is known that once you know the voltage magnitude and the 
phase angle at every node, you can calculate just about most other variables in 
the power system [9].
3.2.9  Superconductivity in Transmission Lines and Transformers
Superconductivity is the ability to conduct electricity without any resistance. 
This is a significant breakthrough in the field of electric power systems. How­
ever, until recently one needed to maintain these materials at extremely low 
temperatures (close to zero degrees Kelvin). More recent advances in supercon­
ductors have led to the development of or high-temperature superconductors 
(HTSs). These allow the ability of materials to exhibit superconducting prop­
erties at temperatures as high as 110 degrees Kelvin. As a result, utilities are 
experimenting with using HTS materials in transmission lines, transformers, 
and even distribution lines.
3.3  Key Business Concepts Explained
Superimposing over the basic electrical components and the physical concepts 
there are certain business concepts that drive how electric systems operate. 
While the examples used in this section may be U.S.-centric, these same con­
cepts are applied all around the world. 
3.3.1  Utility Interconnected System
An interconnection [10] is basically a power grid that functions at a regional 
scale and operates at a single synchronized frequency and is electrically tied 
together during normal system conditions. All of the interconnects in North 
America are synchronized at 60 Hz, while those of Europe run at 50 Hz. Inter­
connections can also be tied to each other via high-voltage direct current power 
transmission lines (DC ties), or with variable frequency transformers (VFTs), 
which permit a controlled flow of energy while also functionally isolating the 
independent AC frequencies of each side.

 
Introduction to Power Systems 
49
The benefits of interconnected utility systems include pooling of genera­
tion, resulting in lower generation costs; pooling of load, resulting in significant 
equalizing effects; and common provisioning of reserves, resulting in cheaper 
primary and secondary reserve power costs.
The North American Power Grid is divided into four AC electrical inter­
connections (Figure 3.11):
1.	 The western interconnection covers much of the western part of North 
America;
2.	 The eastern interconnection covers much of the other half of North 
America;
3.	 The Quebec interconnection covers the Quebec province in Canada; 
4.	 The Texas interconnection covers much of Texas.
3.3.2  Control Area or Balancing Authority Areas
By NERC definition, a control area is an electrical system bounded by intercon­
nection (tie-line) metering and telemetry. It controls its generation directly to 
maintain its interchange schedule with other control areas and contributes to 
frequency regulation of the interconnection.
For each of the interconnections to operate safely and reliably and provide 
dependable electric service to its customers, it must be continuously monitored 
and controlled. This monitoring and control function is distributed among the 
control areas that comprise the interconnection.
A control area is somewhat analogous to a pond: Water flowing into the 
pond is analogous to generating units generating energy, and water flowing out 
of a pond is analogous to energy being consumed. 
In a simplified control area (not interconnected to anything else), the level 
of water in the pond must stay the same at all times. This is analogous to the 
frequency of the power system, which must stay constant. This does not change 
much with an interconnected power system (somewhat similar to the various 
interconnected systems in North America) with one exception—power (analo­
gous to water) can flow from one pond to the other, thereby helping the levels 
of water in the various ponds (analogous to the frequency) in the interconnec­
tion to stay constant.
Both the generation and load in a control area are managed to keep fre­
quency as close to constant as possible. The variation in this closed-loop control 
mechanism is a specific metric called area control error (ACE). This is also 
one of the key metrics by which the performance of the transmission/ control 
area operator is evaluated. Keeping ACE within the right set of limits indicates 

50 
Electric System Operations  
that the control area operator is doing a good job of controlling their resources 
instead of “leaning” on other control areas in the interconnection. 
3.3.3  Renewable Energy Zones
Renewable energy zones are a new concept being considered but not yet adopt­
ed, more so in the United States. Consider the more recent proliferation of large 
transmission-level wind farms in some areas of the United States. Wind farms 
are known for their notorious volatility in power generation, which can cause 
havoc with control area metrics like ACE if the capacity of the wind farm(s) is a 
significant proportion of the overall control area generation capacity.
To combat this issue, control area operators (mainly in the western in­
terconnection [11] are considering joining together to form renewable energy 
zones (REZs) [12]. The intent of these REZs is to function somewhat like a 
supercontrol area and share the ACE calculation across multiple control areas. 
Endnotes
[1]	 Information on transformer and its definition are taken from wikipedia.org.
[2]	 Faults are caused in an electrical network when something short-circuits a live portion of 
the grid to the ground, causing an extremely increased amount of current to flow through 
the electrical network. This is considered bad for the network because it can cause com­
ponents to burn out.
[3]	 Adapted from Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltage.
[4]	 Taken from Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohm’s_law.
[5]	 From Wikipedia.org, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kirchhoff’s_circuit_laws# 
Kirchhoff.27s_voltage_law_.28KVL.29.
[6]	 From Wikipedia: There were still 1,600 DC customers in downtown New York City as of 
2005, and service was finally discontinued only on November 14, 2007.
[7]	 Adapted from Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AC_power.
[8]	 There are a few odd frequencies in some islands that are at 25 Hz.
[9]	 The PMU is a device capable of measuring synchronized voltage and current phasor in a 
power system. Synchronicity among PMUs (or synchrophasors) is achieved by same-time 
sampling of voltage and current waveforms using a common synchronizing signal from a 
GPS.
[10]	 Basic information on interconnected utility systems taken from Wikipedia.
[11]	 These REZs are also being created in other parts of the country; for example, Texas is 
creating competitive renewable energy zones.
[12]	 http://www.westgov.org/initiatives/rtep. More information on the Western Renewable 
Energy Zone task force report is in this location.

51
4
Impact of Deregulation on System 
Operations
After the blackouts of 1965 and 1977, deregulation probably had one of the 
biggest impacts to system operations. The overall objective of system operations 
changed significantly to go beyond focusing on reliability on to a plethora of 
new tasks that were needed to support market operations. In a simplistic man­
ner, many of these tasks were still being done prior to deregulation but mainly 
with utility-owned assets—transmission and generation. Now they needed 
to be done with several new participants all of whom needed to interface on 
market rules instead of a cost-based system. The expected functions to be per­
formed by the new system operator needed to now include:
• Maintaining a reliable grid and thus ensuring the smooth flow of power 
from source to sink;
• Developing a level playing field for all market participants by enabling 
them to buy and sell power at market-based rates;
• Providing incentives for infrastructure expansion either in generation 
or transmission by sending appropriate price signals to the market par­
ticipant;
• Providing for market-based mechanisms to purchase real-time energy 
through a balancing (or other type of) market;
• Ensuring adequate sources of ancillary services and compensating them 
at market-based rates.

52 
Electric System Operations  
4.1  A Brief Look at the History of Deregulation in the United States
The first phase of competition in the U.S. electric utility industry began with 
the 1978 enactment of the Public Utility Regulatory Policy Act (PURPA). This 
legislation required established utilities to purchase power from independent 
generators at prices that equaled their “avoided costs,” or the cost to replace 
the energy if the utility needed to provide the energy with new construction. 
Although PURPA introduced the concept of competition into the generation 
of power, its passage was motivated primarily by a desire to encourage new and 
alternative energy-saving means of generation not by the government’s intent to 
deregulate or restructure the industry. 
In 1992, the Energy Policy Act (EPA) mandated that the industry move 
more rapidly toward a competitive market. It granted wholesale customers a 
choice of supplier while forcing the utilities to allow power transfer across their 
respective territories.
FERC selected Transmission Open Access (as described in Order 888/889) 
as the method to implement a competitive wholesale electric market. The ap­
proach chosen by FERC forced nondiscriminatory access to the transmission 
grid, allowing wholesale users open access to power across the grid. The objec­
tive of 888/889, according to FERC, was to provide better service and reduced 
rates to the end-user. As a result, utilities were required to focus on the busi­
ness side of energy delivery more than ever before. The focus moved from pure 
reliability to adding production accountability and the responsibility for their 
associated financial consequences.
The FERC mandate from orders 888/889 for the electric utility industry 
had no historical precedent even when compared with the deregulation of the 
U.S. airline, gas, and telecommunications industries. The breadth of scope and 
the time allowed for implementation were substantially more aggressive than 
for the other deregulated industries. Even the word deregulation when applied 
to the change brought about by the FERC order only partially explained what 
was happening. 
A more precise definition for this change could be found by examining 
a process with similar goals and intent that was taking place in Australia, the 
United Kingdom, and New Zealand around the same time. These countries had 
identified the process as “disaggregation”—the breaking down of the traditional 
vertical boundaries that once bound all entities involved in the production, 
transport, and delivery of power into one single organization. This breakup in 
Australia and New Zealand was taking a more consistent form; the separation 
of the entities involved in the production, transportation, and delivery of power 
into functionally separate units. Arguably, this better described the restructur­
ing of the traditional electric utility industry into a more universal model. In 
the United States, it is fair to say that instead of creating a fully deregulated or 

 
Impact of Deregulation on System Operations 
53
disaggregated electric utility industry, it actually ended up creating a patchwork 
with full deregulation and RTOs in some parts of the country only. In other 
parts of the country, vertically integrated utilities still exist with functional sepa­
ration built into the organization and no RTOs in others. Some locations like 
ERCOT went all the way into retail markets, thereby creating markets in a 
whole different scale there.
While Orders 888 and 889 have been credited with getting the industry 
moving towards electricity deregulation there have been other orders and key 
actions that have contributed to keeping the momentum in the right direction. 
Analyzing the full time of the changes in the utility industry would require 
one to go all the way back to the passing of PUHCA in 1935, long considered 
one of the more significant pieces of industrial legislation passed in the United 
States. Understanding the time line from then on is important to understand 
both the legislative calendar as well as the important events that happened along 
the way that lead to where the United States now finds itself (see Table 4.1). 
Other countries may not have gone through similar time lines or steps but 
over time the United States learned from the mistakes of these other countries 
and vice versa. From a deregulation perspective, early efforts in California both 
duplicated some of the successes and repeated some of the mistakes that were 
experienced in the U.K. market opening.
4.2  The New Participants and Their Activities
The splitting of the vertically integrated utilities happened with some antici­
pated set of by-products. The process resulted in the creation of a significant 
number of new participants from (1) other parts of the energy business (in the 
beginning mainly from the gas industry because they had deregulated prior 
to electricity), (2) restructured utilities branching out from their traditional 
geographic service area, and (3) the financial services industry. They brought 
specific resources to produce electricity better, more efficient methods for serv­
ing existing load, and new business techniques to manage risk. As the process 
continued, this area is still evolving especially as we find ourselves in the throes 
of increased potential for retail level deregulations. All participants—new and 
old—are continuing to become more aggressive and focused on success in this 
competitive market.
Figure 4.1 provides an insight into the new players who have emerged on 
every segment of the utility-energy value chain. Some of the new entities that 
would have been unthinkable prior to deregulation are players like independent 
transmission companies [1], and utility transcos [2].
Since the onset of deregulation, the traditional vertically integrated utility 
has been facing the most dramatic change. Prior to deregulation, it managed the 

54 
Electric System Operations  
Table 4.1
Historical Time Line of Actions in the United States Leading to Deregulation*
Landmark Ruling/
Law
Date/
Year
Brief Description
PUHCA
1935
The Public Utility Holding Company Act is passed. The Federal Power 
Act is passed. The Securities and Exchange Commission is established. 
The Bonneville Power Administration is established.
PURPA
1978
The Public Utilities Regulatory Policies Act (PURPA) is passed, and ends 
utility monopoly over generation.
Energy Policy Act
1992
The National Energy Policy Act is passed.
Order No. 888
April 24, 
1996
Transmission Open Access. Promoting Wholesale Competition Through 
Open Access Non-discriminatory Transmission Services by Public 
Utilities; Recovery of Stranded Costs by Public Utilities and Transmitting 
Utilities (Final Rule). 
Order No. 889 
April 24, 
1996
OASIS: Open Access Same-Time Information System (formerly Real- 
Time Information Networks) and Standards of Conduct (Final Rule). 
ISO New England begins 
operation
1997
ISO New England begins operation (first ISO). New England Electric sells 
power plants (first major plant divestiture).
California opens market 
and ISO
1998
California opens market and ISO. Scottish Power (UK) to buy Pacificorp, 
first foreign takeover of US utility. National (UK) Grid then announces 
purchase of New England Electric System.
Electricity marketed on 
Internet
1999
Order No. 2000 (Complete 
Version) 
» Part 1 of 4 
» Part 2 of 4 
» Part 3 of 4 
» Part 4 of 4 
December 
20, 1999
Regional Transmission Organization (RTO). The final rule requires 
all public utilities that own, operate or control interstate electric 
transmission to file by October 15, 2000, a proposal for a Regional 
Transmission Organization (RTO), or, alternatively, a description of any 
efforts made by the utility to participate in an RTO, the reasons for 
not participating and any obstacles to participation, and any plans for 
further work toward participation. The RTOs will be operational by 
December 15, 2001 (Final Rule). 
The largest blackout in 
North American history
2003
Leaves nearly 50 million people without power in the northeastern 
United States and eastern Canada, some for as long as four days. A 
government report estimates the cost of the outage at between $4 
billion and $10 billion in the United States alone. 
Congress passes the 
Energy Policy Act of 2005
2005
The act includes repeal of PUHCA, which supporters claim will lead 
to greater investment in utilities. The act also creates a mandatory 
reliability organization with the power to impose fines on utilities. 
In July 2006 the government appoints the industry’s existing self-
regulatory body, NERC, to be the new, higher-powered reliability 
watchdog under the ultimate authority of the Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission (FERC).
Order No. 667-A (RM05-
32-001)
April 24, 
2006
Repeal of the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 and Enactment 
of the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2005 (Final Rule). 
Order No. 890
(RM05-17-000 and RM05-
25-000) 
February 
16, 2007
Preventing Undue Discrimination and Preference in Transmission Service 
(Final Rule).
Order No. 729
(RM08-19-000, RM09-5-
000 and RM06-16-005)
November 
24, 2009
Mandatory Reliability Standards for the Calculation of Available Transfer 
Capability, Capacity Benefit Margins, Transmission Reliability Margins, 
Total Transfer Capability, and Existing Transmission Commitments and 
Mandatory Reliability Standards for the Bulk-Power System (Final Rule).
Order No. 745 
(RM10-17-000) 
March 15, 
2011
Demand Response Compensation in Organized Wholesale Energy 
Markets (Final Rule).
*Most information has been taken from FERC Web site Major Orders & Regulations, http://ferc.gov/legal/maj-ord-reg.
asp?new=sc3.

 
Impact of Deregulation on System Operations 
55
entire business of marketing energy, obtained fuel for the generating plants, and 
generated, transmitted, and distributed energy all within a vertically integrated 
corporate structure. With the onset of deregulation, most utilities have needed 
to make extensive modifications to their structures and other companies, many 
of whom were already involved in the production or marketing of energy are 
slowly extend their business reach into this traditional arena. The changes in 
traditional vertically integrated utilities can be summarized as follows:
• Creation of utility holding companies to be able to better manage a 
combination of business units, some which are regulated by FERC, 
some by state PUCs, and some completely unregulated.
• Full functional separation of the generation business unit from the core 
utility. The utility’s wholesale trading arm also moves with this business 
unit because they can now buy and sell in the open market where there 
is an RTO or not. This business  for the most part is unregulated.
• Separation of the T&D business units into either one or two separate 
business units. The two do not have to be completely separate as would 
be the case with the generation business unit. This business unit(s) will 
need to treat the generation/trading business unit at arm’s length and 
exactly the same as any other utility generation company, Independent 
power producer or other sources of nonutility generation. This unit will 
also still be fully regulated through FERC and state PUCs as appropri­
ate. 
• Retail and customer service still for the most part stays with the regu­
lated T&D entities. An exception to this has occurred in states with 
full retail choice like Pennsylvania and Texas where independent retail 
companies have operated for several years.  
Figure 4.1  Change in utility energy chain participants due to deregulation.

56 
Electric System Operations  
Beyond the traditional utility, companies like independent power pro­
ducers (IPPs) and other generation companies are very active in the generation 
arena once solely the providence of utilities. ISOs and regional transmission 
groups (RTGs) are now the unbiased controllers of the transmission system in 
areas where they have jurisdiction.
4.2.1  Summary Description of the Participants and How They Interact
The list of participants of participants in the deregulated market are many and 
their interactions can get quite complex. Figure 4.3 provides a high-level view 
of these interactions with the RTO at the center of the action.  As we analyze 
the participants, it is important to note that not all of them will be independent 
companies—they could be business units within one company.
• RTO/ISO: A new entity with the primary responsibility of ensuring 
short-term and long-term reliability of grid operations. To ensure fair 
access to the transmission system, its management and control is com­
pletely independent of generation entities and any other market par­
ticipant. Examples include Pennsylvania Jersey Maryland Power Pool 
(PJM), Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) and the New 
York Independent System Operator (NYISO), Independent System 
Operator of New England (ISO-NE), California Independent System 
Operator (CAISO), Southwest Power Pool (SPP), and Midwest Inde­
pendent System Operator (MISO). There are also several of these in 
Canada and in other countries.
• Vertically integrated utility: Like a full-service store that can offer one or 
more of the following functions: generation, transmission, distribution 
and retail, all under a holding company mechanism. 
• Generator: Any entity that generates electric power and feeds it into the 
grid. 
• IPP: An independent (nonutility affiliated) generator of energy and 
therefore a seller.
• Power marketer/broker: An entity which buys/sells energy and transmis­
sion services. With a few exceptions, this entity typically does not own 
generation/transmission facilities.
• Transmission asset owner: Owns or controls facilities used for the trans­
mission of power. Can sometimes also be responsible for the short-term 
reliability of grid operations. Examples can include a vertically integrat­
ed utility, or an independent transmission company. 

 
Impact of Deregulation on System Operations 
57
Figure 4.2  Market informational flow.

58 
Electric System Operations  
Figure 4.3  Operational information flow.

 
Impact of Deregulation on System Operations 
59
• Transmission user (TU): A transmission user buys the rights to transfer 
energy (from the seller to the buyer) through the transmission provider’s 
transmission lines.
• Distributed Asset Owner: Owns, operates, and maintains distribution 
level substations and equipment. The interface to the small-to-medium 
customers that is ultimately responsible for the “obligation to serve” and 
may stay regulated much like the local telephone company.
• Wholesale customer: The role of the consumer cannot be excluded from 
this equation since the large consumers will (and some already are) play­
ing a major role in buying and selling power. They are generally trans­
mission level end use customers (e.g., large commercial or industrial 
load).
• Retail customer: Distribution level end-use customer (e.g., residential, 
small commercial).
• Competitive retailer: Retail customer interface. Responsible for arranging 
physical delivery and conducting commercial transactions with end-use 
customers but are not a part of a utility. Many terms like energy ser­
vice provider (ESP), load serving entity (LSE), or retail energy provider 
(REP) have been used in different markets for this role.
• Wholesale energy merchant: Similar to ESP (above), but does not deal 
with retail customers.
• Scheduling coordinator: Responsible for creating and submitting bal­
anced schedules and ancillary services requirements (provisions) to RTO 
and the OASIS [3]. Also responsible for tagging. Presently more appro­
priate to the ERCOT and California models. 
• Markets: Third-party responsible for forward markets matching supply/
demand, including energy and ancillary services and FTR auctions if 
appropriate. Can be a separate entity or run by the RTO.
• Control area or balancing authority: An electric system or systems, bound­
ed by interconnection metering and telemetry, capable of controlling 
generation to maintain its interchange schedule with other control areas 
and contributing to frequency regulation of the interconnection. Where 
RTOs do not exist, this role is still performed by some organization who 
has the authority and responsibility to run a balancing market and ensure 
enough ancillary services are available for the system to run efficiently. 
Each of these entities has a different set of roles to play in the deregulated 
environment.

60 
Electric System Operations  
4.3  Architectural Discussion
Figure 4.4 [4] presents the various system operations functions in an RTO 
grouped together in an architectural view. The capabilities are grouped and sub­
grouped to appropriatley identify their areas of impact. The capabilities shaded 
in gray are the ones that are either completely new or have changed significantly 
with the advent of deregulation. The others have also been impacted but to a 
lesser extent. 
As can be seen in the figure, they can be represented in several functional 
blocks, all of which reside within the system operations function. These blocks 
are:
1.	 Grid operations: This includes the subgroups of securing the grid, per­
forming real-time operations, and supporting real-time operations.
2.	 Market operations:Tthis includes the subgroups of facilitating the mar­
ket, performing forecast, performing scheduling of energy/ancillary 
services, and monitoring the market.
3.	 Participant operations: This includes the subgroups of managing the 
participants, managing communications with them, and managing 
contracts with them.
4.	 Commercial operations: This includes the subgroups of gathering and 
managing metered data and settling the market, which also includes 
the billing and associated dispute resolution capabilities. The metered 
data identified here is not to be confused with the AMI/Smart Meter 
data being discussed in other places. This is generally wholesale me­
tering aspect of the market to the extent that it impacts settling the 
market.
5.	 Managing the assets: Depending upon the type of RTO, this can in­
clude all the subgroups that have been listed here. In general this 
mainly includes the subgroup plan system enhancement. The other 
two subgroups build assets and maintain assets are mostly transmis­
sion owner capability subgroups and may leave some level of coordi­
nating function at the RTO level.
6.	 The two other capability groups of system administration and IT man­
agement and corporate services are very similar to other functions at a 
regular utility and not as impactful of system operations and so will 
not be discussed in any more detail. 
Let us now analyze the impacts of deregulation on system operations.
Grid operations: The main objective of this function is still network securi­
ty and grid control. That aspect has not changed much from what existed under 

 
Impact of Deregulation on System Operations 
61
Figure 4.4   Overall system operation architecture for an RTO.

62 
Electric System Operations  
system operations prior to the start of deregulation (see Figure 4.5). These func­
tions are still performed mainly by an EMS that is configered slightly different 
than that for a regular utility as opposed to a RTO. The changes are:
• SCADA control. RTOs are generally not allowed SCADA control of de­
vices in the field. This action is still performed by the transmission asset 
owner/operator. Similarly, the SCADA data comes from the transmis­
sion asset owner/operator through a potocol called ICCP [5].
• Calculate and update ATC and TTC. [6] Power system conditions, sys­
tem loading conditions, and the weather all have an impact on both the 
TTC and ATC. This calculation is performed fundamentally by appli­
cations within the EMS’s network applications and then posted on the 
OASIS system to ensure that all market participants are made aware of 
the information at the same time. 
• Manage congestion. While the system operator has always needed to 
solve problems of congestion, deregulation brought in new rules that 
governed which tools and mechanisms need to be applied when and 
how. Prior to deregulation, the system operator needed to run a program 
called unit commitment or security constrained unit commitment but 
as if moving the output of any generation had the same cost component 
to it. With deregulation, the paradigm changed towards more market 
forces, and in some jurisdictions they also needed to take into consid­
eration the locational marginal aspects of the loading and flows as well. 
While the mechanisms and tools are well defined in the market rules, 
the actual levers in terms of which resources to move would be now pro­
vided to the system operator by market operations.
Market operations: This is a completely new set of capabilities that came in 
to the control room after deregulation was implemented and most of it was as 
a result of managing the market (see Figure 4.6). For a typical utility many of 
the functions listed here may not apply—they apply more to a RTO or an ISO. 
However, in places where a market (outside of jurisdictions of PJM, MISO, 
SPP, ERCOT, ISO-NE, NYISO, and CAISO) does not exist, the system opera­
tor is expected to run some basic market functions to run a balancing market 
[7]. A key part of the balancing authority is also to provide generation support 
where market signals are sent to all generators participating. In this section, 
we will only focus on those portions that are either perfomed by or impact the 
system operator.
• Performing forecast. While forecasting load and ancillary service was im­
portant even prior to deregulation, the biggest difference came from the 

 
Impact of Deregulation on System Operations 
63
Figure 4.5  Grid operations modifications.

64 
Electric System Operations  
Figure 4.6  Market operations impacts to the grid operator.

 
Impact of Deregulation on System Operations 
65
fact that this forecast would not be used to set the market in terms of 
how much would need to be purchased in actuals and how much in 
reserves. All of this also impacts market participants because once the 
market clears for them, there is a revenue implications on the outcomes. 
Accurately predicting these values based on system, weather, and other 
conditions is important.
• Facilitating the market. Different jurisdictions run different mar­
kets based on diferent rules. Some states like Texas also run a retail 
market at the same time. Most run a locational marginal pricing-
based market as well as a combination of a day-ahead, day-of, and 
real-time markets for energy and ancillary services. The actual in­
ner workings of a market are not that relevant from a system op­
ertor perspective with the exception that they all take the cost of al­
leviating congestion into consideraton as they clear the market.
  When there is no market in a jurisdiction such as in the Northwestern 
United States, much of the energy transactions are done through bile­
ateral trades between specific parties and this entire process is facilitated 
through a balancing authority who is held responsible to ensure that 
sufficient supply has been made available to service the load. The bal­
ancing authority also operates a balancing energy market to ensure that 
appropriate reserves and ancillary rvices are made. 
• Performing scheduling. The outcome from a market clearing process are 
a set of energy and ancillary services schedules that are fed to the system 
operator who then uses them to manage and operate the grid efficiently. 
As grid conditions change during the day, they are reevaluated in the 
real-time market and then readjusted.
Commercial operations: This represents another new set of functions in a 
system and depending on whether the operator functions as a normal transmis­
sion/distribution operator (see Figure 4.7), RTO/ISO, or a balancing authority, 
some of these capabilities will still need to performed either for other partici­
pants n the market or for themselves to perform a shadow settlement of the 
market operator to ensure that they are able to collect on what is due to them. 
However, these functions have no impact to the system operator or vice versa.
Participant interface: This is the last of the set of totally new capabilities 
that got introduced into the system operator function due to deregulation (see 
Figure 4.8).
Much of these capabilities will only be needed in a system operator if they 
are functioning as a RTO/ISO or a balancing authority. When the system is also 
performing those functions, the need to manage participants and contracts with 
them becomes an important part of the system operator. 

66 
Electric System Operations  
Figure 4.7  Commercial operations in a system operator.

 
Impact of Deregulation on System Operations 
67
Figure 4.8  Participant interface functions in a system operator.

68 
Electric System Operations  
4.4  Conclusion
Deregulation brought along some of the most dramatic impact on system op­
erations. As can be seen in this chapter, much of it impacted transmission sys­
tem operations with the exception of places like Texas, which also went deep in 
to retail choice where there are some impacts to distribution operations as well.
The key changes can be summarized as:
• Brought a commercial mindset into the control center with focus on 
settlements and the need to perform financial transactions, which had a 
significant impact on their utility’s bottom line.
• Brought a customer service mindset into the control center because of 
the need to deal with players who were not employees of the same util­
ity, were not of a reliability mindset like themselves, and who very often 
had very different corporate objectives than a typical utility. Employees 
of these companies could sometimes even be competitors and so all the 
interactions needed to be strictly process driven, transparent, and audit­
able.
• The move towards making transmission tracking and availability trans­
parent (OASIS) required a real Chinese wall-like separation between 
core control center functions and transmission functions, which also 
needed to be separate from generation and trading functions, required a 
major redesign of all of these capabilities in the control center or needed 
a single utility to buy more than one set of system operations technologi­
cal solutions. 
• As defined above, core functions like generation dispatch and unit com­
mitment that used to be all cost-based now became market-based, lead­
ing to very different patterns in how generation was either dispatched, 
made available, or compensated.
As retail choice becomes more prevalent, it is possible that these changes 
will also contine to extend from transmission into distribution operations.
Endnotes
[1]	 An independent transmission company (ITC) is basically an entity that would operate as 
a stand-alone, for-profit transmission business. FERC is encouraging ITCs to function in 
this marketplace in conjunction with RTOs that meet the requirements of Order 2000.
[2]	 A utility transco is basically the IOU spinning off its transmission business unit into an 
independent company. AEP transmission performed this action more recently in 2010.

 
Impact of Deregulation on System Operations 
69
[3]	 The Open Access Same-Time Information System (OASIS) is an Internet-based system 
that was originally developed in 1996 in response to the mandate of FERC orders 888 and 
889. The intent of this system (as the name implies) was to make transmission services 
available to all wholesale market participants at the same time. This was an important 
movement because for the first time, even the vertically integrated utility that owned the 
transmission line needed to go to the same site to reserve for their transmission service 
needs in the same way as a merchant generator. By reserving transmission services, anyone 
could use (or resell) transmission services to move their energy from source to consumer.
[4]	 The picture presents more of an architectural view. Depending upon whether the entity is 
an RTO, vertically integrated utility, a disaggregated utility (as in Texas), each version of 
system operations will have more or less emphasis on the various capabilities either old or 
new.
[5]	 The Inter-Control Center Communications Protocol (ICCP) is a very specific commu­
nications protocol used by utilities worldwide to exchange data over the wide area net­
works in a secure and real-time manner. This data protocol is now used by a combination 
of utility control centers, RTO/ISOs, utilities, regional control centers, and nonutility 
generators.
[6]	 TTC stands for total transmission capability, which is the total transfer capacity of the 
transmission corridors available for the wholesale market to take advantage of in order to 
move their generation supply to the locations of the load. This information is posted on 
the OASIS system and wholesale traders make reservations requests for their needs. ATC 
is the available transmission capability, which is the TTC minus the amount of capacity 
that has already been reserved.
[7]	 Electricity load fluctuates constantly, and any changes in load demand that are not offset 
by a change in resource schedules (in essence, under- or overscheduling) require the bal­
ancing authority to meet the demand by purchasing electricity from generators or by com­
pensating those to reduce. In either case, the expense is recouped from the load-serving 
entities. This additional power (or reduction in power) is purchased in the “balancing” 
market. The balancing authority determines a market-clearing price every 15 minutes that 
it will pay to generators that sell energy in the balancing market. The market-clearing price 
is the price paid for the last megawatt procured in the bid-stack for balancing energy and 
is paid to all generators providing this service.


71
5
Impact of Smart/Modern Grid on System 
Operations
Intelligent electric networks are defined as a state of increased awareness in a 
network and its ability to respond in real time, leading to better operational 
effectiveness for the utility and an improved experience for the customer. It 
represents a complete transformation of today’s electric grid.
The electricity system in the United States received renewed attention 
after the August 2003 blackout that affected more than 50 million customers 
across the Northeast United States and caused billions of dollars of damage to 
the U.S. economy. This blackout became a call to action as the event exposed 
the United States’ dependency on a vulnerable infrastructure. This situation 
was found to be unacceptable and changes were needed to ensure increased 
safety and reliability across the system.
The smart grid is one of the results of that call to action.
The utility industry is embarking on a transition whose end isn’t fully un­
derstood. That uncertainty is due at least in part to the fact many utilities and 
regulators aren’t yet comfortable relying on smart grid technologies as a sub­
stantive resource planning tool. This isn’t stopping utilities and vendors from 
making those investments, but companies and regulators are questioning the 
assumptions used in smart grid investment planning. Some analysts point out 
that experience teaches that the more complex a system becomes, the more frag­
ile it becomes.  Many people in this mature, bricks-and-mortar industry gener­
ally distrust modern technologies as a resource planning solution. They think 
we are putting too many eggs into the smart-grid basket, and we will regret it 
as we did our heavy reliance on nuclear and gas during their boom periods in 
recent decades.

72 
Electric System Operations  
However, the underlying problem has not gone away. As industrialized so­
cieties continue growing, worldwide electricity demand is estimated to double 
by the year 2030, and the minor inconveniences that customers currently notice 
in the power grid will increase, becoming more pronounced and problematic.
In addition, the notion of expanding power capacity simply by building 
new power generators cannot be offered as a reasonable alternative, as obtain­
ing building permits for these new facilities is increasingly difficult. In addition, 
consumers and stakeholders are pressing for productivity increases to accom­
modate demand growth and rising capital costs. Users are expecting quality, 
reliability, and power production increases on the one hand, while at the same 
time demanding that the electric power industry reduce or mitigate its carbon 
emissions and increase energy efficiency. Managing the grid will become more 
complex with implementation of state renewable portfolio standards (RPS), 
which will require that utilities use more renewable sources of energy.
Figure 5.1 presents a futuristic conceptual look at the smart grid and 
how it could impact the generation, delivery, and consumption of energy. As 
is visualized in this picture, in the future we could foresee a combination of 
diverse energy sources both at the bulk/wholesale level as well as at the distribu­
tion level, delivering power through a smart infrastructure to a combination 
of smart homes and smart buildings. This future could hold a combination of 
energy sources such as hydrogen (fuel cells) or biofuels. We could envision grid-
scale storage making a play, supported by distributed storage at the community 
level such as community energy storage. At the retail end smart homes and 
smart buildings become willing participants in the grid of the future through a 
combination of automated and semiautomated control of their consumption. 
It must be noted that much of this is in a pilot-like stage and being proven in 
various jurisdictions around the world. The pilots are trying to prove their ef­
fectiveness both from functionality as well as economic viewpoints. Putting the 
delivery system in the middle gets to the heart of this picture because the system 
operator of the future will need to be able to manage this diversity of supply 
and consumption and at the same time provide the flexibility to the consumers. 
The key drivers for a smart grid (in addition the 2003 blackout), for ex­
ample, are:
• Customer expectations. Customers are demanding higher levels of service. 
Utilities need to ensure that their service at least matches, and perhaps 
surpasses, the standards set by other industries.
• Workforce skills shortage. The utility workforce is aging. It is anticipated 
that the industry could lose half its skilled workers in the next 5 to 10 
years to retirement.

 
Impact of Smart/Modern Grid on System Operations 
73
Figure 5.1  A conceptual view of the smart grid. (© Accenture. Reprinted with permission.)

74 
Electric System Operations  
• Infrastructure replacement. Aging physical infrastructures will require ex­
tensive replacement, and those costs are expected to outstrip historical 
capital spending rates by more than $14 billion over the next 10 years. 
There is growing recognition that utilities need to be smarter in imple­
menting replacements.
• Environmental constraints. There is a concerted movement toward RPS 
and reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. This fact, com­
bined with rising fuel costs and rising load, is making the delivery of 
power more expensive and difficult.
• Technology. Technology costs continue to decline, and performance of 
technologies available to deploy continues to improve.
All of these factors [1] necessitate the implementation of a smart grid 
capable of monitoring the transmission and distribution and able to regulate 
transmission and distribution when the smart grid senses disruptions in the 
system. The implementation of a smart grid, along with an overall demand 
management system, will help provide the lower-carbon-emissions future that 
has become a necessity in terms of both our current standards and future energy 
requirements.
5.1  Smart Grid Changes That Impact System Operations
The key changes on the utility side (see Figure 5.2) as a result of the smart 
grid are basically invisible to the average customer. The customer would see 
the results of these changes, which is an improvement in the quality of service. 
On the transmission and distribution side, sensors and digital relays are being 
installed on power lines to enable utilities to operate systems with greater ef­
Figure 5.2  Conceptual view of distributed energy delivery to a home. (© Modern Grid Solu­
tions.)

 
Impact of Smart/Modern Grid on System Operations 
75
ficiency and reliability. Today’s SCADA systems, for example, typically provide 
data on the state of transmission or distribution every 2 to 4 seconds. PMUs 
are being added to the transmission system that can sample voltage, current, 
and many other variables several times a second or faster—giving utilities and 
system operators a far more accurate view of the health of the grid. A broad 
deployment of synchrophasors are planned to be used in a new kind of systems 
called WAMS to become an early warning system to help halt or prevent power 
surges before they develop into massive blackouts.
Similarly in a distribution system, other sensors and controls like IVVC, 
reclosers are being added to provide more visibility and control of the flow of 
energy and the state of the system in terms of quality of service to the customer.
These digital sensors and remote controls to the transmission and dis­
tribution system would make it smarter, greener, and more efficient, resulting 
in what is being called as an energy Internet. The expectation is that this new 
system would be far more responsive, interactive, and transparent than today’s 
grid. It would also be able to cope with some of the other new changes that are 
being done to the grid—integrating new sources of renewable power, support 
charging of electric vehicles, provide information to consumers about their us­
age, and allow utilities to monitor and control their networks more effectively.
There are other smart-grid technologies that would be more visible to the 
customer. Probably most important would be the introduction of smart meters, 
which track electricity use in real time and can transmit that information back 
to the power company. Smart meters have been used by commercial and indus­
trial customers for decades, but in recent years are slowly becoming cheaper to 
support wider deployment.
5.2  Community Changes Impacting System Operations
The electric energy user community is also making several changes to their life 
styles that impact utility operations significantly through the need for smart 
grid technologies, as outlined below.
5.2.1  Proliferation of Distributed Generation, Renewable, and Community-Level 
Storage
New sources of localized generation sometimes supported by storage are making 
a slow and steady move into neighborhoods. Generation can either be home-
based gasoline or natural gas gensets, or could be of the renewable kind.  The 
most common generation of the renewable kind is solar PV cells and sometimes 
wind-powered. Storage can either be at the home or of the community energy 
storage (CES) [2] kind. 

76 
Electric System Operations  
Distributed generation or storage of any kind impacts distribution system 
operations in several ways. First, it brings in new sources of generation that 
could be somewhat unpredictable, leading to fluctuations in power quality to 
the customer and/or backflow to the grid. It also could also represent a safety 
and protection issue due to its ability to cause two-way power flow in a system 
that is basically designed for one-way power flow.
5.2.2  Advent of Electric Transportation
Electric cars and other similar forms of transportation are making their mark in 
our society (see Figure 5.3). Some key examples of these vehicles showing up in 
residential drive-ways include the Nissan Leaf, Toyota Prius PHEV, Chevy Volt, 
and others. As plug-in hybrids and all-electric vehicles become more popular, 
they will be added to households already stuffed with power-hungry devices 
ranging from big-screen TVs to electric dryers. Adding a plug-in car to the grid 
is equal to about a third of the load of a house [3].
The key issue from a system operations perspective is that these cars rep­
resent new load that tends to bunch up in some neighborhoods and can cause 
overloads of distribution lines. An equally important issue is associated with 
the life of distribution transformers at the local level. These transformers are 
designed to be used heavily during the daytime and cycle down in the night 
when the oil is used as the insulator and coolant for the transformer. If electric 
cars (that require charging at night) perform their activity for about 4 to 8 hours 
every night, the transformers will not have a chance to cool down—potentially 
leading to shorter run times, more replacement costs, and more outages. 
5.2.3  Introduction of Microgrids
Microgrids are slowly making their way into the modern grid, mainly showing 
up in industrial campuses, university campuses, and military bases. By their 
very definition, they are designed to either operate independently, bringing to­
gether a variety of sources of generation to service their load, or to be fully con­
nected into the grid.
This very feature that is their strength is also their complicating factor 
with respect to system operations. When connected to the electric grid, all of 
their fluctuations need to be handled by the system operator who is still re­
quired to deliver high-quality electric supply to them. Microgrids also present 
the complexity of bidirectional power flow that needs to be managed for the 
safety and reliability of the grid [4].

 
Impact of Smart/Modern Grid on System Operations 
77
Figure 5.3  An illustrative example of a home area network. (© Modner Grid Solutions.)

78 
Electric System Operations  
5.2.4  Introduction of Smart Appliances
Smart appliances [5] are on the cusp of transitioning from the development to 
commercialization. Appliance manufacturers are working with utilities to test 
various capabilities under different scenarios. It is anticipated that smart appli­
ances will have an acceptance curve somewhat similar to that of the “Energy 
Star” appliances. If that happens, then it is quite probable that percentages of 
smart appliances sold in the marketplace will slowly increase to become the 
default within the next 5 to 10 years (see Figure 5.3).
From a system operator perspective, the key here is to leverage smart ap­
pliances to significantly improve the stability and operational efficiency of the 
electrical grid with limited impact on the lives of energy users. The system 
operator’s ability to manage discrete device components to reduce energy con­
sumption at a moment in time allows him or her to offer load management 
option such as demand response programs. System operators need to have tools 
that allow them to take advantage of these mechanisms. 
5.3  So What Does This All Mean to the System Operator?
For the system operator, smart grid changes everything. The magnitude of 
change is very similar to the types of changes that happened during deregula­
tion. Some of the key changes are outlined below.
• Given the plethora of sensors and controls, there is expected to be a 
paradigm shift from a centralized command and control mechanism to 
an advanced network of both centralized and distributed integrated sys­
tems that can make intelligent decisions.
• At the transmission level, the advent of PMUs is bringing in new tools 
that provide far more information to the system operator both at the 
predictive and at the reactive level. It is anticipated that transmission will 
still stay centralized.
• Distribution system operations will move from a paper and pin version 
of system control from back rooms of utility service centers to more 
formal command and control centers using systems called DMS, OMS, 
SCADA, GIS, and others. It is anticipated that distribution will convert 
itself into a combination of centralized and distributed control mecha­
nism.
• The system operator needs to move from dispatching a centralized set 
of controllable generators to a combination of centralized and locally 
distributed generation sources, some of which are controllable and some 
of which (like wind and solar) are not (Figure 5.4). 

 
Impact of Smart/Modern Grid on System Operations 
79
• Improved sensors, which can instantly observe the state of the grid and 
transmit the information to different locations.
• Entry of new technologies (like virtual power plants), which through 
the use of smart grid technologies (like AMI, Demand Response, and 
other controls) is able to provide virtual power and improve the effi­
ciency of the overall system.
• More automated processes supported by trained people.
• Adding a whole new dimension of cybersecurity and privacy to opera­
tions. Given the plethora of sensors, smart meters, and similar products 
that are anticipated to be added on to the network (and whose data may 
be coming into the control center, some of which will be controlled by 
the system operator), the area of cybersecurity is getting a whole new 
look. For the first time, utilities are looking at large-scale usage of public 
networks for the purposes of communicating with these new devices. 
Cybersecurity standards are being developed and should become normal 
and accepted in the near future. Similar to the focus on cyber security, 
privacy is becoming an issue primarily due to the focus on demand re­
sponse and the ability of the utility (or other entities like aggregators) 
to go onto the premise and control loads inside. Privacy advocates are 
demanding increased levels of attention on the use and widespread avail­
ability of personally identifiable information (PII) and are working on 
developing standards for them as well. 
Figure 5.4  A control center view of the smart grid. (Source: EPRI.)

80 
Electric System Operations  
These changes will breathe a tremendous amount of new life into electric 
system operations and make the operators more capable of making better deci­
sions faster and cheaper.
5.4  Impact of Smart Grid on New Systems
Possibly the biggest impact of all these areas is in the introduction of new sys­
tems into distribution operations. Prior to these systems coming on, distribu­
tion operations was either the domain of customer operations or field opera­
tions and the main focus was on trouble-call management, which has been long 
considered the precursor of outage management. Introduction of new sensors 
and controls, AMI and its associated head-end systems, more SCADA into the 
distribution end of the system, new programs like demand response and time-
of-use rates have required utilities to make distribution operations into a more 
formal set of operational functions—and these have all been supported by new 
sets of systems, which will be introduced next.
5.4.1  Meter Data Management System
Meter Data Management (MDM) is a system designed to store and manage 
data collected from electric meters. Originally, the data was collected manually 
and entered, but with the advent of smart meters, this activity is now done au­
tomatically. The data consists of voltage, current, harmonics and so on. Primar­
ily, usage data is brought in from the head-end servers that serve as the main 
collectors of the data from the meters.  
The MDM system imports the data, validates it, checks it for errors, and 
then processes it before making it available for billing and analysis. As smart 
meters are becoming more prevalent, the data contained in an MDM system is 
used for far more than customer billing; it is also used for outage management, 
asset management, and analysis of utility operations.
With anticipated increase in the number of meters in service supported 
by better communications, it can be expected that these meters could end up 
sending their data to the head-end system more often. As these changes occur, 
system operators are anticipating that this could be an opportunity for meter 
data to be routed to the DMS as well to provide better and more complete abil­
ity to observe the system in more detail. 
5.4.2  Outage Management System 
A significant portion of the North America’s distribution networks are still not 
telemetered. As a result, utilities depend on customers to report outages; cus­
tomers need to call in and report their outages. An OMS collects, analyzes calls, 

 
Impact of Smart/Modern Grid on System Operations 
81
and determines probable device failures and/or probable outage locations. Us­
ing this information, utilities are able to reduce the time to identify, prioritize 
and resolve network incidents, and effectively communicate with their custom­
ers and regulators.
From a value perspective, OMSs allow the utility to reduce the duration 
of outages (as measured by SAIDI and CAIDI), improve customer communi­
cation before, during, and after outages, and improve operational efficiency by 
reducing overtime, dispatch centers, and storm staffing.
OMSs had their humble beginnings in trouble-call management systems 
(TCMSs), which were created to process the inbound avalanche of calls that 
follow a power outage and to manage the outbound communication of that 
same information to field crews, customers, stakeholders, and others who re­
quire it. As more and more telemetry was available from systems like SCADA, 
trouble-call systems became more complex and developed into OMSs.
In several implementations, MDM systems are being integrated with 
OMS systems so that outages can be more automatically identified instead of 
solely relying on customers to call and report their outages.
5.4.3  Geographic Information System
GISs are designed to capture, store, manipulate, analyze, manage, and present 
all types of geographically referenced data. In the simplest terms, GIS is the 
merging of cartography, statistical analysis, and database technology.
Fundamental to a GIS is in its ability to store and correlate disparate types 
of data like type of device, ID, location (GPS coordinates), characteristics, and 
connectivity with their geospatial rendering. While this type of information 
was not that important when trying to model and support transmission systems 
(due to fewer components), it is tremendously important to support distribu­
tion systems.
From a system operations perspective, the GIS is a fundamental system 
that is designed (among other things) to deliver as-built static and physical 
data to OMSs, DMSs, and other similar systems that depend on an accurate 
representation of various power system components in the field and their 
connectivity.
5.4.4  Distribution Management System 
A DMS comprises a base SCADA system that is equipped with additional plan­
ning and operations functions for the utility’s subtransmission and distribution 
feeder systems. DMS applications are highly data-intensive. This is due to the 
greater number of power system elements and spatial information to be in­
cluded in displays, analysis functions, and databases.

82 
Electric System Operations  
The DMS enables distribution system operators to manage their respon­
sibilities of monitoring and operating the grid, coordinate clearances, create 
switching orders, and support emergency and storm management. As a system, 
the DMS for the most part is the distribution equivalent of the EMS, which 
was developed for transmission. The advent of smart grid has made the DMS 
the cornerstone of the system operator’s response for everything that the smart 
grid can throw at the utility.
5.4.5  Distributed Energy Management System
As DEMSs are getting more and more accepted in the industry, an important 
gap has been identified by most utilities and vendors. This is the gap between 
the distribution tap-end transformer and the customer: With so much going on 
at the customer end of the system under the auspices of the smart grid, new ca­
pabilities are needed at this end. For lack of an industry-accepted name for this 
system, we have called it a distributed energy management system or DEMS. A 
typical DEMS system does not need to perform the full suite of power systems 
applications but has a combination of SCADA interfaces supported by one 
or more optimization mechanisms to support specific applications. We also 
believe that this system could also be a path for those (generally) smaller utili­
ties that either do not need the sophistication of a full-fledged DMS or cannot 
afford one.
Two major application suites stand out from a DEMS perspective. It is 
important to note that it could either reside independently, be a part of the 
DMS, or be integrated into the DMS.
5.4.5.1  Demand Response Management
There is a need to track various demand response (DR) programs and the cus­
tomers who have signed up for them. The system would enable communica­
tion of the various DR triggers to the participating customers and track their 
responses, all in one place. This system will perform all actions required by the 
DR programs. The data collection and the associated analytics tend to be an 
added bonus in these systems with a possible outcome being reports that can 
track compliance to the program requirements and their effectiveness. 
5.4.5.2  Distributed Renewables Management
As energy storage mechanisms, electric vehicles charging, renewables, and other 
forms of distributed generation proliferate, distribution operators see a need to 
track and manage them. Key to this application suite is the ability to track their 
generation/consumption, the different controls that can be sent to them, and 
the forecasting that would assist the system operator to manage the loading on 
the system appropriately.

 
Impact of Smart/Modern Grid on System Operations 
83
Endnotes
[1]	 Implementing a “smart grid” is becoming an increasingly common topic. At both the 
state/federal level and internationally, initiatives are under way to modernize the electric 
transmission and distribution system, and the discussion has extended beyond the tradi­
tional industry channels into the mainstream media. For many, the idea of a power system 
that can automatically provide for the needs of all stakeholders at all times is a compelling 
vision.
[2]	 [http://www.renewableenergyworld.com/rea/news/article/2010/05/taking-grid-energy-
storage-to-the-edge, “Taking Grid Energy Storage to the Edge,” an article by Brad Rob­
erts, S&C Electric. 
	
  The term community energy storage (CES) defines an approach where smaller pack­
ages of battery energy storage, typically 25 kW with one to two hours of back-up time, are 
deployed in neighborhoods on street corners or along backyard utility rights-of-way.
	
  The CES units are connected on the low-voltage side of the utility transformer and 
protect the final 120/240-volt circuits to individual customers. Placing a utility-controlled 
device at the edge of the grid allows for the ultimate in voltage control and service reli­
ability. Meeting this challenge of even greater control of voltage at the point of customer 
use is a major departure for traditional utility system control philosophy, but it’s needed 
to deal with a rapidly changing customer load profile. While customers are adding more 
sophisticated electronic loads (computers, appliances, etc.) requiring greater service reli­
ability, new, even larger loads—such as plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) charging 
units—will be added randomly in the grid.
[3]	 The Nissan Leaf is a 3.3-kW load. Industry averages for PHEVs and BEVs of 14 kWh and 
22 kWh batteries result in recharge times of 4.25 and 8 hours, respectively.
[4]	 From the Galvin Electricity Initiative:  Microgrids are modern, small-scale versions of the 
centralized electricity system. They achieve specific local goals, such as reliability, carbon 
emission reduction, diversification of energy sources, and cost reduction, established by 
the community being served.  Like the bulk power grid, smart microgrids generate, dis­
tribute, and regulate the flow of electricity to consumers, but do so locally.
[5]	 A smart appliance is one that is capable of modifying its energy consumption based on 
price (or other) signals from the utility. It has an embedded microprocessor that enables 
it to have a two-way communication with the utility, sending information on energy con­
sumption and cost. Further, the integration of the various smart appliances into a home 
area network (HAN) as illustrated in Figure 5.4, enables greater monitoring, control, and 
optimization of end-use load.


85
6
Business of System Operations
6.1  Anatomy of a Utility
An electric utility is in the primary business of generating power (or buying it), 
transmitting it to locations where it is needed and delivering power to the cus­
tomer. Generation, transmission, and distribution tend to be large asset inten­
sive areas of operation requiring large amounts of capital spending and manage­
ment. As explained earlier, the utility spends money to build the assets (subject 
to regulatory approval) and recovers the money from the customer proportional 
to the amount of energy consumed at the premise. 
The core operations (see Figure 6.1) of a utility are generally spread 
around its main value chain that generally includes generation, transmission, 
and distribution (also known as T&D), and customer. Other functions, such as 
enterprise management and the enabling functions, while still being extremely 
important to the proper functioning of the utility are all supportive in nature.
While this chapter will focus on the T&D in general and system opera­
tions in specific, it is important to point to few key functions in a utility that 
tend to stand out whether they are at the enterprise level, enabling level, or at 
the core functionality level. They are IT, capital management and regulatory 
relations, and associated compliance monitoring.  
• IT. The typical utility is extremely IT-intensive with a unique combina­
tion of normal IT functions (like finance, ERP, HR/benefits) integrated 
with real-time operational systems (like EMS, DMS, SCADA) integrat­
ed with generation functions and energy trading functions. Regulations 
like FERC orders (e.g., 888/889) also bring in constraints such as who 

86 
Electric System Operations  
can get access to what information. All of this represents at best, an 
extremely complex IT scenario. This also brings an extra level of conser­
vatism that tends to bubble to the surface as utilities make changes and/
or replace them. 
• Capital management. As we have mentioned before, utilities tend to 
extremely capital-intensive companies. Building generating plants, hy­
droelectric dams, transmission and distribution lines, and substations is 
an expensive proposition that results in asset/capital budgets at utilities 
that tend to be in the billions of dollars annually. Managing these large 
capital budgets is a complex process in every utility.
• Regulatory relations and compliance monitoring. The capital budgets for 
the most part are approved through rate cases either with the state PUCs 
or FERC. As a result, this is another important core capability within 
a utility and not only exists at the corporate level but also at the core 
functionality level—generation, T&D, and the customer.
6.1.1  Generation Business
Generation, as we know, deregulated due to the release of FERC Orders 888 
and 889. As a result, even if the utility is vertically integrated, there is expected 
Figure 6.1  Core operations of a utility.

 
Business of System Operations 
87
to be a solid separation between generation and the rest of the utility. The 
generation business also represents a utility’s entry into the wholesale business. 
Core capabilities of a utility’s generation business include:
• Operating generating plants. Operating each generating plant can take up 
to several hundred people with varying expertise from generation opera­
tions to journeyman/lineman. These plants are of varying complexity 
from small combustion turbines (CTs), which could be unmanned and 
remotely operated, to large coal and nuclear-fired plants, which could 
involve complex operational and startup/shutdown requirements. 
• Wholesale markets. Generating plants offer their energy in the wholesale 
market and are thus exposed to vagaries of energy market fluctuations. 
To participate in these markets, they require access to physical and fi­
nancial hedging instruments and also the ability to play integrate and 
settle the market.
• Capital build programs. As explained earlier, generating plants can be 
large multiyear, multiphased activities that require a deep understanding 
of the capital/funding process both within the utility and externally. 
6.1.2  Customer
The customer is the only reason for the existence of the utility. The customer is 
critical to the very existence of the utility, since this is the person who consumes 
the product —electricity—created by the utility. The utility until now has held 
a monopoly on the relationship with the customer [1]. This monopoly means 
that to some extent of a jurisdiction, the traditional utility is the only entity 
that can supply power to a customer’s premise. The customer is bound by this 
relationship and hence purchases electricity from the utility and pays his or her 
bills on time. The utility for its part ensures power is delivered to the customer 
in a reliable manner with minimal outages. The key functions in the customer 
side of the business include:
• Managing customer interaction. Managing a call center is one of the 
most important parts of this capability. This capability is the only direct 
hands-on connection of the utility to the customer and represents in 
many ways the brand of the utility. Customers tend to call the utility for 
all kinds of issues associated with their bill, report outages, and so on.
• Managing core operations. Core operations of a utility from a customer 
perspective covers all the activities that lead to sending the bill to the 
customer. This is where the amount of the bill is calculated based on 

88 
Electric System Operations  
the various variables in the customer’s tariff. Meter data is handled here 
along with its storage.
• Manage customer programs. In any utility, there are always different pro­
grams associated with energy efficiency, demand response, social out­
reach, and so on. They need to be managed and their impacts measured 
and validated.
• Managing data insights and segmentation. The large amounts of data be­
ing stored in one place allows the customer capability to perform various 
kinds of analysis on the data. As the utilities enter the smart grid era, 
they are also looking at this data, cross-referencing the data to other 
demographic data that they can purchase to segment their customers 
appropriately and service them better. 
6.1.3  Transmission and Distribution
Over the last few years, while other areas of the utility like generation have also 
seen changes, the T&D area has demonstrated high levels of activity with a lot 
of changes. Everything from deregulation to smart grid has impacted the T&D 
area in major ways. The T&D area is also one of the businesses in a utility that 
tends to employ the largest number of people and so is one of the most expensive 
businesses to run. As a result, much of the changes that have happened here are 
the introduction of more automation both in the field as well as in the utility.
6.1.4  Anatomy of an RTO
RTOs and ISOs, which are responsible for the overall management of the en­
ergy market, regional reliability, and now even for coordination of the system 
expansion plans, have a lot of similarities with regular utilities and key capabili­
ties that are described in this chapter. However, as we saw in Chapter 4, RTOs 
and ISOs in general do not own any power system assets that will drive the 
need for large planning departments either in transmission or the distribution 
arena. The assets generally stay with the asset owner and do not transfer over. 
This aspect coupled with no direct SCADA control of the assets drives a differ­
ent kind of management and business capability structure from that of a typical 
investor-owned utility. Many of these differences will become more obvious in 
the following section.
6.2  T&D Operating Model
Even though the overall T&D capability has three main functions, they are at 
times divided into several subfunctions. The three main functions include:

 
Business of System Operations 
89
• System operations;
• Asset management;
• Work and resource management.
In this section, we present an electric T&D operating model that will 
demonstrate the interrelationships between these functions. The system opera­
tions function included in Figure 6.2 will be provided in more detail in Section 
6.3
Figure 6.2  T&D operating model.

90 
Electric System Operations  
6.2.1  Asset Management
Asset management focuses on defining the long- and short-term T&D asset 
strategy, defining work to be executed on the assets that systematically consider 
the needs of all stakeholders and also integrate this strategy with the business’ 
financial strategy (impact on ROR, free cash flow, etc.). Asset management also 
serves the asset owner by prioritizing capital and operations and maintenance 
(O&M) spending on the business through developing and monitoring strategic 
and operational asset KPIs [2] to monitor system performance. A GIS system 
tends to be one of the more important tools in their arsenal that needs to be­
come the fundamental repository of all asset information in the utility—what 
type of assets it is, what is its ID, where is its location, what are its characteris­
tics, who is it connected to, and the rendering on how the connection is made 
in the field (as built). 
The asset management capability is a significant core capability of the 
utility. As we have identified before, utilities are fundamentally asset manag­
ers and are focused on getting a regulated rate of return of their investment on 
the assets. The asset management capability is where that happens. The entire 
capital plan in the utility starts and ends with the asset manager. The entire 
planning (transmission, distribution, relaying and protection, automation) de­
partment resides within this capability. 
The system operator provides the asset manager with operational perfor­
mance information and smart automation requirements. In return, the asset 
manager provides to system operations the information on the assets and also 
the policies governing their use. The two groups of people work together in 
developing the short-, mid-, and long-term asset strategies and the planning 
aspects of T&D. 
6.2.2  Asset Owner
The asset owner capability is the front-end of the asset manager focusing mainly 
on the ownership aspects of the asset management. In this capability, the util­
ity is going into the capital markets to borrow money to make the investment, 
working with the regulatory people to ensure that it is indeed covered in the 
rate case for recovery and finally making sure of the depreciation aspects are ap­
propriately covered in the financial books. The asset owner also establishes the 
revenue requirement for the investment as well as developing the performance 
measures to measure cost, risk, and performance. 
This is an important aspect of the asset management function in that 
the flow of capital is appropriately tied to the rate case, ensuring the utility’s 
solvency in the long run.

 
Business of System Operations 
91
6.2.3  Work and Resource Management
The utility’s assets (see Figure 6.3) will need to be maintained on an ongo­
ing basis, replaced when they are due for replacement and repaired when they 
are damaged (e.g., during a storm). Work and resource management’s primary 
focus is to manage all of the processes associated with the assets. Here the util­
ity manages all resources (labor, equipment, materials) required to effectively 
execute defined work on the T&D system. They also schedule and dispatch 
the work by mapping the best resources to perform the work. They perform 
this work by optimizing the utilization of resources to perform short-cycle and 
long-cycle work and also driving the overall resource forecast and plan, thereby 
efficiently managing work through the entire “production line” life cycle, in­
cluding production design and estimating.
The large number of assets that need to be managed (across generation, 
transmission, and distribution) leads to a need for a large staffing pool of dif­
ferent people with different competencies and locational access. This capability 
needs to be able to allocate the right kinds of people with the right skill sets at 
the right location at the right time. This is because work sometimes needs to be 
done quickly and it is not always possible to move people with the right skill 
sets across large distances to fix a problem. This leads to a need to optimize the 
use of the right resources supported by the right processes to ensure that quality 
at the lowest cost is being delivered.
The system operator receives clearance requests and work schedules from 
work and resources management. In return, the system operator provides the 
necessary clearances (could include the implementation of switching orders) on 
the equipment so that work can be performed on the equipment. In addition, 
Figure 6.3  Substation equipment. (Picture courtesy of www.osha.gov.)

92 
Electric System Operations  
the system operator may also make work requests based on either outages or 
analysis leading to potentially imminent outages. As a result, this area works 
very closely with the system operator on a daily/hourly basis. 
6.2.4  Field Execution
The field crews execute assigned work on the T&D system safely, productively, 
and with quality (see Figure 6.4) . They perform the work both during normal 
asset maintenance/replacement and during emergency/trouble condition. At all 
times, they will restore T&D network service to specified performance criteria 
seamlessly with internal and external resources. They will also close out work 
from a work quality, asset information, and accounting information perspec­
tive. There are three main types of field crews:
• Troublemen (or T-men). Troublemen [3] tend to be first line of attack 
during or after a storm and who will very often be the first on the scene 
and will assess the damage, call fire/police if necessary, and enter the 
first work order for the work to be performed along with the estimates 
of time to repair and the materials needed to perform the work. If the 
work needed to be performed is reasonably straightforward, they may 
also perform the work.
Figure 6.4  Utility bucket crew in action.  (Picture courtesy of www.osha.gov.) 

 
Business of System Operations 
93
• Field specialists. As the name implies, specialists are capable of resolv­
ing problems in specific equipment and are generally considered utility-
wide experts for that system.
• Field bucket crew. The bucket crews ride on bucket trucks and are liter­
ally the frontline of the utility’s response to asset problems or mainte­
nance/replacements. These are the people who do the main amount of 
the work. 
Field crews are the first and last line of attack for a utility and its as­
sets—they keep the system up and running. Field crews directly interact with 
the system operator, first to go through the switching order to confirm that the 
equipment is completely disconnected electrically, and visually from the system 
so that they can work on it. They will also work with the operator to reconnect 
the equipment back in when the work is completed. This handoff process is 
critical because of safety issues.
6.3  Architecting the Business of System Operations
The system operator [4] operates the T&D network safely and efficiently serv­
ing as the “traffic cop” for all work performed on the network (see Figure 6.5). 
The operators monitor/control the T&D power system, manage/maintain 
system reliability, and authorize execution of planned work on assets. Dur­
ing emergencies, the system operator is the source of all information tracked 
through the outage management system where it identifies outages, prioritize 
them, and coordinates systemwide emergency response. The transmission pre­
dominantly (and in some cases he distribution system operator as well) man­
ages ISO/RTO interactions and interfaces and is also the implementer of any 
control actions needed by the RTO operator [5]. The system operator supports 
execution of planned/emergency work by developing switching orders to deen­
ergize/energize the power system where needed. Lastly, the system operator is 
also the singular source of critical system and asset performance information 
6.3.1  Drivers
In addition to the drivers that have been identified in Section 6.2.2, there are a 
few other timely drivers that impact the system operations space:
• Utilities will face a high percentage of operators who will retire in the 
next 5+ years. It takes operators about 2+ years of training before they 
can become proficient in their job.

94 
Electric System Operations  
• Utilities have increased their spending on infrastructure, and this in­
frastructure will now be asked to do more with less. The grid will be 
expected to become smarter.
• There will be greater emphasis on reliability for utilities with the cre­
ation of the Electricity Reliability Organization [6], leading to the po­
tential for fines, some reaching as high as one million dollars per day.
• There is a greater focus on the customer for system operations when it 
comes to one of its core capabilities: outage management.
• There is an increased need to be operationally efficient in all parts of the 
utility business, and system operations is no exception.
System operations also needs to change to address these business drivers. 
Figure 6.5  Key drivers of the system operation function at a utility.

 
Business of System Operations 
95
6.3.2  Strategy
The core strategy for systems operations has not changed much over the last 
few years—items like reliability and safety have always and will always continue 
to be critical from a strategy perspective. As the system operations arena has 
moved from the original vertically integrated utilities through deregulation and 
the Smart Grid, a new set of strategies have come into play that bring more light 
into the control center:
• Pervasive safety conscious culture. As distribution control centers move 
out of out the shadows of the utility service centers and DMS systems 
become more prevalent, the concept of safety consciousness becomes 
more and more important. This is further exacerbated with more devices 
entering the home on the premise side of the meters as well as on the 
grid.
• Improved customer service. With this move towards markets in the dereg­
ulated space and the advent of the smart meter in the smart grid space, 
the system operations space is becoming more opened to the external 
stakeholders. The external stakeholders that get access to the control 
center include other utilities and large customers all the way down to 
the individual residential customer who has a smart meter. Talking to 
customers means a different focus on handling the questions and re­
sponding in a professional manner.
• Increased employee satisfaction. The complexity of system operations 
means that the operator is a highly trained individual on whom the 
utility has spent a lot of time and money. Employee satisfaction has and 
always will be important to this area and is becoming more important as 
operations becomesmore complex.
• Cost-efficient operations. As with any other business, there is always a 
downward pressure on costs and the need to be more efficient. This is re­
sulting in a greater need for more automation in the control center sup­
ported by advanced visualization tools and data mining and analytics.
6.3.3  People
System operations for the most part tends to be a 24/7 operation. This means 
that the control center operates 24 hours a day, 365 days of the year. As a result, 
this is one of the few areas in a utility that attracts a different kind of person—
someone who is extremely motivated, knowledgeable about how the system 
operates and behaves, and most important, is very passionate about keeping the 
lights on. For the most part, the control center job has always been the most 

96 
Electric System Operations  
senior of the jobs in the utility’s union cadre and as a result the average age of an 
operator is mid-fifties or higher [7]. Key areas of focus of a system operations 
area include:
• Management of attrition. As mentioned above, the average age of a sys­
tem operator is mid-fifties. This means that in the next 10+ years, many 
of them will retire. Given the fact that these workers have come up the 
ranks as linemen means that they are also some of the most knowledge­
able people in the utility about how the system will react under various 
situations. Transitioning their knowledge to the next generation of the 
operator will be a critical area of focus for every utility.
• Knowledge transition. Utility operators see situations that many times 
happen once in several years and may not happen again for a while. 
Transitioning this knowledge to other operators who have not faced this 
situation and to other future operators is an important area to address. 
Management at most utilities is actively analyzing knowledge manage­
ment systems which can help in capturing the overall knowledge and 
store it for future learning.
• Work under duress. The control center environment (as is similar in con­
trol centers for other areas as well) goes through long periods of low and 
steady activity separated by short bursts (that can sometimes last a few 
days) of hectic and stressful activity, generally during storms or large 
unplanned outages. When this happens, the center is a very stressful area 
to work in and the personnel need to stay very calm as they coordinate 
the restoration of the system in conjunction with field crews, which in 
a large outage can involve hundreds of utility personnel, some of whom 
may even be from different utilities who may have come to help out.
• Training. Training is an extremely important part of becoming a system 
operator. Utilities spend a lot of money and effort to train these system 
operators, using tools like dispatcher training simulators. The training 
program can be anywhere from 1 year to even 4 years long before the 
operator is allowed to drive the operation of the system independently. 
Training is provided on a variety of subjects—operations processes, use 
of tools under normal and emergency situations, understanding the be­
havior of the power system under normal and emergency situations, and 
so on.
• Tools. System operators tend to work under immense pressure during 
system emergencies. Even under normal operations the operator tends 
to do a lot of things in parallel, working with several field crews in per­
forming normal maintenance and creating/executing switching orders 

 
Business of System Operations 
97
to either energize or deenergize different equipment. Having the right 
set of tools is critical to keep track of various actions so that the sequence 
of actions is completed correctly and safely.
• Work in teams. More than anyone else in a utility, system operators work 
in teams. Each shift consists of a group of people who will work together 
to keep the power system safe and secure. Working in teams requires 
each team member to be an expert in one or another set of activities and 
depend on other operators as well as field personnel to complete specific 
tasks.
6.3.4  Process
For the longest period of time, system operations depended on the operators 
defining the processes that over time resulted in processes that differed from 
operator to operator and control center to control center even within the same 
utility. As a result the same effort would be done in different ways, preventing 
the utility from learning from either best or bad practices. Recently, most utili­
ties have moved the bar to make the control center more of a process-centric 
organization. Given that, there is a greater focus on 
• Standardized processes. Focusing on standardized processes has become a 
key priority at most utility control centers. This action has benefits not 
just within the control center but also with the interactions with various 
other departments such as asset management/system planning, work/re­
source management, and field crews. A specific set of definition of these 
standardized processes is provided in the next section. 
• Workflow redesign. System operations are not a silo unto itself. Regard­
less of which process is being executed, there is a lot of interaction with 
people inside the control center and other parts of the utility as well 
as the field. Some of the tasks are completed over the period of a year 
(or more). This generally covers system planning tasks. Other tasks like 
switching sequence execution need to be completed within a day or a pe­
riod of a few hours. Lastly, in an emergency situation, everything needs 
to be done faster and better. Given all this there is an increased interest 
in redesigning the entire workflow from end-to-end that will result in 
changes so everyone is more prepared when the work comes to them.
• Switching order standardization and simplification. Under normal oper­
ating scenarios, in addition to monitoring and operating the grid, the 
main activity in a control center is supporting the normal maintenance 
tasks of the power system. Switching orders are created to ensure the 

98 
Electric System Operations  
equipment being maintained is deenergized in the proper sequence pri­
or to maintenance activity and also reenergized after the maintenance 
activity is completed. Standardizing these procedures is crucial to the 
proper interaction between the various teams and also to support the 
workflow redesign efforts. 
• Operations focused on system state, not raw data. System operators tend to 
constantly monitor the system looking for issues. A significant portion 
of their information comes from the alarms that are created by various 
items that go out of normal range and are flagged by the system. Howev­
er, as the system gets more and more complex, the operator can easily get 
swamped under the burst of alarms. Dues to these kinds of conditions, 
it is important for operators to move from reacting to raw data (like 
individual alarms) to reacting to full knowledge of the system state. This 
change allows them to move from trying to find the root cause of the 
problem to knowing the root cause and working to solve the problem.
• Increased use of technology. Increased complexity of the grid activity, the 
sensors and controls being added to it, and the addition of renewable 
sources all are contributing to a serious need for strong technology-based 
support for the system operator’s tasks. As a result, systems like EMS, 
DMS, OMS, GIS, and so on are all being developed and rolled out 
in support of the operator’s tasks. Some of these tools have over time 
become an indispensable part of the operator’s tool belt, and are also 
becoming more sophisticated over time with the addition of new ap­
plications.
6.3.5  Technology
Technology is the major backbone of system operations as is the case with any 
other critical function in a utility. More so here, the technology components 
used in a control center focuses on certain key attributes to support varied na­
ture of actions that take place there.
• Electronic mapping platform. The mapboard or its electronic equivalent 
is a critical part of the system operator’s toolbox. It brings a visualization 
aspect to the system, allowing the operator to either visualize the state of 
the system or look at trends at how the system is undergoing responses 
to stimuli put in place by the operator. The platform differs from control 
center to control center and also from transmission to distribution. The 
electronic map is slowly becoming the centerpiece of the system opera­

 
Business of System Operations 
99
tor’s toolbox and also becomes an excellent platform to demonstrate key 
actions to senior management in the utility. 
• High observability and controllability of network. Technology in the 
field is a key part of the repertoire for the operator. These are basically 
the eyes, ears, and arms of the system operator. Sensors such as PTs, 
CTs, current, voltage, and PMUs all create an ability to bring data back 
into the control center. Controls such as the ability to turn devices and 
switches on and off allow the operator to reroute power or turn equip­
ment off in order to better manage the power system. 
• Advanced suite of specialized applications. Over a period of time, the con­
trol center has been the recipient of several sets of advanced applica­
tions. Examples like the network advanced applications (state estimator, 
contingency analysis, optimal power flow), generation applications (eco­
nomic dispatch, unit commitment, security constrained unit commit­
ment), and distribution applications (fault location isolation and service 
restoration, volt-VAR control, and feeder load balancing) all have con­
tributed to creating a truly high-tech environment in the control center 
in support of the operator’s tasks.
• Integration between transmission and distribution. A key area in which the 
utilities are beginning to move in the integration of transmission and 
distribution systems. This is still somewhat in its nascent stage given the 
low levels of sophistication of the distribution control center in general. 
However, as new systems are being procured and implemented, this in­
tegration is a cornerstone of the implementation process. 
6.4  System Operations Processes
System operations processes are round-the-clock operations. As defined earlier, 
these processes are also not executed in a silo but are quite heavily integrated 
with the other core processes in a T&D organization and external. Figure 6.6 
has identified seven core processes that are considered as a part of the system 
operator’s activities. Considering the unique attributes of the system operator, 
these processes are also not batch processes but on the other hand are ongoing 
processes that are in continuous action all the time. Many are also a combina­
tion of predictive and/or reactive in nature, meaning that the system operato, 
while trying to predict key problems from happening on the grid, sometimes 
also needs to react to key events that have happened and have impacted the grid 
in some form or another. 

100 
Electric System Operations  
6.4.1  Monitor and Execute Real-Time Operations
The most fundamental job of the system operator is to monitor and operate the 
grid. In this process, the system operator is constantly monitoring the state of 
the grid through different alarms that are coming in and watching the power 
flows on various lines and substations, voltage, and current levels at various 
points in the system. The operator is also monitoring other aspects of the power 
system such as generator status, system frequency, and the power that is sched­
uled to be transmitted through the system. All in all, the entire focus of this 
process is to predict (to the extent possible) potential problems that may hap­
pen and take advanced actions to prevent a problem. Key aspects of this process 
include:
• Ensuring the safe, efficient, and reliable operation of the electric system;
• Providing timely updates and communications to all parts of the com­
pany and external agencies (if necessary) on the state of the system and 
key problems;
• Minimizing response time to events impacting the system by predicting 
to the extent possible ahead of time and reacting in the fastest manner 
to resolve problems;
• Streamlining the interaction with tools used for real-time operations all 
across the horizon of transmission to distribution and also interacting 
with external agencies like adjoining utility control centers and power 
market operators if necessary.
Figure 6.6  Key system operations processes over time.

 
Business of System Operations 
101
6.4.2  Manage Planned Events
Any time the utility wants to maintain a specific piece of equipment, the sys­
tem operator needs to get involved. First the equipment needs to be cleared 
for maintenance, meaning that the system conditions are OK for the specific 
equipment to be in a deenergized state for an extended period of time until the 
maintenance action is completed. The system operator also needs to actually 
deenergize the equipment so that the field crew can perform their maintenance 
actions under safe conditions. Key aspects of this process include:
• Developing and executing switching orders, which are the list/sequence 
of steps required to deenergize the equipment prior to maintenance and 
then reenergize it again after the maintenance action is completed. The 
exact sequence of steps is important to ensure that the equipment is 
deenergized (or reenergized) with minimal impact to other aspects of a 
stable system.
• Executing the clearance management/approval process, is one of the 
steps in a maintenance plan for a piece of equipment, resulting in the 
approval from the system operator to the asset manager confirming that 
the planned outage can be allowed. 
6.4.3  Manage Unplanned Events
The power system is an active system in which loads are changing on an ongo­
ing basis—loads are going up and down, generation supply is going up and 
down, lines get overloaded and sometimes trip (get disconnected from the sys­
tem), weather-related issues could result in trees (or something else) falling on 
a line and tripping it, and so on. These kinds of actions are called unplanned 
events. When they happen because of situations beyond the control of anyone, 
the operators (and other utility personnel) need to react to the events and bring 
the system back to normal. Key aspects of this process include:
• Performing timely and effective restoration is an important part of the 
system operator’s job. The system operator knows how to prioritize the 
various actions necessary to take to solve the one or more unplanned 
events that have taken place. Based on the prioritization, the actions 
taken will focus on restoring the power as soon as possible. 
• Minimizing the impact of customer outage is fundamental to the opera­
tor’s focus, leading them to start with prioritization of the events as well 
as developing the sequence of steps necessary to restore power.

102 
Electric System Operations  
• Ensuring the safety of employees and customers during the process of 
restoration drives the operator to also ensure that the equipment is ap­
propriately deenergized before the field crew gets to reconnect the equip­
ment. This same action is also applied to customers—they are asked to 
call the police or the utility before taking any steps on their own.
6.4.4  Coordinate Emergency Response
At some point in time, when the number of unplanned events becomes too 
many or the outage extent is too widespread, the utility goes into emergency 
management. When that happens, an entirely new organization swings into 
action, depending on whether this was a transmission-related or distribution-
related emergency. Emergency coordination committees take over and people 
from different groups across the utility are seconded into this ad hoc organiza­
tion. An important part of this process is the involvement of the system opera­
tor, who needs to be able to drive the reenergization process to ensure a safe 
and orderly restoration of power. It is not uncommon for one of the emergency 
center locations to be in the conference rooms adjoining the control center.
The prioritization of the restoration is done by the emergency coordina­
tion committees based on a variety of factors like criticality of load (such as 
hospitals), extent of outage (number of customers that can be restored with one 
solution), nested outages, and so on.
6.4.5  Plan Daily Operations
Every day, either by the night shift of the previous day or when the morning 
shift just comes in, the control center team creates the daily operations plan. 
This plan focuses on the day that is ahead for the team and focuses on getting 
ready for the action. Key aspects of this process include:
• Understanding recent system events that have just happened in the 
power system is an important first step in this process because it could 
impact scheduled work that was planned to either start or continue dur­
ing the day. If there is an impact, the work and resources management 
processes are informed of the changes and a new updated plan is devel­
oped. This update could either be a modification of the scheduled work 
or a complete postponement. 
• Anticipating major events like weather or special events like the Super 
Bowl or a major concert that could impact system integrity due to either 
a different load pattern and/or outages. If, for example, a new weather 
pattern is emerging, the system operator will appropriately modify the 
operations plan to prepare a contingency plan and get ready ahead of 

 
Business of System Operations 
103
time to the extent possible. This also requires a continuous monitoring 
of the operating plan to ensure that all changes are reflected into a single 
plan (playbook) from which everyone is operating.
• Reviewing operational plan and ensure compliance standards are met. 
6.4.6  Perform System Analysis
As asset management develops their systems plan whether it is for upgrades or 
for maintenance of the assets, system operations is the final arbiter of the situ­
ation on whether the clearance can be provided to perform the maintenance/
change. These analyses are done on different time horizons—5 years, 1 year, 6 
months, next month, tomorrow, and so on. Key aspects of this process include:
• System operations will perform extensive scenario/contingency analysis 
of planned work scope to ensure that the system conditions will still 
leave it in a stable operating mode from an operations perspective. All of 
these analyses are preformed to ensure that the reliability of the system 
is not compromised by the work planned in any form whatsoever. If 
reliability of the system is threatened, and then they will suggest work­
arounds or splitting the work to still support it.
• The system operator also needs to be certain that established standards 
and procedures are followed both with regard to the equipment that is 
being maintained as well as to the integrity of the system when it comes 
back online.
• System operations will also look for opportunities to combine and co­
ordinate other work that can be performed under the same clearance, 
thereby increasing the benefit to the utility and the ratepayer. 
6.4.7  Report Operational Performance
There is a significant focus on operational performance of the power system 
and this is increasing with the advent of the smart grid and also due to greater 
customer involvement. While the focus for transmission is very different from 
distribution—different kinds of data are collected and reported on an ongoing 
basis. While the actual selection of metrics to be reported on is large and varies 
from utility to utility, we will discuss a small set of the industry standard ones 
here.
At the transmission level the main metrics are the NERC CPS1, CPS2 
and DCS:

104 
Electric System Operations  
• CPS1 measures control performance by comparing how well a control 
area’s ACE [8] performs in conjunction with the frequency error of the 
interconnection. CPS1 links system reliability—measured in terms of 
the acceptable frequency error—to the allowable control performance.
• CPS2 is designed to limit a control area’s [9] unscheduled power flows. 
CPS2 is similar to the old A2 criteria. Average ACE for each 10-minute 
period must be within limits. 
• A disturbance is defined as any event that is 80% of the magnitude 
of the control area’s most severe single contingency. A control area is 
responsible for recovering from a disturbance within 10 minutes by re­
covering the amount of the disturbance or returning ACE to zero. A 
disturbance is not reportable if it is greater than the control area’s most 
severe contingency. Control areas must comply with the DCS 100% of 
the time. Any control area not complying will be required to carry addi­
tional contingency reserve. Extra reserves must be carried for the quarter 
following the quarter in which the noncompliance occurs.
At the distribution level the main metrics are SAIDI, SAIFI, CAIDI, and 
MAIFI. SAIFI, SAIDI [10], and MAIFI are some of the indices used to measure 
distribution system reliability. 
• SAIFI is the average number of sustained interruptions per consumer 
during the year. It is the ratio of the annual number of interruptions to 
the number of consumers.
SAIFI = total number of sustained interruptions in a year/total number 
of consumers
• SAIDI is the average duration of interruptions per consumers during the 
year. It is the ratio of the annual duration of interruptions (sustained) to 
the number of consumers. If duration is specified in minutes, SAIDI is 
given as consumer minutes.
SAIDI = total duration of sustained interruptions in a year/total number 
of consumers
• CAIFI is the average number of interruptions for consumers who expe­
rience interruptions during the year. It is the ratio of the annual number 
of interruptions to the number of consumers affected by interruptions 
during the year. Consumer is counted only once regardless of the num­
ber of interruptions.
CAIFI = total number of sustained interruptions in a year/total number 
of consumers affected

 
Business of System Operations 
105
• CAIDI is the average duration of an interruption, calculated based on 
the total number of sustained interruptions in a year. It is the ratio of 
the total duration of interruptions to the total number of interruptions 
during the year.
CAIDI = total duration of sustained interruptions in a year/total num­
ber of interruptions [11]
• MAIFI is the average number of momentary (less than 5 minutes) in­
terruptions per consumer during the year. It is the ratio of the annual 
number of momentary interruptions to the number of consumers.
MAIFI = total number of momentary interruptions in a year)/total 
number of consumers
Endnotes
[1]	 We are seeing chinks in this armor with the opening of retail competition that is happen­
ing in Texas, Pennsylvania, and a few other jurisdictions in North American and is in place 
in several other parts of the world.
[2]	 KPIs stand for key performance indicators, which are different metrics used to help evalu­
ate the performance of an organization or system or capability and upon comparison with 
other similar structures can help in defining mechanisms to improve on them.
[3]	 Hence the term “trouble-call management systems,” which was the precursor to today’s 
outage management systems and which denoted that there was trouble in the system.
[4]	 The system operator should not be considered as one person or just focused on the team 
of operators who all sit in the control center console. In this book, the system operator is 
more of a capability that includes lots of people involved in make system operations work, 
with the system operator and many others, such as support engineers.
[5]	 RTO/ISOs do not own the assets and hence do not have any SCADA-level control of the 
devices. The actual control needs to be performed by the transmission operator upon the 
request/command of the RTO operator. 
[6]	 The Electricity Reliability Organization was created through the passage of the Energy 
Policy Act of 2005. Its objective was to develop and enforce compliance with mandatory 
reliability standards in the United States. In 2006, NERC applied for and was granted this 
designation.
[7]	 Having system operators in their mid-fifties is not in itself a sign of an aging workforce. It 
is more of an indicator that they will retire in about 10 years. In most utilities the system 
operator position is a one that people get promoted into after having worked several years 
in other union cadre jobs, and then stay in this position until they retire. 
[8]	 ACE is defined as the instantaneous difference between net actual and scheduled inter­
change, taking into account the effects of frequency bias including a correction for meter 
error.

106 
Electric System Operations  
[9]	 A control area is an electrical system bounded by interconnection metering and telemetry, 
capable of controlling generation to (1) balance supply and demand, (2) maintain inter­
change schedules with other control areas, and (3) contribute to the frequency regulation 
of the interconnection.
[10]	 SAIFI and SAIDI are the most used pair of reliability indices. A North American survey 
showed SAIFI figure of 1.1 (indicating 1.1 interruption/year/consumer) and SAIDI of 1.5 
hours.  Singapore is reported to have a SAIDI of 3 minutes.
[11]	 It can also be seen that CAIDI = SAIDI/SAIFI.

107
7
Control Center: The Hub of System 
Operations
The control center is the hub of system operations activity in the utility control 
centers may be called by different names at different utilities or may even be 
used for different actions depending upon whether the control center is being 
used for transmission operations or distribution operations at a utility or to run 
the entire market/reliability operations at an RTO.
Control centers are designed to support 24/7 operations and as such all 
aspects of these centers are oriented around this fact. Key characteristics of con­
trol centers are:
• They are hardened structures designed to handle severe weather con­
ditions and possibly even earthquake-proof up to a certain magnitude 
where necessary.
• They are supported by multiple levels of redundancy in electric power 
(independent feeders from two different substations) supplemented by 
a diesel genset, supplemented by an uninterrupted power supply (UPS), 
and supplemented by battery storage.
• The communications needs of the control center are also designed for 
redundancy and hence have multiple communication feeds coming in.

108 
Electric System Operations  
• The core personnel staffing the control center (system operators or dis­
patchers as they are called) is also designed around the need to staff the 
desks on a 24/7 basis. This means that to staff each desk adequately, 
somewhere between 5 to 6 personnel are needed so that key areas like 
vacation, training, holidays, and weekends are covered.
• The technology servicing control centers is also designed for high lev­
els of redundancy—and hence the systems are designed for individual 
systems/applications/hardware to fail without impacting the overall 
outcome of the control center. These systems are designed with dual-
redundant or quad-redundant systems so that the systems can back each 
other up on failure.
• Control centers also tend to have large mapboard hardware driven by 
software systems designed to provide the system operator with an overall 
view of the system with identification for power flows on lines, some 
critical voltages and currents identified, and system frequency [1]. Map­
board systems have evolved significantly over time, changing from static 
displays constructed from tiles and tape supported by lightbulbs here 
and there to high-definition television monitors that can display any 
page from the control center software, thereby allowing the system to be 
that much more flexible.
• Strip chart recorders tend to record the change of key system quantities 
like tie-line flows between control areas, system frequency, voltages, and 
other quantities like that over time.
• Organization of work: The core part of the control center is organized 
around desks; each desk has one or two operators and is focused typically 
on one major task. The concept of a control center desk is important 
because given that these are 24/7 staffed roles, they will need 5+ person­
nel per position.
  While both the transmission and distribution control centers all 
basically follow the same core processes, they are organized different­
ly, meaning that the actions performed at each desk is different. The 
organization is based on the criticality of the functions they perform 
and the level of specialization required supporting those functions.
  For example, in transmission, the desks are organized as trans­
mission desk, generation desk, and so on. Distribution on the other 
hand is more organized as switching desk, clearance desk, and so on.
  The control center at an RTO is more organized like a transmission 
center with the exception of added desks to support the market func­
tions and processes.

 
Control Center: The Hub of System Operations 
109
  There are several other support functions that also function in a con­
trol center. Some of them may be 24/7 and others may be either only on 
the day shift or run only two shifts instead of the three. These support 
roles include operations engineers, system analysis, real-time operating 
plan, and so on.
Despite maintaining several strong and constant characteristics over a pe­
riod of time, control centers have also evolved over time. In the beginning, 
every utility had one control center for all of their electric system operations 
capability. This included much of today’s transmission operations, generation 
operations, market operations to the extent any bilateral trading took place 
between utilities, and even distribution operations to the extent any part of the 
distribution system was either remotely monitored or controlled. Over time, 
different configurations have emerged, especially with the advent of RTOs, 
gencos, energy trading companies, enhanced levels of distribution sensors, and 
controls supported by a DMS, and so on. All of this has resulted in the func­
tionality that used to exist in control centers to get split among several control 
centers, and brought along with it a need for enhanced levels of integration that 
at the same time supported the conflict of interest mandates enforced by FERC 
orders 888/889 and others that came after it.
Figure 7.1  An actual control center in action. (Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid and used with 
their permission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for this image.)

110 
Electric System Operations  
Figure 7.2 presents a conceptual view of this split that has occurred from 
its genesis of all functionality inside one control center to multiple control cen­
ters, with each market participant/role focusing on the needs of their business 
and how to interact with the others [3].
7.1  Transmission Control Center Desks
Typical transmission control centers have between 3 to 4 desks: the generation 
desk, transmission desk, and scheduling desk. Overseeing these three desks is 
the shift supervisor’s desk. In addition to this there are various support desks 
that may not all be staffed 24/7.
7.1.1  Transmission Desk
The transmission desk is basically responsible for overall security of the bulk 
power system. The transmission desk runs different kinds of analysis on the 
transmission system, constantly looking for weak spots and constantly asking 
“how can I get out of this?” The system operator has several tools at his or her 
disposal to perform these analyses:
Figure 7.2  Split of original control center functionality into different market participants. 
(Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid and used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains all copy­
rights for this image.)

 
Control Center: The Hub of System Operations 
111
SCADA
This is the main application that is the eyes, ears, and arms for the operator. 
Through this application, sensors in the field send in data into the control 
center. Alarms get issued when data exceeds one or more limits that are set for 
them. SCADA also allows the operator to control devices in the field, such as 
open/close circuit breakers, change transformer taps, and so on.
It basically reports the data that it receives from the field in a raw form 
and converts it into engineering units based on the actual quantity that it is 
sensing. The data could be any of current (amps), voltages (kV), or power flow 
(megawatts (MW) or megavolt ampere reactive (MVAR)). It could even be 
something like the status of a substation door (open/close).
The incoming data from SCADA has all kinds of variables—generator 
output MW, MWh, MVAR, and MVARH, power flow values through lines 
measured either in MW and MVAR or current values in amperes. Much of 
this data is sensed in the field, collected by devices called RTUs [3] or IEDs 
[4], which then send the data to the control center through a dedicated set of 
communication lines.
SCADA has one main problem. It does not know if the data is accurate 
or not. It cannot also confirm whether the circuit breaker status is open or not, 
even if the data that comes in says so. These errors could happen due to the 
meter either reading wrong or just malfunctioning. It could also happen if the 
meter parameters are adjusted in error, leading to inaccurate conversion from 
raw to engineering units. When this happens, the information is still reported 
as is, and this is where the state estimator comes in.
State Estimator
The state estimator performs an estimation of the power system state. The state 
of the power system is defined by the combination of the voltage magnitude 
and the voltage angle [5] at every bus in the power system. The key to this 
calculation is that if we know these two variables, almost every other quantity 
(current, power flow, etc.) in the grid can be calculated.
The state estimator is executed generally every 5 minutes and when some 
component in the power system changes state (e.g., circuit breaker gets tripped). 
It starts with getting the data from SCADA and ends with the calculation of 
system state.
Once the system state is calculated, then the power system variables and 
the flow through various components need to be calculated. This is performed 
by another application called the powerflow.

112 
Electric System Operations  
Power Flow
Power flow is generally the last step of state estimator calculation. It is used to 
start from the system state information (which actually does not mean much to 
most people), and convert it into power flow calculations that then inform the 
operator the calculated value to power flows across various components in the 
power system. The result of power flow calculation includes both the real and 
reactive components of power flow (in MW and MVAR). This output calcu­
lated information is then superimposed on the one-line diagrams used by most 
operators to monitor and operate the grid. This information is also passed on 
to the alarms subsystem to bring the operator’s attention to (1) alert them of a 
out-of-normal value, and/or (2) that a SCADA measurement could be wrong 
and needs to be fixed.
The next step is to test the power system for reliability, and this is when 
the contingency analysis application comes in.
Contingency Analysis Application
The contingency analysis application performs an analysis of the power sys­
tem response to various potential problems (contingencies). The basic premise 
here is that the power system at normal state should be able to withstand a 
predefined set of contingencies and still stay secure. This criterion has been 
established by NERC [6] from a system security perspective.
The fundamental criterion is that the system should be able to withstand 
the loss of any power system component, such as
• Loss of a single generator, generally the largest single generator in the 
grid;
• Loss of any power system component (e.g., the loss of a line, a trans­
former, or a circuit breaker).
A single-component contingency analysis checks the systems security sta­
tus for the loss of any of the components identified above—and that the system 
should still be secure. The contingency analysis application will run multiple 
power flows, one on each of these components to give the operator a better 
understanding [7] of what will happen to the system state if any of these com­
ponents fail (see Figure 7.3).
Based on analysis, understanding, and experience with the power system, 
system operators also identify a set of multicontingency cases, which means that 
if a combination of components fail, the system will still stay secure.

 
Control Center: The Hub of System Operations 
113
Optimal Power Flow
If contingency analysis identifies one or more contingencies that would result 
in an insecure state for the power system, the optimal power flow (OPF) ap­
plication looks at the best and most feasible option to move the system from a 
precontingency state to a postcontingency state. The OPF takes only physical 
constraints into consideration. Market mechanisms are not taken into consid­
eration here.
Security Enhancement
Security enhancement is an improvement over OPF in that it takes market 
mechanisms into consideration to identify steps to be taken to move the system 
from a precontingency state to a postcontingency state.
Figure 7.3  A typical control center mapboard example. (Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid and 
used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for this image.)

114 
Electric System Operations  
The transmission operator tends to have the most difficult job even 
though it appears (at first) to be simple. Using the tools identified above, the 
operator is constantly looking at the systems space, looking at various one lines, 
looking at various substation details, and trying to understand what is hap­
pening on the system. A transmission operator needs to be constantly on the 
lookout—at SCADA alarms coming in, other activities in the network (there is 
always planned work going on), generators are coming up and down, and lines 
are getting loaded up and down. From a maintenance perspective, transmission 
lines are going in and out of service, circuit breakers and transformers are get­
ting maintained, which means they are going in and out of service, and so on. 
A transmission operator watches the system on an ongoing basis.
During the night shift, since there is not much maintenance activity going 
on, most operators tend to use this time to take care of paperwork and other 
administrative tasks while monitoring the systems.
Over a period of time operators tend to get much more comfortable with 
the network; they have a set of indicators that they watch for and from there 
they can quickly figure out whether there is a problem with a segment of the 
network.
Transmission operators also have a feel as to the flows and the schedules of 
networks around them. For example, in PJM, the transmission operator knows 
all the normal flows of most major transmission lines in Ontario, New England, 
New York, ECAR, MISO, and so on because any changes in any of those flow 
will have impact on the PJM system.
7.1.2  Generation Desk
The generation desk is very different from the transmission desk. The genera­
tion schedules come in either a day before, or on the hour for the next 3 or 4 
hours based on a preset schedule. The generation operator’s main job is to look 
at the overall load, confirm that between schedules (generation external to the 
system but coming into the system due to a prearranged sale or purchase) and 
internal generation it is sufficient to meet the load (consumption). The total 
amount of generation should meet load, plus any necessary reserves and also to 
cover any outages that may be identifiable ahead of time. The generation desk 
also looks at the potential to bring on new generation in a hurry if and when an 
actual unplanned outage takes place.
The primary application suite at the generation desk is called the real-
time generation application [8], study generation applications, and so on.
The core functions under real-time generation are economic dispatch 
(ED) and automatic generation control (AGC).

 
Control Center: The Hub of System Operations 
115
• Economic dispatch looks at the list of generators that are online and 
running and their cost models (or market bids) if there is a wholesale 
market.  Based on this stack, ED decides which of the generators should 
be generating how much.
• AGC is the real-time application which tends to run every 2 to 4 sec­
onds depending on how often SCADA runs, and then uses that infor­
mation to get an understanding of exactly how much each generator is 
generating at the moment and what the load is expected to be in the next 
2 to 4 seconds. Based on that information and the results of ED, AGC 
sends control signals to the generator to either ramp up or down, or do 
nothing. If the generator is not responding to the control signals, then 
an alarm is raised to the attention of the operator.
The primary application within the study generation suite is unit com­
mitment. Unit commitment basically focuses on how to commit generating 
units for the slightly longer term. While ED assumes that generators are both 
online and running or can come up very quickly without too much prepara­
tion, unit commitment assumes that generators can be started up. This means 
that its time frame of reference is more of the next day, week, and so on.
Much of the focus of unit commitment in the present day and age is on 
market functions and the need to move away from cost to market bids for both 
generation and ancillary services. Taking generation availability/bids along with 
the ability of considering congestion has led to the movement away from a 
pure marginal cost across the entire system to a locational marginal cost where 
the price varies based on locations in the systems and their respective localized 
loads.
In utility control centers, the generation desk has been reduced in im­
portance over time due to their becoming more of a market function, which is 
generally controlled by the RTO if one exists in the region.
• In places where an RTO exists, much of this functionality has been 
moved to the RTO’s control center. It starts with the market functional­
ity, which drives and bids and the market clearance activities. The bids 
that clear then become generation schedules (for energy and ancillary 
services) that are dispatched out of the RTO’s generation desk to the 
gencos generation desk and are then tracked.
• In places where an RTO does not exist, this work is done by various 
gencos (either owned by the utility or other) who may buy or sell power 
through bilateral trades or from other exchanges, all of which get re­
corded as generation schedules and dispatched as such. These genera­

116 
Electric System Operations  
tion schedules get sent in to the balancing authority where they are dis­
patched and tracked.
However, regardless of where it exists, the generation desk is a very im­
portant function for the overall control center and also from the perspective of 
ensuring enough generation always exists to support the load.
7.1.3  Scheduling Desk
The scheduling desk primarily focuses on all activities that require some kind 
of scheduling. The primary quantities that need to be scheduled in a control 
center are energy and transmission access. Other scheduling activities like out­
age scheduling (for planned maintenance work on the system) are also tracked 
and scheduled but generally performed by the support desk because they do not 
need to be staffed 24/7.
• Energy scheduling. All energy coming into the system, going out of the 
system, or going through the system under control of the control cen­
ter needs to be scheduled with the control center. The control center 
needs to know about all the energy flows in, out, or through the system 
because the generation desk needs to use this information to define the 
economic dispatch or unit commitment stack. 
  The scheduling desk is fundamentally responsible for approving (or 
rejecting) the energy schedule request. The key aspects that the sched­
uling desk checks before approving or rejecting the request is, Does it 
violate any ramp [9] characteristics? Can this energy flow? If it requires 
any generation is there a corresponding generation schedule to back that 
up? If there is load then is that a real load or is it going to be wheeled out 
of the system again?
• Transmission access scheduling. Transmission access scheduling start­
ed as a direct result of FERC open access rulings 888 and 889. Un­
der open access rules, utility companies must allow external entities 
fair access to the electric transmission systems in North America. The 
act’s intent was to allow large customers (and in theory, every cus­
tomer) to choose their electricity supplier and subsequently pay for 
the transmission to deliver it from the generation to serve their load.
  To deliver to this mandate, the scheduler is expected to evaluate every 
transmission access request that comes across the OASIS system in an 
open and transparent manner and either approve or deny the request. 
All approved requests are stored in the system and used by all the other 
desks (both generation and transmission) and the support functions. 

 
Control Center: The Hub of System Operations 
117
  The approval (or denial) is based on whether there is adequate trans­
mission access available under the product (firm, nonfirm, etc.,) for 
which the requests are being made. Once the approval is done, the re­
maining available transmission capacity is then updated so that all the 
participants in the transmission access market can get the same informa­
tion at the same time.
7.1.4  Other Support Desks
In addition to the three main desks that have been described in the sections 
above, there are several other desks that function within a control center, some 
that may be staffed 24/7 and some that may not. For the most part, these are 
support and engineering functions required for the control center and the rest 
of the utility’s transmission operations to function smoothly. A representative 
list of support desks include:
• Shift supervisor desk. As defined earlier, the core control center desks are 
24/7 and one or more operators staff the desks based on the volume 
of activity and complexity of operations. Each shift also tends to have 
a shift supervisor whose main role is to be the supervisor for the other 
operators. There will always be key decisions that need to be taken dur­
ing the shift and the shift supervisor typically tends to have the authority 
to approve (or deny) them. Very often the shift supervisor also tends to 
be the management person to whom the operators report. This desk is 
typically also staffed on a 24/7 basis. From a location perspective, this 
desk is generally situated either in the middle of the other desks or be­
hind them.
• Clearance management [10]. Anytime before any equipment on a power 
system is touched for maintenance, a clearance needs to be obtained 
on that equipment (see Figure 7.4). A clearance means that permission 
has been obtained for the utility to perform physical action on it. The 
request to perform maintenance (a clearance request) is sent by asset 
management. The clearance operator performs the analysis based on the 
projected system conditions for the time frame of the clearance and con­
firms that the system can perform in an unobstructed manner while the 
component is out. Once the clearance has been provided, a tag is placed 
both on the physical device in the field as well as in the systems used by 
the operator. The tag alerts the people in the field that between a certain 
date and time combination, work is being performed on the equipment 
and that it should not be energized inadvertently. 

118 
Electric System Operations  
Figure 7.4  Typical transmission one-line diagram. (Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid and used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for 
this image.)

 
Control Center: The Hub of System Operations 
119
• Switching desk. Before any work is actually performed on the equipment, 
it needs to be deenergized. For this to happen, the system operator will 
go through a fairly complex set of steps of circuit breaker openings and 
closings to ensure that (1) the particular equipment of set of equipment 
is completely deenergized, and (2) the power system has been recon­
figured in a way that the system can perform in a stable manner while 
this equipment is not available. The transmission desk will normally 
perform or coordinate the performance of the complex sequence of op­
erations necessary to deenergize the equipment. However, developing 
this sequence of operations known as the switching order [11] is actually 
done by the switching desk in conjunction with the clearance desk. This 
is a very important activity because a specific piece of equipment can be 
deenergized in many ways. The person manning the switching desk will 
(based on their long years of experience) come up with the best and most 
efficient sequence of steps possible.
• Operations support desk. The operations support desk is generally staffed 
by operations engineers who provide a lot of support to the operators. 
These personnel perform short-term, mid-term, and long-term studies 
using different applications, some embedded within the EMS and some 
external to the EMS, and are constantly giving feedback to the operator, 
asking them to watch out for specific conditions that they may come 
across and also what to expect under those conditions and what key op­
tions they have for a response. These support engineers are also working 
on KPIs, reports (internal and external), and also generally monitoring 
the power system’s performance to various actions. The operations engi­
neers also maintain the power system, SCADA, and generation models 
for the various systems in the control center. 
7.2  Distribution Control Center Desks
The distribution control center works very differently from the transmission 
control center. Unlike the transmission control center, the distribution control 
center did not get affected at all by deregulation, but is expected to be more 
impacted by the advent of the smart grid.
The origins of the distribution control center started from the original 
trouble-call management centers from where outages were being managed. Be­
cause of this core requirement, these centers were generally located in one of the 
back rooms of utility distribution service centers so that they could coordinate 
during storm (or other emergency) restoration processes by directly interacting 
with the field crew.

120 
Electric System Operations  
The biggest aspect of work in a distribution control centers is clearance 
management and developing switching orders for planned work. This is be­
cause until now, for the most part, there is very little observability into the 
distribution system and limited controllability as well. The large amount of 
planned work being done in the distribution system also results in making this 
area one of the more important aspects of the control center. As a result, the 
desks in a distribution control center are focused around clearance management 
and switching order creation.
Given the need for a high degree of coordination between the control cen­
ter operator and the field crew, they continue to be located in services centers, 
where a great deal of planned work happens in the system every day (could be 
in the hundreds in a large utility) coordinated from multiple service centers.
Distribution operators for the most part worked using paper maps, which 
were the best representation of the connectivity in the field. These paper maps 
were maintained lovingly by the operators and updated very few times a year by 
the graphics people. The operators would pore over these paper maps as they 
developed switching orders—which came only from many years of experience. 
Sometimes, these paper maps were indeed connected to a rudimentary GIS 
system (mostly home-grown) that might be needed to support the underlying 
data model for an OMS.
The main area of change in a distribution control center, a charge led by 
the advent of the smart grid, is coming from new systems (integrated DMS/
OMS), replacement of paper maps with electronic maps integrated with the 
DMS, and the need/ability to handle distributed generation and storage from 
the end of a distribution feeder.
One common trait that they share with the transmission control center is 
that these centers also tend to be staffed 24/7.
7.2.1  Clearance Desk
As explained earlier, this desk provides clearances for planned work to be done 
on the power system. This desk performs a very important task within the con­
trol center because the operator at this desk needs to analyze the loss of this 
equipment under different system conditions for the entire length (of time) of 
the clearance.
The clearance request comes from asset management who is interested 
in maintaining a specific piece of equipment—a necessary step to ensure the 
normal long-term operation of the equipment under different conditions. The 
clearance process is a close coordination between asset management and the 
distribution operator who will identify one or more specific times during which 
the clearance can be taken. The operator will also look at other clearance re­
quests to see if any can be bundled into one single clearance action, thereby 

 
Control Center: The Hub of System Operations 
121
ensuring that planned equipment outages are minimized while at the same time 
supporting the needs to maintain the equipment.
As clearances are issued, there are also possibilities that they can be re­
voked. If the system conditions change so much that the original assumptions 
of system conditions are no longer valid, the clearance desk can revoke a clear­
ance, at which point the process will start all over again. 
7.2.2  Switching Desk
As explained earlier, the next step to an approved clearance is the development 
of a switching order. The main objective of the operator at this desk is to de­
velop switching orders. Switching orders in distribution are very similar to their 
counterparts in transmission with the following exceptions:
• There are so many of them. Unlike transmission, where the numbers of 
planned work events are fewer, a lot of planned work takes place in dis­
tribution.
• Fewer tools available for automation. Unlike transmission, where there 
are several automation tools are available for the operator to test the 
steps out in a safe simulated mode, the distribution operator has to test 
hypotheses out on paper and use his or her best experience to avoid any 
missteps or problems.
• Fewer options to reroute power. Developing a switching order is more 
challenging because of the primarily radial nature of the distribution 
system and the three-phase unbalanced system. This aspect compared 
to the networked/grid nature of the transmission system, which is also 
balanced, makes the two very different problems to solve.
• More steps in the process. Distribution switching orders tend to have more 
steps in them on average and the added complexity of having more of 
the steps being manual in nature, which means for the execution of most 
of the steps, the operator will need to work with a crew in the field even 
to implement several of the steps in the switching order.
7.2.3  Other Support Desks
Very similar to the transmission control center, the support desks in the dis­
tribution control center are (1) the shift supervisor desk (or senior dispatcher 
desk) and (2) the operations engineer/analysis desk. The latter desk for the most 
part is not staffed 24/7 (just as in transmission) but may be staffed two out of 
three shifts, mainly to accommodate the volume of planned work (see Figure 
7.5) [12].

122 
Electric System Operations  
Figure 7.5  Typical architecture of all the systems in a control center. (Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid and used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains 
all copyrights for this image.)

 
Control Center: The Hub of System Operations 
123
7.3  Other Key Aspects of a Control Center
Control centers are differentiated from any other department in a utility due to 
a set of key characteristics:
• Mapboard. Depending upon whether this is a distribution control cen­
ter or to be used for transmission control, the mapboard varies from 
large paper-based boards to tile-based to fully electronic displays. Re­
gardless of the mechanism used, they clearly distinguish the control cen­
ter from everything else. The mapboard also allows the operators to get 
an overview of the system at a glance with a focus on some of the main 
attributes that could be of value to all.
• Complex telephone systems. Control centers also tend to have complex 
telephone systems with advanced caller ID systems generally integrated 
with a wide variety of new and legacy phone, voice over Internet Proto­
col (VOIP), cellular, and radio-based systems.
• Alarms and annunciators. Control centers tend to have alarms and an­
nunciators along one of the walls. The main idea behind this panel is to 
bring the operator’s attention to one or more specific problems on the 
grid that requires immediate or quick response.
• Audit tracking. Control centers are the hub of the operational activity 
in a utility. Both during normal processes and emergency/storm restora­
tion processes, numerous decisions get made, most of which are right 
and some which may be wrong. Utilities like to learn from both—which 
could either be used for training the operators or for performing analyses 
for a report. Most actions taken inside a control center are tracked for 
future auditing trails. This applies to the data entered into systems like 
EMS/DMS and so on. It also applies to all phone calls made in and out 
of the control center. The stored information can be retrieved at a future 
date/time for analyses.
• Failure redundancy architecture. The 24/7 nature of control center sys­
tems requires that they are architected for fault tolerance. This means 
that both the applications (software) and the hardware components are 
designed to stay up all the time and when one or more of them go down, 
the system is designed such that the data and models are not just secure 
but that the appropriate components are brought back into operation 
with little or no time/system access lost. 
• Physical security and cybersecurity. The importance of system operations 
in a utility in part comes from the capability to open/close circuit break­
ers that in turn could black out large parts of their territory. As a re­

124 
Electric System Operations  
sult, a lot of attention is focused on both physical and cyber security.
  From a physical security perspective, NERC has already identified 
key actions that need to be taken to record the ingress and exit from 
the control center. They generally require that every person (includ­
ing visitors) sign in with full disclosure information (e.g., name and 
affiliation). Visitors are also escorted within the control center facility. 
  From a cybersecurity perspective, the systems within a control center 
are generally held to a higher standard of cybersecurity protection. This 
action results in impacts to how the systems are architected, potentially 
resulting in separation of how data and actions are passed in and out of 
the systems. 
7.4  Introducing a High-Performing System Operator
System operators face the same set of pressures as the rest of the utility to con­
tinue to innovate both from a technology perspective as well as from a business 
perspective. All of this is a focus on moving toward a high-performing system 
operator. 
The drivers towards this innovation are:
• Process standardization. There is a need to standardize all the processes 
that impact the system operator and how they interact with other parts 
of the utility as well as those external to a utility.
• Overall emphasis on reliability. The continued emphasis on system reli­
ability and the public uproar after the 2003 Northeast blackout has led 
to new and improved mechanisms made available to the system opera­
tor.
• Asset risk management. At one level, the system operator’s job is also 
about managing the asset risk in a prudent and effective manner. 
• Regulatory relationship. With the push for the system operator to include 
distribution and move towards the customer, the regulator is now more 
interested in understanding the impact of operations.
To respond to these drivers, system operations are slowly moving in a 
direction of change (Table 7.1).
As this movement is occurring in many control centers around the world, 
there are several benefits being identified:

 
Control Center: The Hub of System Operations 
125
• Reduction in operating costs;
• Improved operator productivity;
• Improved customer service;
• Support system growth, with major growth occurring in greenfield loca­
tions;
• Improved response time during emergencies—customer satisfaction 
scores and reduced outage duration.
In order to support these benefits and also to provide mechanisms for 
control centers to improve over time, several metrics have been identified in 
control centers in North America and around the world. Some of these metrics 
are required by NERC, some by state PUCs, and some are being implemented 
by utilities just because they support an internal intent to continuously improve 
and also do more activity with either the same set (or fewer) number of people 
(Table 7.2).
Table 7.1
Changes in a System Operator’s Responsibilities
What’s Ending
What It Is Moving Towards
Control centers operating in silos with visibility 
of only their geographic area
Customers and emergency agencies are primary 
methods for determining network problems
Ambiguity around workforce switching skills 
and capability, leading to a small pool of trusted 
switchmen
Paper- and tile-based static wall maps
Customers with outages experiencing long 
periods with inadequate information about 
restoration
Switching orders with hundreds of steps
Individual workers choosing the work they are 
assigned
Using different tools, processes, and people to 
do resourcing in storms/events 
Increased remote, SCADA-based controls for 
operating the network
Visibility of network status and information 
between control centers
Electronic schematics with real-time network 
status information
Improved coordination of clearances and work 
with the goals of maximizing the amount of work 
completed with a given clearance and minimizing 
the number planned outages
A worker classification that is qualified to both 
first response and switching (or the development 
of a switchman classification)
Network operability is consistently factored into 
new designs
Resourcing in storms/events is done from a 
centralized scheduling/dispatch center
Ιnitial estimated time of restoration (ETOR) is 
based on historical information and operating 
experience
Streamlined switching orders coupled with the 
expectation that switchman have the proper 
skills
Consistent, standardized business processes 
between control centers
Operational preparation to accept new load on 
the system is uniform across all control centers
Improved integration between operations, 
operations engineering, and mapping

126 
Electric System Operations  
Endnotes
[1]	 Control center picture (Figure 7.1), courtesy of Alstom Grid and placed here with their 
permission.  Alstom Grid retains all copyright for this picture.
[2]	 Figure 7.2, Picture Courtesy Alstom Grid. Picture placed here with their permission.  All 
copyrights of this picture remain with Alstom Grid.
[3]	 An RTU is a device that collects data from data acquisition equipment and sends them to 
the main system over a wired or wireless network. See SCADA.
[4]	 An Intelligent Electronic Device (IED) is a term used in the electric power industry to de­
scribe microprocessor-based controllers of power system equipment, such as circuit break­
ers, transformers, and capacitor banks.
[5]	 A “phasor” is a complex-number representation of an electrical quantity, such as voltage, 
current, or impedance.  These ingredients must be present in any definition of a phasor. 
A phasor, (possessing both magnitude and direction), is not the same as the vectors com­
monly used in other areas of physics (e.g., force vectors, electric/magnetic field vectors, 
etc).
[6]	 NERC’s major responsibilities include developing standards for power system operation, 
monitoring and enforcing compliance with those standards, assessing resource adequacy, 
and providing educational and training resources as part of an accreditation program to 
ensure power system operators remain qualified and proficient. NERC also investigates 
Table 7.2
Key Attributes of a High-Performing System Operator
Area
Sample Metrics
Reliability
SAIDI, CAIDI, SAIFI, MAIFI
Compliance with NERC/ERO reliability and control area rules (e.g., CPS1/CPS2)
Operating reserve compliance
Proven backup/recovery capability 
System/communications uptime
Operational 
Efficiency
Operating costs (GMC)
Actual vs. optimal dispatch
Switching errors
Clearance application response timelines
Need something on emergency response
Information 
Accuracy
Forecast accuracy (long- and short-term)
Transmission capacity accuracy (OASIS)
Planned outage accuracy (start/stop)
Procedure accuracy (e.g., switching procedures, emergency procedures)
Accuracy of operator logging
Customers
Customer satisfaction survey
Power quality (voltage, frequency, etc.)
Billing accuracy/timeliness
Employee
Employee satisfaction survey
Overtime/sick days
Safety (reportable events, lost time accidents, etc.)
Training (maintaining operator certification, cross training on various desks, etc.)

 
Control Center: The Hub of System Operations 
127
and analyzes the causes of significant power system disturbances in order to help prevent 
future events.
[7]	 Figure 7.3 is a picture of a typical control center mapboard, Courtesy Alstom Grid. Picture 
placed here with their permission.  All copyrights of this picture remain with Alstom Grid.
[8]	 Real-time generation and study generation are generic terms used in the industry.  Each 
EMS vendor uses different names for them within their system.
[9]	 Energy cannot just go from zero to the end result value in an instant. It needs to be ramped 
up and down in an orderly fashion so that the power system does not see too many volatile 
changes in a short instant.
[10]	 Figure 7.4 is a picture of a typical Transmission one-line diagram, Courtesy Alstom Grid. 
Picture placed here with their permission.  All copyrights of this picture remain with 
Alstom Grid.
[11]	 A switching order contains a list of switching devices and time of execution for circuit 
breakers, load disconnects, and ground disconnects. Before any switching sequence is 
executed, the operator verifies whether the sequence is compliant with safety switching 
procedures and requests confirmation during execution of each step before proceeding to 
the next step in order to avoid inadvertent switching.
[12]	 Figure 7.5 shows a typical architecture of all the systems in a control center, Courtesy 
Alstom Grid. Picture placed here with their permission.  All copyrights of this picture 
remain with Alstom Grid.


129
8
Energy Management Systems
The acronym EMS stands for many things these days. Even when expanded 
into its full form—energy management system—it can have many meanings, 
such as building energy management systems and so on. However, when you 
walk into a control center and talk about EMS, it stands only for one thing: the 
core flagship system used in a transmission control center that is responsible for 
the management and control of much of the transmission system in a utility 
or RTO.
An EMS can be defined as an integrated system of computer hardware, 
software and firmware designed to allow a system operator in the control 
room to monitor, control and optimize in real-time the flow of electric 
power in a transmission system through the use of advanced algorithms, 
intelligent techniques and situational awareness-based visualization 
mechanisms [1]. 
Even within a utility, the EMS can have different meanings. Some of these 
have more to do with history than with the actual use and value of the systems 
involved. From a historical perspective, the first entrants into this arena were 
the SCADA systems. This came from a need to control devices remotely and 
get some of the sensor data into a central control center. The 1965 New York 
blackout led to the identification of a need for more sophistication, and the 
need for (what was then called advanced applications) network applications was 
born. This was timed well with the release of the development of foundational 
algorithms for power flow, optimal power flow, and so on.
With the advent of the advanced applications, the modern EMS was (kind 
of) born. The 1977 blackout in New York led to the identification of a need for 
better training for operators so that they could respond to one-of-a-kind prob­
lems if they were trained for it. The DTS also required a complete redesign of 

130 
Electric System Operations  
major modules of the EMS because, for the first time, the system needed to be 
able to either go at normal clock time, faster than clock time, and also be able 
to go back and forth in time so that operators could be trained multiple times 
on the same scenario. The simulator also needed to allow a trainer to set up 
scenarios that could execute events in the power system and be able to observe 
the response of the trainee operator.
Over a period of time, the importance of the EMS continued to grow 
and the data (both real-time/raw and the calculated data that was the output of 
different applications) that it collected was required outside the EMS and the 
control center. This rise in its importance required that the EMS become more 
and more integrated with other corporate business, analysis, and reporting sys­
tems. The continued evolution of the control center also created a need for 
closer integration between control centers of different utilities where real-time 
data needed to be shared. New protocols were then created (specifically Inter 
Control-Area Communication Protocol (ICCP)-based data exchange) so that 
control centers having EMS systems from different vendors could share data in 
real time.
Within the utility, this movement required closer integration with other 
parts of the utility and also led to change in how EMSs were architected. The 
new architecture led to the opening of the systems from proprietary systems 
into some kind of SOA-based architectures [3] (Figure 8.1). 
This chapter analyses EMS from the following perspectives:
Figure 8.1  The evolution of an EMS.

 
Energy Management Systems 
131
• How an EMS is used to support the mandate of the system operator by 
different users;
• Key components of the EMS—hardware, software, databases, user in­
terface, and power system modeling;
• EMS application suites—SCADA, network applications, generation ap­
plications, modeling applications, system utilities (alarms, process man­
ager, and others), and WAMS.
• Other tools in the transmission control center
8.1  How an EMS Supports the System Operator’s Mandate
EMS is one of the core systems supporting the system operations mandate of 
different entities, all of whom are responsible for the security of the electrical 
power system in one form or the other. However, over time this unique system 
has grown so much in depth as well as breadth that this name has become syn­
onymous with the use of any real-time system in a utility control center. As a 
result, this system in some form or another is being utilized by the transmission 
operator, generation operator, RTO/ISO market operator, and even the RTO/
wholesale market participant (from within the utility or independent).
8.1.1  Transmission Operator
The transmission operator is the traditional user of this system. EMS was fun­
damentally designed for this type of operator. As a result, the transmission op­
erator uses this system to perform all the normal actions expected of him/her: 
monitor, control, and optimize in real time the flow of electric power in the 
transmission system. In a vertically integrated utility with no RTO, the trans­
mission operator is also (very often) the primary responsible agency for reli­
ability for the region. However, if an RTO exists, these commands and instruc­
tions will come from the RTO system operator to the transmission operator for 
implementation.
8.1.2  Generation Operator
There are two types of generation operators. One set is responsible for one 
generating unit and/or plant and the other set is responsible for managing an 
entire fleet of generating plants. The former uses a more specific process-based 
system called a plant DCS [4] while the latter uses a more specific configuration 
of an EMS and sometimes the term generation management system (GMS) is 
also used. While the underlying infrastructure and systems mechanisms are the 

132 
Electric System Operations  
same between GMS and EMS, the actual set of advanced applications may be 
customized to support generation operations instead of transmission.
The generation EMS will focus on monitoring the real-time statuses of 
the plants, and in addition
• Interact with one or more RTOs and other control areas to which they 
deliver power.
• Interact with in-house trading and risk management teams to ensure 
that the generation gets the best market access possible to maximize their 
return on the generation investment. Generally, in these situations it is 
not uncommon for the market bids to be submitted from one of the ap­
plications embedded within the GMS.
• Provide data to in-house trading teams to support key activities like 
settlements, volume, and charge management functions necessary to 
function in a deregulated wholesale market.
• Perform localized optimization analysis among all the generators avail­
able in the fleet to run them at the best possible levels across the various 
regions that they may exist in—with available market data.
• Support the various plant maintenance functions by providing both op­
erational data as well as market forecasting data, so that maintenance can 
be performed under the right market conditions if appropriate.
8.1.3  RTO/ISO
From an EMS perspective, the RTO’s needs can be defined as that of a super-
EMS. The RTO (see Figure 8.2) needs all the functions of a traditional EMS—
transmission applications, generation applications, SCADA, and so on. A big 
difference between the EMS at a transmission operator and that of the RTO is 
that the RTO does not have the control capabilities of a transmission operator. 
If the RTO operator wants to execute a supervisory control, then they will need 
to call the transmission operator and ask them to do it. Depending on the situ­
ation and level of emergency, this can be either a request or a command.
In addition to the EMS, a significant focus at the RTO/ISO is also the 
market functions, which include the life cycle of a market operator—includ­
ing receiving bids from market participants, validating the bids, clearing the 
market, sending the instructions back to each of the participants, and finally 
settling the market. Depending upon the type of market, this activity can either 
be done at the wholesale level or at both the wholesale and retail levels.

 
Energy Management Systems 
133
In an RTO/ISO, the EMS and market systems need to be very tightly 
integrated both in real time as well as in maintaining and managing common 
models. This is necessary to ensure that the market solutions are compatible 
with that of the reliability solution because the market clearance for the most 
part takes system security and congestion constraints into consideration.
8.1.4  RTO/Wholesale Market Participant
The wholesale market participant is somewhat of a unique user of the EMS. 
Under normal circumstances, this would not be something to even think of—
but let us consider the way most wholesale markets function. Market partici­
pants bid into the market—from a generator perspective, getting the bid in at 
the right price is critical. For this they need to know something about system 
congestion and where it will happen.
For the wholesale participant to know this type of information, it is im­
portant for them to also perform some levels of power flow/network analysis. 
The added constraint here is that the participants cannot have access to the 
same sets of data or the models as the transmission operator. They need to 
depend on public models and sources of data and use them to drive market 
decisions. 
Most major market participants have an EMS-like system that is managed 
based on public sources of data and its outputs are used to drive the market 
bids. They use this system to predict locations of congestion, and leverage this 
information to adjust their bid into the market accordingly.
Figure 8.2  RTO and markets interactions with an EMS.

134 
Electric System Operations  
8.2  Key Components of an EMS
The complete EMS system along with SCADA and the front-end systems have 
been identified as one of the more complex systems deployed. It has been said 
that the missile defense systems and the space shuttle systems are a few examples 
of systems that could be considered to be more complex than the EMS.
The typical EMS system is a complex combination of several components 
that consist of a broad range of hardware, software, databases, and UI.
The following sections will provide insight into these components in 
more detail.
8.2.1  EMS Hardware
The hardware used in an EMS is varied. However, it can be roughly divided 
into the following categories:
• Computers servers,
• UI devices;
• Mapboard;
• RTUs and other front-end devices;
• Ancillary devices;
• Communications hardware.
8.2.1.1  Computers servers
The EMS servers are the main computers on which the various application 
sets are executed. This is also the core location where the database services, UI 
services, mapboard services, and a host of other system services are executed.
EMS server architectures have changed dramatically over the last 20 years, 
moving from a monolithic set of computers configured in a dual or quad re­
dundant setup to today’s fully distributed architectures designed with advanced 
redundant fault-tolerant systems capable of being dynamically load-balanced 
for optimum performance under different operating scenarios. These servers 
support a combination of Windows, UNIX, LINUX, and other operating sys­
tems as desired by the corresponding application set. A typical server setup is 
presented in Figure 7.5.
A new breed of computer systems is beginning to show up in EMSs: SCA­
DA front-end processors (FEPs). These are systems that have allowed the SCA­
DA systems to become very distributed. The configurations allow these FEPs to 
be situated anywhere in the network and act as both aggregators of data as well 
as perform some SCADA processing. The SCADA processing performed by 
FEPs includes (but is not limited to) conversion from raw to engineering units, 

 
Energy Management Systems 
135
error checking, limit checking, and issuing alarms. The significant benefit of 
this configuration is mainly reduced loading on communications lines leading 
to a reduced need for communications bandwidth.
8.2.1.2  UI Devices
The UI devices also known as operator’s consoles are generally placed on the 
operator’s desk for the purpose of interfacing with the EMS and other systems 
within the control center. A console is generally a multiheaded (this could be 
one monitor also—generally this is configurable based on the needs of the user) 
set of computer monitors controlled by one keyboard and one mouse designed 
to allow the operator to view multiple systems, views, and applications at the 
same time. 
The operator’s console has also transitioned over time from the AYDIN 
consoles of the old via workstations monitors to the PC-based monitors of vary­
ing sizes designed to support the specific operator’s needs.
8.2.1.3  Mapboard
Everyone knows the mapboard. Walk into a utility’s control center and the first 
thing that you notice is the huge display of the current state of the utility’s op­
erations. The mapboard presents an overview of the system state at a high level. 
Mapboards have made dramatic transitions over time.
The original mapboards were paper-based (or tiles)—basically a printout 
of the system one-line (three-line in the case of distribution) connection dia­
gram attached to a wall  Some control rooms of today (especially distribution) 
still have these as their mapboards. Mapboards have transitioned from these 
paper maps via tile-based (also static) to the newer and extremely dynamic TV/
computer monitor-based systems that can be used to project any EMS display 
or other displays such as weather maps.
There have been numerous discussions on whether the time of the map­
board has come and gone given that rather large displays can be placed right 
at the operator’s console at very little additional cost. Does this mean that the 
next generation of the control center will no longer have mapboards or they 
will slowly transition out over time? While the actual answer is unknown, it 
is clear that in the near- to midterm, they will remain in control centers (see 
Figure 8.3).
8.2.1.4  RTUs and Other Front-End Devices
RTUs and IEDs are devices that collect data from data acquisition equipment 
in the field and send them to the main systems (EMS or DMS) over a wired 
or wireless network. They form the eyes, ears, and the hands of the EMS. They 
gather data and implement the control signals sent out by the control center 
operator to perform actions such as closing a circuit breaker, raising/lowering 

136 
Electric System Operations  
the output of a generating unit, and so on. RTUs come in various configura­
tions and are made by various vendors, each with their own specific protocols. 
The protocols are used by the SCADA system software to talk to the RTU. The 
newer ones use a standardized protocol called DNP3.
The key to RTUs and IEDs is that they collect data from local sensing 
devices that are generally hardwired locally and generally within the substation 
with few exceptions [5]. The RTUs and IEDs then transmit the information 
back to the central location through a variety of mechanisms- some wired (pow­
erlines, optical fiber) and some wireless (RF, microwave, or others).
8.2.1.5  Communications Hardware
Communications is a key ingredient of the EMS. Communications are needed 
from the sensors to the RTUs/IEDs, from RTU/IEDs to the FEPs, and from 
FEPs to the main system in the control center. Over time, the communications 
mechanisms used have transitioned from hardwired coaxial cables to radio, mi­
crowave, fiber-optic cables, and more recently to cellular/IP. It is not uncom­
mon to find a mixture of all of the above in any modern EMS systems. 
Telephones to support human interactions between the control center 
operators and the field/other utility/nonutility personnel are also a key part 
of the communications that are part of the EMS. Depending on the level of 
integration with the EMS, key conversations that are (for the most part) all 
Figure 8.3  An older mapboard with tiles and static information. (Picture courtesy of Alstom 
Grid and used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for this image.)

 
Energy Management Systems 
137
recorded can be brought up in synch with any specific events in the systems and 
are generally used for postmortem analysis.
8.2.1.6  Ancillary Devices
In addition to the hardware-based devices that have been described above, there 
are several ancillary devices in an EMS. Among other things, they provide sev­
eral basic systems services for the EMS.
• Printers and plotters. While the functions of these pieces of hardware are 
generally self-evident, the presence of plotters in the control center is 
mainly to support the printing of one-line diagrams.
• Alarm annunciators (visible as well as audible). A key application in an 
EMS is the alarm application. Mainly the SCADA but also many other 
applications also link up to this application. The key focus of this ap­
plication is to alert the operator of any anomalies in the system. Many of 
these alarms are also linked to annunciators, which are generally placed 
on a wall somewhere in the control center. The intent of these annuncia­
tors is to create a visible and/or audible means of alerting the operator 
of a potential (or existing) problem in the system that needs quick at­
tention.
• Strip-chart recorders (mechanical as well as PC-based). There is a pre­
defined set of EMS data for which it is more important to track for their 
trends versus the actual value. This kind of data is integrated with a strip-
chart recorder system (see Figure 8.4). Most control centers will also 
have a bank of strip-chart recorders (similar to a bank of annunciators as 
described above) that are checked every now and then by the operators, 
supervisors, or both. The information in these recorders become even 
more important when there is a disturbance in the system and the inves­
tigators want to see the trend of certain key system variables over time.
8.2.2  EMS Software
The software used in an EMS is also very varied. It can be roughly divided into 
the following categories:
• Operating system software;
• Application software;
• System and utilities software;
• Network/communications tracking software;
• Process management software.

138 
Electric System Operations  
8.2.2.1  Operating System Software
EMS systems started life in extremely proprietary operating systems also known 
as mini- and superminicomputers. These were needed because operating sys­
tems like DOS, Windows, and others were not yet developed.
The transition from these proprietary operating systems to general-pur­
pose operating systems happened in the early to mid-1970s [6] as these systems 
moved to the IBM 370 mainframe, Digital Equipment’s PDP series of com­
puters or the Control Data Corporation (CDC) computers. At this time, even 
though EMSs were not on proprietary operating systems, there was little to no 
ability to interconnect the systems together in a meaningful way.
Over time these systems have moved through UNIX-based operating sys­
tems to the modern EMS, which are all based on a diverse set of operating sys­
tems architected in such a way that it is more optimized for functionality rather 
than a monolithic architecture on one operating system.
Operating systems are critical to an EMS because of its real-time nature, 
more importantly on the SCADA and other front-end systems. To support 
these real-time functions, EMSs tend to go beyond the normal applications to 
use specific aspects of system services provided by these operating systems. As a 
result of this dependence, they are configured to specific versions of specific op­
Figure 8.4  Photograph showing use of strip-chart recorders and other digitally supported 
devices in a control center. (Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid and used with their permission. 
Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for this image.)

 
Energy Management Systems 
139
erating systems and tend to go through major upgrades whenever the operating 
system needs to be updated.
8.2.2.2  Applications Software
EMS applications run the gamut from SCADA (real-time) to advanced net­
work and generation applications to the more business-focused applications.
• SCADA applications: These applications tend to be the truly real-time 
applications in an EMS and are developed using the more advanced 
languages of the time, starting originally from assembly language and 
moving through C/FORTRAN to the more advanced languages of to­
day that  include C++ and C#. 
• Advanced network and generation applications: These applications are 
some of the workhorses of the EMS and are also the reason SCADA 
systems were upgraded to be called energy management systems. They 
are highly algorithmic applications that involve intense mathematical 
computations using extremely advanced concepts. Some of the key algo­
rithms used here include the Gauss-Siedel and Newton-Raphson meth­
ods for solving a nonlinear system of equations, L-U decomposition for 
storage and manipulation of large sparse matrices, weighted least-square 
method for state estimation, and regression analysis for predicting and 
(load) forecasting, among many others.
• Business-focused applications: These applications have moved from their 
traditional EMS-based roots into general relational database-based ap­
plications mainly focused on business intelligence, reporting, and so on. 
In their earlier versions, they were designed and built like other EMS 
applications and were somewhat limited and simplistic in their capa­
bilities. They were designed in such a way that they could be called on 
the monitor as a display and then allowed to be printed as a report. 
Some of the earlier NERC A1/A2 and B1/B2 reports were built like 
this. The transition to the newer relational database-based applications 
has allowed them to be extremely flexible in their capability and hence 
have very strong feature sets. Data from the EMS now gets extracted 
onto relational or other databases and these applications then function 
on them.
8.2.2.3  System and Utilities Software
System and utilities software are designed from a system perspective and are 
capable of being used by other software to either do or check on something.

140 
Electric System Operations  
ALARMS is the single most important application in this set. Most of 
the EMS applications use the ALARMS application when they need to send 
an alarm. The architecture of the EMS allows for applications like this to be 
designed and developed and callable by other applications that will pass the 
right set of variables into the call. When the alarm shows up in the alarm log 
(see Figure 8.5), it is generally clear as to which application was responsible for 
sending the alarm and a description of the problem. Many of the alarms ap­
plications adopt intelligent techniques (intelligent alarm processing) to reduce 
the onslaught of alarms that may overwhelm the operator.
Other examples of this software include configuration manager, console, 
and mapboard control.
8.2.2.4  Network/Communications Tracking Software
Critical to an EMS functioning is a full and unobstructed access to data from 
sensors and the ability to send controls to devices in the field and have them 
complete their actions successfully. For this to happen properly, EMS has a set 
of software that tracks and manages the availability and condition of the com­
munication devices and channels. When one or more of these devices are not 
available, they (also) send an alarm that will then result in someone checking 
out the system for faults.
8.2.2.5  Process Management Software
The EMS is a complex system with applications functioning in a variety of 
ways: 
• Applications like those in the SCADA subsystem execute every 2 to 4 
seconds;
• Applications like those in the network subsystem execute every 5 min­
utes or so unless there is a change in the power system, at which point 
they stop executing the previous run and start all over again.
• Applications like alarms execute all the time, waiting for some other 
application to send out an alarm. A typical alarm display is shown in 
Figure 8.5.
• There are reporting applications that run on a schedule—once a day, at 
midnight, or once an hour on the hour.
Every EMS has an overarching piece of software system—called the pro­
cess manager (or something similar)—that manages and controls the execution 
of all the types of applications.

 
Energy Management Systems 
141
8.2.3  EMS Databases
In general, every software application at some level is a database application. 
EMSs are no different—databases form a very integral part of an EMS. The 
main strength of an EMS comes from its vast repositories of data and its ca­
pability to handle vast quantities of data extremely fast. Database (in an EMS) 
have come a long way since the days of the original EMSs. They started out 
from the original file-based databases (many EMSs still have them) to more 
exotic ones covering the entire range of databases from memory resident to 
relational.
EMS applications have widely varying needs of their databases that are 
based on how they function and how quickly they can be used to access data 
either at the application level or at the display (UI) level. Because of this they 
can be broadly divided into three main categories: memory-resident databases, 
time-variant data historian, and relational databases.
8.2.3.1  Memory-Resident Databases
Most of the core EMS applications (SCADA, network, generation, etc.) have 
an interesting characteristic. They are designed to function in the here and now. 
The applications are designed to overwrite the previous results every time they 
complete their execution. They are also designed to manipulate large quantities 
of data many times in a single execution cycle and in an extremely rapid mode. 
Most EMSs have some form of a memory resident database to allow this kind 
of a rapid data manipulation. 
Memory resident databases are developed to achieve very low response 
time and very high throughput for performance-critical systems. They support 
an architecture to maintain all the data in the main memory and direct data ma­
nipulation. All its data is stored and manipulated exactly in the form used by the 
Figure 8.5  A typical alarm display. (Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid and used with their per­
mission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for this image.)

142 
Electric System Operations  
application, removing overheads associated with caching and translation. As a 
result, the read and write access are generally at the level of a few microseconds.
These core applications all rely on the fast data manipulation capabili­
ties of memory-resident databases that on a periodic basis or on an exception 
basis are then written to the disk to support fault tolerance in the architecture. 
Depending on the type of data being manipulated, the historical data is either 
stored in a time-sequenced database or a relational database.
8.2.3.2  Time-Sequenced Data Historian
A significant percentage of the data being stored in an EMS is of a time-se­
quenced nature. For example if we look at the SCADA data acquisition mecha­
nism as explained in the previous mechanism, the application processes the 
incoming scan and stores it in the memory-resident database. When the next 
scan comes in, it will overwrite the previous scan. EMSs have a need (for report­
ing and other postmortem analysis) to store historical data.
If the historical data is of a time-sequenced nature—for example, all criti­
cal data from one SCADA scan—it makes a lot of sense to store it in a data 
historian. Most EMS data historians are designed to store time-sequenced data 
very efficiently both from a disk space as well as from a retrieval time perspective.
Over time, these time-sequenced data historians have become sophisticat­
ed enough to display trending information on EMS displays as well as produce 
very high-level reports. 
8.2.3.3  Relational Databases
Relational databases, once the workhorse of the business world, have been mak­
ing a slow and steady march into the EMS world. While their mainstay is still 
the storing of nontime-sequenced data and focusing on corporate and other 
reports, they have been making inroads into EMS.
Possibly the main inroad has been along with the entry of third-party 
applications that are being integrated into the EMS. Most third-party applica­
tions that get integrated into the EMS come with their own needs for relational 
databases.
8.2.4  EMS UI
The EMS user interface has changed quite a bit since its origins when EMS 
came with Aydin (or similar) consoles. These consoles only supported character 
graphics displays and they needed to be optimized to take up the entire screen 
size. The configuration was somewhat fixed but these displays were made quite 
rugged to suit control center environments and their fault-tolerant needs and 
be capable of driving multiple display units from one keyboard (and a mouse 
if appropriate). While somewhat uncommon it is still possible to see these con­

 
Energy Management Systems 
143
soles in some of the older control centers that are potentially in the process of 
being upgraded.
The newer UI consoles are mostly either windows-based or Linux-based 
and provide much of the features we are all used to in our PCs and other work­
stations. The UI systems are configured in such a way as to enable both EMS 
and non-EMS displays to be shown on the same workstation monitors 
8.3  EMS Application Suites
The EMS (see Figure 8.6) has several application suites integrated into it. As 
can be seen from earlier sections, it is not a single monolithic set of applications. 
As EMSs get delivered, it is possible that not all the suites of applications are 
included. Similarly, other suites of applications (some external to the EMS) may 
also get added to the EMS depending on the requirements of the client utility.
8.3.1  SCADA
SCADA, as mentioned throughout this book, is the eyes, ears, and arms of 
EMS. Most external field data from sensors come in through SCADA and simi­
larly most controls sent to operate devices in the field go through SCADA. The 
SCADA application suite consists of the following main applications:
SCADA front-ends: These are preprocessors for the SCADA data acqui­
sition application whose biggest importance comes from the ability to 
distribute this application (and associated hardware) around the network. 
The front-end processor performs most normal data error checking and 
sends data back to the main server as appropriate. This ability to distrib­
ute the application around the network results in significant reductions 
in network traffic. 
  The SCADA front-end’s other main objective is to interact with the 
various RTUs and IEDs. This is a reasonably complicated matter because 
of the number of different protocols that are supported by the various 
RTUs in the marketplace. While the newer ones are slowly getting stan­
dardized into the DNP3 (or DNP3 over IP) protocol, there are several 
RTUs in the market with several hundreds of legacy protocols that must 
all still be supported until they get replaced with the newer ones.
Scanner: The data acquisition system feeds into the system through the 
scanner application. Scanner converts the data from the raw format to its 
corresponding engineering units and for the first time we actually know 
that the data coming in from the sensors is actually a voltage, MW, or 
MVAR reading. Scanner also performs more detailed error checking of 

144 
Electric System Operations  
Figure 8.6  EMS application architecture. (© Modern Grid Soltuions.)

 
Energy Management Systems 
145
the incoming data such as limit checking and some preliminary connec­
tivity checking [7]. When limits get violated, alarms are issued.
At the end of the scanner execution, the data is made available for the vari­
ous system one-lines and other displays. At the end of this scan, the data is 
also made available to all other applications in the system. 
Supervisory control: All controls into the field go through this applica­
tion. This includes not just controls manually sent by the operator but 
also those sent automatically by other programs; for example, generator 
set-point and pulse controls that are generated by the AGC application. 
Sending all the controls through one application allows them all to be 
tracked in a common manner. 
  A key aspect of the control function is also in its integration with the 
scanning function where it can send out an alarm if it finds that a specific 
control sent out into the field has failed to generate the expected result. 
When that happens, it will also flag the specific control for more investi­
gation and also possibly make it inactive until it is resolved.
Tagging: Whenever maintenance is being performed on a device in the 
field, the device is first deenergized and then a tag is placed on the device 
informing all personnel in the field that the specific device is not to be en­
ergized, or detailing a specific list of actions on that device that would be 
prohibited. Similarly, an electronic tag is placed on the device in the EMS 
as well. The electronic tag will also be accompanied by appropriate notes 
on the activity that is being performed on the device and it’s estimated 
back-to-service date.
  The placement of the tag on the device in SCADA makes the tag vis­
ible on all the displays where the device (or device information) is being 
displayed and operator remote action on that device is prevented.
Managing the operator interface: The SCADA operator interface is an im­
portant one in that all key operator actions need to be captured and ap­
propriate response provided. SCADA is specific in this because of the 
critical nature of the actions being performed from this application suite. 
A selection of the key operator actions managed under the operator in­
terface include:
• Removing/restoring key data points from the scanning process. When this 
action is performed, that specific (or group of) points will no longer 
be scanned by the scanning function until it is restored back into the 
scan again.
• Inhibiting alarms. Under some circumstances, the operator may in­
hibit alarms for some specific set of data points and/or device. This 
could happen, if for example, a device is under testing and the opera­

146 
Electric System Operations  
tor does not want to be bothered by false alarms taking their attention 
away from the real problems.
• Other examples of operator actions: Changing limits on specific data 
points or manually overriding the data. 
Sequence of events analysis: SCADA scans are dependent upon the time 
cycle at which the sensors are scanned. This could be somewhere around 
2, 4, 6, or 10 seconds and sometimes even more. In between these scans, 
sometimes the sensed value or the state of a switch (circuit breaker) can 
change multiple times. This type of rapid changes tend to happen gener­
ally during storms and sometimes even during localized problem events.
  When this kind of a scenario occurs, there is a need (after the fact) to 
understand the actual sequence of events that happened so that the exact 
problem could be identified and fixed.
Historical data recording: SCADA as described earlier is the primary front-
line application for the EMS. If SCADA data is available, then the rest of 
the EMS data sets (for the most part) can be re-created. With the EMS’s 
real-time nature, there is always a need to go back in time and understand 
a specific event and learn all that happened—either from a training per­
spective or to identify the core problem and fix it. 
  SCADA has the ability to store data for historical analysis in a time-
sequence manner using a special application and special data sets to 
store the data. The intent of this storage is to allow (in the future) to run 
through time in slow motion and truly understand the events that either 
happened or events that caused a specific series of actions to take place.
8.3.2  Network Apps
The core network applications consisting of the state estimator, power flow, 
contingency analysis, optimal power flow, and security enhancement all start 
with a SCADA scan and are intended to take the knowledge of the system state 
to a level higher than that of the SCADA system and also to override known 
and unknown deficiencies in SCADA data. They are also intended to analyze 
the system state and the level of vulnerability of the system to new and potential 
problems that could happen on the system and prepare the operator (and the 
system) ahead of time.
Network applications can be run either in real-time mode or in study 
mode. In study mode, they are designed to provide the operator or an opera­
tions engineer with an off-line analysis environment where the same tools as in 
real-time can be executed but they are run on data sets that have either been 
stored for analysis ahead of time or it starts with a snapshot of the real-time 

 
Energy Management Systems 
147
dataset. The key to this is the need to perform the network analysis in an offline 
mode and not have a direct impact on the system state at hand.
More information on these applications has been provided in Chapter 7
8.3.3  Generation Apps
The fundamental objective of the generation applications is to provide a mech­
anism to control the outputs of the generators in such a way as to allow them to 
provide the necessary supply in an economically viable manner.
The balance of supply and demand is the most important aspect of the elec­
tric grid. There are multiple loops in the overall generator control mechanism.
• The innermost loop (using the coal-fired generator as an example) is the 
one between the boilers, the development of superheated steam that is 
then fed to the turbine that enables the generator to generate electricity. 
If more superheated steam is fed into the turbine, more power is gener­
ated.
• The next outer loop is the governor loop. The frequency of the power 
system is reflected in the speed of the generators connected to the power 
system. The governor is a device connected to the main shaft and con­
trols the amount of steam being fed to the turbine. When the frequency 
of the system goes above or below the nominal value, the governor re­
acts by sending less or more steam into the turbine, thereby controlling 
the output electric power of the generator. Generally, there are several 
hundred generators in a typical interconnected power grid. Each of the 
generators will have a governor that will act based on its relative inertia 
to enable the generator to respond appropriately.
  So far, the generator response discussed has been based on pure phys­
ics. If there is a disturbance in the system, the governor loop will act 
quickly to bring the system to a stable state in the fastest manner pos­
sible. 
• The next outer loop is the first time economics comes into the picture. 
This is the AGC loop. In this loop the relative economics of each genera­
tor comes into play, thereby redistributing their outputs in proportion to 
economics instead of their physical characteristics.
• The last outer loop is the markets loop. Here the market offers and 
bids are considered and the clearance mechanism drives which generator 
will input more electric energy into the power system. This outcome is 
completely based on market dynamics and may even have nothing to do 
with the actual economics of operating a specific generator.  

148 
Electric System Operations  
More information on these applications has been provided in Chapter 7.
8.3.4  Dispatching Training Simulator
Modern power systems are becoming increasingly complex to operate. The 
training departments need more tools to help them in the process of training 
the operators. In addition, they also need more help in evaluating the training 
session. This creates an iterative process, whereby the instructors can evaluate 
the feedback and modify the training program appropriately to cover any holes 
identified, or identify the weaknesses of each trainee and help them perform 
better.
A DTS is a simulation of power system behavior and dispatcher user in­
terface (see Figure 8.7). The simulation of the power system provides the opera­
tor with a realistic environment in terms of power system behavior. This simula­
tion combined with an exact replica of the EMS applications and user interface 
allows the dispatcher to practice operating tasks and experience emergency 
Figure 8.7  High-level view of a dispatcher training simulator. (Picture courtesy of Alstom 
Grid and used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for this image.)

 
Energy Management Systems 
149
operating situations. The dispatcher interacts with the computer simulation to 
practice normal operating activities such as load following, interchange sched­
uling, supervisory control, voltage control, and transmission dispatch. The sim­
ulator is especially advanced in the degree of realism with which it allows the 
operator to observe and practice procedures for normal and abnormal condi­
tions. Typical abnormal conditions include voltage degradation, line overloads, 
cascading outages, system islanding, with large frequency deviations, load inter­
ruptions, and system restoration.
The DTS also has an instructional system that allows an instructor to 
create the scenarios on which the trainee (operator) can practice operating the 
system. The greatest benefit is usually obtained from the interaction of the dis­
patcher and the simulation. Often the instructor can “assist” the simulation 
to make it more realistic or interesting. In this interaction, the behavior of the 
power system becomes very unpredictable and flexible analysis tools are useful 
for the instructor to modify or analyze the training session. 
8.3.5  WAMS
A wide-area monitoring system is a new set of applications tools that are emerg­
ing to address not just immediate reliability concerns but also operations issues 
and long-term system planning as well. WAMS is an enabling technology, and 
while its contribution to preserving grid integrity in an emergency is clear, it 
also represents an equally important advancement for the analytic and planning 
activities that will preserve grid integrity over the long term.
WAMS-based technologies elevate the network applications from per­
forming point-based network analysis to a wide-area analysis of the system. 
WAMS also has the ability to go beyond to analyze the effects on the system 
from impending major disasters. 
WAMS can have a significant impact on day-to-day operations as well. 
Having a more precise understanding of the conditions at a specific intertie, for 
example, would allow an operator to push that connection closer to its operat­
ing limit without sacrificing reliability.
8.3.6  Modeling Apps
For EMSs to function properly, they need three main sets of data: (1) the dy­
namic data that comes from the SCADA scans, (2) the calculated data that is 
the output of various calculations that are the outputs of the applications, and 
(3) the system models. Until now, we have mainly discussed the first and the 
second. In this section we will discuss the third—system models.
For every application in an EMS, we need the static data about how the 
system is connected so that the algorithms can work on them. For example, for 
all network applications, there is some basic static information that is needed 

150 
Electric System Operations  
about the network: (1) the type of component (transmission line, transformer, 
circuit breaker, etc.), (2) component ID, (3) its location (name of the substation 
where this component is located), (4) its characteristics (e.g., for a transmission 
line, its resistance and inductance), and (5) its connectivity (meaning who it is 
connected to). With this information and the state information as the output of 
the state estimator (for example), the power flow calculations can be performed.
SCADA models. At its very basic, the sets of data necessary in SCADA 
models fall into three main groups: substations, RTUs, and communica­
tions.
• Substation and data points: In this group, the model tracks all the 
components in a substation and what kinds of data points and con­
trols exist for those components. Information like a specific trans­
former has x number of sensors for current sensing, voltage sensing, 
and oil temperature sensing, and if a circuit breaker has y number of 
controls like open, close, they will all be tracked here. Key charac­
teristics of the sensor like conversion/calibration parameters are all 
tracked in this group.
• RTUs: This group tracks which sensors/controls are coming across 
which RTU and the specific RTU characteristics that are required to 
track the data coming across them. 
• Communications: Communications are a key component of the SCA­
DA model. As a result, tracking their availability becomes equally im­
portant. The communications model tracks which RTUs are brought 
into the SCADA front-end through which communication path.
Network models. The main network model runs in one single group fo­
cusking on how the various network components are located—mainly 
at a substation level. Every component is tracked through the substation 
they reside in. This works pretty well for most components except the 
ones like transmission lines, which go from one substation to another.
  The models generally supported in the network model include trans­
mission lines, transformers, circuit breakers in all its flavors (circuit break­
ers, disconnects, etc.), voltage regulators, capacitors, and loads. In general, 
the load model is considered one of the most important of all—its fidelity 
will drive much of the fidelity of the calculations in the applications. In 
general, the level of detail in the model for each component will depend 
on the various algorithms being supported in the network applications.
  While the static version of the network model is collected in a node-
circuit breaker version, which means that every component is connected 
to another through a node and circuit breakers separate the components. 
The online, or the version of this model used in various software systems, 

 
Energy Management Systems 
151
is also called the bus-branch model because the circuit (or any form of a 
switch) is either closed or open. Based on this, the connectivity model is 
created.
Generation models. While the generation model is very similar to the net­
work model in its structure, the key focus of the generation model is 
less on the network/power system attributes and more on the generation 
economic attributes. Without a market, the economics would be used to 
perform economic dispatch and confirm that the system is being run in 
an economic manner. 
DTS models. DTS models support the modeling requirements of the DTS 
specifically. The modeling needs of the DTS are more to support the pow­
er system modeling portion of the DTS, while the other modeling needs 
are met by their respective models.
The primary requirements of the DTS model are focused on the gen­
erator prime mover models (e.g., turbines and boilers), protection relay 
models (over/under current relays, over/under voltage relays, distance 
protection, etc.).
Source database. Different EMSs look at their modeling applications dif­
ferently. They either maintain each of the models identified above sepa­
rately or all of them together in one single location. When they are all lo­
cated together in one single place, the system is also known by a different 
name—the source database.
Model validation and verification. Every EMS comes with one or more 
model validation and verification applications whose primary responsibil­
ity is to ensure that the various datasets are in synch with each other and 
are named appropriately, connected to the right components on each side, 
and have consistent parametric characteristics.
Endnotes
[1]	 Definition of the EMS–© Copyright Modern Grid Solutions LLC.
[2]	 The Inter-Control Center Communications Protocol (ICCP or IEC 60870-6/TASE.2) 
[1] is being specified by utility organizations throughout the world to provide data ex­
change over wide area networks (WANs) between utility control centers, utilities, power 
pools, regional control centers, and Non-Utility Generators. ICCP is also an international 
standard: International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) Telecontrol Application Ser­
vice Element 2 (TASE.2).
[3]	 A service-oriented architecture (SOA) is an underlying software system that is uniquely 
designed to allow multiple disparate systems to work together in a many-to-many mode. 
This underlying software includes a set of predefined business functionalities implement­
ed as software that is reusable by different systems at the same time. Implementing an SOA 

152 
Electric System Operations  
architecture forces one to rethink the underlying system design completely because of a 
planned move away from a one-to-one interaction mode, which is the most common form 
of implementing these systems.
[4]	 Distributed control systems (DCSs) are dedicated systems used to control a variety of 
manufacturing processes like generating stations. They are generally localized to a plant 
and the controls are distributed in the system with each component sub-system controlled 
by one or more controllers. The entire system of controllers is connected by networks for 
communication and monitoring.
[5]	 Figure 8.3 is a picture of an older mapboard with tiles and static information, Courtesy 
Alstom Grid. Picture placed here with their permission.  All copyrights of this picture 
remain with Alstom Grid.
[6]	 In some instances, the sensor may be external to the substation and may generally send the 
data to a communications aggregator somewhere in the system – which in turn sends the 
data to the central site.
[7]	 Figure 8.4 is a picture showing use of strip-chart recorders and other digitally supported 
devices in a control center, Courtesy Alstom Grid. Picture placed here with their permis­
sion.  All copyrights of this picture remain with Alstom Grid.
[8]	 Glenn Stagg has been widely credited with being the pioneer who made the first move 
from special purpose computers to general purpose computers.
[9]	 Figure 8.5 is a picture of a typical Alarm Display, Courtesy Alstom Grid. Picture placed 
here with their permission.  All copyrights of this picture remain with Alstom Grid.
[10]	 The connectivity checking is another form of error checking. For example, if a circuit 
breaker is open, then under normal circumstances the flow of power through a line should 
be zero.  If it is not, then the Scanner can identify that one of the two measurements is 
suspect.
[11]	 Figure 8.6 shows a high-level view of a Dispatcher Training Simulator, Courtesy Alstom 
Grid. Picture placed here with their permission.  All copyrights of this picture remain with 
Alstom Grid

153
9
Outage Management System
The electrification infrastructure has been hailed as the single most important 
achievement of the 20th century and that mandate has been provided to utili­
ties to carry it out. The most basic mandate of the utilities is to provide safe, 
reliable, and high-quality power to its customers. It is indispensable to factories, 
commercial establishments, homes, and even most recreational facilities. Lack 
of electricity causes inconvenience and economic loss due to reduced industrial 
production or in preventing the conducting of commercial business. 
The definition of an outage [1] is: a quantity or portion of something 
lacking after delivery or storage or a temporary suspension of operation, espe­
cially of electric power.
As our definition indicates, an outage can be anything from a sustained 
lack of electric power to temporary loss of power and even to flickering of power 
(which is more of a lack of power quality). When any of these happen, it dis­
rupts life. When an outage happens, in essence, the utility is not able to deliver 
on its mandate.
Outages happen due to a variety of reasons, including:
• The circuits in a home get overloaded, causing one or more of the circuit 
breakers in the house to trip, or the main circuit breaker trips because of 
overloading in the circuits inside the home. When this happens, either 
part of the home or the complete home loses supply.
• A line gets overloaded and either burns down due to overheating or the 
overload leads to a relay or circuit breaker tripping, which in turns leads 
to one or more circuits being disconnected from supply.

154 
Electric System Operations  
• A line gets overloaded and the overheating leads to the line sagging so 
much that it may touch a tree or something else, thereby short-circuiting 
it to the ground and leading to relays tripping and disconnecting parts of 
the system from the supply. 
• An electric pole or transmission tower gets knocked down either due to 
a storm or due to a car hitting the pole, leading to lines getting discon­
nected or falling on the ground and short-circuiting.
• A storm blows over an area and several trees or tree limbs fall on electric 
lines, thereby severing them and resulting in circuits being disconnect­
ing from supply. 
• A combination of animals and faulty equipment/human error has also 
been known to cause outages. Rats or other animals can get into sub­
stations and short out the busbars, leading to an outage in a substation 
which in turn results in an outage for several people who are fed from 
that substation. 
While the list provided above is only partial, each of these incidents (and 
possibly others) can cause outages ranging from one home to large areas of out­
age within and beyond a single utility’s jurisdiction.
9.1  Types of Outages
There are two main types of outages: transmission and distribution. Their be­
haviors and impact are vastly different, as detailed below.
9.1.1  Transmission Outages
Transmission systems as we have identified earlier are generally networked in 
nature. This means that most times, when one component fails either due to 
a fault or a natural disaster, the system will still stay stable and continue oper­
ating as if nothing happened. However, under some severe circumstances, a 
single outage can cause other lines to be overloaded and then trip, leading to a 
cascading situation. When this happens, a much larger portion of the grid gets 
disconnected from supply and every customer (residential, industrial, and com­
mercial) in that area loses power. 
The networked nature of transmission systems also can lead to situations 
where the cascading outages can escalate very rapidly, leading to large segments 
of the population being out of power very quickly. The 2003 outage in the 
Northeast United States is one such example, where in a period of 4 hours a 

 
Outage Management System 
155
large portion of the Northeast part of North America was outaged and about 55 
million people lost power across the United States and Canada. 
Another major characteristic of transmission outages is the fact that these 
systems tend to be well covered by sensors and as a result the utility will know if 
and where the power is out. The system operator also has several tools and the 
benefit from experience working through restoration drills over several years. 
Regardless of the type and extent of the outage, these restoration drills allow the 
operator with strong knowledge of system behavior and different mechanisms 
to start the restoration process and bring systems back quickly. In the Northeast 
blackout, while some power was restored by 11 p.m., many did not get power 
back until 8 a.m. the next day.
9.1.2  Distribution Outages
Unlike transmission systems, mostly distribution systems are radial in nature. 
As a result, when something trips, most customers downstream from the loca­
tion of the trip will lose power. Distribution outages also are rarely of a cascad­
ing nature given that they lose load that is not picked up by other feeders in a 
networked system. 
Most distribution outages are due to storm or severe heat conditions in 
which large swathes of a utility’s jurisdiction loses power mainly due to downed 
power lines. Distribution systems also by their very nature tend to be spread 
out, which makes it difficult to restore because the storms cause several outages 
and each one needs to be repaired individually with a lot of attention. When a 
storms comes in, for utilities, it is generally “all hands on deck” with every em­
ployee taking on a specific storm response role. For large distribution outages, 
it is also fairly common for crews from different utilities to come in and help 
with the restoration process. 
A unique aspect of distribution outages is the nested outage, which, as the 
name implies is an outage within an outage. Nested outages happen because 
there are actual multiple outages in a neighborhood or location and the one 
with the largest impact is fixed first. When this outage is fixed, it is not im­
mediately known if there were other outages downstream of this outage until 
the feeder is energized and someone actually drives through the neighborhood 
to check if all the homes are energized. It is expected that the implementation 
of AMI systems may help with solving the problem of nested outages because 
most AMI meters can be pinged to check if they are live or not.
Figure 9.1 presents the output of an outage analysis superimposed on 
an OMS outage map. The shaded areas point to locations in the distribution 
system that have lost power and based on that the system operator identifies the 
possible location for a fault and sends the trouble-men to check it out.

156 
Electric System Operations  
9.2  Origins of the OMS
Outages have been in existence since the dawn of the electric utility. To track 
outages, some form of an OMS has also been in existence since then.
The origins of an outage management system started with the recording 
of trouble-calls, leading to an earlier name—trouble-call management system. 
An early version of the trouble-call process was basically to record incoming 
calls with customers or others reporting a problem in the system. The problem 
could be of any form, obviously with an outage being one of the more common 
items reported. In those days and in most places even now, the only way for a 
utility to know about an outage was if someone called in and informed the util­
ity that they were out of power at their home or premise. The utility collected 
the information from the outage calls, and from the pattern of calls received 
and their locations, they determined the likely location and cause of the outage. 
A crew was then sent to the location of the outage to investigate further and 
begin repairs.
Figure 9.1  Distribution-level outage analysis superimposed on an OMS map. (Picture cour­
tesy of Alstom Grid and used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for this 
image.)

 
Outage Management System 
157
9.2.1  The Paper Age
When calls were received at a utility’s customer service center, they were re­
corded by hand on a “trouble ticket” or they were entered in a computer and 
then printed. These tickets were then sent in some form to the service center 
where the outages were being managed for that location (very often called ser­
vice districts). At that location, these tickets were manually sorted by the circuit 
on which the customers were connected and then placed in a group for further 
action. 
In the service centers, experienced analyzers would then look at the tickets 
and their locations and try to identify the root location of the outage. Printed 
copies of the electrical maps of the distribution grid would be used to assist 
them in following the outage locations and identifying the root cause location. 
A trouble-man (or T-Man) would be sent to the location to pinpoint the exact 
source of the outage. Sometimes they would start from the location identified 
in the service center and then drive along the line to locate the real outage. They 
would then make an assessment of the damage and report back to the service 
center, where a service work order would be created. If the damage was simple, 
the T-Man would be able to fix it—if not, a standard bucket truck with the 
right equipment and supplies would be requested.
This extremely manual set of activities worked well when the volume of 
calls was light and the number of outages was small. However, during storms 
when a large number of outages happen, the number of calls goes severely up 
and this process becomes difficult to sustain. At this time, the utility will also 
need to prioritize which calls get addressed first and so on, leading to an in­
creased potential for error, lost (or misfiled) trouble tickets, and so on. 
Manual paper-based processes also made the collection of outage metrics 
very difficult because (1) very often after a storm most of the regular employees 
went back to their regular jobs, and (2) much of the effort at collecting the out­
aged customer data was difficult to calculate and ended up mostly in guesswork. 
9.2.2  The Move to an Outage Management System
As utilities got more customers, there were more outages, there was a greater ex­
pectation of the need to resolve them quickly in a cost-effective manner. Enter 
the beginnings of the modern outage management system. 
At first, utilities were just automating the manual process described above. 
This resulted in the early trouble-call management systems, which started with 
manual entering of names and locations of outaged customers into a database 
with all customer data and their locations. As these grew in size and complexity, 
two major sets of information were added:

158 
Electric System Operations  
1.	 An underling connectivity model of the distribution system with as 
much detail as possible all the way to the customer’s premise. This was 
generally stored in the form of a feeder tree, which was a static descrip­
tion of each feeder, and the position of each protective device (e.g., 
fuse or recloser) in the feeder hierarchy and customers were assigned 
to specific circuits and upstream protective devices.
2.	 Simplified algorithms that took advantage of the connectivity model 
and provided the service analyzers with quicker feedback on the prob­
able location of the root cause fault.
Over time, these systems got more and more sophisticated, leading to the 
addition of graphical user interfaces with a graphic form of the connectivity 
model on the screen with outages actually placed on them. Automation was 
also getting added to these systems to allow for the prioritization of the outages 
based on key business rules such as number of customers in a single outage or 
criticality of a specific outage (e.g., for a hospital), and so on. The next step re­
sulted in the interaction and creation of work orders so that either trouble-men 
or other field crews could be directly dispatched and the resultant restoration of 
the outage logged against the work order and the subsequent customers.
As the level of automation increased, the outcome from these systems also 
became more effective and the reports more accurate.
9.3  Architecture of an OMS
The OMS is one of the few systems in this book that has registered users from 
outside the control center environment. This is more of a business applica­
tion suite than an operational application suite. The set of utility personnel 
who tend to have access to this suite of applications include system operators, 
emergency service dispatch center personnel, trouble-men, utility mid-to-se­
nior-level management and executives, and in the event of a storm, just about 
most utility personnel. As a result, in a typical utility, it is not uncommon to 
have several hundreds of users on this system, some inside the control center 
and many outside. This also means that the OMS as a system is accessed by 
several people whose access may need to be tightly handled and managed to 
ensure that they do not cause any inadvertent issues with either the data entry 
or data interpretation. In addition, the business aspects of this system also re­
quires some extensive controls and audit tracking—basic requirements of any 
business application.
Figure 9.2 provides a very good insight into the details of how the OMS 
is set up within a utility.

 
Outage Management System 
159
Figure 9.2  OMS architecture. (© Modern Grid Solutions.)

160 
Electric System Operations  
Outage Engine
The engine’s basic functionality is to take the input calls and other sources of 
outages to pinpoint possible locations of the actual outage. During storm con­
ditions, this can be tall order because there could be several thousands of calls 
coming in reporting several hundreds of outage locations. The engine uses the 
core database from the GIS, asset registry, and customer locations to perform 
these actions and also identify the customers and customer counts on who has 
lost power. Information from SCADA, DMS, and other automation sources 
can also augment this analysis by providing more concrete information regard­
ing open devices or overloaded information in the field. The GIS information 
including maps and connectivity also allows the engine to actually place the 
customers and source of outages on the outage maps, which are used not only 
by the outage analysts but also on large TV monitors in emergency operations 
centers for viewing by operators and utility executives.
Key Interfaces
• Customer interface: This is the interface through which customer out­
age information is brought into the outage engine. This could come in 
through one or more of IVR [2] systems call centers representatives or 
other mechanisms.
  As AMI systems become more prevalent, it is anticipated that they 
will become the primary mode of getting outage information into the 
engine, thereby allowing the engine to be more accurate in truly un­
derstanding all customers who have lost power. This will lead to faster 
and more accurate identification of the outage location without actu­
ally waiting for customers to call in with their outage information. Tests 
of AMI integration with OMS systems at various utilities have already 
yielded successful results in improving outage response. 
• Real-time data interface: This is the interface to some of the real-time 
systems like SCADA, DMS, or other real-time automation (substation 
automation, distribution automation) subsystems that are also respon­
sible for protecting the distribution system. When these systems trigger 
on a fault, they not only open circuit breakers that are known ahead of 
time but also provide a good indication of the location of the fault. Be­
cause of the real-time nature of the systems, these interfaces tend to be 
very specific to the system they are interfacing with and most often these 
interfaces also tend to be one-way into the OMS. Any return data move­
ment out of the OMS to SCADA and so on tends to be done manually. 

 
Outage Management System 
161
• Network/model generation: One of the key foundations to an effectively 
functioning OMS system is access to an accurate network connectivity 
model and associated renderings (most often) from a GIS system and 
list of assets and their locations from an asset registry. The OMS starts 
off with these two sets of models and superimposes various kinds of in­
formation on top of it—outages, temporary model changes in the field, 
system tags, outage statuses, crew locations, and so on. All of this also 
gets updated on the renderings so that all users can get a visual map of 
the actual outage situation at any time. 
• Utility business interface: Outages are such an important and sensitive 
issue for utility executives that much has been done in terms of auto­
mating several of the interfaces to utility business systems as well as pro­
viding information to utility execs and managers. The most important 
of these interfaces are the ones to the work and resource management 
system. In this system, the outage analyst can take outages as they are 
prioritized and use this interface to direct work to field crews. Using the 
field force automation interface, the outage analyst can send out key 
information and stay in constant touch with the trouble-men as well 
as the field crew as the outage is being fixed and the circuit reenergized.
  Utility managers and executives also like to stay in the loop on outages 
and many tend to be on e-mail/pager alert as different outages are identi­
fied and the number of customers estimated. This is an important part 
of utility internal communications so that (if necessary) the executives 
can jump in and assist with reassigning resources depending upon the 
nature of the emergency. 
Customer Portal 
Many OMS systems are being paired up with specialized customer portals that 
could nowadays include a combination of both Web-based information dis­
semination and even push of outage notifications and other information to a 
smartphone if so desired by the customer. From the portal, which is fed mainly 
by the OMS, the customer can either get general outage information like how 
extensive a specific storm-based outage is. They can also get customer-specific 
outages upon some form of a log-in where they can get better estimations of 
ETOR.
Report
Given the importance of outages, it is normal to expect that several agencies are 
looking for outage metrics and other reporting requirements from an OMS. 

162 
Electric System Operations  
Beyond the normal need to track the foundational metrics like SAIDI, CAIDI, 
and SAIFI, as mandated by NERC, newer ones like MAIFI are coming up and 
becoming more and more important in today’s utility environment.
Beyond the needs of regulators, utility management also looks for differ­
ent pieces of information that don’t just drive an understanding of the perfor­
mance of the utility under a major outage, but more important, is also used to 
drive capital decisions of equipment repair/replacement.
As a result of these reporting requirements, OMS systems tend to have 
within itself, a fairly complex reporting engine that not only has canned re­
ports but also allows the users to create ad hoc reports for specific information 
mining. 
Operator User Interface
This in fact covers all user interfaces for OMS systems.
OMS user interfaces have evolved dramatically over time. They started out 
with systems that utilized a tabular user interface that tracked it by the outage 
and recorded the extent of the outage in each row. However, these mechanisms 
made it difficult for the user to visualize the outage location. It was also difficult 
to reflect the effect of any feeder reconfiguration that may have been performed, 
especially if the reconfiguration was only temporary. Over time, these systems 
gave way to a spatial representation that was able to bring a graphical approach 
to outage management. 
The newer OMS systems are based on the GIS maps and the underly­
ing spatial data structures. As outage calls come in, they are mapped on to the 
feeders directly and show up on the map. The maps are both graphical and 
geospatial in nature—an aspect that is necessary to allow not only the appro­
priate grouping of outages by feeders but also to provide for the right routing 
and scheduling of trouble-men or field crew and enable maximum efficiency. 
In some, the right interfaces with work and resource management systems also 
allow for mapping crew locations right on the same map as the outages so that 
the operators know which crew is working on which outage and also who is the 
closest to the next outages.
In addition, integrating the outage maps to industry standard tools like 
Google Maps is being tested by several vendors and could become standard of­
ferings in the next generation of OMS systems. 
9.4  The Business of Managing Outages
Outages are important business for a utility. Consumers do not like outages 
[3] and want them to be gone. They speak loud and clear through their state 
regulators who tend to penalize their utilities during rate cases when they feel 

 
Outage Management System 
163
that a utility has done a particularly bad job at responding to outages. Lastly, 
the public perception of a utility’s brand is so heavily linked to their outage 
response, that recently they have been punished even more severely by their 
shareholders when their outage response (or the lack of appropriate response) 
reaches the news outlets and becomes a major point of discussion. An example 
of this could be seen in the resignation of the president and chief operating offi­
cer of Connecticut Light & Power, the state’s largest utility, after coming under 
fire for how the company handled widespread power outages following a major 
snowstorm in 2011.
People don’t like power outages. What may be surprising is the number of 
Americans that are not willing to tolerate disruption even for some handy 
compensation. More than one-quarter of the American public believes 
they should never experience an electric power outage, unless there is an 
extreme weather event [3].
Given its most often direct link to rate case outcomes and the fact that 
utilities are fundamentally asset management companies and live and die by 
their ability to recover on their investments (utilities prefer to do a good job on 
their outage response), they really do like to restore outages as soon as possible. 
They do this by several efficiency measures such as:
• Position crews in key locations ahead of time. As the path of the storm is 
identified, utilities are beginning to position key crews (mainly trouble-
men to start with) in locations spread out in their jurisdiction so that 
they can start the restoration work as soon as possible. Some utilities are 
also having mobile service and dispatch centers that can be dispatched 
to other locations to increase the number of people who can dispatch. 
This becomes even more important during large storms like hurricanes 
where they may also need to coordinate with crews from other utilities.
• Dispatch crews and trouble-men more efficiently. Sending the right crew 
the first time with the right equipment and parts is an important aspect 
of changing the paradigm. This can be done by providing the trouble-
men with OMS terminals and they can perform a full diagnostic and 
assessment of the problem and the parts needed. This requires either 
the field crew who go there after the trouble-men to first come back to 
the service center to get everything they need or for them to go straight 
to the problem location and have the parts and tools sent to them sepa­
rately. Either of these mechanisms can work depending on where they 
are all located.

164 
Electric System Operations  
• Reduce okay on arrivals (OKA). OKA is an important aspect of outage 
management because truck rolls cost time and money that could be bet­
ter spent on solving actual problems. Fully confirming that there is a 
real problem is critical to sending the crew out there. Admittedly, this is 
a difficult problem to solve, though AMI should help in alleviating this 
to a good extent. 
• Improve ETOR timelines and accuracy. This means having a structured 
process for estimating and updating the ETOR information. From a 
customer service perspective, people tend to place a lot of emphasis on 
getting their power back within the time frame given by a utility—and 
when they do not get the power back on time and if it happens very 
often, they lose faith in the utility’s ability to predict when their power 
comes back on. 
9.5  Impact of Smart Meter on the OMS
Smart meters have the potential to make some of the most dramatic improve­
ments in the arena of outage management. For the first time, utilities will have 
something at the home’s location that knows when there is power to the home 
and when there is not. These meters also have the ability to detect if the prob­
lem is on the premise side of the meter or on the grid side.
Smart meters have some key characteristics [4] that allow them to provide 
the features described above and many more, including:
• Last gasp: Smart meters have the capability to send a “last gasp” signal 
to the metering head-end system just before they lose power. The meter 
head-end system can pass this signal on to the OMS which in turn can 
interpret the premise as being without power. This information is used 
by the OMS in the same way that it would process a customer call with 
information of loss of power. This characteristic allows the utility to 
know about a customer loss of power even before either the customer 
knows about it or calls the utility about it. This will allow the utility to 
inform the customer before they call in, thereby reducing call center call 
volumes. Getting this kind of information on all the outages in a loca­
tion allows the OMS to better understand the extent of the outage and 
hence better diagnose the probable location of the originating fault and 
send the right crew to the right location. These characteristics provide 
for reduced and possibly more accurate ETOR calculations.
• Ping for being powered: Smart meters also allow for the meter head-end 
operator to ping them to see if they are still powered. When the cus­

 
Outage Management System 
165
tomer calls the customer service representative about an outage, they can 
ping the meter to check if the problem is on the grid side of the meter 
or on the home side. If it is the latter, then the customer may need to fix 
the problem by themselves.
Nested outages are a phenomenon that occurs during widespread storm 
damage. There could be multiple outages and some could be nested—meaning 
that when there are multiple outages, sometimes the outermost outage could be 
identified but there could be some inner outage locations as well. As soon as the 
crew has fixed the outage problem, the operator can ping all the meters to see if 
they all come back on—and if some of them are still out of power, then it means 
a nested outage has been identified. Now, instead of the crew finishing one 
outage and going back to the service center only to find that there was another 
outage at or near the previous service location, they could move on to the new 
location and work on fixing the problem. This characteristic allows for overall 
improvements in SAIDI/CAIDI numbers and of course the obvious customer 
satisfaction improvements. 
These smart meter impacts on the OMS are affected by the types of com­
munications methods used between the smart meters and the meter head-end. 
If it is wireless, and a part of the wireless system goes down, then it does become 
difficult for the smart meters to either send out a last gasp or respond to a ping. 
When something like this happens, then we are back to the days of OMS in 
which we were dependent on the ability of the customer to call in and tell the 
utility about the outage, and also possibly the need to call them back to tell 
them that the power is back on.
9.6  Future of OMS? 
The future of the OMS system is a little cloudy. Much of it depends on the suc­
cess of the DMS (next chapter) and how it is taken up in the marketplace. The 
OMS and DMS have a lot of features in common as will be explained in the 
next chapter. These common features are:
• Reduce manual work for switching, logging, and reporting. Keeping the 
full state of the system in one place is important because it simplifies the 
maintenance process of keeping the two databases in synch. There are 
several items of data that need to go back and forth between the two sys­
tems—device statuses, SCADA maintenance tags, relay/fuse trips, and 
so on.

166 
Electric System Operations  
• Tracking all deenergized segments of the grid in one place. Currently, 
planned outages and those observed by SCADA are fist maintained in 
the DMS and then passed on to the OMS. Similarly, the ones not ob­
served through SCADA but called in are recorded in OMS first and 
need to be either manually or automatically passed on to the DMS.
• The need to generate switching sequences for either deenergizing a compo­
nent or for reenergizing it. It does not make sense to develop switching 
sequences for unplanned outages in an OMS and for planned outages 
in a DMS. Developing all switching sequences in one location is opti­
mum because it would then take advantage of the full state of the system 
that is both planned and unplanned. In the long run, keeping these two 
systems in synch would require a tremendous amount of effort because 
the two systems are updated differently and the control requirements of 
the two are also different. OMS is fundamentally a business system (it 
does not perform any controls on the system) whereas the DMS is fun­
damentally an operations tool and performs controls on the system via 
a SCADA-like interface. However, they both have many common func­
tions and track a lot of common data, and as a result, some utilities are 
taking the step of using combination systems—a step that even several 
vendors are also taking.
Much of the information on DMS systems is described in the next chapter.
End Notes
[1]	 http://www.answers.com/topic/outage. 
[2]	 Interactive voice response system (IVR) is a telephone-based system designed to improve 
communications and assist customers with their needs. An IVR system is a software ap­
plication that enables users to interact with a database through the keypad of a phone or 
voice commands. This allows services to be made available to customers 24 hours a day. 
IVRs can route calls to in-house agents or transfer calls to an outside extension, in this case 
to the outage engine.
[3]	 “Americans say: You Can’t Pay Me to Tolerate a Power Outage,” http://www.fierceenergy.
com/story/americans-say-you-cant-pay-me-tolerate-power-outage/2012-05-11?utm_
medium=nl&utm_source=internal#ixzz1uZvas9ES.
[4]	 Not all smart meter installations will have these characteristics. If you consider the evolu­
tion of smart meters all the way from AMR to AMI to today, they will have a variety of 
capabilities. However, these characteristics and others are expected to be the wave of the 
future.

167
10 
Distribution Management Systems
Distribution management for the longest period of time basically consisted of a 
basic SCADA system supported by paper maps generally operating out of one 
of the back rooms of a utility’s service centers. The SCADA system was gener­
ally piggybacked out of the transmission SCADA and one or more consoles 
were provided for the distribution operator to monitor and operate the parts of 
the distribution system that were covered by the SCADA system.
Unlike the situation with the EMS where there was a clear and specific 
requirement for the system borne out of the (now famous) New York blackouts, 
there wasn’t a specific industry event that specified a need for a DMS system. 
The need for a DMS came more from the ongoing increase in sophistication 
within the distribution system with more and more sensors being added, and 
supported by customer need for a more reliable distribution system that re­
quired an increased ability to control the system closer to the problem area. The 
arrival of the smart grid accelerated this effort.
In the mid-2000s, the distribution system started getting more atten­
tion. The inability to restore outages in a faster manner coupled with an aging 
workforce alarmed several of the distribution utilities. Their ongoing poor per­
formance metrics in SAIDI/CAIDI/SAIFI have made distribution operation a 
business platform with rising costs and unsatisfied customers complaining to 
their regulators. The set of industry drivers are identified next.
Increased Competition and Focus on Regulation
Utilities are facing significant external pressures that are driving a business mod­
el change for the industry from a customer perspective. States have been in­
creasingly active in promoting competition and market restructuring since the 
approval of the Energy Policy Act of 1992. These days, competition is primarily 
driven by the threat of municipalization [1]. 

168 
Electric System Operations  
Additionally, advocacy and industry watchdog groups have been high­
lighting the inadequate service provided by electric utilities, and state public 
utility commissions react by imposing increasingly demanding regulations as an 
alternative means to increase customer satisfaction. This has escalated the need 
for utilities to improve performance and enhance services in order to strengthen 
existing customer loyalty and attract new customers. Several consumer groups 
are also recommending improvements to service reliability, stronger enforce­
ment of rules, better consumer protections, and mandating public reporting 
processes.
Load Growth and Aging Infrastructure
Utilities are witnessing rapid expansion of power distribution systems in size 
and complexity coupled with a strict limitation of investment resources that 
severely limits the ability to improve the aging infrastructure. This is coming 
from having more customers in a service area and more load per customer [2]. 
Historically, the primary approach a utility would employ to mitigate the effect 
of load growth and aging infrastructure would be to spend significant dollars 
to upgrade the electric system. This is no longer possible because of increased 
pressures on infrastructure spend.
Data Overload
Many utilities have separate user interfaces for operating SCADA devices, man­
aging outages, interacting with field resources, entering outage information for 
customer communications, and logging and writing switching orders. In storm 
situations, operators find themselves managing multiple outages, toggling back 
and forth, trying to keep track of it all. Many times operators find themselves 
duplicating work effort and entering in the same information multiple times. 
A distribution system operator is simply overloaded with data. The data comes 
from different user interfaces and he or she does not have the time to convert 
the data into useful information that can be leveraged to make decisions. With­
out the time or tools to make sense of all the data, much of it is wasted, leading 
to less than optimal operation of the distribution system.
Aging Workforce
The aging workforce has and will continue to be a significant issue in the utility 
industry. In the next 10 years, the utility industry expects a significant reduc­
tion in its workforce as the average age of a utility worker is greater than 50 
years old. For some utilities, the number of expected retirements is over 40 
percent of its current staff, including supervisory personnel. This departure of 
key personnel represents a loss of knowledge capital, experience, and capability 
and results in a huge risk to effectively and efficiently operate the distribution 

 
Distribution Management Systems 
169
network. The key factor that is keeping aging workforce as a critical driver is the 
state of the economy, which is forcing many people to stay in their jobs longer.
Within distribution system operations, the long lead time required to 
onboard a new hire makes this even more pressing. Depending on the utility 
and the jurisdiction, the lead-time can range from 1 to 2 years to be capable to 
operate the network. Developing the proficiency and knowledge of the “traps” 
within the jurisdiction takes an even longer time. All of this intensifies the criti­
cality of the risk to the utility.
Desire to Reduce Outage Duration and Frequency
For a utility, an outage represents a failure to deliver on their basic mandate of 
delivering reliable power to their customers. As a result, they do not like them 
and will go to great lengths to either reduce outage duration and/or frequency.
With each outage their customer base is less satisfied with the electricity 
service and there have been many cases of cities breaking away from their util­
ity. In addition, SAIDI and SAIFI costs are impacting revenues as utilities are 
paying millions in PUC penalties or their rate-cases are being refused/ reduced. 
However, outages are a fact of nature and are in fact most often caused 
by acts of nature [3]. The way a utility reacts to an outage either through com­
municating with its customers and/or mobilizing the crews to get to the outages 
quickly and efficiently says a lot about the utility’s interests in reacting to its 
mandate. Utilities that tend to get hit by large hurricanes a lot tend to get bet­
ter at responding to them by planning their crew locations around their service 
territory based on the anticipated destruction leading to loss of power. 
Need for Increased Visibility
Visibility into the status of the power system network can have a significant 
impact on a utility’s ability to either support planned work and/or unplanned 
situations like storm restoration.
The manner in which a utility responds during an emergency is critical 
not only for safety but also for customer satisfaction. Paper wall maps of the 
past used to make it difficult to isolate where outages occurred, and know the 
state of equipment and location of field crews. After many phone calls and 
sectionalizing circuits, more knowledge about the outage is gained but unfor­
tunately only the control center would have the information because efficient 
dissemination of data could not be done electronically.
Informing the emergency centers are generally done using phones and as 
a result response is not quick enough. Without an efficient real-time system, 
customers are also not updated on the situation, causing more angst amongst 
them. 

170 
Electric System Operations  
Reduction of Risk from Disasters
In the current paper wall map environment, there is no backup map in case of a 
regional disaster. With paper maps, colored pushpins are inserted into a map of 
the network to indicate open or closed switches and crew locations. Tagging is 
done with markings on a paper hooked onto the location to indicate a location 
where a crew is dispatched.
There have been cases where pins and tags fell off the paper map. In this 
scenario there is no other backup map to indicate the “as-operated” state of the 
network. Control centers will spend countless hours calling crews and analyz­
ing switching plans to recover from a disaster situation. If the disaster is more 
extreme and knocks out a control center completely, there is no way to trans­
fer control to another control center. Cross-jurisdictional operations is more 
complicated.
10.1  Introduction to the DMS
A distribution management system (see Figure 10.1) is a system of computer-aided 
tools used by operators of electric distribution networks to monitor, control, and 
optimize the performance of the distribution system [4].
Currently, in many utilities, the system operator function is fairly manual 
in nature with several control centers still using paper maps for distribution. 
Key data such as relay settings are still not fully integrated into the major sys­
tems and these are critical to support switching activities. Outage management 
for the system operator still consists of manual data entry (after receiving a call 
from the customer) versus proactive identification of outages and their loca­
tions. The system operator skill set still for the most part is the journeyman skill 
set that emphasizes a more physical understanding of the grid instead of the 
power system knowledge with focus on information management.
In order to face these drivers, utilities are implementing DMS as a tool and 
are becoming front runners in distribution operations. DMS provides greater 
monitoring and control over the distribution grid in addition to enhancing ef­
ficiencies in the operator’s daily tasks, which results in quicker location of faults 
and lower duration of outages.
These key drivers analyzed have created a situation that results in a call 
to action to upgrade distribution operations and bring it into the 21st cen­
tury to take advantage of modern applications and better communications 
mechanisms.
DMS is answering this call to action!
A distribution management system was developed to provide a framework 
in which utilities can more easily support and maintain the distribution grid 
through the use of modern technology. Similar to an EMS, which started with 

 
Distribution Management Systems 
171
Figure 10.1  High-level view of how the DMS, EMS, and OMS interact with each other. (© Modern Grid Solutions.)

172 
Electric System Operations  
just a SCADA system and evolved to include the network applications and then 
WAMS, DMS has also evolved over time but in a very different manner.
DMS has evolved from different areas depending upon the strengths of 
the different vendors who are in this marketplace (see Figure 10.2). This evolu­
tion has also resulted in the vendors being able to demonstrate different key 
factors as their selling points as they have marketed their products to utilities. 
DMSs have evolved from outage management systems, SCADA dystems, and a 
combination of SCADA/OMS systems.
While the benefits of where the DMS evolved from can be debated, most 
of the DMSs are beginning to coalesce around a common set of functionalities, 
which will be defined later in this chapter. 
10.2  The Utility Context: Why is a DMS Needed?
Given the key drivers that were discussed earlier, it is important to analyze how 
DMS solves the key issues identified below.
Greater Standards for Customer Satisfaction
One of the most important benefits of implementing a distribution manage­
ment system is DMS’s ability to fully integrate with the outage management 
systems. DMS is able to monitor the progress of all network incidents and their 
potential impacts on customers.
The operator can use this information for regulatory compliance and 
improving their customer satisfaction. Market research by regulatory and cus­
tomer-representative bodies has identified that customers affected by outages 
are less dissatisfied when provided with additional information relating to the 
fault and especially its likely duration. This outage information is considered 
to represent more than an acknowledgment that the customer is affected by a 
particular network incident.
This higher customer satisfaction factor has resulted in further benefits 
for integrated DMS, OMS, and interactive voice recognition systems such that 
the necessary accurate information quickly flows between systems. This is also 
time-critical because customers contact the utilities almost immediately after 
the incident begins and continue to do so until after power restoration.
Decision Tools
Most DMS products have out-of-the-box functionality called modules or ap­
plications that provide enhanced functionality. They are called advanced ap­
plications and give operators tools at their fingertips that automate a lot of the 
work that would otherwise be manually intensive. This provides the operator 

 
Distribution Management Systems 
173
Figure 10.2  Evolution of a distribution management system. (© Modern Grid Solutions.)

174 
Electric System Operations  
with more time to analyze the results instead of spending time crunching data. 
Typical DMSs tend to include the following advanced applications:
• Load flow analysis, which is a real-time load data analysis to accurately 
represent a variety of network configurations and power system compo­
nents to relay voltage and VAR analysis and expected voltage impacts.
• Paperless restoration switching, which provides a recommended restora­
tion sequence based on real-time and historical data analysis as well as 
the ability to include potential limiting factor identification and the 
ability to manually preselect restoration criteria.
• Paperless planned switching, which is similar to restoration switching but 
used for implementing planned outages. Planned outages, as identified 
earlier, are required to perform maintenance tasks. 
• Study mode, which is the ability to run switching scenarios in a test mode 
prior to running the switching steps in the real-world environment. This 
mechanism also allows for operators to run “what-if” scenarios to maxi­
mize switching options.
• Distribution training simulator, which is a training module that allows 
operators to interact with the network environment in a safe manner. 
DMS vendors have varying levels of maturity in their training simula­
tors, ranging from an advanced test environment to a fully functioning 
network grid with real-time playback and the ability for a training super­
visor to input various real-world scenarios.
Reduced Outage Duration
With a fully integrated DMS, a system operator can expect to manage out­
ages more effectively. Instead of updating multiple paper maps and the outage 
system, the operator can concentrate on a single DMS map. With a fully func­
tional DMS, the operator can yet standard OMS functions of identifying out­
age locations, outage extent, and so on, and spend less time creating switching 
sequences since the DMS can determine and present switching scenarios that 
best meet the operator’s needs.
Moreover, rapid restoration of power following a nondamage fault can 
often be effected within the threshold time, which requires the incident to be 
included in SAIFI/SAIDI reporting. 
Proactive Management of the Distribution System
Most DMSs also come with a study mode that allows the operators to check for 
problems in switching steps before they are put into production. They can also 

 
Distribution Management Systems 
175
test out the various aspects of the daily operations plan prior to agreeing to the 
final plan of the list of maintenance actions that can be implemented.
Ability to Process Real-Time Data Quickly
DMS and its strong integration with SCADA allow the presentation of impor­
tant real time information quickly to the user.
For example, in the paper-based environment, if there were an outage, 
the operator will first need to recognize that an outage has occurred through an 
OMS or a phone call from a field crew. Then the operator will need to go over 
to the paper wall map and determine where that outage is on the circuit and the 
devices that are affected.
In a fully integrated DMS, the outage and deenergized lines would im­
mediately show up on the electronic map in some kind of a visually impactful 
mode—sometimes as flashing symbols to indicate an outage and colored lines 
to indicate what section of the grid is potentially without power.
When this happens, the operator can instantly identify the sections with 
lost power and also the isolating switches that border the outage. Similarly, if 
there is adequate SCADA coverage, it is possible that the operator could have 
also identified an overloaded situation ahead of it becoming an outage.
Disaster Recovery
Most DMSs are designed with the ability to have the “as-operated state” of the 
grid in a centralized location that is replicable to other locations. DMSs tend 
to be designed with advanced fault-tolerant architectures that can be replicated 
with other parts of the architecture. 
If a control center were to shut down due to a regional/local disaster, 
control of that jurisdiction can be easily transferred electronically to another 
functioning center very quickly. The extra load can then be handled by opera­
tors in the new location.
Increased Manageability of the Distribution Infrastructure
DMS provides clear and user-friendly interface for visualization of any size sec­
tion of the distribution network (schematic and geographical), topology analy­
ses with coloring of the network (energization, feeders area, and voltage levels), 
location of any element of the network (find function), and clear insight in 
technical data of all elements of the network. 
The graphics supported by the systems also allow for the panning and 
zooming of the displays to view either a larger portion of the distributions sys­
tem at the same time or a more detailed assessment of a smaller segment of the 
system. The software can also allow for the conversion of the actual geoaccurate 
system into a schematic three-line interpretation of a segment of the grid.

176 
Electric System Operations  
DMS is a Tool for Optimizing Employee and System Performance
The advanced set of tools that come with most DMSs supported by strong 
integration with several systems allow for a combination of improved system 
and operator performance. The deep integration of technology and processes 
both on the GIS modeling side as well as on the operational side with OMS, 
CIS, and other systems allow for serious savings in operator performance due 
to some possible interesting opportunities:
• Entering data once and having the data propagate automatically to all 
other systems and processes that require it.
• Ensuring online data acquired in a single space and stored in one place; 
this should be the same regardless whether the data is coming from the 
AMI/MDM system or SCADA system or manually entered. 
The DMS has several value-added advanced applications that come with 
the system. A couple of key examples are presented here:
• The Volt-VAR optimization application in any of its forms (VVO, 
CVVC, IVVC, and others) basically allows for optimal capacitor switch­
ing improving the voltage profile between the transformer and the load. 
Many times this is to reduce energy consumption.
• Fault location isolation and service restoration FLISR allows the opera­
tor to automatically identify fault location based on sensors in the field 
and then use the network connectivity model to identify the most opti­
mum route to service restoration. 
10.3  DMS: An Architectural Description
From a macro perspective (see Figure 10.3), the DMS sits the next level down 
from the EMS. However, from any other perspective, it is a very independent 
system in terms of its needs to monitor and operate the distribution system. 
Given that the DMS focused on distribution system, it has some key differences 
from an EMS (Table 10.1).
10.4  How the DMS Supports the System Operator’s Mandate
As time has progressed, the DMS has established itself as the foundation system 
to support the system operation mandate. It delivers on the mandate through a 
variety of characteristics:

 
Distribution Management Systems 
177
• Convergent: The DMS is the single repository of all operations-related 
information whether they are the maps/connectivity of the system, asset 
operational characteristics, limits, and so on. By keeping it all in one 
place, the DMS has allowed the system operator to go to one place for 
any specific piece of information related to distribution operations or for 
the need to take any specific action on the distribution system. 
• Complete: The DMS has the ability to provide the operator with a ho­
listic picture of the distribution system, taking on information from sev­
eral different sources, SCADA RTUs, IEDs, substation and distribution 
automation sensors, field crew location (from their on-board GPS sys­
tems), and others. Getting all the data and processing it allows the DMS 
to provide an as-complete-as-possible picture of the distribution system 
to the operator.
• Accurate: The algorithms used in a DMS provide a high level of preci­
sion on their output related to the calculation of the connectivity in 
the network, systems flows, and voltage magnitudes, planning them on 
the electronic map, and so on. This accuracy comes from using a so­
phisticated three-phase unbalanced power-flow as the underlying engine 
supported by n accurate GIS/power system model and characteristics. 
Figure 10.3  Architecture of a DMS. (Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid and used with their 
permission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for this image.)

178 
Electric System Operations  
As a result, the DMS uses SCADA values where available and model 
variables when actual measurements are not.
• Real-time: Given the real-time nature of the DMS and its applications, 
it has a unique ability to process most inputs extremely fast and also 
displays that information immediately upon discovery or calculation. 
This includes not only the calculated values like power flows and circuit 
breaker statues, but other information like alarms, exceptions, operator 
logs, and tags are all visible as soon as they are applied. 
• Interactive: The DMS provides the operator with the ability to interact 
with the system whether the action is being taken remotely to perform 
a control action or the operator needs to connect with the crew in the 
field and work on the control action in a manual manner. This is an im­
portant characteristic because many times in switching scenarios, some 
of the steps could be performed remotely and some steps need the as­
sistance of the field crew. Keeping all the steps and their completeness 
status (and time stamps) in a single location also allows the DMS to 
maintain its convergent characteristic.
Table 10.1
Difference between the Software Used in an EMS versus DMS*
EMS
DMS
Solves for a single-line system: Even though 
the transmission system is also three-phase, 
the phases are generally balanced.
Solves for a three-phase unbalanced system.
The underlying entry point into the EMS 
is through SCADA measurements, which 
are then fed into a state estimator that 
in turn feeds a powerflow to get the 
final understanding of the flows in the 
system. This happens because of the 
fundamental requirement that there are more 
measurements than states (remember the 
discussion on state estimator) that it is solving 
for.
The underlying entry point into the DMS is from 
the model fed into the DMS from the GIS, which 
leads to a solved power flow. This of course is 
the solved three-phase unbalanced power flow. 
SCADA measurements are then fed into this to 
update the solved power flow values in the next 
iteration. This then becomes an ongoing process 
of solved power flow being updated by SCADA 
measurements. This mechanism happens because 
in general this system is expecting fewer SCADA 
measurements than EMS/transmission—a result 
of fewer SCADA instances in the field.
The network applications are run in a 
sequence in the EMS focusing on a full-system 
analysis all at the same time.
The applications in a DMS are mostly ones that 
are run as a specific tool necessary for performing 
specific tasks—switching order creation, 
clearance management, volt-var control, etc. 
Much of the measurements are based out 
of a substation—again a product of most 
transmission components being generally all 
located within a substation. 
Much of the measurements are based external 
to a substation—a product of most distribution 
components being generally located outside a 
substation. 
*See Figure 10.3.

 
Distribution Management Systems 
179
• Dynamic: Most DMSs (see Figure 10.4) provide fairly sophisticated lay­
ering and advanced visualization mechanisms as a part of their display 
systems. They provide the ability to overlay various types of information 
on the map, like weather data, crew location information, different lev­
els of system connectivity/detail, and so on. The panning and zooming 
capability allows the DMS to show different levels of detail as you zoom 
in or out. 
• Advanced: As they moved away from the SCADA systems running on 
paper maps, the DMS vendors have provided a platform for advanced 
applications to run from same real-time or a study model.
  The study model allows the operators or operational planners to run 
multiple what-if scenarios either on the real-time model or on a future 
planned model. This is possibly one of the more powerful features of the 
DMS in that it allows the utility operations personnel to either study a 
future scenario or learn from a recreated scenario of a past disturbance.
  Incorporating these into a simulation model also allows the opera­
tor to be trained on realistic simulations of the distribution grid. These 
Figure 10.4  Picture of a typical DMS one-line diagram with three-phase and one-phase 
overlays. (Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid and used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains 
all copyrights for this image.)

180 
Electric System Operations  
simulation systems allow the distribution operators to be trained on dif­
ferent scenarios in a time-based simulation environment. 
• Ubiquitous: Until the onset of the DMS, we had discussed the use of 
paper maps and pushpins as their predecessor. With these capabilities, 
disaster recovery and backup was almost impossible. The DMS allows 
the capability to replicate the same information in multiple locations 
with different levels of permission to perform specific actions. Either 
upon a disaster scenario or during emergencies when extra hands are 
needed to help out with multiple nested outages, the DMS allows sup­
port operators to provide help all of them functioning from multiple 
locations. This comes in especially useful to transfer the full control of a 
jurisdiction from one control center to another either upon the occur­
rence of a disaster or for work-load balancing.
10.5  How the DMS Supports the Smart Grid
A DMS is in a unique position to support and enable the smart grid by becoming 
the single repository of all real-time and near-real-time data and power system con­
nectivity model (asset characteristics, connectivity, and renderings). The DMS in 
conjunction with the EMS and the OMS becomes the basic T&D foundation source 
of information to support the smart grid.
Three capabilities stand out with respect to how a DMS supports the 
various mandates of the smart grid. These are in addition to the foundational 
characteristics identified earlier.
• Self-healing grid: From a smart grid perspective, the self-healing grid 
has always been identified as the Holy Grail. DMS takes us part of the 
way there. As long as there are sensors in the field that detect faults and 
send the information back and the DMS has sufficient controls to be 
able to (either automatically or under manual control) open/close circuit 
switches, the DMS brings it all together.
  Understanding the location of the fault and combining it with the 
knowledge of power system connectivity and switch status/remote con­
trollability will allow the DMS to develop a new configuration that will 
minimize the number of customers lost and also allow the system to be 
brought back to normalcy in the fastest possible manner.
• Condition-based maintenance: The DMS has the best ability to track and 
maintain records on asset usage and it associated response patterns. This 
knowledge allows the DMS to analyze and develop different mainte­

 
Distribution Management Systems 
181
nance and/or replacement strategies for distribution assets. Given the 
study environment in the DMS, it can even try them in a safe environ­
ment and run them to failure before determining the best time to main­
tain or replace them.
• Predictive monitoring: Condition-based maintenance is the pre-cursor 
to predictive monitoring. Understanding usage and response patterns 
provides the relevant data that will then allows the DMS to analyze us­
age patterns and predict its possible failure. Doing this in real-time can 
allow the DMS operator to monitor the situation and take appropriate 
action based on the urgency, the perceived health of the specific asset, or 
the system conditions on that day or in the near future. 
10.6  Key Component of a DMS
The DMS in many ways is architected in a similar fashion as the EMS. It tends 
to have several of the same components as the EMS: hardware, software, data­
bases, and user interface (UI).
The following sections will provide insight into these components in 
more detail (see Figure 10.5).
10.6.1  DMS Hardware
The hardware used in a DMS has many of the same components as the EMS:
• Computers servers: Similar to the EMS, the DMS system servers are the 
main computers on which the various application sets like database ser­
vices, UI services, mapboard services, and a host of other system services 
are executed.
• UI devices: The UI devices, which are operator consoles, are generally 
configured similar to an EMS and even other systems within the control 
center.
• Electronic mapboard: Given that DMS systems are newer when 
compared to EMS systems, the mapboards are directly going to­
wards the electronic versions. But for all other practical purposes 
they still fulfill the same functionality of presenting an overview of 
the system state at a high level.
• RTUs and other front-end devices: The RTUs and their front-end proces­
sors function in a similar way as in the EMS. A newer set of devices that 
is being rolled out into the field include distribution automation devices 

182 
Electric System Operations  
Figure 10.5  Typical DMS technical architecture. (Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid and used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for 
this image.)

 
Distribution Management Systems 
183
and substation automation devices. While not all need to send informa­
tion back to the DMS, some do and may utilize mechanisms other than 
an RTU.
• Ancillary devices: The ancillary services devices that support a DMS are 
very similar to that in an EMS and provide similar services as well—
printers and plotters, alarm annunciators, and strip-chart recorders.
• Communications hardware: In the communications arena, we have seen 
the maximum amount of change over that of the EMS. While in the 
EMS, much of the communications were done over fixed wire to the 
central site, for the DMS, utilities are even experimenting with cellular-
based IP communications mechanisms. 
10.6.2  DMS Software
The underlying software used in a DMS is very similar to that in an EMS:
• Operating system software: DMSs appear to have moved into very general 
purpose operating systems like MS-Windows, Linux, Unix, and so on.
• Application software: DMSs have a similar set of applicant software that 
runs the gamut from SCADA (real-time) to advanced network applica­
tions to the more business-focused applications.
• System and utilities software: While alarms continues to be one of the 
more important system/utility software in a DMS, some of the other ap­
plications that are prevalent in an EMS also tend to be used in a DMS—
configuration manager, console, and mapboard control.
• Network/communications tracking software: The importance of track­
ing communications network status while being very similar as in the 
EMS—it tends to be done in a very different manner in a DMS mainly 
because of a more diverse set of communications medium being em­
ployed here. 
• Process management software: Similar to an EMS, the DMS also has an 
overarching piece of software system that manages and controls the ex­
ecution of all the types of applications, and is called the process manager 
(or a similar name).
10.6.3  DMS Databases
In the area of databases, DMS applications have moved significantly away from 
how EMSs were architected. Much of it is architected around relational data­
bases and time-sequenced databases. 

184 
Electric System Operations  
Figure 10.6  DMS application architecture. (© Modern Grid Solutions.)
10.6.4  DMS UI
The DMS consoles are architected very similar to the newer EMS UI consoles, 
which are mostly either Windows-based or Linux-based and provide much of 
the features we are all used to in our PCs and other workstations. 
10.7  DMS Application Suites
At the distribution level, utilities tend to want to solve very diffferent problems 
depending upon where they are located, the legacy of their power system ar­
chircture, and what kinds of problems tend to hit them on an ongoing basis. As 
a result, the DMS application architecture (see Figure 10.6) can be divided into 
the following three main segments: (1) core applications, (2) distribution and 
substation automation applications, and (3) integrating applications.
10.7.1  Core Applications
DMSs core applications are design to deliver to the core mandate of distri­
bution operations. This has more to do with supporting the basic day-to-day 
operations of a distribution utility and less to do with optimization of network 

 
Distribution Management Systems 
185
performance. The latter comes from the addition of distribution automation 
and substation automation functions.
The core applications of a DMS are:
Distribution SCADA
In general, there is little to no difference between distribution and transmission 
SCADA systems. The big difference is the need to provide remote monitoring 
and control of equipment located both in distribution substations and out on 
the distribution feeders. Just like in transmission, distribution SCADA is a ba­
sic building block upon which provides the ability to monitor the distribution 
system components in real-time or near real time.
The main purpose of any SCADA system is to continuously monitor the 
loading, status, and performance of equipment located on distribution feed­
ers. Under normal conditions, the system periodically acquires real-time values 
of current and voltage at various strategic measurement points and the open/
closed status of all monitored switches.
Typical sources of DSCADA measurement information and equipment 
status indications include:
• Intelligent electronic devices (IEDs) associated with distribution system 
power apparatus. IEDs include protective relays, device controllers (volt­
age regulators, capacitor bank controllers, etc.), and RTUs.
• Stand-alone sensors, such as faulted circuit indicators (FCIs) and line 
monitoring devices.
• External systems, such as AMI.
The DSCADA system also enables operators to remotely control devices 
located on the feeders. Controllable devices include reclosers, capacitor bank 
switches, voltage regulators, and any other electrically operable device.
DSCADA is also being used to monitor and (in some cases) control the 
growing number of distributed energy resources (DERs) being connected to 
the distribution system. DERs include distributed generating units (including 
renewables) and energy storage units.
Switching Sequence Generator
Besides SCADA, the switching sequence generator is considered to be one of 
the most important applications within the DMS. This application attempts 
to deliver to one of the main tasks that consumes the most time of a distribu­
tion operator’s job whether it is for normal operations or for emergency/storm 
restoration operations.

186 
Electric System Operations  
The main objective of the switching sequence generator is to support the 
operator’s job of develop a switching sequence to isolate specific components 
in a power system. During normal operations, it is created to isolate a specific 
component so that maintenance can be performed on it. During emergency op­
erations, it is created to find the best and quickest way to both isolate a faulted 
zone and/or to bring power back to the people.
The switching sequence generator works by running thousands of power 
flow solutions under different switching conditions to identify the one or more 
sequences that can perform the operation in the best manner possible. Several 
vendor offerings also provide for sequence generators that can deliver to one or 
more objective functions: (1) fewest set of operations to perform the isolation or 
reconnection sequence, and (2) fewest number of customers impacted and oth­
ers. It also performs this operation on the present state of the network, thereby 
ensuring that the operation, if triggered, would actually work as planned. 
From an implementation perspective, the output of the generator is an 
ordered list of actions that will need to be performed in sequence. The operator 
can simply perform the specific operations right from this list itself. It the spe­
cific operation is SCADA-enabled, the system connects and sends the control 
command through SCADA. If it needs to be performed manually by a crew in 
the field, the operator will communicate to the field crew and record the action 
as complete as soon as they complete it. This way, there is a full record of the 
actual completion of the switching action to either isolate or reconnect parts of 
the distribution grid.
Electronic Map Support
The electronic map is slowly becoming cornerstone of the DMS and distribu­
tion operations. Several features of the typical electronic map allows the system 
operator to become much more efficient 
• Geospatial or schematic visualization:The operator now has the ability to 
visualize a distribution network either in a geospatial mode or a schemat­
ic mode. The geospatial mode is the actual physical model of the power 
system in the field with all the components with their state information 
as they are connected. In a schematic view, the network is depicted in 
straight lines and at right angles with only power systems components 
shown. Figure 10.7 presents a DMS map in schematic form.
• Three-phase or single-line visualization. The electronic map can visualize 
the power system in either a single line mode or in a three-phase three-
line mode. Each of these modes allows the operator to view the system 
in different ways.

 
Distribution Management Systems 
187
Figure 10.7  DMS output in three-phase schematic form. (Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid and used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains all copy­
rights for this image.)

188 
Electric System Operations  
• Providing a topology-based connectivity model. A topology-based connec­
tivity model allows the operator to look at the distribution in terms of 
connected/live and outaged segments. The disconnected segment be­
tween the two provides the starting point for the faulted locations and 
also allows the operator to send the trouble-men to that location first. 
• Panning and/or zooming with different levels of details. The electronic 
map provides for easy panning of the displays, allowing the operator to 
follow a specific line or fault all the way to the source substation or to 
other substations to fix the problem zone. Similarly the zooming func­
tion works similar to something like Google Maps in that different levels 
of detail show up at each zoom level. Depending on the level of detail 
in the underlying GIS model that is being used, the map can also show 
details like electric poles, cross arms, and so on.
• Overlay of other relevant details for the operator. Most electronic maps also 
allow for overlaying other nonpower system data like weather patterns, 
storm patterns, field crew locations, building locations, and street maps/
traffic signals.
• Go up to transmission view or go down to distribution view. Most vendors 
support the integration between the DMS and EMS, thereby allowing 
the operator to go up the chain from distribution to transmission or 
down from transmission to distribution. This type of feature allows the 
operator to trace the problem to its original source or even allow them 
to solve the problem at a higher level. 
Distribution 3-Phase Unbalanced Power Flow
A foundational difference in a DMS is the three-phase unbalanced power flow. 
The sophistication of this algorithm is a differentiator in the quality of the 
DMS and the fidelity of the system. This is one of the key areas where the DMS 
differs from the EMS. 
• In an EMS, the power flow is solved at the tail end of the state estimator 
more to solve the state of the system to calculate the flow of power across 
the various transmission lines. This happens because in a transmission 
system, there are more measurements than observable states. 
• In a DMS, there are fewer observations than actual states. As a result, 
there is different need for the power flow algorithm here. Here it actu­
ally uses the power system model to actually maintain the state, which is 
then augmented by the measurements that come in from SCADA. Over 

 
Distribution Management Systems 
189
time, it is anticipated that as more measurements come in, this model 
will become more accurate. 
The DMS power flow model takes the load model and the connectivity 
model based on the information that is available to it and solves it.
10.7.2  Distribution and Substation Automation Applications
Distribution automation and substation automation are applications that get 
added on top of the DMS base applications and very often depend on special 
sensors in the field or on the substation to support the algorithms. Figure 10.3 
shows a subset of them from the field. We will discuss a few of these below.
Volt-VAR Control
Distribution feeders already have capacitor banks that assist in maintaining the 
voltage profile on the feeder. Very often these capacitor banks are either fixed 
(no switching) or switched in a schedule resulting in a suboptimal voltage pro­
file. It has been proven that flattening each feeder’s voltage profile and lowering 
the average voltage often results in significant energy savings while simultane­
ously maintaining unity power factor to eliminate technical losses.
IVVC is considered the most sophisticated of the Volt-VAR control 
mechanisms and provides all of the benefits of power factor correction, voltage 
optimization, and condition-based maintenance in a single, optimized package. 
In addition, IVVC enables conservation voltage reduction (CVR) on a utility’s 
system. CVR is a process by which the utility systematically reduces voltages in 
its distribution network, resulting in a proportional reduction of load on the 
network. A 1% reduction in voltage typically results in a 0.5% to 0.7% reduc­
tion in load.
In this system, there is generally an optimization engine that focuses on 
meeting the utility’s desired power factor and voltage targets while resolving 
conflicts. The application evaluates and controls LTC and regulator set points 
and tap positions, as well as capacitor bank states, in order to maintain target 
voltages in the distribution grid. It also evaluates and controls capacitor bank 
states to manage feeder and substation VAR flows. This optimization of re­
sources enables a utility to defer new installation costs by making the most of 
equipment already in place.
Feeder Load Balancing
Distribution feeders as they are designed [5] in the United States by nature are 
unbalanced. Depending on the load they are connected to, unbalanced feeders 

190 
Electric System Operations  
can result in overloaded phases and inadequate use of grid capacity with the 
extreme case of phase blowouts. 
While it is in the interests of utilities to maintain balanced feeder loadings 
to the extent possible, this is generally only done during initial design of the 
feeder. After that, there aren’t sufficient levels of controls to change the loadings 
in real time.
However, there are a new set of tools and controls becoming available 
for feeder load balancing to become a reality. This is done by a combination of 
using power flow analysis and switching scenario generation and execution to 
make this a reality. 
Fault Location Isolation and Service Restoration
FLISR applications can utilize decentralized, substation, or control center intel­
ligence to locate, isolate, reconfigure, and restore power to healthy sections of 
a circuit.
FLISR is a distribution automation application that networks groups of 
switches on a feeder to vastly improve the reliability of utility delivered power 
by “localizing” outages. Localizing restores power to the majority of an affected 
circuit, minimizing interruptions to the customers on the faulted portion of the 
line between the two most local automated switches. The FLISR software can 
automatically:
• Sense trips (faults) in switches that are monitored and controlled by a 
SCADA;
• Identify the faulted section;
• Isolate the fault;
• Restore power to customers by automatically switching them to non­
faulted sections of the line.
FLISR does not “fix” the problem. Utilities still need to send crews to the 
site of the fault, where they verify it and make permanent repairs. But many of 
the customers will experience smaller outage times. 
Equipment Condition Monitoring
This is a new area of an extension for the DMS. In the past, asset management 
at the distribution was considered to be more of an inventory management 
problem. To support this objective, asset maintenance was, for the most part, 
done either on a schedule or replacing it when it failed.
With a DMS, for the first time, utilities have equipment usage infor­
mation. Using this, newer applications for condition monitoring are being 

 
Distribution Management Systems 
191
designed and developed that can monitor equipment conditions in real time 
based on usage, peaks/valleys, and cycles. These applications can evaluate equip­
ment condition and inform the operator and even possibly set up maintenance 
requests as appropriate. 
10.7.3  Integrating Applications
For a DMS to function effectively, close integration (see Figure 10.8) with sev­
eral systems is imperative. While integration is also important to an EMS, it is 
far more important to the DMS due to the workflow nature of much of the 
effort that goes through a DMS. In this section, we examine some of the key 
integration points in a DMS:
Outage Management System 
Today, many utilities today utilize their OMS to operate the distribution grid. 
Connected to a GIS, the outage management electronic map is an effective tool 
to view the connected assets and associated attributes in the network. However, 
as reliance on SCADA and distribution/substation automation becomes more 
prevalent, utilities that manage their distribution operations through a DMS 
and outages through an OMS end up using two separate systems and need to 
look at integrating them. For this to happen effectively:
• Operator-commanded SCADA controls need to be passed through to 
the OMS for it to realize that a specific switch is open on command. 
Similarly, an uncommanded operation like (possibly) a relay trip also 
needs to be passed on to the OMS.
• Tags need to be passed on from SCADA to the OMS and possibly back, 
depending upon where the tag information is recorded. This is in re­
sponse to a safety issue. 
• Manual actions that are performed in response to a crew work order sent 
out by an OMS need to be tracked in the DMS to ensure that all switch 
actions manual or remote-controlled need to be tracked in the DMS. 
Utilities are moving towards a single integrated system which includes 
both DMS and OMS functionalities.
SCADA
Even though most DMSs come with a SCADA system built-in (sometimes 
called DSCADA), it is also quite common for DMSs to be integrated with 

192 
Electric System Operations  
other SCADAs—possibly a SCADA that is more commonly used for monitor­
ing and controlling the transmission system at the same utility. 
If the SCADA is an external SCADA, then the interface is generally 
through an ICCP interface. 
Geospatial Information System
DMSs and OMSs get their basic model information from another external 
system.  It can either be a GIS or a homegrown system that delivers the same 
functionality. 
EMS
As mentioned earlier, integration between an EMS and DMS is critical given 
that they both essentially monitor and support the same grid. For the EMS, 
the system at the end of a load connection is a distribution grid. Similarly, for 
a DMS, the system/network that delivers supply into a distribution network is 
the transmission grid.
This means that the operator, whether it be transmission or distribution 
operator, needs to be able to go up or down into the other’s system just to 
understand the impact of problems in one propagating into the other. If both 
the systems are developed by the same vendor, then they tend to have native 
interfaces between the two. If that is not the case, then the interface is through 
an ICCP-based mechanism. 
AMI/MDM System
While OMSs have AMI/MDM interfaces to provide outage information, the 
need for AMI/MDM interfaces for a DMS is more of a futuristic need. There is 
a belief in the industry that given the paucity of sensor information in a distrib­
uted system that feeds into a DMS, the information from meters could be of 
immense value to furthering the improvement of visibility into the distribution 
network. This subject will be covered in a later section of this chapter.
Customer Information System
The CIS system is the final holder of customer information including con­
sumption and so on. This information is required in the DMS (and if a OMS is 
integrated into one) to bring the customer side of the equation into the system. 
Customer information including location and which transformer they are con­
nected to are all information required in the DMS. 
Work and Resource Management System
Whether the DMS is integrated to an OMS or not, planned work is still done 
partly from within the DMS. The mechanism used in the utility to send this 

 
Distribution Management Systems 
193
information to the field crew is through the work order. While the main work 
order is created and sent out from within the work and resource management 
system, a critical set of fundamental information will come from the DMS, 
switching sequence.
10.8  DMS Models and Its Interface with GIS
The DMS and the supporting electronic map are only accurate as the system 
model that is contained within it. This model (for the most part) is provided 
by GIS or another system that could be homegrown and deliver the same func­
tionality. The GIS and its related asset systems provide the foundation to the 
DMS and as a result, must contain complete and accurate data, strong support­
ing functions and processes, and a robust, integrated set of systems. 
Complete and Accurate Data
The DMS relies heavily on a large amount of data, most of which is typically 
supplied by a company’s GIS.
• Assets. Assets include switches (circuit breakers, line reclosers, fuses, 
etc.), transformers, and other similar components that are operated by 
a system operator. A key question is “What is the minimum number of 
assets that are required to model the system?” A utility needs to analyze 
its goal for the DMS and strategically develop a long-term plan for its 
GIS. Most times, this would be in addition to the asset management and 
work management requirements of the GIS. 
• Attributes. “What characteristics of each asset are required to provide the 
desired capabilities for the DMS algorithms to solve?” Ratings, location, 
and engineer/operator notations are just some of the information that is 
needed to operate off the electronic map (see Figure 10.8). 
• Connectivity. “How are the assets linked together?” The DMS’s electron­
ic maps will turn these connection points into an operable schematic 
map. 
• Maps/renderings.“How will I reference the location of assets that are 
being operated?” Maps typically come from a GIS, which ensures the 
multiple use of the same graphical interface. Early planning of the maps 
focused on layering, declutter, symbology, SCADA/control interfaces, 
standardized naming conventions, layout of devices on maps, and so on, 
will help ensure a highly usable product for the system operator. 

194 
Electric System Operations  
Strong Supporting Functions
While utilities generally give primary attention to acquired data quality, they 
need to consider equally the processes around the management of the data:
• Data maintenance. Maintenance processes will allow the various entities 
that use the data to submit changes (new additions, modifications to 
equipment ratings, errors identified in the field, etc.) to be sent back in 
with an expectation of those changes being rolled into the new release 
of the data model within a predetermined amount of time based on the 
criticality of the change.
• Data upload. The move from paper maps to electronic maps comes with 
some constraints: it may not be as easy to mark up the maps with the 
most recent change using a pen or a pencil. As a result, it is very impor­
tant to have key features like advanced posting of new equipment or 
configurations for online energizing, more frequent uploads of data (i.e., 
once a day), incremental uploads versus full data uploads, and so on.
These two processes are important because they determine the accuracy 
of the data in the DMS and as a result also determine the accuracy of the forth­
coming solutions. 
Figure 10.8  DMS and integration with external applications. (Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid 
and used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for this image.)

 
Distribution Management Systems 
195
Robust Integration
A utility company’s GIS and DMS need to be very strongly integrated—ef­
ficient transfer of data from GIS to the DMS is required. This is because there 
are several processes in which these two systems need to be in synch. 
• At any point in time in a distribution grid, several changes are constant­
ly taking place. This means that the DMS model also must somewhat 
stay in synch with these changes as close to the time they are placed and 
energized in the field. The fewer exceptions to the differences between 
the systems, the better.
• During storms or other emergencies, it is normal for field personnel to 
make temporary changes (for example, jumpers) to the system to get 
the system up and running as soon as possible. During those times, they 
will come back and implement the more permanent solution at a later 
time. Until the permanent solution is in place, the temporary fixes must 
be reflected in the DMS and/or the GIS to ensure that the system being 
monitored/ controlled is as accurate as possible. During these times, it 
is considered routine to make the temporary change in the DMS and 
bring it back into the GIS later. 
For these specific reasons, it is important to keep the systems in synch 
as close to each other as possible. There are emerging standards in the form of 
common interface model (CIM) for transmission and distribution that is being 
accepted by most vendors and will enable different parts of the value chain to 
share information among each other.
10.9  The Future of DMS
Distribution system operations is one of the core functions of a utility. This 
function entails having primary responsibility and authority for the reliable op­
eration of the electric distribution system. This means they are responsible for 
the smooth flow of energy to the customer. 
The DMS will dramatically change the situation and will be the primary 
tool of the future to enable the distribution system operator to manage their re­
sponsibilities. Its functionality will support monitoring and operating the grid, 
clearance coordination, switching order creation, and emergency and storm 
management.
The future of DMS (see Figure 10.9) points toward enhanced capabilities 
including increased automation, integration with AMI, and smart grid technol­
ogy. If a utility has not deployed a DMS or is not currently in the process of an 

196 
Electric System Operations  
implementation, they run the risk of falling farther behind the rest of their peers 
in this transformed, highly demanding, and competitive market.
The future of DMS is to incorporate distribution automation (DA) com­
ponents into its core product. Similar to the way SCADA is widely distributed 
within the grid today because of the efficiency it provides to the operators, DA 
components will provide even more in the way of automating the monitoring 
and control of field devices. This automation gives the operators an enhanced 
ability to pinpoint outage locations, restore customers and reduce unplanned 
outage time than what is possible without DA components.
Considering distribution automation (DA), an advanced DMS solution 
is typically the quickest and most cost-efficient means of implementing a solu­
tion. For example, a feeder fault normally requires up to a day to repair and 
restore power back to the customers. Also, it could take a few hours to restore 
the electricity to customers that are affected by the circuit switching for this 
restoration due to manual switching.
While DA cannot reduce the repair time involved, it can provide dra­
matic reductions to the switching and isolation times with the 3-hour manual 
switching duration cut to less than 3 to 5 minutes through the addition of a 
small amount of remote-controlled switchgear. By making use of an advanced 
DMS, the implementation of DA can be accelerated at lowest cost, providing a 
solution where the DA intelligence, IT support, and operational expertise can 
remain at the control center, leaving the remote-controlled devices and simple 
communications infrastructure in the field.
As utilities integrate more technology to their DMS, they will start laying 
out the road map towards the smart grid vision. Sensors like SCADA and AMI 
will monitor events on the grid and provide feedback to operators and engineers 
in real time. In contrast to today’s capabilities, operators will know when and 
precisely where an outage occurred before customers start calling. 
Figure 10.9  DMS and its applications: focus on extensions.

 
Distribution Management Systems 
197
It must be noted that implementing a DMS involves a lot of work that 
goes into planning, building, and testing the new application. The implementa­
tion also focuses a lot of attention on the GIS, a key enabler.
This is only the beginning for electronic maps. Vendors are capitalizing 
on its potential and are developing the next generation of capabilities. The near 
future will show us such advances as advanced visualization for operators, pro­
viding users with different ways of looking at the same information in a more 
efficient way.
End Notes
[1]	 Municipalization happens when a portion of a utility, usually a city with some specific 
boundaries, decides to secede from a utility and form its own municipal utility. San Fran­
cisco, California is an example of an entity that has been trying to (but unsuccessful so 
far) to secede from PG&E. The city of Boulder, Colorado is an example of a successful 
secession from Xcel Energy. This just happened in 2011.
[2]	 2009 was the first year in a long time where the load growth stayed somewhat flat on aver­
age. It is predicted to go up again over the next few years.
[3]	 Some outages are also caused by either human actions (some in error) or due to inadequate 
design that results in overloads and hence outages.
[4]	 Definition of a DMS, © Modern Grid Solutions LLC.
[5]	 The feeder system that feeds the residential customers is single-phase 12.47-kV network 
for the most part. This is different from a three-phase residential delivery system in many 
other countries.


199
11
Distributed Energy Management System
This chapter is a little futuristic, mainly because this system as specified does 
not exist but will fulfill a niche that the industry really needs. Many vendors are 
indeed thinking of a system like this and some actually have systems that fulfill 
portions of this mandate. Some are more ahead than others but all have gaps. It 
is not the intent of this chapter to promote one vendor or the other but more to 
set the vision that (we hope) utilities and vendors can support.
Some of the biggest movements in the smart grid arena are in smart me­
ters, demand response and integration with distributed renewables. Utilities are 
spending a lot of time and effort in implementing these initiatives and there is 
a lot of public (and regulatory) attention focused on them. For the first time, 
utilities are also directly interacting with customers in a way that they have 
never done before. They are slowly moving from a one-way interaction with 
the customer into a two-way mode. This is aided by smart meters with two-
way communications, time-of-use rates and dynamic pricing, distributed and 
renewable generation, electric transportation, and storage.
Possibly the biggest impact of the smart grid is in the introduction of 
new systems into distribution operations. Prior to these systems coming on, 
distribution operations was either the domain of customer operations or field 
operations and the main focus was on trouble-call management—which is long 
considered the precursor of outage management.
Several key changes are impacting distribution operations in a manner 
quite unlike that of transmission:
• Pilots. Thanks to the Smart Grid Investment Grants and Demonstra­
tion Grants programs, a tremendous amount of pilot activity has been 
launched in the utility industry.

200 
Electric System Operations  
• Distribution automation. There is a careful and steady move towards in­
stalling sensors and controls in the utility’s distribution grid with a focus 
on IVVC, smart regulators, and so on.
• Smart meters. It is anticipated that with the end of the Department of 
Energy (DOE) grants, more than 39 million smart meters will have 
been implemented in the United States alone. These and their associ­
ated head-end systems have resulted in smart meters being treated as a 
commodity.
• DMS. Increased distribution automation is resulting in the design and 
implementation of operational systems like DMS.
• OMS. OMS systems are being implemented either with their function­
ality assumed within a DMS system or as an independent system.
• Changes in utility rate structures and advent of demand response:  Utilities 
are experimenting with time-of-use rates and rolling out new programs 
to take advantage of them and controlling demand as a result.
These changes have created a level of buzz in the utility industry quite un­
like anything we have known in a long time.  The diverse needs of utilities are 
resulting in vendors also jumping in and creating innovative solutions to meet 
those needs not just in the United States but for a global marketplace. 
Even though newer systems like DMS, OMS and others are coming in 
to the utility operational centers, there is a serious hole in how the utility ad­
dresses the customer’s needs from an operational perspective.  This is because 
the customer is also making changes in how their energy needs are being met—
net-zero buildings and homes, addition of PHEV/PEV to homes and associated 
charging stations in office buildings, addition of solar/PV cells on homes and 
offices and so on. 
These changes are making an impact on the use and pattern of energy 
consumption. However, either because these changes have not yet reached criti­
cal mass or for some other reason, utilities have not yet provided enough focus 
on this segment on the management and operation of this segment of their 
system.
• This is not purely a customer service issue but the customer has new and 
evolving kind of needs that still need to be met.
• This is not purely a reliability issue but what the customer can do will 
impact the stability and reliability of the distribution system.
• This is not purely an energy supply issue but the customer can and has the 
ability to become a net exporter of energy to the grid.

 
Distributed Energy Management System 
201
• This is not purely a regulatory issue but the outcome of these changes and 
the need to learn from them is of great interest to the regulator.
• This is not purely a services issue but utilities and others who are already 
providing services to the home (home security, cable, telephone, etc.) are 
looking at this as an adjacency to identify the possibilities. 
• This is not purely a competitive issue but unregulated entities could be 
enticed at defining this market and take more interest in providing new 
and innovative service to the customers. In doing so, they may move 
into the utility market and take it away from them. 
The author has identified the need for a distributed energy management 
system that is focused on customer operations, which in turn will provide a 
be-all and end-all set of operational services to the customer and at the same 
time allows the utility to manage and operate the grid all the way down to the 
customer in a safe and effective manner.
11.1  What Is Complicating This Situation? 
The present situation, while bringing in a high level of excitement and innova­
tion into a field that really needed some has also created some complicating 
factors. These complicating factors have prevented the smart grid arena from 
demonstrating benefits to all the stakeholders in a cohesive manner (see Figure 
11.1). They have also prevented utilities from demonstrating substantive ben­
efits to the customer who is the key stakeholder and the regulator who is look­
ing out for them. We have identified a core set of complicating factors:
Data Deluge or Tsunami
There is a tremendous amount of activity at utilities, resulting in a lot of data 
coming into the utility. Some well-known examples are provided below:
• Meter data. There are about 39+ million meters that have either been 
installed or are in the process of being installed. For the most part, these 
meters collect data every 15 minutes for each residence. They also collect 
different types of data for each residence—consumption, voltage (aver­
age voltage, min/max voltage, and voltage snapshots), outage data, pow­
er quality information, and diagnostic flags (e.g., meter status checks). 
Several analysts have predicted that, as smart meters get smarter, the 
data-processing intervals will decrease to around every 30 seconds or so. 
All this data is time-stamped prior to being sent to the head-end system. 
This data is generally stored in an MDM system.

202 
Electric System Operations  
Figure 11.1  Example vendor DEMS architecture. (Courtesy Comverge Inc. All rights are held by Comverge.)

 
Distributed Energy Management System 
203
• Outage data. An interesting by-product of smart meter implementations 
is the ability to get a better handle on outages. Outage data is provided 
as a “last gasp” alarm from most advanced meters. Often utilities can also 
ping smart meters after an outage to confirm that the power is back on. 
This detects nested outages, which is when a storm breaks a feeder line 
in two places, the one closer to the customer is nested within the area af­
fected by the break that is further from the customer. Much of this data 
is stored in an outage management system and used for managing out­
ages, developing outage metrics (SAIDI, CAIDI, etc.), and for providing 
information to customers. 
• Substation and distribution automation data. The smart grid has un­
leashed a host of distribution and substation automation initiatives 
which has resulted in several sensors that have been installed on the grid. 
These sensors, which are in addition to the normal SCADA/RTU sen­
sors that are fed from substation-based potential transformers (PTs) and 
current transformers (CTs) [1], consist of sensors for volt/VAR control, 
automatic reclosers, transformer temperature and oil viscosity measure­
ment, fault measurements, and several others.
  Unlike meter measurements, which are taken every 15-minutes or so, 
these measurements are taken every 2 to 4 to 6 to 10 seconds. Generally 
all of these come into the DMS system, a substation automation system, 
or others. These systems hold on to one snapshot of the data for their 
analysis and store the rest—raw and computed data—in some kind of a 
hierarchical database.
• Other sensor data. With every smart grid pilot or special project, sensors 
are placed on the grid. The data is brought into some system somewhere 
in the utility and stored. This could be storage pilots, renewable integra­
tion pilots, a specific distribution automation pilots, or others. This data 
tends to get stored somewhere locally in some system within the utility.
• Customer program data. A utility typically runs several customer programs. 
The programs can either be rate programs for any of classes of custom­
ers (residential, commercial, or industrial), demand response programs, 
energy efficiency programs, or others. For each program, the utility will 
store information like the details and parameters of the program, the 
information on the customers who are signed up for it, and the real-time 
or near-real-time data collected from the participants in the program.
  The information associated with each of these programs is generally 
stored in the customer information system (CIS). However, it is also 
not uncommon to store temporary programs and pilots in temporary 

204 
Electric System Operations  
systems somewhere within a utility and this data may never be migrated 
into the main CIS system.
The examples provided in this section are just the tip of iceberg of the data 
tsunami [2] that is expected to hit the electric grid operators. Other examples 
could include all the information pulled from new smart appliances, electric 
vehicles, and other metering equipment in the grid. This is nearly a several 
million-fold increase in daily data processing for most electricity providers—
and at this time, they are not prepared for it.
Multiple Noncoordinated Demand Response Programs
Demand response is broadly recognized as one of the early, “low-hanging fruit” 
from implementation of the smart grid. The potential benefits for managing 
peak loads—reducing the need for new generation and transmission capacity 
and mitigating high wholesale power prices—are substantial.
Demand management is garnering attention throughout the electric pow­
er industry as a significant mechanism to offset some of this growth by reducing 
peak demand and allowing the industry’s current generation capacity to supply 
more of customers’ required power. As a result, several (if not all of them) are 
experimenting with some form of demand response However, most utilities are 
implementing these in a somewhat haphazard manner.
In most utilities each of these programs are being planned and managed 
independently. This means 
• Programs cannot be managed across each other, resulting in loss of op­
portunity depending upon the problem being solved—peak shaving, 
congestion, etc. For example, if a specific location within the utility is 
congested, then there is no easy way to identify and trigger all customers 
participating in all the demand response programs that could potentially 
assist in relieving the congestion. 
• No coordination of technologies used in these programs. Most programs 
at utilities appear to select technology components (at the home, com­
munications and at the utility back office) independent of each other, 
resulting in a potpourri of technologies with different interfacing mech­
anisms. While some of this is understandable given the newness of the 
technology, thought must be given to bringing them all into one single 
end-to-end technological platform to allow long-term scalability of the 
program and not have it too dependent on just one technology compo­
nent or communications technology. 

 
Distributed Energy Management System 
205
• Independent tracking of program metrics. Given the independent tracking 
of the programs, they are all also tracked independently from a metric 
perspective. This lack of coordination and the allowing of cross pollina­
tion between various programs makes it difficult for utilities to exploit 
each program to its fullest advantage. 
• Inadequate customer segmentation. Success of a DR program starts from 
selecting the right set of customers for each program independent of 
specifics like location and so on. Very often the customer segmentation 
is not properly utilized or even performed. As a result, the customer 
engagement is spotty at best.
Management Reporting
To start, one must understand the amount of activity at electric utilities where 
a lot of money is being spent on smart grid and related efforts. In what could 
arguably be called new technology, electric utilities have never spent this kind 
of money on something new in a very long time.
Given this there is an intense amount of pressure from management, ex­
ecutives and regulators need to (1) show progress, (2) show benefits, (3) show 
them quickly and in a timely manner, and (4) want the same data in a different 
manner. However, considering the uncoordinated way that much of this work 
is being done, creating these reports is slowly becoming a gargantuan task for 
utility mid-senior-level managers and directors. 
Continued Customer Apathy
As mentioned before, this is the first time the utility has tried to monitor infor­
mation directly from within private residences. The residential customer has for 
the most part been somewhat immune and left alone from the utility’s normal 
operations activities. The closest the utility came to being inside homes was 
with the electric meter, which was generally installed when the customer had 
moved into the home, and after that, no one ever interfered with it. Now, with 
programs like demand response, the utility is interacting much more with the 
customer directly.
For an entity that has not interacted with the customers directly until 
now, there have been a lot of growing pains. Key aspects of those growing pains 
include:
• Control/interest in energy at the home. When it comes to basic energy ef­
ficiency upgrades or even energy-related issue, a recent Harris poll found 
that Americans are still largely apathetic to making changes in their en­
ergy use [3]. Whether that is from a lack of knowledge, time, interest, or 
willingness, utilities have a long way to go.

206 
Electric System Operations  
• Mistrust. With a few exceptions, most customers do not either like or 
trust their utility. The addition of smart meters inside the home allows 
the utility for the first time to have very detailed information on con­
sumption at the home, leading to privacy issues. This has further exac­
erbated the situation of trust, leading to several consumers pushing back 
on smart grid actions by the utility. 
• Opt-in versus opt-out. Privacy is one of the major issues leading to a 
movement in the smart meter industry of people wanting to opt out of 
smart meter installation in their homes.
  A similar issue is also happening in demand response circles. There is 
a growing movement that says if we need to develop a successful demand 
response capability at each utility, we need to have more people enrolled. 
As we identify the people who could be candidates, the thought is to get 
them all enrolled into the program and have them ask to opt out.
• Privacy and intrusion. The change from yesterday’s utility where they 
had a manual read of consumption once a month to a potential place 
where they have 15-minute (or lesser time) reads in an electronic man­
ner has led to the utility having the ability to understand energy usage 
profiles within the home.
  In addition, demand response programs at utilities have led to them en­
tering the home for the first time. Devices such as home energy managers, 
programmable controllable thermostats, and smart appliances have allowed 
utilities to have an even greater understanding of residential consumption. 
  However, this information, if it falls in the wrong hands, can lead to 
an invasion of privacy.
This has become a serious problem, mainly because much of this effort 
is focused on the residential customer. Utilities have been working closely with 
commercial and industrial customers, with special tariffs and energy manage­
ment equipment at their sites, for a very long time in a mutually beneficial 
relationship.
Until these problems are resolved quickly, it is possible that the smart 
grid could either become an expensive experiment in technology looking for 
a problem to solve, or be taken over by entities other than utilities who may 
deliver these services to the residential customer, leaving the utility in a purely 
wires and delivery role. In this chapter, we present the underpinnings of a new 
system—the distributed energy management system.

 
Distributed Energy Management System 
207
11.2  Distributed Energy Management System
Utility operational environments have the benefit of several operational systems 
like SCADA, EMS, DMS, and OMS. With the exception of OMS, all of the 
others are primarily power system and engineering systems. This means that 
their basis at some level is the need/ability to execute a power-flow solution. 
This requires the involvement of a power system model as the basis of these 
systems. This requirement brings with it a certain level of sophistication in both 
understanding and maintaining the power system model and understanding 
the results that the system delivers. The questions we need to ask are:
• Do we need to go to this level of sophistication for all distribution grid 
solutions?
• Do we need to solve power system equations to get to integrating and 
dispatching supply/demand components like demand response, distrib­
uted generation and renewables, storage, and/or PHEVs/PEVs?
The answer is NO. There is a place for a simpler system that sits below 
the DMS. Let us call it a distributed energy management system (DEMS) (See 
Figure 11.2).
The intent of such a system would be to become the singular system 
capable of managing all distributed energy programs, be device- and system-
agnostic, and manage all the data in one place through a common set of user 
interface into which pilots and programs can be easily be added and removed. 
11.2.1  The Core Components of a DEMS 
User Interface
The user interface for such a system would be Web-based, focusing on data en­
try. One could easily visualize several types of data entry that could be supported. 
• Program data entry. Program/tariff information for demand response, 
time-of-use rates, regulatory mandates, and limits either instantaneous 
or cumulative would need to be recorded.
• Distributed energy devices data entry. Location and characteristics of all 
distributed energy devices like homes participating in demand response, 
solar rooftop PV cells, wind turbines, and microturbines need to be 
stored in this system to enable them to receive appropriate dispatching 
commands.

208 
Electric System Operations  
Figure 11.2  An all-inclusive DEMS architecture. (© Modern Grid Solutions.)

 
Distributed Energy Management System 
209
On top of manual data entry mechanisms, this system would also support 
a bulk data upload mechanism from a variety of data formats (CSV, XML, etc.) 
into the system. 
Dashboard and Reporting
Having a top-level dashboard allows for the executive superuser to have a single 
place to get summary information about every program that is in place and 
their basic performance as measured by an appropriate metric. This feature sup­
ported by a flexible reporting mechanism allows the various users—utility man­
agement, program manager, utility executives, regulatory agencies, and so on to 
quickly get the right data they need and in a form that makes sense to them.
Core Optimization Modules
Depending on the sophistication of the programs being run and/or the need to 
cross-pollinate between one or more of the programs, multiple types of optimi­
zation programs may be run. This could be a core module of the DEMS or a 
part of the package provided by a vendor delivering one of the demand response 
program packages. A good example of a program optimization package would 
be a real-time pricing engine running [4] a double auction mechanism to com­
municate and control devices at the home based on prices and the homeowner’s 
wishes.
Verification, Validation, and Estimation
Fundamental to managing and operating programs is in validating the out­
comes against programmatic information and confirming the benefits to either 
the utility and/or the customer. This is important mainly from a settlements 
and reporting perspective. 
Programs and Tariffs
Tracking the various programs and tariffs that are being implemented is an im­
portant part of the DEMS system. This module not only tracks the programs 
for demand but also for time-of-use tariffs, renewables, EVs, and so on.
This module will in addition to the program parameters also hold the 
calculations and algorithms that will be used by the optimization module. 
Interfaces
This is possibly one of the most complicated of the core modules in the DEMS 
system. The core set of interfaces will be with all the systems that have been 
presented in the architecture diagram in the previous page. The complication 
comes from the fact that each of these systems is architected differently, is from 
a different legacy, and ranges from real-time systems to batch-mode systems to 
database registries. 

210 
Electric System Operations  
The interface mechanism needs to be flexible enough to get the right 
data out of the right system of record to avoid creating a data maintenance 
nightmare. The possible way to make this work would be through some kind 
of a service-oriented architecture (SOA)-based architecture that can be flexible 
enough to support different systems of different types. 
Privacy
Whenever customer data is being maintained in a system that is not the cus­
tomer information system (CIS), privacy concerns take on a certain level of im­
portance of their own. This is because most CIS systems tend to have the right 
levels of controls in place to ensure the privacy of the customer information is 
appropriately maintained.
DEMS needs to include a set of privacy mechanisms, protocols, and con­
trols to ensure this information is kept private and cannot be taken out of the 
system unless personally identifiable information (PII) information is removed. 
Cybersecurity
Next to privacy, cybersecurity is an important criterion that needs to be con­
firmed. DEMS will need to be designed with the appropriate set of cybersecu­
rity firewalls so that data breaches can be caught before they happen. 
Now one could argue that there is no need for a separate system such 
as DEMS. The optimization modules and the dashboard/reporting modules 
could as easily become applications in a DMS.
11.2.2  So What Makes DEMS a Necessary System?
Fundamental to a DMS is the need for a model capable of solving a power flow 
solution. This can be complex because the underlying model (coming from a 
GIS) changes all the time and this model is not an easy one to maintain. 
However, if the main purpose of the system is to manage distributed en­
ergy sources like distributed generation and renewables, demand response, stor­
age and PHEV/PEV, a solved power flow is not a requirement. It may improve 
the solution but it clearly not a requirement. 
This is an important distinction because irrespective of the user of this 
system, it brings down the bar to the list of hard requirements that make this 
system more accessible to utilities of all sizes. 
It is also equally important to note that if a utility already has a fully func­
tional DMS, it may be worthwhile to investigate a scenario where the DEMS is 
either tightly integrated with the DMS or the applications subsumed into one.

 
Distributed Energy Management System 
211
11.3  Who Would Use This System?
DEMS would be used by all utilities big and small who have any play in the 
smart grid space. All have seen the complications identified in this chapter and 
struggle with its consequences both internally and externally. At a macro level, 
this is even having an impact on the consumer-perceived benefits of the smart 
grid and if not taken care of quickly could become serious impediments to the 
progress in this area.
Large investor-owned utilities (IOUs) who tend to run different pilots 
across all dimensions of the smart grid could use DEMS to bring the man­
agement of all the programs, their data, and their associated reporting under 
one umbrella, thereby getting the benefits of a single well-designed overarching 
system.
Similarly, smaller utilities like municipalities, co-ops, and others can use 
this kind of a mechanism to almost get a DMS lite. It can still allow them to get 
their SCADA, correlate it with MDM data, support various demand response 
and time-of-use (TOU) options and bring it all together into one cohesive ar­
chitecture system. Also, depending on the completeness of their GIS data, they 
can even use DEMS to project several extra pieces of information on their GIS-
based electronic map.
For this kind of a system to be truly effective, it needs to make several 
inroads into the complications identified earlier in the white paper. Let us see 
how it can solve the key problems identified in the complications section.
• Data deluge or tsunami. With the exception of something like PMU 
data, DEMS will have the ability to either store the data inside its data­
bases or have the appropriate APIs to get access to the right data within 
an acceptable time frame.
• Multiple noncoordinated smart gird pilots/programs in various different 
technologies such as demand response, storage, renewables, PHEV/PEVs, 
and so on. For this to work, DEMS will need to be technology- and ven­
dor-agnostic. Until we can get a full suite of interoperability standards 
in place, we will need to think of a set of published APIs that will allow 
DEMS to take part in two-way interconnection with disparate systems. 
One can easily visualize the need for an interface with a DMS (if one 
exists) where a DEMS could provide data through a single pipe instead 
of having every pilot/program having separate interfaces with the DMS. 
• Improved customer engagement. Having access to all program and cus­
tomer engagement data in one place will allow the utility to more easily 
focus on meeting the customer’s needs in a coordinated manner, thereby 
ensuring they are not contacted multiple times for multiple (and pos­

212 
Electric System Operations  
sibly conflicting) programs. Also, having the data in one place will allow 
the utility to have the best understanding of their response to various 
stimuli instead of trying to collect all of this information from multiple 
disparate systems spread across the various back-office computer systems 
within a utility.
• Management reporting. Having all the data in one place also allows the 
utility to create stakeholder reports that have the ability to go across 
programs, technologies, locations, and customer classes in a quick and 
less-laborious manner and be reasonably assured of their accuracy.
Notice that nowhere in this section have we identified the need for a 
DMS-like power-flow solution.
From a vendor’s perspective this is a platform issue (see Figure 11.3). 
Would they like to be in the hardware/software business or platform business 
or both? DEMS has the potential to be the first utility-wide system that is truly 
designed from the ground up to support the smart grid and all its dimensions 
across the entire value chain.
11.4  Service Models That Need to Be Considered
The movement into smart grid has brought something along with it that is 
new to the utility industry: Pilots. Until now, most of the systems implementa­
tions within a utility have been major procurement efforts—specifications are 
written, design is performed, RFPs get written and based on it, and the vendor 
is selected. Then the vendor delivers the solution. This represents a nice clean 
waterfall-based delivery process. To deliver to this model, utility IT teams have 
codified strict processes that must be adhered to with respect to design/develop­
ment of any software that enters their environment. These strict processes have 
then allowed them to perform routine processes like system upgrades, routine 
backups, and other maintenance tasks while still managing a system with the 
right sets of cybersecurity protocols, controls, and access mechanisms.
All of this has changed. There are a lot of pilots, especially in the distrib­
uted energy space. Many pilots do not go into full production mode and may 
not have been even intended to go into full production mode. This means that 
the systems need to be implemented quickly, get into production quickly, and 
possibly be dismantled quickly without leaving any kind of a system/digital 
footprint behind.
For this new kind of a business environment, utilities and their vendors 
need to come up with new approaches to deliver this capability. Two main ap­
proaches are proposed (Table 11.1):

 
Distributed Energy Management System 
213
Figure 11.3  Example vendor DEMS architecture. (Courtesy Calico Energy. All rights are held by Comverge.)

214 
Electric System Operations  
1.	 Delivery as a system;
2.	 Delivery as a service.
Selecting one versus the other appears to be somewhat subjective in na­
ture. If this question was posed a few years ago, one could have easily said that 
IOUs and similar-sized utilities would opt for delivery as a system and munis/
co-ops and similar sized utilities would opt for delivery as a service. This is 
mainly because IOUs are fundamentally asset organizations and are compen­
sated for delivery of assets. On the other hand, munis and co-ops are not com­
pensated based on capital expenditure and as a result prefer a mechanism where 
the cost of the assets can be converted into a monthly rate component.
This has changed with the advent of smart grids and the influx of a tre­
mendous number of pilots across all segments of utilities. As a result of the 
temporary nature of many of these implementations, even IOUs are seriously 
considering opting for pilots, because the overhead on making small changes to 
their IT infrastructure has a big cost to it. 
11.5  Challenges 
Implementing a system of this kind requires overcoming several challenges. 
Some are technological in nature and some are business-related.
Table 11.1
Comparison of Service Delivery Mechanisms 
Delivery as a System
Delivery as a Service
System can have customizations as specifically 
required by the utility.
While system customizations are still possible, 
it becomes more complicated for the vendor or 
may impact the overall pricing and hence the 
associated advantages.
All critical interfaces can stay within the 
utility’s operating environment. 
Critical interfaces need to go from inside the 
utility’s operating environment to outside sources.
All system components need to be procured 
just for the utility—potentially costing more.
Reduced cost: Cost is added incrementally 
based on actual functionality purchased, saving 
organizations money. 
All storage needs to be purchased specifically 
for the system—costing more. 
Increased storage: Organizations can store more 
data than on private computer systems. 
All software updates, backups, etc. must be 
done locally. 
Highly automated: No longer do IT personnel need 
to worry about keeping software up to date. 
Mobility is something that would need to be 
added specifically, thereby constraining access 
to the system. 
More mobility: Employees can access information 
wherever they are, rather than having to remain at 
their desks.
IT has to maintain the servers and take care of 
all computing issues. 
IT does not have to worry about constant server 
updates and other computing issues.

 
Distributed Energy Management System 
215
• Where does this system reside? This system is a logical progression away 
from the EMS (for transmission) to DMS (for distribution) and finally 
to the customer (DEMS). Given that it is not controlling grid devices, 
it does not need to reside in a tight access-controlled control center like 
the EMS and DMS. However, it still performs operations on customer 
premises by driving the power supply going to residential, commercial, 
and industrial load by managing the load and supply on the other side 
of the fence. A better location for this system would probably be in the 
customer service department in the utility given its closer proximity to 
customer programs and consumption.
• Physical and cybersecurity. At its most fundamental, this system and all 
that it coves is managing customer data and controlling their energy 
consumption in some form. While something like the NERC CIP rules 
do not apply to this system, one must treat this system as having the 
potential for a medium security threat and apply appropriate cyber and 
physical security precautions.
• Privacy and confidentiality. DEMS is handling a lot of customer data 
from location (address), location on the grid, usage, appliances at the 
home that can be controlled remotely, and so on. Standard and appli­
cable privacy and confidentiality rules need to be applied to all the data 
in this system along with access to it.
• Interfacing with legacy systems. As we have identified earlier, several pilots 
and their systems are being deployed in the utility and we expect DEMS 
to become the single point of record for all distributed energy related 
information and the reporting associated with it. This requires DEMS 
to have two-way interactions with all of these systems. A suggestion for 
the design would be to create a standardized interfacing mechanism and 
bring all data in and out through that mechanism; this way the rest of 
the design and architecture could be managed in a clean manner.
• How does it get financed and/or paid for? Given that each pilot is paid for 
in a separate manner, the common DEMS could be paid for by moving 
the data entry and reporting costs from each pilot to fund the underly­
ing assets of DEMS. Once the basic underlying architecture is devel­
oped, the other modules can be developed over time.
• Common optimization algorithms. Given that DEMS would be the um­
brella system across multiple pilots, it could also be used to drive com­
mon optimization mechanisms as it tries to achieve the best results in 
energy consumption and still take advantage of new and innovative en­
ergy devices like storage, distributed generation, and electric vehicles. 

216 
Electric System Operations  
The main challenge here would be in using common algorithms while 
still trying to achieve the specific mandates of each individual program. 
11.6  Does DEMS Have a Future?
The distributed energy management system is a conceptual response to a set 
of unmet needs. These are needs that are associated with the focus on the cus­
tomer, which is one of the areas where the greatest change is either happening or 
poised to take off depending on where in the world one is living. The custom­
ers, whether residential or the commercial, will see some tremendous changes 
happening in the areas of how their consumption is serviced or controlled. 
Instead of a different system design to deliver to either a specific type 
of load or supply, this is an attempt to bridge the gap between DMS and the 
customer by bringing all of those variations of load and supply into one single 
integrated system. It is anticipated that this system will grow from being purely 
an umbrella system over the existing and future pilot systems providing com­
mon reporting and model maintenance mechanisms to a full-fledged energy 
management application suite.
DEMS is in a unique position to support and enable the smart grid by be­
coming the single repository of all real-time and near-real-time data and power 
system connectivity model (asset characteristics, connectivity, and renderings) 
for all utility and nonutility assets leading to the customer and all demand and 
supply sources within their premise. DEMS in conjunction with EMS, DMS, 
and OMS becomes the complete suite of applications to support the smart grid.
End Notes
[1]	 PTs and CTs are capable of sensing voltage and current measurements from the power line 
to which they are connected. These are generally accurate to SCADA standards and collect 
data every 2–4 seconds based on need.
[2]	 Levitt, A., “Riding the Smart Grid Data Tsunami”, Investopedia, December 23, 2011.
[3]	 Tweed, K.,“13% of Americans Say They’d Likely Install an Energy Dashboard”, 
greentechenterprise, March, 16, 2012, http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/
only-13-percent-of-americans-say-theyd-likely-install-an-energy-dashboard/. 
[4]	 Vadari, M., “Active Demand Management—A System Approach to Managing Customer 
Demand,” Public Utilities Fortnightly, November 2009.

217
12 
System Operator Training Simulators
The job of the system operator includes some of the most complex activities 
in the utility. The system operator is one of few sets of 24/7 roles in a utility in 
which, depending on the circumstances, they are asked to make split-second 
decisions to solve major problems in the grid, and very often they try to solve 
problems they may face only once or twice in their entire professional careers. 
This makes it difficult to develop training curriculum for them because we 
need to develop an environment that would simulate the real world as best as 
possible.
For the purposes of this book and the chapter, the term “system operator” 
has been used in a somewhat generic sense and is intended to include all the 
people who are involved in supporting the system operations capability. These 
include the following roles:
• The operator/dispatcher, who sits at the desk managing and operating 
both the transmission and distribution power systems;
• The shift supervisor, who generally is the senior person on the shift and 
who leads the group;
• The operations engineers, who provides support through various analy­
sis asks;
• The personnel supporting both the transmission and distribution clear­
ance and switching desks;
• The personnel supporting the scheduling and other dispatching tasks in 
transmission. 

218 
Electric System Operations  
Enter the system operator training simulator—the singular toolset that is 
designed to support all of them.
The training simulator is a software environment that simulates power 
system behavior and the (dispatcher) user interface. The simulator may be used 
for dispatcher training, dispatcher evaluations, engineering studies, power sys­
tem model evaluations, and offline testing of EMS/DMS/SCADA functions. 
often, new applications/functions are first tested in the simulator environment 
before being integrated into the real-time control center arena. The simulator 
provides a realistic environment for dispatchers to practice operating tasks un­
der normal, emergency, and/or restorative conditions.
Before going into any great details of operator training, it is important 
for every utility (or its training center) to answer some preliminary questions:
• What is the operator’s job in the control center?
• How well does he or she perform the job, and what specific things tell 
us about his or her performance?
• How can we show these things in an objective manner and help the 
trainee to overcome any deficiencies?
• How is the job responsibility changing in the short and long term?
From this chapter, one must not assume that a single training simulator 
exists to train operators all the way from transmission to distribution. Just like 
there are different systems focusing on transmission (EMS) and distribution 
(DMS), it is considered fair to assume that there may be two very different 
training simulators for training those two sets of operators. It is also not uncom­
mon that the two systems are from different vendors.
12.1  Drivers Behind the Need for a System Operator Training 
Simulator?
The system operations arena has changed dramatically both over time and 
through deregulation and the smart grid. These changes have also impacted 
the job of the system operator. As a result of all these changes, the task of train­
ing the system operator has become more of a necessity than ever before with 
today’s electric power utilities. What used to be required more for the transmis­
sion system operator has now been expanded to include the distribution system 
operator as well (Figure 12.1).

 
System Operator Training Simulators 
219
There are many factors that have contributed to this situation. These fac­
tors have complicated the operator’s primary job of operating the system reli­
ably and economically. An operator’s performance is generally evaluated by how 
well he or she runs the power system. However, the following questions probe 
more fully into the specifics of an operator’s performance, and should be con­
sidered when evaluating an operator:
• Can the system operator recognize problems and take proper corrective 
actions in a timely manner?
• Can the system operator recognize opportunities and take advantage of 
them?
• Does the system operator know the right people to contact for different 
tasks? 
Figure 12.1  Typical main page of a dispatcher training simulator. (Picture courtesy of Alstom 
Grid and used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for this image.)

220 
Electric System Operations  
• Does the system operator have the right tools that can be used correctly 
and efficiently? Are new tools needed to enable the operator to perform 
more effectively?
• Is the system operator able to communicate clearly and effectively with 
the various people contacted (field, division operations, and other sup­
port personnel?)
There are other considerations as well, but the ones listed above tend to 
be the more important ones necessary to evaluate from a training point of view. 
The following factors have contributed to this situation.
New Controls
Today’s power systems and their controls are increasing in complexity. The new­
er control centers include features (such as Volt/VAR dispatch) that were not 
available a few years ago. As a result, operators now are expected to do much 
more than their counterparts were doing a few years ago. The operator needs to 
be trained at understanding these new controls and their possible impacts on 
the grid under different conditions and scenarios. 
Economics
There is a much greater emphasis on economics. For example, the generation 
operator is now being asked to monitor costs closely and consider various op­
tions between either generating the power themselves or buying power in order 
to meet the demand. Given the advent of power markets and the result of 
FERC Orders 888/889, economics have played a bigger role in system opera­
tions and changed the scenario from cost-based to price/bid-based selections for 
both energy and all types of ancillary services. 
Security of the Changing System
Many utilities are finding that their generation and transmission facilities are 
not keeping pace with their increases in load. As a result, more and more power 
is being wheeled across longer distances, very often through congested corri­
dors. The power system is being strained in ways that were unforeseen a few 
years ago. Utilities are operating closer to their steady state and dynamic se­
curity limits. This is even more of a concern as DMS systems are being rolled 
out, because this is completely changing the entire system operator paradigm 
for the distribution operator—moving them away from paper-based manually 
intensive operations to more levels of automation.

 
System Operator Training Simulators 
221
Safety Concerns
On an ongoing basis, operators work closely with various field service person­
nel like linemen, trouble-men, and field crews on bucket trucks. This combine 
team works on isolating field equipment, performing actions on the equip­
ment, and restoring them back to service. Operators need to be trained on the 
various switching and operating actions which they perform to ensure that they 
are fully trained on all aspects of safety.
Regulatory Changes
Between transmission and distribution, there are a plethora of regulatory agen­
cies that drive the business rules and reporting requirements needed to be fol­
lowed by the system operator. Regulatory agencies such as NERC and local 
PUCs have set up power system operating guidelines that should be followed 
for proper system operations. In addition, with the advent of the smart grid, 
there are numerous new and ongoing regulations that keep coming on a fairly 
regular basis (DR [1] pilots, TOU rates, RPS mandates, etc.). It is imperative 
that the operator understand what is required for compliance with these rules.
Smart Grid
The advent of the smart grid has brought several new changes to the grid and 
most of these changes are either directly or indirectly impacting the job of the 
system operator. New and more exotic types of sensors and control are going 
on the grid, new and special types of tariffs are being created, new and complex 
reports are being required, and much more. For example, when new sensors go 
on the grid, the system operator needs to understand (1) how the sensors work, 
(2) what the data actually means and how they should react to the extremes of 
the data, and (3) how to support the field crew when they are either installing, 
removing, or maintaining the sensors.
Renewable Power Generation
After smart grids, distributed sources of generation from wind and solar are 
some of the changes that are impacting the stability of the system the most. 
Transmission-level wind farms are almost considered one of the most signifi­
cant nightmare scenarios for the system operator.
For example, large wind farms with generating capacities of the order 
of thousands of megawatts can go from zero (or low) output to full capacity 
output within minutes. The same can happen in reverse as well. When this hap­
pens, the system operator has the responsibility to scramble quickly and use the 
levers available to them and rebalance the generation. They need to be trained 
to do this—otherwise, it can lead the system closer to instability.
In distribution, a similar issue can happen with solar PV installations on 
homes or through PHEVs/PEVs at the residence. During the middle of the 

222 
Electric System Operations  
day, when solar PVs are generating a lot of power, it can result in a reverse flow 
of power situation in a system fundamentally designed for one-way flow of 
power. Besides the obvious safety issues that can come from the two-way flow of 
power that needs to be taken care of, it is also causing newer and more complex 
problems in the system that need to be solved by the operator, who needs to be 
trained for this as well. 
Self-Healing Grid
Most system operators will tell you that they are OK with having relays in the 
grid because they help to protect and this is done by opening breakers/switches 
in the event a problem is detected. Now, for the first time, the concepts of the 
self-healing grid are taking hold, meaning that switches may be opened/closed 
automatically. The author is not sure as to how far this concept has been taken, 
but one can already see evidence of this in the areas of feeder load rebalancing, 
FLISR applications, and so on. When switches close automatically, safety issues 
become more paramount and appropriate new process steps may need to be 
taken. This brings in a new level of complexity to the system operator’s life and 
leads to an increased requirement for training.
12.2  What Are the Key Characteristics of a Good System Operator 
Training Simulator
Besides the obvious characteristics of any software system that it be easy to 
use, have a user interface that is intuitive, and so on, a system operator train­
ing simulator needs to have a specific set of characteristics that make it a good 
simulator for use in training system operators:
• An exact replica of the system used in the real control center. When a 
system operator is being trained, whether this is for transmission or dis­
tribution, it is important that they still use the same set of tools that are 
normally available to them in the control center at their desk. So a good 
training simulator needs to maintain an exact replica of their system 
along with user interface and actions. For them it must appear as if this 
is the real power system that they are controlling. 
• An instructional position, where the simulation can be set up and moni­
tored/ controlled. Any simulation environment, especially one in which 
a very complex system is being managed, needs a control panel from 
where the simulation is controlled. This includes starting/stopping the 
simulation, selecting the right save-cases that drive the scenarios for the 
training, and so on. Generally the instructor tends to be one of the more 
senior dispatchers or possibly a retired dispatcher who understands the 

 
System Operator Training Simulators 
223
simulation/training objectives. The simulation metrics are also generally 
gathered here to support the eventual evaluation of the training out­
comes. 
• An event subsystem. Fundamental to a training simulator is the ability 
to execute events in the power system. An operator in their normal job 
responds to incidents in the field. Most often, they do not know the 
core problem. They start from a series of alarms pointing to some ab­
normal events in the system. From this, they need to diagnose the core 
problem and bring the system back to normal. This same aspect needs 
to be simulated through an events subsystem, where the instructor can 
perform actions in the power system like trip an overcurrent relay, open 
a circuit breaker, or trip a generator, thereby taking the system away 
from normal and observing the operator respond to this stimulus. Very 
often in most simulators, events can either be deterministic, conditional, 
or probabilistic.
• Simulation fidelity must of a high level. The simulation fidelity comes 
from having an excellent model of the various components in the power 
system down to the right level of detail. Power system components that 
drive the fidelity, meaning the components whose models need to be 
paid more attention include generators and associated turbines and boil­
er subsystems, load models, and transmission and distributions lines and 
transformers. The solving of these models drives the automatic genera­
tion of the right response to various stimuli (events).
• Ease in manipulating/configuring the system. Training scenarios are gener­
ally given multiple times either to the same participant or to multiple 
participants (e.g., all the operators in a utility). To support this, the sim­
ulator needs to be able to support different operating scenarios multiple 
times. Some kind of a save-case mechanism will allow the instructor to 
bring a combination of power system model and the events associated 
with it together to drive a specific training session. 
  Adding on to the ease in manipulating and configuring the system 
is the ability to reinitialize the simulation and start all over with no 
memory of the previous run of the same simulation. This is an impor­
tant aspect of a good training simulator because it allows the instructor 
to test the scenario multiple times before confirming that it is ready for 
use for training purposes. Sometimes, this also comes with the ability to 
run the simulation faster (or slower) than real time.
• The ability to simulate and learn from external conditions. A very common 
occurrence in a control center is in facing a new problem that has never 

224 
Electric System Operations  
been faced before. This could be a major storm, a sequence of events 
which happened in the most improbable manner possible, or a genera­
tor tripping during the most inopportune moment. When anything like 
this happens, most EMS/DMS systems have the ability to store all rel­
evant information associated with the event. A good training simulator 
would have the capability to initialize from this event and use it to train 
the operators to learn from both the operator’s response and also when 
went right or wrong (see Figure 12.2).
• A real control center environment. Beyond the capabilities of the training 
simulator there is one key point that very often tends to get missed in 
developing a good training program. There is a need to re-create as close 
as possible the actual control center environment all the way to console/
desk/monitors/phones and so on to create a realistic simulation of the 
actual response to actions. Re-creating the control center environment 
Figure 12.2  Simulator in replay mode. (Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid and used with their 
permission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for this image.)

 
System Operator Training Simulators 
225
provides the seriousness of the training and ensures that the operators 
who are getting trained are getting the full picture.
12.3  Architecture of a System Operator Simulator
The training simulator is generally comprised of three main subsystems:
1.	 The control center model. This is generally an exact replica of the con­
trol center applications set that the operator would normally be inter­
acting with on a normal day-to-day basis and would include all the 
normal applications like SCADA, alarms, mapboard (sometimes), and 
the set of advanced applications. This subsystem is purely configured 
to be the view for the operator who is getting trained. 
2.	 Instructional subsystem. This subsystem is designed and developed for 
the instructor of the training program. This is where the instructor 
configures the simulator to set up the training session: the power sys­
tem model is configured to deliver to a specific training, the events 
are set up, and the overall environment is made ready. This is the also 
the environment used by the instructor to monitor and control the 
simulation during the actual training session to create as realistic-as-
possible experience for the operator (see Figure 12.3).
3.	 Power system dynamic simulation model. The power system simulation 
subsystem is the most critical part of a training simulator. In the real 
world, actual transformers, circuit breakers, and loads exist to provide 
SCADA data for the EMS/DMS and so on. However, in a simulation 
system, we need realistic models of all components that are generally 
in the field. These models need to be realistic enough to ensure that 
their responses to operator or system stimuli are such that they mimic 
the real component. They also must create the right kinds of data to be 
fed into the SCADA subsystem because that s the only way data comes 
into the EMS/DMS (see Figure 12.4).
12.4  Key Challenges in Setting Up a System Operator Training 
Environment
There are three key challenges in setting up a system operator training environ­
ment: (1) Hardware/software environment along with the necessary interfaces, 
(2) the database models and event scenarios, and (3) the actual training envi­
ronment. Let us analyze them one by one.

226 
Electric System Operations  
Figure 12.3  Distribution training simulator architecture. (Picture courtesy of Alstom Grid and used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights 
for this image.)

 
System Operator Training Simulators 
227
12.4.1  Hardware/Software Environment
Depending on the compatibility of the software systems between the EMS/
DMS vendor and the simulation vendor (either same vendor or different ven­
dors), this can be either a simple job or a reasonably complex job. Most utilities 
tend to procure the training simulator from the same vendor as the original 
EMS or DMS system. 
As identified in the architecture picture, there are three main systems in 
a training simulator: control center subsystem, simulation subsystem, and in­
structional subsystem. Depending on how it is configured, these three subsys­
tems can either be in different computers or all in one.
For the most part, the training simulator is a fairly self-contained system. 
An exception to this is the interface between the real-time system (EMS or 
DMS) and the training simulator to allow after-the-fact study/analysis of key 
events and associated training to operators to learn how to react to them. This 
interface could be either a real-time interface to move the saved data from the 
real-time system to the training simulator and simulate the actual event right 
away. This interface could also be a simple mechanism to transfer save-cases 
across as a file transfer to the training simulator.
The challenge here is to maintain the systems and the interface with real-
time systems in peak operating conditions so that the systems function all the 
time in a seamless manner. 
Figure 12.4  Architecture of a distribution operator training simulator. (Picture courtesy of 
Alstom Grid and used with their permission. Alstom Grid retains all copyrights for this image.)

228 
Electric System Operations  
12.4.2  Training Environment
Good operator training centers tend to re-create the real-time system as close­
ly as possible. The training environment could include a training simulator 
room(s)—one for the trainee operators and one for the instructor, operator 
console desks, phone systems, mapboards, and so on.
The main challenge here is in the ability to justify the expense to purchase 
and integrate these items into a fully functional training environment. The next 
challenge is to maintain these systems on an ongoing basis.
12.4.3  Database Models
The biggest and most critical challenge in setting up a training simulator is to 
find the data and the settings for the various models that are used in a simula­
tor. As described earlier in this chapter, these simulators can have rather so­
phisticated models of key power system components like generators (turbines, 
boilers, and exciters, for hydro, coal-fired, gas-fired, nuclear, etc.), relays, load/
consumption of power, and so on. The data and the settings for these models 
are not easily available and it obvious that the fidelity of the simulation is quite 
heavily based on the quality of the data going into the models. Bad modeling 
provides inaccurate simulation results and thereby has minimal value for train­
ing. When simulators are first set up, it is extremely common to have a team 
of people working painstakingly to find the model and settings data for these 
devices by combing through manufacturer documentation, IEEE reports, and 
other places for the information and validate them internally with experts be­
fore entering them in.
Another key challenge in setting up an ongoing management of the train­
ing program is in the maintenance of the database models. A training simulator 
generally has multiple databases that need to have a lot of care and feeding. 
The power system models can have a time-period aspect to them as they could 
change over time and new components could get added or removed. Keep­
ing them all synchronized require time and effort on the part of one or more 
personnel.
12.5  Key Challenges in Setting Up a System Operator Training 
Program
Most utilities would agree that the job of their system operators is very criti­
cal to the stability of their utility’s smooth operations. In transmission, bad 
decisions can impact various things from blown equipment to the stability of 
the overall grid. Similarly, in distribution, bad decisions can impact everything 
from customers being out of power for too long to causation of safety issues for 

 
System Operator Training Simulators 
229
field crew. However, most utilities tend to step back and think carefully before 
spending money to obtain the right tools and training for those same opera­
tors. This is generally less of an issue for training transmission operators than 
for distribution operators. It all comes back to a discussion on people, process, 
and technology. How much one should spend on these items varies widely from 
utility to utility.
People
Utilities need to make a decision on how much training is required and what 
kind of training their system operators need. This will drive the need to identify 
the level of formality of training required for those operators and other support 
personnel. A typical training program for transmission operators alone requires 
a staff of about 4 to 5 people. If you add distribution operator training to this 
list, one can easily see this go as high as 10+ people or higher depending on the 
number of operators to train. Utilities need to balance this cost against their 
priorities regarding spending for training.
Process
As new system operators come on the job or when something has changed in 
the field (a new type of control such as IVVC) or in the EMS/DMS/SCADA 
system, then utilities need to develop a process around how to get their opera­
tors trained to implement them. This obviously is more critical for a new op­
erator but major changes can also throw experienced operators off their norm 
because the power system may no longer behave in a manner they are used to.
All of this needs a very formal and structured process for utilities to ensure 
that their operators are trained prior to handling the controls of the system. 
This can go the entire continuum of ensuring their operators are fully trained 
prior to managing the system on one end to training the operator on the job by 
pairing them up with more experienced operators and moving them along the 
learning curve. 
A typical set of activities used to train a transmission system operator 
consist of a structured set of areas they are exposed to and trained, all the way 
from orientation to full analysis of the response of the system under normal and 
emergency conditions.
An illustrative set of examples are identified in Table 12.1.
Technology
Procuring a viable simulation system is only the start to establishing a full-
fledged training program. The technology can go from one extreme of getting 
a couple of monitors connected to a simulator and placed in a conference room 
to a full-fledge replica of the entire (transmission and/or distribution) control 
room along with all of the console desks, mapboards, phone systems, and so on.

230 
Electric System Operations  
All of these cost a lot of money and time to maintain and the benefit of 
having them depends on whether the utility sees a major issue around system 
operator training or not.
12.6  Training Simulators as a Real-Time Simulation Platform
Training simulators both at the transmission and the distribution level have a 
couple of important and common sets of characteristics. They deliver a high-
fidelity simulation of the response of the power system to various stimuli and 
given their time-dependent models, can also go faster than real time. Leveraging 
these two key characteristics, one could easily visualize the training simulator 
delivering one a whole host of new capabilities beyond training to support the 
system operator (the trained one) in their normal day-to-day job. Examples 
abound in this area where the operator could really use a real-time simulation 
tool to check things out prior to actually implementing them in the real field.
Table 12.1
Illustrative Set of Training Activities for a Transmission System Operator
Phase
Activities
Orientation phase
Orientation to system operation center
Introduction to power system operation
Overview of the basic principles of operating a power system
Overview of all generation stations and the transmission system.
Basic training phase
Overview of the system operation center, including the hardware, 
software, communications, and the user interface
Power system control 
principles phase
AC power applications
Electrical workers safety practices
Power system facilities
Power system control principles: Generation
  ·Generation control
  ·Energy interchange
  ·Hydro and pumped storage operation
  ·Nonutility generation
  ·Energy resource planning
Power system control principles: Transmission
  ·MW flow controls and limits
  ·Voltage controls and limits
  ·Switching and clearance procedures
Normal operations phase
Normal operations: Generation
Normal operations: Transmission
  ·Security analysis and outage planning
  ·Switching operations
  ·Transmission system monitoring and control
Off-normal and emergency 
operations phase
Transmission contingencies
Generation contingencies
Extreme minimum and peak loads
System dynamics
Load curtailment and system restoration

 
System Operator Training Simulators 
231
• For the transmission system, a good example could be in the use of a large 
wind farm coming on board. We all know they come on suddenly and 
stop as suddenly, causing major problems to the stability of the grid. 
However, under different circumstances, if the operator runs simulation 
of the wind farm coming online, they can see the impact in a safe envi­
ronment, thereby leading them to try different mechanisms to control 
the outcome before it actually happens.
• For the distribution system, a good example would be analyzing the ap­
proach of a storm on the system. One could easily overlay the path of the 
storm on the system, look at the potential areas of damage, and get ready 
in advance for it either with the predispatching of trouble and other field 
crews across the jurisdictions or perform advanced switching maneuvers 
to mitigate the problem. 
These two examples highlight the potential for using the training simula­
tor not just for training but as a support tool for the system operator in real 
time.
12.7  Training Simulators in the Future
The power system is ever-increasing in complexity. The advent of deregulation 
has made a huge impact to the job of the transmission system operator. Simi­
larly, the smart grid is poised to do the same to the distribution system operator.
The advent of the smart grid is bringing new types of control mechanisms 
in the field along with different sensing mechanisms as well. With this ever-
increasing complexity, system operators need more advanced training in the 
areas of power flow, voltage and VAR control/dispatch, contingency analysis, 
and network analysis. While in the past much of these were in the realm of the 
transmission operator, some are slowly creeping into the distribution scene as 
well. As systems are updated and these advanced applications are included in 
new EMSs and DMSs, the operators need to be trained in how to respond to 
these new stimuli.
In addition, distribution is poised to be dramatically changed over the 
next few years. Many of the sensors and controls that are presently being pi­
loted will be rolled out all across the system, new application subsystems will be 
added to the DMS and possibly other systems in the field, and new regulations 
will come in and modify how the operators can use some of the new technolo­
gies in the field. Last but not least, the advent of AMI is well situated to pre­
cede the launch of widespread retail markets in several jurisdictions. As all of 

232 
Electric System Operations  
this happens, training becomes much more important. This is where a training 
simulator stands out over all other forms of training.
System operators can receive training that can then be applied to the sim­
ulated power system. The effects of what they have learned become much more 
apparent with this type of hands-on activity. This also allows them the means to 
try new approaches to problem areas of the power system and find the best way 
to deal with these problems. The training simulator is the best tool for giving 
the system operator confidence and experience in the use of new tools to better 
manage the power system.
End Notes
[1]	 Demand response or demand side management.
[2]	 Time of use rates for the residential customer based on availability of interval data from 
smart meters.
[3]	 Renewable Portfolio Standards (RPS) are regulations that are enacted in various states in 
the United States with a view to increasing the  production of energy from renewable en­
ergy sources, such as wind, solar, biomass, and geothermal. Most times, energy produced 
from hydro sources is not included in this list. Even though RPS is mainly an American 
term, similar terms exist in the United Kingdom and other parts of the world. 

233
13
Conclusions and What Is Coming Next 
on the Horizon
The utility industry is embarking on a transition whose end isn’t fully under­
stood. Several new areas are just beginning to blossom. Distributed renewables 
(mainly solar) and new storage technologies are being developed and brought to 
the market, demand response (even though its acceptance is still a little slower 
than anticipated), and micr-grids and their proliferation in college campuses 
and military bases are all just a few examples of these changes, all of which could 
have significant impacts on how the grid is managed and operated.
This uncertainty is also fueled at least in part due to the fact that many 
utilities and regulators aren’t yet comfortable relying on smart grid and demand 
response technologies as a substantive resource planning tool. In short, many 
people don’t believe demand management can accomplish more than a very 
small and incremental dent in the overall load and system usage profile, and 
that dent will be accomplished at a high cost and perhaps as a notable security 
risk compared to simply building more power plants and stringing more wires. 
In addition, the notion of expanding power capacity simply by building new 
power generators can’t be offered as a reasonable alternative, as obtaining build­
ing permits for these new facilities is increasingly difficult due to environmental 
reasons even though new and more vast sources of fuel are being discovered.
Finally, consumers and stakeholders are pressing for productivity increases 
to accommodate demand growth and rising capital costs. Users are expecting 
quality, reliability, and power production increases on the one hand, while at 
the same time demanding that the electric power industry reduce or mitigate its 
carbon emissions and increase energy efficiency. Users are also adding new types 
of loads and generation sources on the grid at their homes with the eventual 
intent to either become net-zero from a grid perspective or significantly reduce 

234 
Electric System Operations  
energy drawn from the grid. The new types of loads include PHEV/PEVs and 
new generation sources are most often of the solar/PV type. This means that 
while they may be still connected to the grid, their main intent is to draw load 
from the grid sometimes and deliver supply to the grid at other times.
We can summarize the global energy problem with four main points:
1.	 Diversification of energy supply and reserves. While new and additional 
sources of petroleum-based resources are being found, they are increas­
ingly being found in difficult environments, are costly to extract to a 
useable form, and are having more significant environmental prob­
lems that need to be solved before they reach the market. This fact 
combined with the increasing global competition for energy resources 
(from countries like India and China) and increased risk of importing 
energy from countries who could use this as a leverage for political 
reasons, requires a rethinking of how the energy needs are met and 
are thought of in terms of national security. All of this is resulting in a 
greater focus on new and alternative sources of energy, some conven­
tional and some unconventional/renewable.
	
  In the near term, two key factors that are affecting the price of elec­
tricity at least in the United States are the low cost of natural gas and 
the dependence of renewable energy (especially wind) on tax credits. 
It is unknown how long these will last or what impact they will have 
on the long-term prices of electricity, and will be something for us to 
watch.
2.	 Increasing focus on climate and environmental change. While the global 
dialog and rhetoric on climate change has pretty much slowed down 
to a whisper, it has moved to a different battlefield and that is on the 
environmental side of the argument. New coal-fired plants are begin­
ning to get difficult from a permitting perspective and most states and 
a few other countries are mandating that a nontrivial portion of their 
supply come from renewable sources.
3.	 Increased electric power intensity of the economy. As industrialized soci­
eties continue to grow, worldwide electricity demand is estimated to 
double by the year 2030, and the minor inconveniences that custom­
ers currently notice in the power grid will increase, becoming more 
pronounced and problematic if no action is taken. Much of this new 
demand is not just coming from developing and underdeveloped 
countries that are all electrifying at a rapid pace because they have all 
identified this as a key path to progress. It is also coming from devel­
oped countries because of the increased proliferation of multiple TVs, 
smartphones, computers, and a plethora of new devices in the home. 

 
Conclusions and What Is Coming Next on the Horizon 
235
In addition, the expected move towards the electrification of transpor­
tation will only serve to exacerbate the problem, although this may 
happen faster with commercial vehicles than with residential vehicles.
	
  Utilities are looking at this increased load and looking at intelli­
gent ways to deliver to this requirement. Coupled with the increases 
in generation from renewable sources—some distributed and some 
centralized but all of them volatile in their delivery process—this is 
forcing utilities to come up with imaginative solutions through energy 
efficiency and capacity management solutions.
4.	 Increasing pressure for infrastructure renewal. All the changes listed 
above are resulting in a tremendous pressure to rethink the renewal 
of energy infrastructure in ways that have never been imagined be­
fore. The old paradigm of centralized upgrade of the transmission and 
distribution infrastructure is being completely rethought to meet this 
completely new mix of generation/supply and consumption/load. In 
fact, the advent of microgrids is even bringing more attention to the 
transportation of alternative fuels like natural gas that could be used 
to generate electricity locally.
	
  An important and critical aspect of this infrastructure revitalization 
is the focus on substation and feeder automation. For the first time 
in the history of electricity, a lot of intelligence is being added to the 
distribution grid. This is being done through the placement of sensors 
and controls in the field supported by local intelligence to actually 
make localized decisions. This will drive a change from today’s mostly 
centralized systems in which all the data comes to a single system (like 
EMS, DMS, and OMS) to a more distributed system in which much 
of the analysis and decision may take place in a distributed manner 
and only some of the effort done centrally. 
All of this will make managing and operating the grid much more complex. 
What does this mean for the system operator of the future?
We will now end this book with a series of predictions on the changes that 
will come the way of the system operator of the future.
• In transmission systems, more and more PMUs will be installed over 
time, leading to a much more accurate understanding of the state of 
the power system, which will in turn lead to a dramatic redesign of the 
network application suite, in which one may question the long-term role 
of the state estimator at least in its present form.
  The advent of PMUs will also provide the system operator with pre­
dictive tools that will alert the system operator to potential problems 

236 
Electric System Operations  
that may impact the grid in an adverse manner, provide them with mul­
tiple options to solve the problem in an optimal manner, and give them 
enough time to respond.
  The advent of distribution PMUs that are coming preinstalled in the 
relays and other devices of tomorrow will change the distribution system 
operator’s capabilities in ways that we cannot even imagine today.
• The vast amounts of data coming into the utility systems—some in 
real time and some slower—will lead to a greater reliance on decision-
support systems in which analysis results will be fed to the system opera­
tor instead of today’s data-based flow of information. This will allow the 
system operator to make better and more optimal decisions in a more 
time-effective manner. This aspect applies to both transmission and dis­
tribution.
• There will be larger amounts of distributed control all the way from the 
substation/feeder level to the customer’s premise level.
The newer devices like PEV, distributed storage, and others will allow 
the provision of new and imaginative controls that may be leveraged 
by the system operator through means like V2G and so on, in which 
thousands of distributed controls can be brought to bear in running the 
system in an optimal and cost-effective manner. 
  This could also come from increased availability and use of HVDC 
circuits and microgrids, which allow for an increased level of localized 
control both at the grid level as well as at the energy supply level. This 
means that the system operator may need to become more nimble and 
respond to new and different types of stimuli that may impact the grid. 
The newer tools will need to be more intelligent and automated, lead­
ing to the development and deployment of intelligent decision support 
systems. It can be anticipated that these systems will first show up at the 
microgrid level and then move up the chain to the full transmission and 
distribution grid levels.
• Given the increased focus on controls and sensing at the premise level, 
it will be accompanied by an increased focus on privacy. It is antici­
pated that (at least in the United States and some of the more developed 
countries), there will be specific laws on how this information can be 
collected, what form it can be stored, and how this information can be 
used. This is new territory for the utility industry and they will slowly 
learn how to continue to operate seamlessly under this new paradigm.
• Given the increased number of sensors and controls in the grid, leading 
all the way into the residential premise, it is natural that cybersecurity 

 
Conclusions and What Is Coming Next on the Horizon 
237
will take on levels of importance somewhat similar to how financial data 
is treated by the brokerage houses of today. The present set of rules gov­
erning cybersecurity, which predominantly cover only the transmission 
system, will extend to beyond the distribution grid all the way to the 
home. This aspect will change or have a serious impact on just about 
everything in how the grid is being managed and controlled, although 
much of this may happen in the background within each vendor’s of­
ferings.
• With wholesale markets being the norm in some form in much of the 
world; it is only natural that retail markets will be the next horizon to 
cross in terms of the commercial side of utilities and their way of operat­
ing. While states like Texas and a few others have already experienced 
this, a large-scale move towards retail choice will change much of how 
the system operator manages and operates the system because then even 
at the distribution level, the utility will have to depend on the availabil­
ity of the information from other third-party sources, many of whom 
may not have the rigor and reliability as themselves.
  Even at the wholesale level, the advent of PMUs supported by WAMS 
applications leads to a requirement for increased cooperation between 
RTOs. WAMS systems can support very effectively the ability to per­
form stability and reliability analyses over a wide area encompassing sev­
eral RTOs and even be somewhat predictive in nature. This capability 
will become more critical as the operations of the electrical network will 
get closer to their limits as a result of increasing load supported by fewer 
large centralized generation plants and more by distributed/renewable 
sources of supply and more control of end-use load as well. The present 
discussion of seams issues, which is generally done one-on-one between 
RTOs will take on greater importance with WAMS systems, as they 
need to be supported by broader regional cooperation and coordination 
not just between RTOs but also between utilities in ways that has not 
yet been considered. 
One question that gets asked very often is, “If one were to start with the 
design of system operations from scratch today, keeping in mind where the 
future is leading us, how would we do this differently?” The fundamentals of 
the system of the future will be different. Given some of the key changes that 
the future is bringing upon us—microgrids, distributed renewables, distribu­
tion and transmission automation, PMUs, storage, and so on, the answer can 
be given as follows:

238 
Electric System Operations  
There is still a need for systems like EMS, DMS, DEMS, and so on. The 
future of the OMS can be in doubt especially if the DMS can perform 
much if not all of its functions with the business interfaces back into the 
rest of the utility’s back-office systems. These systems will need to become 
extremely well integrated with each other and be able to move most 
important information and control between each system back and forth.
  However, in addition, given that the today’s distinct line between 
the functionality in transmission and distribution will become 
blurred, a need for a system/regional outlook of the grid will become 
more important. This new system, whether it is being run at a RTO 
level or even above them at a regional level, will focus on performing 
regional level stability/security/congestion analysis of the system 
using PMU (and other) data supported by more sophisticated 
WAMS-like applications, which then become responsible 
for keeping the regional backbone of the larger electric grid.
  This new system will also be integrated with all the systems 
described above, across the utilities in the region in addition to being 
in constant contact with the various distributed and automated 
controls available to it. It is still unknown as to who or what entity 
will be running this new system or what level of control they will 
have to effect the movement of the system in the right direction. 
However, it is critical that a system of this kind is somewhat necessary 
given the regional nature of some of the latest disturbances (e.g., the 
2003 Northeast blackout). Add to the mix the broader movement 
of supply away from centralized to more of a distributed model and 
also the advent of smart grid and its associated technologies and 
systems.
All of these discussions lead one to looking at system operations from an 
entirely different lens. However, whatever direction this area moves in, the fu­
ture of the system operator is very bright. New problems will be identified, new 
challenges will appear on the horizon, and for all of these new solutions will be 
developed, some technological in nature and others process-oriented. However, 
change will be constant and the level of excitement will always be high.

239
Acronyms and Abbreviations
AC	
alternating current
ACE	
area control error
AGC	
automatic generation control
AMI	
automated metering infrastructure
AMR	
automated meter reading
ATC	
available transmission capacity
CA	
contingency analysis
CAIDI	
Customer Average Interruption Duration Index
CAIFI	
Customer Average Interruption Frequency Index
CAISO	
California Independent System Operator
CES	
community energy storage
CIP	
critical infrastructure protection
CIS	
customer information system
CPS1 CPS2	
Control Performance Standards 1 and 2
CT	
current transformer
CVR	
conservation voltage reduction
CVVC	
conservation volt-VAR control
DC	
direct current

240 
Electric System Operations  
DEMS	
distributed energy management system
DER	
distributed energy resource
DMS	
distribution management system
DR	
demand response
DSCADA	
distribution SCADA
DTS	
dispatcher training simulator 
ED	
economic dispatch
EMS	
energy management system
EPA	
Energy Policy Act
ERCOT	
Electric Reliability Council of Texas
ERO	
Electric Reliability Organization 
ERP	
enterprise resource planning
ESP	
energy service provider 
ETOR	
estimated time of restoration
FCI	
faulted circuit indicator
FEP	
front-end processor
FERC	
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
FLISR	
fault location identification and service restoration
GHG	
greenhouse gas
GIS 	
Geospatial Information System 
GMS	
generation management system
GPS	
Global Positioning System
HAN	
home area network 
HTS	
high-temperature superconductors
ICCP	
Inter Control-Area Communication Protocol
IED 	
intelligent electrical device 
IOU	
investor owned utility
IPP	
independent power producer
ISO	
independent system operator

 
Acronyms and Abbreviations 
241
ISO-NE	
independent system operator-New England
ITC	
independent transmission company
IVR	
interactive voice response
 IVVC	
integrated volt-VAR control
KCL	
Kirchhoff’s current law
KPI	
key performance indicator
kV	
kilovolts
KVL	
Kirchhoff’s voltage law 
kWh	
kilowatt hours
LSE	
load serving entity 
LTC	
load tap changer 
MAIFI	
Momentary Average Interruption Frequency Index
MDM	
meter data management system
MISO	
Midwest Independent System Operator
MVAR	
megavolt-ampere reactive
MVARH	
megavolt-ampere reactive hour
MW	
megawatt
MWH	
megawatt hour
NERC	
National Electricity Reliability Council
NYISO	
New York Independent System Operator
O&M	
operations and maintenance
OASIS	
open access same-time information system
OKA	
OK on arrivals
OMS	
outage management system
OPF	
optimal power flow
PEV	
plugged-in electric vehicle
PHEV	
plugged-in hybrid electric vehicle
PII	
personally identifiable information
PJM	
Pennsylvania Jersey Maryland ISO

242 
Electric System Operations  
PMU	
phasor measurement unit 
PT	
potential transformer
PUC	
public utility commission 
PUHCA	
Pubic Utilities Holding Company Act
PURPA	
Public Utility Regulatory Policy Act
PV	
photo-voltaic
REP	
retail energy provider
REZ	
renewable energy zone
ROR	
rate of return
RPS	
renewable portfolio standard
RTG	
regional transmission group
RTO	
regional transmission operator
RTU	
remote terminal unit
SAIDI	
System Average Interruption Duration Index
SAIFI	
System Average Interruption Frequency Index
SCADA	
supervisory control and data acquisition
SCED	
security constrained economic dispatch
SCUC	
security constrained unit commitment
SE	
state estimator
SEC	
Securities and Exchange Commission
SOA	
service-oriented architecture
SPP	
Southwest Power Pool
T&D	
transmission and distribution
TCMS	
trouble-call management system
TO	
transmission operator
TOU	
time of use
TTC	
total transmission capacity
TU	
Transmission User
UC	
unit commitment

 
Acronyms and Abbreviations 
243
UI	
user interface
UPS	
uninterrupted power supply
V2G	
vehicle to grid
VAR	
volt-ampere reactive
VFT	
variable frequency transformer
VIU	
vertically integrated utility
VVO	
volt-VAR optimization
WAMS	
 wide area monitoring system


245
About the Author
Dr. Subramanian (Mani) Vadari is the founder and president of Modern Grid 
Solutions, where he consults with smart grid companies (utilities and vendors) 
in setting the strategic and technical direction for developing key aspects of 
the generation/transmission/distribution system of the future. Prior to found­
ing Modern Grid Solutions, Dr. Vadari was a vice-president at Battelle, where 
he led the development of an industry-leading demand management product. 
Earlier, Dr. Vadari was also a partner at Accenture, where he was one of the lead 
partners in their global T&D practice having founded their system operations 
and smart grid practice. Dr. Vadari also previously served as a lead engineer at 
ESCA (Areva T&D), focusing on power system and deregulation applications 
and their delivery. While at ESCA, Dr. Vadari developed ESCA’s Transient Sta­
bility application and also led the industry’s leading DTS product team respon­
sible for development, project support, training, marketing, and sales support.
Dr. Vadari brings over 25 years of experience delivering solutions to the 
electric utility industry, focusing on T&D grid operations, generation opera­
tions, energy markets, and smart grid. His experience spans the regulated and 
unregulated arena for utility and energy companies. His roles have primarily 
been business architect, and/or solution delivery for many leading utility com­
panies in North America and around the world. Dr. Vadari is considered a 
smart grid subject matter expert, offering much sought-after perspectives on 
the entire value chain of an electric utility from generation to consumption. Dr. 
Vadari has authored over 40 articles in a variety of areas from dispatcher train­
ing simulator (DTS) development to artificial neural networks to electricity 
utility deregulation and the smart grid. A frequent keynoter at industry events 
in the United States and abroad, he has served on the boards of GridWise Al­
liance and Smart Grid Roadshow. Dr. Vadari presently serves on the advisory 
board of several companies.


247
Index
888/889, 14, 17, 52, 85, 109, 220
AC, 19, 35–37, 43–50, 230
Alarms, 98, 100, 111–112, 114–115, 
123, 131, 135, 137, 140–141, 
145–146, 152, 167, 178, 183, 
203, 223, 225
Ancillary services, 51, 59, 60, 62, 65, 115, 
183, 220
Apparent power, 45–46
Architecture, 81, 122, 123, 127, 130, 134, 
138, 140–142. 144, 151, 152, 
158, 159, 175, 177, 182, 184, 
202, 208–211, 213, 215, 225, 227
Area control error, 49
Asset management, 20, 80, 89, 90, 97, 103, 
117, 120, 163, 190, 193
Asset owner, 56, 59, 62 88, 90
Automatic generation control (AGC), 
114–115, 145, 147
Balancing authority, 49–59, 62, 65, 69, 116
Billing, 10, 12, 17, 60, 80, 126
Blackout, 14–15, 26, 32, 51, 54, 71, 72, 75, 
124, 129, 155, 167, 238
Busbars, 40, 154, 
CAIDI, 22, 81, 104–6, 126, 162, 165, 167, 
203
CAISO, 56, 62
Capacitance, 36, 45
Capacitor, 33–36, 126, 150, 176, 185, 189
CIS, 176, 192, 203, 204, 210
Circuit breaker, 8–9, 34, 38–39, 40, 111–
112, 114, 119, 123, 126–127, 
135, 146, 150, 152–153, 160, 
178, 193, 223, 225
Clearance management, 101, 117, 120, 178
Commercial operations, 60, 65–66
Competition, 3, 12, 16, 20, 22, 52, 54, 105, 
167, 234
Competitive retailer, 59
Complex power 45–46
Confidentiality, 215
Congestion, 20, 62, 65, 115, 133, 204, 238
Contingency analysis, 99, 103, 112, 113, 
146, 231, 
Control area, 49–50, 59, 104, 106, 108, 
126, 130, 132
Control center, 7, 22, 24–26, 32–33, 68–69, 
78–79, 95–100, 102, 105, 107–
111, 113, 115–117, 119–127, 
129–131, 135–138, 142–143, 
151–152, 158, 169–170, 175, 
180–181, 190, 196, 215, 218, 
220, 222–225, 227

248 
Electric System Operations 
Control center model, 225
CPS1, NERC CPS1, 103–104, 126
CPS2, NERC CPS2, 103–104, 126
Current, 7, 19, 24, 26, 28, 36–39, 41–48, 
50, 74–75, 80, 99–100, 108, 111, 
126, 135, 150–151, 170, 185, 
203, 216
Current relay, 39, 151, 223
Customer, 1, 3, 5–6, 8–10, 12–13–14, 16, 
19–20, 22, 23–25, 30, 33, 49–50, 
52, 55, 59, 68, 71–72, 74–76, 
80–83,85–88, 94–95, 101–103, 
116, 124–126, 153–158, 160–
161, 164–170, 172, 180, 186, 
190, 192, 195–197, 199–201, 
203–212, 215–216, 228, 232, 
234, 236
Customer portal, 161
Cyber security, 33, 79, 123–124, 210, 212, 
215, 2360–237
Data deluge, 201, 211
DC, 37, 43, 44, 46, 48, 50, 
DCS, NERC DCS, 103–104
Demand response, 54, 78–80, 82, 88, 199, 
200, 203–207, 209–211, 232–233
DEMS, 82, 202, 207–213, 215, 216, 238, 
Deregulation, 14, 15, 31, 51–69, 78, 88, 95, 
119, 218, 231, 
Digital relay, 74
Disaggregation, 52
Disconnect, 33, 38, 40, 127, 150
Dispatcher Training Simulator (DTS), 96, 
129, 148–149, 151, 152, 219
Dispute, 32, 60
Distributed control system (generation plant/
process control), 34, 131, 152
Distributed generation, 30, 32, 75, 76, 78, 
82, 120, 207, 210, 215
Distributed renewables management, 82
Distribution, 1, 3, 6–11, 13–17, 19, 21–25, 
27–35, 38, 40, 41, 46–48, 56, 59, 
65, 68, 72, 74–76, 78, 80–83, 85, 
86, 88, 90, 91, 93, 95, 98–100, 
103, 104, 107–109, 119–121, 
123, 124, 135, 154–158, 160, 
167–197, 199, 200, 203, 207, 
215, 217, 218, 220–222, 
226–231, 233–238
Distribution automation, 160, 177, 181, 
185, 189–190, 196, 200, 203
Distribution operator, 23, 30, 65, 82, 
120–121, 167, 180, 185, 192, 
220, 227, 229
Distribution operator training simulator, 227
Distribution SCADA (DSCADA), 185, 191
DMS, 22, 30, 33, 78, 80–82, 85, 95, 98, 
109, 120, 123, 135, 160, 165, 
166, 167, 170–197, 200, 203, 
207, 210, 211, 212, 215, 216, 
218, 220, 224, 225, 227, 229, 
231, 235, 238
Economic dispatch, 99, 114–116, 151
EISA, 33
Electric transportation, 76, 199
Electric utility, 3–5, 12, 14–15, 19, 52–53, 
85, 156
Electronic map, 98, 120, 175, 177, 181, 
186, 188, 191, 193–4, 197, 211
EMS, 27, 32, 33, 62, 82, 85, 98, 119, 123, 
127, 129, 130–146, 148, 149, 
151, 167, 170, 171, 176, 178, 
180, 181, 183, 184, 188, 191, 
192, 207, 215, 216, 218, 224, 
225, 227, 229, 235, 237
Energy markets, 54, 65, 87–88
Energy policy act, 22, 52, 54, 105, 167
Energy storage, 45, 72, 75, 82–83, 185
ERCOT, 53, 56, 59, 62
ERO, 126
ERP, 85
Event Scenario, 225
Fault, 33, 38–39, 50, 99, 123, 134, 140, 
142, 154, 155, 158, 160, 164, 
170, 172, 174–176, 180, 188, 
190, 196, 203
Feeder automation, 235
FEP, SCADA FEP (Front-end processor), 
134, 136
FERC, 14, 52, 54, 55, 68, 69, 85, 86, 109, 
116, 220
Field specialist, 93
FLISR, 32, 33, 176, 190, 222
Frequency, 22, 24, 39, 43, 47–49, 59, 100, 
104–106, 108, 126, 147, 149, 169
Frequency regulation, 49, 59, 106
Frequency relay, 39
Fuse, 29, 37–38, 158, 165, 193

 
Index 
249
Generator, generation, 1, 3, 5–7, 11, 13–14, 
19–20, 30, 32, 36, 40, 49–52, 56, 
59, 62, 68–69, 72, 7–76, 78, 82, 
85–88, 91, 96, 99–101, 106, 108–
112, 114–116, 119–120, 127, 
131–133, 135, 139, 141, 145, 
147, 151, 161–162, 185–186, 
190, 197, 199, 204, 207, 210, 
215, 220–221, 223–224, 230, 
233–235, 237, 239, 240
Generation app, 99, 114, 131–132, 139, 147
Genco, 109, 115
GIS, 30, 78, 81, 90, 98, 120, `160–162, 
176–178, 188, 191–193, 195, 
197, 210, 211
GPS, 25, 50, 81, 177
Grid operations, 20, 27, 56, 60, 63
Historical data, 142, 146, 174
Home area network, 77, 83
Home energy manager, 33, 206
ICCP, 62, 69, 130, 151, 192
IED, 28, 34, 111, 126, 135–136, 143, 177, 
185
Impedance relay, 39
Inductance, 35–36, 45, 150
Inductor, 36
Instructional position, 222
Interchange, 49, 59, 105, 106, 149, 230
IOU, 68, 211, 214
IPP, 56
ISO, 14, 15, 54, 56, 62, 65, 79, 88, 93, 105, 
131–133, 
ISO–NE, 56, 62
ITC, 68
IVVC, 32, 33, 75, 176, 189, 200, 229
Kirchhoff’s Law, 42–44, 50, 
Load forecast, 139
LSE, 59
MAIFI, 104–5, 126, 162
Manage Congestion, 62
Mapboard, 98, 108, 113, 123, 127, 
134–136, 140, 152, 181, 183, 
225, 228–229.
Market operations, 51, 60, 62, 64, 109
MDM, 80–81, 176, 192, 201, 211
Memory-resident database, 141–142   
Microgrid, 76, 83, 235–237
MISO, 56, 62, 114
Modeling, 30, 131, 149, 151, 176, 228
NERC, 49, 54, 103, 105, 112, 124–126, 
139, 162, 215, 221
Network app, 62, 129, 131, 146, 149–150, 
172, 178, 183, 235
NYISO, 56, 62
OASIS, 54, 59, 62, 68–69, 116, 126
Ohm’s Law, 7, 41, 42, 44, 50
OMS, 30, 78, 80, 81, 98, 120,155, 156, 
158–166, 171, 172, 174, 175, 
176, 180, 191, 192, 200, 207, 
216, 235, 238
One-line diagram, 26, 112, 118, 127, 137, 
179
Open Access, 14, 52, 54, 69, 116
Optimal power flow, 99, 113, 129, 146
Operations support, 119,
Order 2000, 17, 54, 68
Outage Engine, 160, 166
Participant operations, 60, 65, 67
Personally Identifiable Information, (PII), 
79, 210, 
PEV, 200, 210, 236
Phase angle, 25, 34, 47–48
PHEV, 76, 83, 200, 210, 211, 234
PJM, 56, 62, 114
PMU, 25, 26, 30, 32, 50, 75, 78, 99, 211, 
235–238
Power factor, 28, 33, 46, 189
Power flow, 26, 28, 30, 42, 46, 76, 99–100, 
104, 108, 111–113, 129, 133, 
146, 150, 177–178, 186, 188–
190, 207, 210, 212, 231, 241
Power marketer, 20, 56
Power system dynamic simulation, 225
Power system model, 28, 131, 151, 177, 
188, 207, 218, 223, 225,228
Power system state,  111
Privacy, 33, 79, 206, 210, 215, 236
PUC, 24, 34, 169
PUHCA, 13–14, 53–54
PURPA, 52, 54
Radial, 11, 28, 29, 121, 155
Real power, 45–46, 48, 222
Reactive power, 35–36, 45, 46, 48
Reactors, 35, 

250 
Electric System Operations 
Real-time, 24, 26, 33, 51, 54, 60, 65, 69, 71, 
75, 85, 100, 109, 114–115, 125, 
127, 129–133, 138–139, 146, 
160, 169, 174, 175, 178–181, 
183, 185, 190–191, 196, 203, 
209, 216, 218, 223, 227, 228, 
230–231, 236
Regulation, 3, 14–16, 20, 22, 49, 85, 
167–168, 221, 231–232
Regulatory, 1, 13–14, 16–17, 34, 52, 54, 
85–86, 90, 124, 172, 199, 201, 
207, 209, 221 
Relational database, 139, 141–142, 183
Relay, 29, 39, 40, 74, 151, 153, 165, 170, 
171, 174, 185, 191, 222, 223, 
228, 236
Reliability, 11, 15, 16, 20–22, 28, 51, 52, 
54, 56, 68, 71–72, 75, 76, 83, 88, 
93–95, 103–107, 112, 124, 126, 
131, 133, 149, 168, 190, 200, 
233, 237
Renewable energy, 5, 50, 232, 234
Renewable energy zone, 50
REP, 17, 59
Reserve, 49, 65, 69, 104, 114, 126, 234
Resistance, 11, 35–37, 41–43, 45, 48, 150
Resistor, 41
Retail, 1, 12, 14, 15, 17, 22, 32, 53, 55, 56, 
59, 65, 68, 72, 105, 132, 231, 237
Retail customer, 59
RTO, 14, 15, 53–56, 59–62, 65, 68, 69, 88, 
93, 105, 107, 108, 109, 115, 129, 
131–133, 237–238
RTU, 28, 34, 111, 126, 134–136, 143, 150, 
177, 181, 183, 185, 203
SAIDI, 22, 24, 81, 104, 106, 126, 162, 165, 
167, 169, 174, 203
SAIFI, 22, 24, 104, 106, 126, 162, 167, 
169, 174
Scanner, 143, 145, 152
Scheduling coordinator, 59
Security, 33, 60, 62, 79, 99, 110, 112–113, 
123, 124, 131, 133, 146, 201, 
215, 220, 230, 233, 234, 238
Security enhancement, 113, 146
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA), 130, 
151, 210
Settlements, 20, 68, 132, 209
SCADA, 22, 23, 27, 28, 30, 33, 34, 62, 75, 
78, 80–82, 85, 88, 105, 111, 112, 
114, 115, 119, 125, 126, 129, 
131, 132, 134, 136–143, 145, 
146, 149, 150, 160, 165–168, 
172, 175–179, 183, 185, 186, 
188, 190–193, 196, 203, 207, 
211, 216, 218, 225, 229
Single-phase, 11, 12, 30, 34, 46, 47, 197
Situational awareness, 26, 32, 129
Smart appliance, 78, 83, 204, 206
Smart grid, 14, 22, 31, 33, 71–75, 78–80, 
82, 83, 88, 95, 103, 119, 120, 
167, 180, 195, 196, 199, 
201–206, 211, 212, 216, 218, 
221, 231, 233, 238
SPP, 56, 62
State estimator, 27, 99, 111, 112, 146, 150, 
178, 188, 235
Strip-chart recorder, 108, 137–138, 152, 183
Substation, 7, 8–11, 17, 26, 28, 29, 31, 36, 
40, 41, 59, 86, 91, 100, 107, 111, 
114, 136, 150, 152, 154, 160, 
177, 178, 183–185, 188–191, 
203, 235, 236
Substation automation, 160, 183–185, 189, 
191, 203
Sub-transmission, 8, 9, 81
Superconductor, 48
Supervisory control, 22, 33, 132, 145, 149
Switching order, 23, 82, 91, 93, 96–97, 101, 
119–121, 125, 127, `168, 178, 
195
Switching sequence, 97, 127, 166, 174, 
185–186, 193
Switching sequence generator, 185, 186
Synchrophasor, 25, 26, 32, 50
System Operator, 17, 23, 51, 56, 62, 65–67, 
72, 76, 78, 79, 82, 90–93, 96, 
99–103, 105, 108, 110, 119, 124, 
126, 129, 131, 155, 168, 170, 
174, 177, 186, 193, 195, 217–
222, 225, 228–232, 235–239. 
System Operator Training Simulator, 217, 
218, 219, 221–224, 227, 229, 231
Tag, tagging, 24, 59, 117, 145, 170, 191
Time of use rate, 119, 200, 207,232
Time-sequenced data, 142, 183

 
Index 
251
Three-phase, 11, 12, 30, 33, 34, 46, 47, 
177–179, 186–188, 197
Transco, 68
Transformer, 7–9, 11, 29, 34, 36–38, 40, 
44, 46, 48, 50, 56, 76, 82–83, 
111–112, 114, 126, 150, 176, 
192–193, 203, 223, 225
Transmission, 1, 3, 6–11, 13, 14, 17, 19, 
20, 25–32, 35, 36, 40, 46–54, 56, 
59, 60, 62, 65, 66, 68, 69, 74, 
75, 78, 81–83, 85, 86, 88, 90, 
91, 93, 98–100, 102, 103, 105, 
107–110, 114, 116 121, 123, 126, 
127, 129, 131–133, 149, 150, 
154, 155, 167, 178, 185, 188, 
192, 195, 199, 204, 215, 217, 
218, 220–223, 228, 229–231, 
235–239, 241, 242, 245
Transmission operator, 14, 105, 114, 131, 
132, 133, 229, 231
Transmission owner, 60
Transmission user, 59
Transmission and distribution, 3, 6, 9–10, 
13, 19, 31, 35, 40, 46–47, 74, 75, 
81, 83, 85–86, 88, 91, 99, 108, 
154, 195, 217, 221, 223, 235, 
236, 238
Training Scenario, 223, 
Trouble-call management system (TCMS), 
30, 81, 105, 156–157
Trouble-men, 155, 158, 161–163, 188, 221
Unit commitment, 62, 68, 99, 115, 116
Utility interconnected system, 48
Vertically Integrated Utility, 3, 14, 20, 53, 
55–56, 69, 86, 95, 131, 
Voltage, 7–13, 26, 28, 33–45, 47–48, 50, 
75, 80, 83, 99–100, 108, 111, 
126, 143, 149–151, 174–177, 
185, 189, 201, 216, 230–231
Voltage class, 8, 10
WAMS, 30, 75, 131, 149, 172, 237, 238
Wholesale, 10, 14, 15, 52, 54, 55, 59, 60, 
69, 72, 87, 115, 131–133, 204, 
237
Wholesale energy merchant, 59
Work and resource management, 20, 89, 91, 
161–162, 192–193


Recent Artech House Titles
in Power Engineering
The Advanced Smart Grid: Edge Power Driving Sustainability, 
Andres Carvallo and John Cooper
Battery Management Systems for Large Lithium Ion Battery Packs, 
Davide Andrea
Designing Control Loops for Linear and Switching Power Supplies: 
A Tutorial Guide, Christophe Basso
Electric System Operations: Evolving to the Modern Grid, 
Mani Vadari
Energy Harvesting for Autonomous Systems, Stephen Beeby and 
Neil White
Power Line Communications in Practice, Xavier Carcelle
For further information on these and other Artech House titles,including 
previously considered out-of-print books now available through our 
In-Print-Forever® (IPF®) program, contact:
Artech House	
Artech House
685 Canton Street	
16 Sussex Street 
Norwood, MA 02062	
London SW1V 4RW UK
Phone: 781-769-9750	
Phone: +44 (0)20 7596-8750
Fax: 781-769-6334	
Fax: +44 (0)20 7630-0166
e-mail: artech@artechhouse.com	
e-mail: artech-uk@artechhouse.com
Find us on the World Wide Web at: www.artechhouse.com


