The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Concepts and Applications
Second Edition

The McGraw-Hill Companies
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Vedam Subrahmanyam received his MSc (Engineering) degree in Electrical 
Machine Design from Madras University in 1963 and his PhD from IIT Madras in 
1973. He joined IIT Madras in 1966 and served as a Professor in the department of 
Electrical Engineering. Prior to this, he had taught for two years at Visweswaraya 
Regional College of Engineering, Nagpur, and Regional Engineering College, 
Warangal, as a faculty member. A popular academician, he has guided several 
research students at the MTech and PhD levels.
Prof. Subrahmanyam has published around 60 articles in national and interna­
tional journals and has also presented papers at international conferences. He has 
attended programmes in Germany and worked as a faculty member at the Uni­
versity of Dar-es-Salaam for two years. He is the author of well-acclaimed books 
like Power Electronics: Devices, Converters, Applications and Thyristor Control 
of Electric Drives, the latter published by Tata McGraw-Hill.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Concepts and Applications
Second Edition
Vedam Subrahmanyam
Former Professor
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology 
Chennai
Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited
NEW DELHI
McGraw-Hill Offices
New Delhi 
New York 
St Louis 
San Francisco 
Auckland 
Bogotá 
Caracas 
Kuala Lumpur 
Lisbon 
London 
Madrid 
Mexico City 
Milan 
Montreal 
San Juan 
Santiago 
Singapore 
Sydney 
Tokyo 
Toronto

The McGraw Hill Companies
Tata McGraw-Hill
Published by the Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited,
7 West Patel Nagar, New Delhi 110 008.
Electric Drives, 2e
Copyright © 2011, 1994, by Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise or stored in a database 
or retrieval system without the prior written permission of the publishers. The program 
listings (if any) may be entered, stored and executed in a computer system, but they may 
not be reproduced for publication.
This edition can be exported from India only by the publishers,
Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited.
ISBN-13: 978-0-07-070199-1 
ISBN-10: 0-07-070199-7
Vice President and Managing Director—McGraw-Hill Education: Asia Pacific Region: 
Ajay Shukla
Head—Higher Education Publishing and Marketing: Vibha Mahajan
Manager: Sponsoring— SEM & Tech Ed: Shalini Jha
Assoc. Sponsoring Editor: Suman Sen
Development Editor: Manish Choudhary
Executive—Editorial Services: Sohini Mukherjee
Sr Production Manager: P L Pandita
Dy Marketing Manager—SEM & Tech Ed: Biju Ganesan
General Manager— Production: Rajender P Ghansela 
Asst. General Manager—Production: B L Dogra
Information contained in this work has been obtained by Tata McGraw-Hill, from 
sources believed to be reliable. However, neither Tata McGraw-Hill nor its authors 
guarantee the accuracy or completeness of any information published herein, and 
neither Tata McGraw-Hill nor its authors shall be responsible for any errors, omissions, 
or damages arising out of use of this information. This work is published with the 
understanding that Tata McGraw-Hill and its authors are supplying information but are 
not attempting to render engineering or other professional services. If such services are 
required, the assistance of an appropriate professional should be sought.
Typeset at ACE PRO India Private Limited, Ghaziabad 201 014, and printed at Avon 
Printers, Plot No 16, Main Loni Road, Jawahar Nagar Indl. Area, Shahdara, Delhi 110 094.
Cover: SDR
RAXCRRQZDRBCZ
The McGraw-Hill Companies

The McGraw-Hill Com pan ies
Dedicated to my beloved 
mother late Smt Seshamma

The McGraw-Hill Companies

The McGraw Hill Companies
C
ContentsJ
Preface
XI
Introduction
1
1. 
Characteristics of Electric Motors
5
1.1 Introduction 
5
1.2 Characteristics of DC Motors 
6
1.3 Characteristics of a Three-phase Induction Motor 
29
1.4 Characteristics of Synchronous Motors 
46
1.5 Braking of Electric Motors 
57
1.6 Starting of Electric Motors 
75
Worked Examples 
83 
Problems 
93
Multiple-Choice Questions 
98 
References 
100
2. 
Dynamics of Electric Drives 
101
2.1 Introduction 
101
2.2 Classification of Electric Drives 
102
2.3 Basic Elements of an Electric Drive 
103
2.4 Dynamic Conditions of a Drive System 
116
2.5 Stability Considerations of Electrical Drives 
118
Worked Examples 
123 
Problems 
127
Multiple-Choice Questions 
128 
References 
129
3. 
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors 
130
3.1 A General Survey of Converters 
for Feeding Electric Motors 
130
3.2 Phase Controlled Line Commutated Converters 
143
3.3 DC Choppers 
210
3.4 Inverters 
224
3.5 Cycloconverters 
243
3.6 AC Voltage Controller 246

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Contents
Worked Examples 
273 
Problems 
286
Multiple-Choice Questions 
290 
References 
291
4. 
Control of Electric Motors 
293
4.1 Induction Motor Drives 
295
4.2 Synchronous Motor Drives 
343
4.3 DC Drives 
367
4.4 Permanent Magnet Synchronous Motor 
413
4.5 Classification of Permanent Magnet Synchronous Motors 
419
4.6 Cycloconverter-fed Synchronous Motor 
425
Worked Examples 
429 
Problems 
448
Multiple-Choice Questions 
458 
References 
464
5. 
Rating and Heating of Motors 
466
5.1 Requirements of a Drive Motor 
466
5.2 Power Losses and Heating of Electric Motors 
466
5.3 Heating and Cooling of an Electric Motor 
468
5.4 Classes of Duty and Selection of Motor 
474
Worked Examples 
491 
Problems 
494
Multiple-Choice Questions 
495 
References 
496
6. 
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives 
497
6.1 Introduction 
497
6.2 Basic Features of an Electric Drive 
499
6.3 Block Diagram Representation of Drive Systems 
500
6.4 Signal Flow Graph Representation of the Systems 
504
6.5 Transfer Functions 
505
6.6 Transient Response of Closed Loop Drive Systems 
517 
6.1 Frequency Response Approach 
524
6.8 Stability of Controlled Drives 
531
6.9 Compensation and the Use of Controllers 
to Improve the Performance 
543
Worked Examples 
587 
Problems 
598

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Contents
Multiple-Choice Questions 
601 
References 
602
7. 
Drives for Specific Applications 
603
7.1 Drive Considerations for Textile Mills 
604
7.2 Steel Rolling Mills 
609
7.3 Cranes and Hoist Drives 
615
7.4 Cement Mills 
625
7.5 Sugar Mills 
629
7.6 Machine Tools 
631
7.7 Paper Mills 
633
7.8 Coal Mines 
635
7.9 Centrifugal Pumps 
636
7.10 Turbocompressors 
642
7.11 Summary of Thyristorised AC and DC Drives 
645
Multiple-Choice Questions 
650 
References 
652
8. 
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives 
653
8.1 Introduction 
653
8.2 Dedicated Hardware Systems versus 
Microprocessor Control 
654
8.3 Application Areas and Functions of Microprocessors 
in Drive Technology 
656
8.4 Control of Electric Drives Using Microprocessors 
663
8.5 Some Aspects of Control System Design
of Microprocessor Based Variable Speed Drives 
698
8.6 Stepper Motors 
699
Multiple-Choice Questions 
709 
References 
710
Appendix A
711
Appendix B
721
Index
727

The McGraw-Hill Companies

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Even in the 21st century electric drives continue to be widely used in the industry. 
During the last one and a half decades, since the publication of the first edition, 
research in electric drives has been very active. Significant improvements in com­
puting have given rise to technologies that make design and control of electric 
drives efficient. Electric drives have a number of advantages and are widely used 
in the industry. Among these advantages are reliability and versatility of speed 
control, especially with a dc drive. Speed control of electric motors has become 
possible with the advent of the thyristor. Optimisation and automation have, how­
ever, improved the static and dynamic behaviour of these drives. Further develop­
ments in the area of control of static apparatus such as converters and inverters 
using thyristors have made these drives more reliable and accurate in operation 
which in turn, has led to a wider application of these drives.
ABOUTTHE BOOK
This book is written to cover the subject at a basic level in order to familiarize 
the reader with the problems of the drives and possible solutions for them. Before 
going into the details of closed-loop control and associated design problems 
connected with dynamics of the drives, knowledge of conventional drives for vari­
able speed operation is necessary. The dynamics of these conventional systems 
are discussed to give an idea as to how these can be improved with closed-loop 
systems. The availability of thyristor power converters has made an impact on 
the area of drives with sophistications such as fast dynamic response, accurate 
speed control, etc. A detailed discussion of these converters and their features has 
also been provided. The features of ac and dc drives are discussed in detail. The 
control aspects of the drives have been elaborated upon so that improvements in 
both the static and dynamic behaviour of the drives can be achieved with proper 
design of the controllers.
The text covers cutting-edge research and development in effective self-control 
of electric motors. Sensorless control using advanced control technologies like 
Artificial Intelligence including Fuzzy Logic and Neural Networks are covered. 
It discusses topics like state estimation using sophisticated filtering techniques in 
significant detail. Concepts and applications of cycloconverter fed synchronous 
motors are also explained.
The book provides an exhaustive and comparative study of all drives, both 
conventional and those fed from static converters. It also discusses the utility of 
static drives for these applications.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Preface
TARGET AUDIENCE
The book is intended to serve as a textbook for basic courses in drives covering 
fundamentals of the drives, as well as advanced courses dealing with the design 
of closed-loop speed control and design of controllers. The focus on applications 
makes it useful to practicing engineers.
NEW TO THIS EDITION
While maintaining core chapters from the previous edition, the second edition 
brings the readers abreast to state-of-the-art design of electric drives and their lat­
est applications. This edition introduces Permanent Magnet Synchronous Motors, 
their mathematical modeling and applications. The other new topics introduced 
are Brushless Motors, Three Phase Induction Motor Drives, Current Source 
Inverter Control (CSI Control), Voltage Source Inverter Control (VSI Control) 
and Application of Electric Devices in IGBT, MOSFET and BJTs. The peda­
gogy is refreshed with inclusion of new problems in the form of Solved examples, 
Review Questions and Objective Type Questions.
SALIENT FEATURES
• 
In-depth coverage of thyristor power converters and drives employing these 
converters
• 
Highlights closed-loop control and dynamics of electric drives
• 
Detailed discussion on industrial applications, utility and technical prob­
lems of electric drives
• 
Comparative analysis of various drives along with the relevant discussion
• 
Application of Microprocessor in electric drives presented in separate 
chapter
• 
Excellent pedagogy including
• 
65 solved problems
• 
190 review questions
• 
115 objective-type questions
CHAPTER ORGANIZATION
Chapter 1 deals with an introduction to the drives, their classification, and their 
dynamics. A brief description of methods of speed control and braking of the 
motors using conventional methods is given in Chapter 2. Chapter 3 gives a 
review of all the power converters used for drives. The methods of improving the 
performance are also discussed. Chapter 4 deals with ac and dc drives. The former 
uses induction and synchronous motors. All the technical problems of the drives 
are discussed where they are operated on static power converters. The problems 
of motor heating on different load cycles are discussed in Chapter 5. Chapter 6

The McGraw Hill Companies
Preface
discusses the control aspects of electrical drives, the design of controllers to 
improve performance. Chapter 7 discusses typical applications of electrical 
drives in the industry. Chapter 8 presents Microprocessors and Control of Elec­
tric Drives in detail.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
First of all, I would like to acknowledge the support and patience of my beloved 
wife, Leelavathi, during the process of writing and revising this book. Also, the 
reviewers of this edition deserve a special mention for their efforts in scrutinizing 
the manuscript and providing helpful inputs. Their names are given below.
G K Singh
Indian Institute o f Technology (IIT) 
Roorkee, Uttarakhand
Vivek Deep Verma
BED Institute o f Technology 
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
Ranjan Behera
Indian Institute o f Technology (IIT) 
Patna, Bihar
S B L Seksena
National Institute o f Technology (NIT) 
Jamshedpur, Jharkhand
K N Pawar
BSD College o f Engineering, 
Dhule, Maharashtra
N Kumaresan
National Institute o f Technology (NIT) 
Tiruchirapalli, Tamil Nadu
B Vinod
PSG College o f Technology 
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
B K Murthy
National Institute o f Technology (NIT) 
Warangal, Andhra Pradesh
Subbarayudu Duggisetty
GPR Engineering College 
Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh
Gita Ramadas
RMK Engineering College 
Kavaraipettai, Tamil Nadu
Finally, my wholehearted appreciation and gratitude is due to the editorial and 
production staff of Tata McGraw-Hill, especially Shalini Jha, Suman Sen, Manish 
Choudhary, Sohini Mukherjee and P L Pandita for their constant support and 
encoragement during various stages of revision of the text.
V edam Subrahmanyam

The McGraw-Hill Companies
BM
Preface
FEEDBACK
Constructive criticism and suggestions are always welcome for the enhancement of the 
book, all of which can be sent to the publisher’s email at tmh.elefeedback@gmail.com, 
mentioning the title and author’s name in the subject line. Feel free to report any piracy 
spotted by you as well.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Introduction)
Industrial loads require operation at any one of a wide range of speeds. Such 
loads are generally termed as variable speed drives. These drives demand precise 
adjustment of speed in a stepless continuous manner over the complete speed 
range required. The loads may be constant torque loads, requiring constant torque 
at all speeds. The torque may also be a function of speed, e.g. in a fan type or 
pump type load the torque is proportional to the square of the speed. These loads 
are driven by hydraulic, pneumatic or electric motors. An industrial drive has 
some special features when driven by electric motors. The speed-torque charac­
teristic of the motor can be very easily modified to suit the load characteristic. It 
has a sufficient overload capacity and can be overloaded for short periods without 
affecting the life of the motor. The motors can be brought to operation without 
any warming up period.
One of the important features of an industrial drive is its four quadrant opera­
tion in the speed-torque plane. An electric motor can operate in all the four 
quadrants of the V-I plane, corresponding to the mechanical quantities, speed 
and torque. The normal motoring operation is in the first quadrant. Sometimes 
the drive motor is required to maintain a constant speed, especially when there 
is a tendency for the load to get accelerated beyond the safe speed. Electric 
motors have a natural tendency to become generators automatically if the 
speed of the motor goes beyond the no-load value. The energy responsible for 
acceleration is successfully returned to the mains, thus maintaining constant 
speed. This operation corresponds to the second quadrant. An electric motor can 
operate in the reverse direction of rotation with suitable changes in its supply 
connections. This operation corresponds to the third quadrant. Operation is also 
possible in the fourth quadrant, where the motor acts as a brake. This can be 
done by suitably modifying the characteristic, e.g. by inserting a resistance in 
the rotor circuit of an induction motor. A suitable torque developed by the motor 
drives the load at the desired speed, providing the braking action. An electric 
motor thus adapts itself for four quadrant operation. Rapid acceleration of the 
drive and frequent reversing, if required, can be easily accomplished when an 
electric motor is employed.
Another feature of drives employing electric motors is smooth speed control 
over a wide range, e.g. the speed control of a dc motor in Ward Leonard control 
when a variable voltage is applied to the armature. This had not been possible with 
ac motors till the advent of thyristor. The development of compact thyristor power 
converters has made possible the smooth speed control of both dc and ac motors. 
The efficiency of the drive in the complete speed range also improves. Electric 
motors have a good starting torque and can be started on load.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Industrial drives demand very precise variations in speed. This can be easily 
accomplished by means of an electric motor, up to an accuracy of 1%. An electric 
drive is easy to maintain and can even be operated in a contaminated atmosphere. 
Because of these features industrial drives employ electric motors ac or dc.
REQUIREMENTS OF AN ADJUSTABLE SPEED DRIVE
An electric drive should satisfy the following requirements:
i. Stable operation 
The speed-torque characteristic of the motor should 
be such that stable operation of the drive is assured in all the four quad­
rants over a wide range of speeds. The drive must be controllable with 
regenerative braking to maintain constant speed if the load overhauls 
the motor. The motor must have stable operation in the fourth quadrant.
ii. The drive motor should also have a good transient response. The drive 
should return to its original operating condition very quickly in case of 
disturbance. If there is a step change in torque or speed the drive must 
attain its new operating point quickly without any large overshoots. It 
must operate with stability, not have a sluggish transient response, not be 
very oscillatory, and have a suitably chosen damping.
The frequency and transient responses may be corrected with a proper design 
of the controllers in the closed loop controls. Stability considerations of electric 
motors and the optimum designs for improving the transient performance are dis­
cussed in subsequent chapters.
FORMS OF DRIVE MOTORS
The possible forms of drive motors are
i. dc motors fed from dc supply
ii. dc motors fed from ac supply
iii. ac motors fed from ac supply
The speed control of a motor can be accomplished either in the conventional man­
ner or by using thyristor power converters. Solid state drives using thyristor power 
converters are gaining popularity over drives employing conventional methods due 
to their reliability, compactness and capability for controlling speed. Thyristorised 
drives employ both dc and ac motors. The dc motors can be driven from an ac supply 
with a thyristor power converter interposed. The capacity of this converter to operate 
both as a rectifier and an inverter makes regeneration possible. A converter fed drive 
therefore has a natural tendency to operate in the first and second quadrants. With 
suitable changes in the power circuit of the converter operation can be extended to the 
third and fourth quadrants also. If operation is needed only in the first quadrant a half 
controlled converter with better characteristics may be used. Power converters, such 
as choppers, may be used to feed (operate) a dc motor from a dc supply.
Till the advent of thyristor power converters, variable frequency to an ac induc­
tion, synchronous motor had been provided by rotating the motor-generator set 
for the purpose of speed control. The development of inverters providing variable

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Introduction
voltage, variable frequency sources has widened their applicability in control­
ling the speed of ac motors over a wide range. Both dynamic and regenerative 
braking are possible. Conventional armature voltage control, slip energy recovery 
schemes and rotor resistance control are now being replaced by static converters. 
These drives and discussed in the following chapters.
Thyristor power converters have made possible the speed control of synchro­
nous motors, which had otherwise been of the constant speed type. Self controlled 
synchronous motors with constant margin angle control have a steadystate and 
dynamic behaviour comparable to that of a dc motor.
AC DRIVES AND DC DRIVES—A COMPARISON
DC motors are very versatile for purposes of speed control. Smooth speed control 
is possible by varying the armature voltage and/or field current, but they suffer 
from disadvantages imposed by the commutator. Sparking at the brushes limits 
both the highest speed of operation and the design capacity of the motor. Also, the 
ripple content of the motor current due to processes of rectification impairs the 
commutation capability of the motor. Induction motors, which had been constant 
speed type till the advent of thyristor power converters, posed problems in the 
area of speed control. When controlled using conventional methods, only stepped 
speeds are possible with a limited range of speed control. The power factor and 
efficiency are poor. With thyristor power converters providing a variable volt­
age, variable frequency supply the speed control of induction motors has become 
straightforward, making them viable competitors to dc motors. Current research is 
oriented towards the sophisticated control of induction motors such that the char­
acteristics of dc motors can be realised. Further, the static and dynamic character­
istics of synchronous motors can be improved by self control making them similar 
to those of a dc motor. A comparison of dc and ac drives is given in Table 1.
From the table it is clear that developments in the area of solid state device 
technology are providing the thyristor at increasingly more economical prices, 
thus making ac drives more popular than their dc counterparts.
TRENDS IN DRIVE TECHNOLOGY
With thyristor power converters achieving popularity in the area of adjust­
able speed drives, the operational problems of motors on these converters have 
started posing problem. The ac motor has a non-sinusoidal voltage or current 
while operating on inverters while a dc motor has a ripple superimposed on its 
current. These lead to additional losses and torque pulsations which are objec­
tionable at low speeds. The trend is now towards designing the motor as well 
as the inverter such as to minimise these problems. The design of a dc motor 
is being improved to provide a sufficiently good commutating capability, while 
that of the inverters is being improved to provide voltage with the least har­
monic content. PWM techniques have been developed, and the thyristors are 
being replaced by transistors.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Table 1 
Comparison of dc and ac drives
DC drives 
AC drives
The commutator makes the motor 
bulky, costly and heavy. Sparking at 
the brushes makes it environmentally 
unsuitable in certain locations. The 
highest speed and design rating are 
limited due to commutation. The com­
mutator requires frequent maintenance.
The converter technology is well estab­
lished. The power converter is simple 
and inexpensive.
Line commutation of the converter.
The line conditions are very poor, i.e. 
poor power factor, harmonic distortion 
of the current.
Fast response and wide speed range 
smooth control.
Small power/weight ratio.
Cost does not depend on the solid state 
converter.
The problems are not there. Motors are inex­
pensive, particularly the squire 1 cage motor. 
Speed and design rating have no upper limits. 
Motor is reliabie, requires little maintenance 
and can be used in all locations. Economical in 
some applications.
The inverter technology is still king devel­
oped. The power circuit of the converter and 
its control are complex.
Forced commutation is usedwith induction 
motors. Sometimes machine commutation 
may be used with synchronous motors.
For regenerative drives the line power factor 
is poor. For non-regenerative drives the power 
factor is better.
Response depends upon the type of control. 
With solid state converters the speed range is 
wide. With conventional methods it is stepped 
and limited.
Large power/weight ratio.
Solid state converter employed also decides 
the cost.
Vector controlled induction motors, and margin angle controlled synchronous 
motors are employed in high performance drives having precise speed and torque 
control. These also have a very good static and dynamic response.
Solid state drives employ closed loop control both for speed and torque con­
trol. Modern control methods use state space techniques. Methods of stabilising 
the drives and improving their transient performance are being developed.
Digital control using microprocessors is slowly replacing the analog control of 
the drives, which had limitations due to component drift and temperature. Micro­
processor control has several features and advantages. Modem control techniques 
to the implementation of sophisticated drives (which are very difficult to realise 
with hard wired systems) are possible, as are diagnosis, monitoring, warning etc.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
r
I
1
_______ J
\
Characteristics 
of Electric Motors
J
I_______________
1.1 
INTRODUCTION
Variable speed drives in the industry employ electric motors as their drive motors 
mainly because they enjoy several specific advantages, such as overload capacity, 
smooth speed control over a wide range, capability of operating in all the four 
quadrants of the speed-torque plane, etc.
Till the advent of thyristors and thyristor power converters the dc motor had 
been very popular in the area of adjustable speed drives, even though it suffered 
from the disadvantages imposed by the presence of a mechanical commutator. 
Thyristor power converters capable of providing variable voltage, variable fre­
quency supplies have now made ac motors increasingly popular.
Industrial loads have different types of speed-torque characteristics. Once the 
speed-torque of the load to be driven is determined a proper motor has to be 
selected for driving the load. Some of the factors that can influence the choice of 
a motor to drive the load are:
i. the available ratings, capital and running costs involved
ii. the limits of speed range, hardness of speed control and speed regulation
iii. the efficiency during variable speed operation
iv. controllability
v. braking requirements
vi. reliability of operation
vii. starting requirements
viii. power/weight ratio
ix. power factor
x. capability of operating on a load factor or duty cycle
xi. availability of supply
xii. effects of supply variations
xiii. 
loading of the supply, and
xiv. environmental effects.
Therefore, a knowledge of the behaviour of electric motors and with regard to 
the factors listed above is required. It may also be possible to modify the system 
to improve its performance and make it more economical and efficient.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
A short survey of the characteristics of electric motors, the conventional 
methods of speed control, braking and starting are discussed in this chapter.
1.2 
CHARACTERISTICS OF DC MOTORS
DC motors are of the rotating armature type. The armature winding is a closed 
winding through the commutator. The armature is supplied through the brushes 
which are placed along the neutral axis on the commutator. The field system is sta­
tionary. The mmf produced by the field is along the magnetic axis while the cur­
rent flowing through the armature produces an mmf directed along the brush axis. 
The two mmfs are in space quadrature and occur simultaneously in the motor. 
They react with each other and develop a torque under whose action the armature 
rotates. A voltage is induced in the armature called the back emf. The direction of 
rotation can be determined by the left hand rule. The mmfs and the direction of 
rotation of the armature are illustrated in Fig. 1.1.
Fig. 1.1 
The magnetomotive forces of a dc machine

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
A special feature of dc motors is that it is possible to connect the field and 
armature windings in several ways so as to achieve a variety of speed-torque 
characteristics. The motors are classified depending upon the type of connection 
between the armature and the field.
In a separately excited dc motor the armature and field are excited by inde­
pendent voltage sources. In a dc shunt motor the field winding is connected in 
parallel with the armature, both of which are supplied from the same source. In 
series motors the armature and field are connected in series and are obviously 
supplied from the same source. In a compound motor both series and shunt fields 
are present. The performance of the motor is determined by the relative strengths 
of the series, shunt or separately excited field windings and by the orientation of 
the fluxes produced by them. Different types of dc motor connections are shown 
in Fig. 1.2.
(a) Separately excited 
dc motor
(d) Long shunt compound 
(e) Short shunt compound motor
motor
Fig. 1.2 
Types of dc motors
In a separately excited motor, it is possible to control both armature voltage 
and field current, so as to control the speed over a wide range in a smooth manner. 
Speeds ranging from zero to base speed may be obtained at constant torque by

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
armature voltage control. Speeds above base speed are possible at constant power 
output by a weakening of the flux.
Shunt motors operate at almost constant speed from no load to full load when 
operated from constant voltage mains. With a series connection of the field 
winding with armature an inverse relation between the speed and torque may be 
achieved. By properly adjusting the relative field strengths of the series and shunt 
windings of a compound motor a speed-torque curve with desired speed regula­
tion may be obtained.
The speed-torque characteristic of an electric motor is very significant since it 
decides the application of the motor.
1.2.1 
Speed-Torque Characteristic of a Separately Excited dc Motor
The circuit equation of a dc motor whose armature, having a total of Z conductors, 
is wound for 2P poles (the brushes divide the winding into 2a parallel paths), is
K = E  + / ara(1.1)
Where E is the back emf of the armature given by
E = <|)ZN 2P 
60 2a = Ke$N = Kt<\>co
( 1.2)
where co is the angular velocity given by co = (2k N/60), Ke and K{ can be easily 
identified.
From Eqs (1.1) and (1.2) we get
N = K.\ 
1a fii
(1.3)
The torque developed by the motor is given by
rd = 2_ 2pif E  z = Kty t
2n 
2a
Substituting for /  in Eq. (1.3) from Eq. (1.4) we have
V 
Ta
r a 
1 d
N =
« A  
KtK A
r
2 
a
(1.4)
(1.5)
When Td = 0 the corresponding speed A^0 = VJ(KJ§) is the no-load speed. The 
motor speed decreases as the torque developed increases, resulting in a droop­
ing characteristic. The speed-torque curves are shown in Fig. 1.3. The figure 
clearly shows a speed drop of 2 to 3% as the torque varies from no-load to 
full load.
In dc machines the armature mmf reacts with the field mmf this reaction is 
known as the armature reaction. When the effects of the armature reaction are 
neglected, the flux per pole of the motor is constant and is independent of load. 
In normal construction the brushes are placed in the neutral zone. The armature 
reaction, though cross magnetising, is followed by demagnetisation due to satura­
tion. The effect of demagnetisation on the field flux due to armature flux is clearly

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
Fig. 1.3 
Speed versus torque of a separately excited dc motor
shown in Fig. 1.3. The speed drop from no-load to full load decreases, improving 
speed regulation.
The effect of additional resistance in the armature circuit is depicted in 
Fig. 1.4. Speeds in the range of zero to base speed may be obtained. With a suit­
able value of r very slow speeds are possible, at the cost of efficiency.
Fig. 1.4 
Torque developed, Td
The speed-torque curves for a smooth variation of armature voltage are shown 
in Fig. 1.5. They move along the 7-axis (speed axis) following changes in the 
armature voltage. The field winding of the motor is supplied from a separate 
source. The smooth variation of armature voltage brings about speed control in 
the zero to base speed range very efficiently. The motor operates in a constant 
torque mode. This method of controlling the speed of a dc motor using variable 
voltage to the armature is employed in Ward Leonard control.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 1.5 
Torque developed, Td
The effect of the variation of field current on the speed-torque characteris­
tic is shown in Fig. 1.6. The field current is decreased to achieve speeds above 
base speed when the armature voltage reaches its rated value. The flux weakening 
mode is best suited for constant power applications, since the armature current 
may be maintained at its rated value. The torque decreases. In the flux weakening 
mode the motor cannot be used to drive constant torque loads as the motor draws 
increased currents as the speed increases. This mode is employed to obtain speeds 
in the range of base speed to twice base speed. The highest speed attainable by 
flux weakening is limited by commutation.
Fig. 1.6 
Effect of field weakening on speed-torque characteristic

The McGraw Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
The armature current can remain constant in the complete range of speeds from 
zero to twice base speed. Constant torque and constant power modes are shown in 
Fig. 1.7. The operation depicted in Fig. 1.7 is possible with shunt motors also by 
means of a variable resistance in the field circuit.
Fig. 1.7 
Constant torque and constant power modes of a separately excited motor
1.2.2 
Modifications to the Speed-Torque Characteristic of a dc Shunt Motor
The preceding discussion shows that armature voltage variation gives creeping 
speeds. The simple rheostatic method provides a characteristic with little hard­
ness and little stability. Ward Leonard control 
(smooth variation of voltage), on the other hand, 
produces a flat characteristic with reasonable 
hardness and stability, but high initial cost. A 
simple method with low initial cost, to obtain 
crawling speeds with sufficient hardness, is 
depicted in Fig. 1.8. The conventional rheostatic 
control with a resistance in series with the arma­
ture is modified by shunting the armature with 
a low resistance. By varying the values of series 
and shunt resistances the speed-torque charac­
teristics can be made to have any desired shape.
In the simple rheostatic control using only 
a series resistance, the voltage across the armature at no-load is V. The no-load 
speed is decided by V, whatever be the value of Rs. If the armature is shunted by R 
the voltage across the armature becomes less than V even at no load. The no-load 
speed decreases to the desired value with proper values of Rs and R h. The smaller 
the value of R , the lesser is the voltage across the armature at no-load. Eventu­
ally, the no-load speed decreases. The value of Rsh is also effective in making 
the characteristic flat.
Fig. 1.8 
Modification to speed- 
torque characteristic by 
shunting armature

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 1.9 
Typical speed-torque curve 
Referring to Fig. 1.8, we have
Typical speed-torque characteris­
tics are shown in Fig. 1.9 in which 
the natural characteristic of the shunt 
motor and the characteristic with 
simple rheostatic control are shown. 
This modification may be used if sta­
ble low speed operation is required. 
It can be employed for accurate stop­
ping of the drive. By changing the 
value of Rgh the speed can be reduced 
to a very low value and then suitable 
mechanical braking may be applied 
to have accurate stopping.
from which
K -  E + ldra + ISRS
(1.6)
K -  4h^sh +
(1.7)
+
<
II
(1.8)
-  / s(*s + *sh) “ I*Rsh
(1.9)
j _ ^a 
^aRsh
(1.10)
1 
(* s + * s h )
Also from Eqs (1.8) and (1.7)
l = l  + v - r >'■
R
( 1. 11)
sh
L
Using these relations in Eq. (1.6) we have
N  =  z
______ * * _________
(^sh + *s) 
^
Substituting for /  in terms of Td we have
V (
N =
f
r + 
'a '
*sh*s
Rsh + R,
(1.12)
s J
V
(  
D 
)  
^sh
T  
(  
7d
K
A
V * sh  +  * s  y
^ t^ e < l>2 l
V + 
'a 
'
^sh
*sh + ^s /
(1.13)
The speed-torque characteristic is shown in Fig. 1.9. The following points are 
clear from the figure:
V
i. The no load speed (T -  0) decreases t o -----(
R,sh
-) as the value of
Rsh
^sh + ^5
< 1. Smaller the value of R , smaller is this value. The slope
*sh + *s
also decreases if R^ is small. The hardness is thus improved and stable 
operation is assured when compared to simple rheostatic control.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
ii. 
Smoothness of speed control depends on how Rsh and Rs are varied. The 
speed control is stepped, as the resistances can be varied in a stepped 
manner.
iii. 
Speeds below base speed are possible. The no-load speed itself changes 
following variations in Rsh. A sharp drop in the no-load speed may be 
observed when R is decreased. Speed control is achieved by varying the 
value of R . The method is equivalent to making the field stronger and 
gives results similar to those obtained by increasing the field current at a 
given armature current.
iv. The method is suitable for constant torque loads, so that the armature 
current is at its rated value.
v. The method is suitable if accurate stopping is required.
vi. It is not economical for continuous operation. The losses in Rsh and Rs 
make the system inefficient. The method can be employed if stable 
creeping speeds are required for short periods.
1.2.3 
Speed-Torque Characteristics of Series Motor
The field winding is connected in series with the armature (Fig. 1.2(b)). The 
armature current and field current are the same. The operating speed-torque char­
acteristic may be deduced for a series motor in the same way as described before 
for shunt motor/separately excited motor using the basic equations (Eqs 1.3 and 
1.4). The speed and armature current are related by the equation
N  =
V
*,4>
I V
1 a ' a
^c<t>
whereas Td and / are related by
rd = k ^ i *
In a series motor I_ = I and hence the field flux
f 
a
4> = /( /a )
(1.14)
(1.15)
(1.16)
For low values of armature current causing no saturation we have
<i> = K th
using which we have
(1.16a)
Ta = K ,^t/a2 
(1.17)
substituting for / in Eq. 1.14, we have
V 
r
N  = -----=
------(1.18)
C ,V ^  
Kf Kt
where C, = K J ^ K (Kt
The speed-torque characteristic of an unsaturated series motor is represented 
by AB in Fig. 1.10. As the torque increases, the speed drops rapidly to B.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 1.10 
Speed-torque characteristic of a dc series motor
When the armature current is greater than the value corresponding to point B, 
saturation sets in and the actual value of flux must be substituted in the equation 
to get the characteristic. However, to understand the trend of the curve it can be 
assumed that 0 is constant. Under this assumption the speed-torque characteristic 
of saturated series motor is
V 
TaV
N = --------------4-2— 
(1.19)
^e<t> 
KeKt<\(>2
and BC in Fig. 1.10 represents the characteristic. AC therefore, is a typical speed- 
torque curve of a dc series motor. Also, the effect of armature reaction is pre­
dominant only when the armature current is large. The speed drop is restricted
due to a decrease in the field flux. The effect of armature reaction is also depicted 
in Fig. 1.10.
Effect of Variation of Armature Voltage The armature voltage variation to a 
series motor can be achieved by means of an additional resistance in the arma­
ture circuit or by using a thyristor power converter. On doing this the torque- 
speed curve moves towards the right when the voltage is increased. For a given 
torque developed the motor speed increases with an increase in voltage. The 
speed-torque curves for different armature voltages (for different armature 
resistances) are shown in Fig. 1.11. Of the two methods employed for the varia­
tion of the voltage the use of additional resistance has greater losses, leading 
to poor efficiency.
Field Weakening in Series Motor Speeds above base characteristic are normally 
obtained by means of field weakening. In series motors this is achieved by a 
diverter coil connected across the field or by a series-parallel combination of field

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
(a) 
(b)
Fig. 1.11 
Torque-speed curves of a series motor (a) at different voltages (b) at different 
field currents
coils. Following field weakening the armature current increases to develop a con­
stant torque or a given armature current develops a reduced torque. The armature 
reaction further demagnetises the field flux, thus enhancing the effect. Due to field 
weakening the characteristic moves towards the right.
The speed-torque characteristic of the motor shows a steep fall in the speed 
as the load increases. This mode of operation is suitable for driving the loads of 
constant power.
1.2.4 
Desirable Modifications of the Speed-Torque 
Characteristic of Series Motors
The light load (no-load) operation of series motors is not possible due to very 
high speeds. Connecting an additional resistance in series with the armature does 
not help in reducing no-load speeds. Speeds are reduced only under loaded con­
ditions. However, the load requirement may be such that even at light loads the 
motor may be required to run at low or medium speeds. The normal methods of 
controlling the speeds of dc series motors do not give satisfactory solutions. Some 
special types of connection may be required to operate the lightly loaded series 
motors at low and medium speeds.
Several such connections are shown in Fig. 1.12.
A resistance connected across the armature and field provides a speed con­
trol downward from its base speed (Fig. 1.12(a)). The voltage drop across the 
series resistance causes a speed drop and the torque developed at this speed is 
reduced by diverting the current through R h. In this connection the field and 
armature currents are the same. Hence it fails to provide a light load operation 
at low or medium speeds. However, the shift of the speed-torque characteristic 
towards the left is more than that achieved with simple conventional rheostatic 
control.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 1.12 
Some possible methods of shunting armature and field of a dc series motor to 
modify its speed-torque characteristic
A better connection is shown in Fig. 1.12(b) where a resistance is shunted 
across the armature. Thus, only a part of the line current flows in the armature 
and the field current is maintained at the line value. By properly selecting the 
shunting resistance, a desirable speed-torque characteristic may be obtained. The 
higher field current stabilises the speed of lower values and the smaller armature 
current develops a lower torque. Very low speed operation is made possible by 
further connecting a resistance in series with the field. The shift of the character­
istic towards the left is more due to R$. Typical speed-torque curves are shown in 
Fig. 1.13. The characteristics show a greater hardness, being flat over a range of 
speeds. The method, however, is not economical due to losses in the resistances 
and is suitable for driving the load at low speeds for short intervals of time. A wide 
range of speeds below the base speed is not attainable with this method.
When medium speeds are required, the shunting resistance may be discon­
nected. The motor then operates with series resistance R . When R is short cir- 
cuited the motor runs on its natural characteristic. It is possible to operate the 
motor from no-load to full load at very low, medium and high speeds.
While lowering the load using a hoist, sometimes, the empty cage may have to 
be driven at low, medium or high speeds. High speed operation may be required 
for rapid lowering. A suitable connection for controlling the speed in such cases 
is shown in Fig. 1.14. The scheme is called the potentiometer lowering circuit. 
In this connection, the field of the motor is connected across the armature with a 
limiting resistance (7?sh) in series. Ra is the resistance in series with the armature. 
A variable resistance R is connected in series with the motor. The armature of the
se

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
Fig. 1.13 
Typical speed-torque curves of connection (c) of Fig. 1.12
dc motor gets its supply from the potential divider 
formed by R and the combined resistance of the
J 
se
field and R . The motor speed-torque characteristic 
can be derived from the following equations.
The armature voltage
The field current
u
K = K ~  «se
(1.19a)
K
(1.19b)
(R$ h + Æf )
The armature current
o
o
Fig. 1.14
Connections of a 
dc series motor as 
a shunt motor
/ a = /  -  if  for normal connection 
The back emf
Eb = V -I.R .
(1.19c)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The torque developed
Td = E>h_ 
(1.19d)
CD,.
The motor has a shunt characteristic. The derived speed-torque curves may be 
obtained by varying the resistance in series with the field. Reverse rotation is 
achieved by reversing the supply to the armature. A set of speed torque obtained 
by this connection is shown in Fig. 1.15, which indicates the possibility of opera­
tion in the fourth quadrant. The series field in this connection carries rated current
Fig. 1.15 
Typical speed-torque characteristic for several values of Rsc and Rsh in a 
shunt motor
and hence the limiting resistor in series with the field dissipates a considerable 
amount of energy. Typical speed-torque curves of a series motor in this applica­
tion are shown in Fig. 1.16. The curves in the third quadrant show the operation 
of the hoist driving an empty cage at all speeds. The curves of the fourth quadrant 
show that heavy loads may be lowered at these speeds. These may be obtained by 
the connection of Fig. 1.17. The speed-torque curves in the fourth quadrant may 
be obtained using the connection of Fig. 1.17(a).
1.2.5 
Speed-Torque Characteristics of Compound Motors
A schematic of a compound motor is shown in Fig. 1.18. There are both series and 
shunt fields (separately excited fields). The orientation of the series flux may be 
such as to aid or oppose the shunt flux in the magnetic circuit. In the former case, 
with the additive nature of the component fluxes, the motor is said to be a cumula­
tively compound motor. In the latter case, it is called a differential compound motor. 
Again, depending upon the position of the series field the motor may be long shunt

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
or short shunt. In the former, the series field is in series with the armature, whereas 
in the latter it is in series with the line. These are shown in Fig. 1.18.
The torque-speed characteristic of a compound motor may be obtained with 
reference to the following equation
N  =  
v_  (ra + r s)
K A  
KcK, (t)2
(1.19e)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 1.18 
Compound motor connections
In a cumulatively compound motor the flux increases with load. Therefore, the 
speed falls as the load increases. The curve has a drooping nature and shows 
less hardness than that of a shunt motor. However, the speed drop is limited by 
saturation and armature reaction. A typical characteristic is shown in Fig. 1.19.
(i) Cumnlative compound
Fig. 1.19(a) 
Typical load current versus speed of compound motors
In a differentially compound motor the air gap flux decreases with load, caus­
ing an increase in the speed as load increases. There may be no saturation effects. 
The armature reaction demagnetises the air gap flux causing a further increase in 
speed. It is less stable than a cumulatively compound motor. Typical speed-torque 
curves are shown in Fig. 1.19.
1.2.6 
Speed Control of dc Motors
In the foregoing sections we discussed the torque-speed characteristics of dc 
motors, bringing out the effects of armature voltage variation and field current on

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
Fig. 1.19(b) 
Torque versus armature current and Torque versus speed curves of a com­
pound motor
them. The discussion also applies to the study of the methods of speed control of 
dc motors, which may be summarised as follows:
i. Variation of armature voltage by inserting an additional resistance in the 
armature circuit.
ii. 
Smooth variation of applied voltage using conventional Ward Leonard 
control or static Ward Leonard control employed for separately excited 
dc motors.
iii. Variation of field current either by inserting a resistance in the field cir­
cuit or by varying the field voltage using thyristor power converters.
The conventional Ward Leonard method of speed control, where the voltage 
to the drive motor is supplied by a variable voltage generator, suffers from low 
efficiency, need for periodic maintenance, bulk and size restrictions, etc. Static 
Ward Leonard control using either phase controlled rectifiers or choppers has now 
become very popular.
A comparison of these methods bringing out their salient features may prove 
worthwhile. The comparison given in Tables 1.1 and 1.2 is based on the following 
aspects:
i. Limit or range of speed control (Hardness of speed control)
ii. 
Smoothness of speed control
iii. Economics of speed control
iv. 
Stability of operation
v. Direction of speed control
vi. Permissible load.

Table 1.1 
Comparison of the speed control methods of shunt/separately excited dc motor
Basis o f
comparison 
Significance 
Armature resistance control 
Field control
Ward Leonard control
1. Limit, range 
and hard­
ness of speed 
control
Signifies the ratio of
N
—
constancy
Nmin
of speed with load
The speeds in the range of zero 
or almost crawling to base 
speeds are possible. The slope 
of the characteristic increases 
and the curve becomes less hard 
with increase in the resistance. 
The range of speed control 
depends on the load.
The speed control is 
obtained in the range base 
to twice base speed. Speeds 
below base speed require 
field currents above the 
rated value. Hence, in view 
of the field rating it is not 
employed for speeds below 
base speed. The upper speed 
limit by field weakening 
is decided by the armature 
reaction and commutation. 
The hardness is maintained 
and is almost the same as 
that at rated field current 
and rated voltage if the 
motor is compensated oth­
erwise the armature reaction 
affects the hardness.
An elegant method for smooth 
variation of speed over a wide 
range. Speed reversal is possible by 
reversing the generator field. The 
speed control in both the directions 
of rotation up to base speed. The 
field weakening may be employed 
to increase the speed above base 
value. Hardness of the speed-torque 
curve does not materially change. 
The char characteristics obtained 
with variation of voltage arc all 
parallel to the normal characteristic. 
The characteristic is sufficiently 
hard. The hardness is affected 
by armature reaction, armature 
resistance. In static Ward Leonard 
control the converter voltage regu­
lation affects the hardness of speed 
torque curve.
m0)n
r-t-
o'o
<*
in
The McGraw-Hill Companies

2. Smoothness of 
speed control
3. Economics of 
speed control
Signifies the num­
ber of steady speeds 
in the operating 
range. Larger the 
number of steps, 
smoother the speed 
control.
In large power drives speed 
control is obtained by varying 
the armature resistance using 
contactors. The control is nor­
mally stepped and is smoother 
with larger number of steps. If 
the resistance is varied smoothly 
by means of a motor the speed 
control would be smooth.
Decided by the 
efficiency of the 
motor, maintenance 
and overall cost
The power loss in the armature 
resistance reduces the efficiency. 
The efficiency is very poor, 
particularly at low speeds. The 
power input is constant while 
driving constant torque loads.
As the speed is lowered a larger 
part of the input is wasted in the 
resistance. The efficiency is poor 
at lowspeeds, it is approximately 
equal to operating speed/base 
speed. Longer operating periods 
at low speeds are not economi­
cal. Frequent replacement of 
resistance may be required.

The field circuit is a low 
power one. The resistance 
in the field circuit can be 
smoothly varied. This meth­
od offers a very smooth 
speed control of speeds 
above the base speed.
The method is economical. 
Power to be handled is only 
5 per cent. The efficiency 
is not very much affected, 
because the field losses de­
crease and rotational losses 
increases. The method is 
well suited for constant 
power loads.
Speed control is achieved by 
controlling the generator field. The 
power required for control is low. A 
smooth variation of voltage makes a 
smooth speed control possible. The 
smoothness with which the genera­
tor field can be varied decides the 
smoothness of speed control. In 
static Ward Leonard control the 
smoothness of speed depends upon 
the fine control of voltage using a 
rectifier or chopper.
High initial cost both for conven­
tional and static Ward Leonard 
controls. Efficiency is better than 
resistance control. Owing to several 
rotating machines, overall efficien­
cy may decrease. The bulk of the 
system and need for considerable 
space are the disadvantages. Static 
systems have better efficiency and 
are compact.
(<Continued)
nrrCi
qn
r-+-ro
r+n*
LO

B
Basis of 
comparison
Significance
Armature resistance control
Field control
Ward Leonard control
4. Stability of 
operation
The capacity of 
the drive to return 
to its original state 
or a state of new 
operating condi­
tions following 
a disturbance in 
speed or torque
The motor operation is stable 
due to the drooping nature of the 
speed-torque curve. The operat­
ing conditions affect stability. 
The hardness of speed control 
affects the stability. Harder the 
characteristic more stable is 
the operation. The stability is 
decided by the torque driven at 
given speed.
The weak flux conditions in 
the machine are prone to in­
creased degree of armature 
reaction. At high speeds 
the cumulative effects of 
weak flux and armature 
reaction may cause stability 
problems. The stability con­
siderations also place a limit 
on the upper speed limit.
Stability is very good at speeds 
below base speed. At higher speeds 
obtained by field weakening the 
stability is a matter of concern.
5. Direction of 
speed control.
Signifies the 
posibility of speed 
control below and 
above base speeds.
Only speeds below base speed 
up to zero are possible, because 
of the motor’s inherent resis­
tance and additional resistance. 
Speed control is possible only 
in the downward direction from 
base speed.
Only speeds above base 
speed are possible due 
to field rating. The upper 
limit is set to twice the base 
speed in view of commuta­
tion, stability and centrifu­
gal forces. Speed control is 
possible only in the upward 
direction from the base 
speed.
Speed variation below base speed 
by armature voltage control and 
above base speed by field control.
The McGraw Hill Companies

6. Permissible
Signifies whether
Suitable for constant torque
load
a machine is over-
loads. The drive has low effi-
loaded or under-
ciency at low speeds. As the mo-
loaded in its speed
tor draws heavy current this is
range and thus
not suitable for constant power
utilisation of the
at low speeds. The underloading
machine.
of the motor does not occur as 
the armature current is main­
tained at its rated value.
7. Others
Special cooling may be required 
at very low speeds for the motor 
as well as the resistance. The 
self ventilation of the motor 
becomes poor.

Suitable for constant power 
loads. Torque is a parabolic 
function of speed. The cur­
rent can be maintained at 
its rated value. The method 
is not suitable for constant 
torque loads as the armature 
current drawn is excessive. 
If the armature current is 
limited it leads to under­
utilisation of the motor.
At high speeds it presents 
poor commutation due to 
increased reactance voltage. 
Stability problems due to 
armature reaction. Mechani­
cal design of the armature 
for running at high speeds 
may be required.
Economical and suitable for con­
stant torque loads when armature 
voltage is varied and constant 
power loads when field current is 
controlled. With pulsating loads a 
flywheel may be used to equalise 
the load.
Requires no starting equipment. 
For speeds above base speeds due 
consideration must be given to 
commutation and stability.
nrrCi
qn
r-+-ro
lTi*
r+n*
LO

Table 1.2 
Speed control of dc series motors
B
Basis o f 
comparison
Armature 
resistance control
Excitation
control
Armature voltage 
control
Shunting armature and field 
or armature alone
Shunting the field 
to the armature
1
2
3
4
5
6
1. Limit of 
speed 
control
Speed control in 
the range 2:1 or 
3:1. Depends on 
load, the hardness 
of the speed- 
torque characteris­
tic decreases with 
increase in arma­
ture resistance.
Control is achieved by 
shunting the field by 
a diverter. Effectively, 
the method is field 
weakening. Hardness of 
the speed-torque curve 
also decreases. Speed 
control range is 2:1.
accomplished by series 
parallel control of 
motors. The range of 
speed control depends 
upon the number of 
motors. This range can 
be widened by means of 
additional resistances.
When both armature and 
field are shunted, low speeds 
at light loads are not pos­
sible. To get low speeds 
at light loads the armature 
alone is shunted. The series 
motor may be made to oper­
ate at no-load with definite 
low speed. Speed ranges of 
3:1 to 5:1 maybe obtained. 
The hardness of the charac­
teristic is improved at light 
loads.
The speed torque 
can be modified and 
desired characteris­
tic may be obtained. 
The series motor is 
made quite useful 
in this connection. 
Very good speed 
range is possible by 
properly varying 
resistances.
2. Smooth­
ness of 
speed 
control
Speed control is 
stepped. The varia­
tion of resistance 
is accomplished by 
means of contrac­
tors.
The field current 
handled is of the same 
order as the armature 
current. Speed control is 
stepped here also.
Stepped speed control, 
Even with additional 
resitances. However the 
step can be decreased 
in size.
Smoothness depends upon 
the shunting resistor and its 
variation. Normally contac­
tors are used and therefore 
control is stepped.
The resistance varia­
tions are stepped, as 
is the speed control.
The McGraw-Hill Companies

3. Economics
Heavy power loss
Power loss takes place
No power is wasted
of speed
in the resistance.
in the shunting resis-
if no resistances are
control
Resistance needs
tor. This loss is of the
used. Very good 
Use
replacement. How-
order of the field copper
of several motors has
ever it is popularly
loss and the method is
advantages:
employed in cranes
efficient, The shunting
1. Time of starting and
and traction as the
value of the resistance is
braking decreases due to
method is simple.
of the order of the field
decrease in intertia.
Capital cost may 
be less.
value.
2. Reliability of opera­
tion. At least one motor 
is operating. Continuity 
of operation is assured.
3. Due to space limita­
tion several motors may 
be preferred to a single 
one. If resistances are 
used, l'j is poor.
4. Stability of
The characteristic
At very weak fields
Stable operation
operation
becomes less hard 
as the resistance 
increases. The 
stability of opera­
tion also becomes 
somewhat poor.
the armature reaction 
may result in unstable 
operation.

Power loss in shunting resis-
The resistances
tors make the method lim-
carry nearly full
ited to short time duty. The
load value. Poor
method is not economical.
efficiency due to 
power loss.
Operation is stable at both
Operation may not
light loads and light speed.
be stable at every 
point in the high 
speed operation 
obtained by field 
weakening. At low 
speeds the hardness 
improves, thereby 
improving stability.
('Continued)
nrrCi-tCin
r-+-ro
lTi'
r+n*
LO

Q
Basis o f 
comparison
Armature 
resistance control
Excitation
control
Armature voltage 
control
Shunting armature and field 
or armature alone
Shunting the field 
to the armature
1
2
3
4
5
6
5. Direction 
of speed 
control
Speeds below the 
base speed are 
possible.
The speeds can be var­
ied in the upward direc­
tion from the base speed 
due to flux weakening.
Speeds below base 
speed.
Very low speeds with light 
loads. Speeds well below 
base speed are possible. At 
these speeds the characteris­
tic is sufficiently hard.
Speed variation 
in both directions, 
below and above 
base speed.
6. Permis­
sible load
To drive constant 
torque loads so 
that the current 
drawn is within the 
rated value. Due 
to heavy losses 
and low efficiency 
the method is 
advisable only for 
intermittent duty.
To drive constant power 
loads if a wide range of 
speeds is required. With 
constant torque the cur­
rent drawn increases and 
range of speed control 
decreases. Economical 
and advantageous with 
constant output; torque 
decreases at high speeds.
Speed control at con­
stant torque so that no 
motor is overloaded 
and every motor is fully 
utilised.
When used for constant 
torque loads speed ranges 
of 3:1 to 5:1 are obtained.
To limit the series field to its 
rated value the motor must 
have lower torques at lower 
speeds.
Constant torque 
operation when 
the speed is below 
base rated speed. 
Constant power 
operation at high 
speed. Suitable for 
crane drives requir­
ing rapid lowering 
of empty cage.
The McGraw-Hill Companies

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
1.3 
CHARACTERISTICS OF A THREE-PHASE INDUCTION MOTOR
The performance characteristics of a three-phase induction motor can be derived 
using the approximate equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 1.20(a). In the circuit
V] 
is the applied voltage
r ,xx 
are the stator resistance and leakage reactance per phase respectively 
r'r, x'2 are the rotor resistance and leakage reactance referred to the stator 
x 
is the mutual reactance between stator and rotor
m
I , 
is the stator current
l* 
is the rotor current referred to the stator, and 
5 
is the slip of the motor.
Fig. 1.20(a) 
Approximate equivalent circuit of a three phase induction motor
The phasor diagram of the motor is shown in 
Fig. 1.20(b).
In an induction motor the power transferred 
to the rotor (PJ, rotor copper loss (Pcu2) and 
mechanical power developed (Pm) are in the 
ratio of 1 : 5 : (1 -  s). The torque developed by 
the motor
rd = 
mt 
—Sî— 
Nm (1.20) 
2nnr
But using the relations P = Pd(l -  s) and nr = 
ns(l -  s) we have
—
Nm 
2izns
Further using Pd
Pcu2
S
ta
m{ 
rotor copper loss 
2nns 
s
(1.21)
( 1.22)
Fig. 1.20(b) 
Phasor diagram 
of a three phase 
induction motor

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
From the equivalent circuit
V,
i
/
V
/
r2
n + -
f \
V
f\2
s 2
+ Oi + x2)
The torque developed is therefore
mx
Ta =
VS
2nns (r, + r2ls)2 + (v, + x2)z 
s
'  \2
At very small slips (operating region of the motor) 
r2/s »  r, leading to
rd =
^ ^ ( s )
27r^2s 
r2'
/
r2
n + —
V
s ;
(1.23)
(1.24)
»  (xj + x2 ) and
(1.25)
This shows that the torque developed is directly proportional to the slip. In a 
similar way, at large slips the torque varies in inverse proportion to the slip. At 
intermediate slips the torque developed needs to be calculated. The speed (slip) 
torque characteristic is shown in Fig. 1.21.
Fig. 1.21 
Typical speed torque curve of a three phase induction motor
From the trend of the characteristic it can be seen that there is a maximum 
value for the torque. The slip at which this maximum torque occurs is given by
sm(T) -  -
r-y
4 r\ + Ol + X2Ÿ
(1.26)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
The maximum torque is
2nns 2 r, ± V'i2 + (x\ + xi f
(1.27)
Sometimes the stator impedance is neglected or the stator impedance drop is com­
pensated to operate the motor at constant flux at all slips. The applied voltage is 
increased such that the induced voltage. E If is constant (equal to the value at 
rated voltage). The applied voltage varies as a function of frequency such that E Jf 
remains constant. The stator impedance can be assumed to be zero since it has no 
effect. In such a case the relations are
Ti
sm(T)
^drn
nt\ 
Ef 
r{_
2nns 
(rfs)2 + (x£ )2 
s
/
*2
m{ 
E2 
2nns 2x2
(1.28)
(1.29)
(1.30)
The speed-torque curve for this case is also shown in Fig. 1.21.
Note the following features of a typical speed-torque curve (Fig. 1.21):
i. At exactly synchronous speed 5 = 0 the torque developed is zero (Td = 0). 
This can be expected because there are no induced currents due to zero 
relative speed.
ii. Full load torque (Tfl) corresponds to the rated slip (sn).
iii. 
r dm is the maximum torque at the slip s
iv. 
T is the starting torque at 5 = 1.
The torque developed at any slip s expressed as a fraction of maximum torque 
is given by
Tj _ 
2(1 + Q5m)
Tjm  
.S'/ .S’m +  S’m I s  +  i/Sm
(1.31)
where a = i\! r{. When the stator resistance r is neglected
Td _ 
2
^dm 
$ / 
/ S
(1.32)
The operation of the motor in the range of slips 0 -  sm is stable. When the motor is 
operating in this range any disturbance in the operating point by change of either 
speed or torque is damped out and the motor returns to its original operating point 
or attains a new one. For stable operation the torque developed must increase 
when the speed falls, i.e.,
djh 
dns should be negative

B
Electric Drives
The operation of the motor in the range sm to / is unstable. In this range the curve 
has a positive dTJdn , i.e. torque decreases when speed falls.
The characteristic is almost linear at very small slips (in the stable operating 
region). This linearity continues till the break down torque point for the case of 
operation with constant flux. The characteristics shown in Fig. 1.21 are redrawn 
in the same figure.
For slips greater than unity, the operation is in the fourth quadrant. The rotation 
of the rotor and the rotating magnetic field are in opposite direction. The torque 
developed is a braking torque, tending to stop the motor. This can occur in two 
ways:
i. The phase sequence of the supply to the motor is reversed while it is 
running.
ii. A negative torque is applied to the shaft.
The motor is operated as a brake in the range of slips (5 > 1) to make it drive the 
load at constant speed while lowering the load. The torque is positive, whereas 
the direction of rotation is reversed. By a suitable resistance of the rotor the point 
of operation is shifted to the quadrant of operation so that the load is lowered at 
constant speed.
The torque-speed curve extends to the second quadrant, representing a nega­
tive torque in the forward direction of rotation. This occurs if the speed of 
the rotor is greater than the synchronous speed. Any tendency of the rotor to 
accelerate beyond synchronous speed is arrested by a generating torque. In 
this mode of operation all the kinetic energy connected with increase in speed 
is returned to the mains. The maximum (break down) torque depends on the 
following:
It varies as the square of the applied voltage.
It decreases with stator impedance.
Its value is independent of the rotor resistance.
Its value decreases with an increase in the rotor leakage reactance.
1.3.1 
Desirable Modifications to the Speed-Torque Characteristic 
of an Induction Motor
Additional Rotor Resistance 
From Eq. 1.27 it can be observed that the maximum 
torque is independent of rotor resistance. However, the slip at which the maxi­
mum torque occurs changes with rotor resistance. When the rotor resistance 
is increased, so is the slip for maximum torque, and the stable operating slip 
range of the motor increases. Typical characteristics of an induction motor for 
different values of rotor resistance are shown in Fig. 1.22. From the figure it is 
seen that the starling torque can be increased by increasing the rotor resistance. 
The maximum torque occurs at starting if the rotor resistance is increased to a 
value.
(1.33)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
If the stator impedance is neglected the rotor resistance needs to be increased to 
a value equal to the rotor leakage reactance. If the rotor resistance is increased 
beyond this value the starting torque decreases. The breakdown torque occurs at 
slips greater than one (in the braking region). The starting current decreases and 
the starting power factor is better at increased values of rotor resistances. The 
full load slip changes, facilitating speed control in a limited range when the rotor 
resistance is varied. However, efficiency is impaired at high rotor resistances due 
to increased losses. Rotor heating is present in an inherently high-resistance rotor.
In short, the starting performance of the motor is improved with large rotor 
resistances while the running performance is impaired. To get the advantages of a 
high rotor resistance at starting, an additional resistance is connected in the rotor 
circuit of the wound rotor induction motor and slowly cut off as the rotor acceler­
ates. At rated speed the motor operates on its natural characteristic. The connec­
tions are shown in Fig. 1.23(b).
Fig. 1.23(a) 
Starting torque as a function of rotor resistance

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
re
Fig. 1.23(b) 
Slip ring rotor with additional rotor resistance. Rotor resistance r2 = r2. + re
However, connecting an additional resistance is not possible in squirrel cage 
motors. Special rotor constructions, such as double cage and deep bar rotors are 
employed. At staring, due to high rotor frequency the current distributes in the 
outer cage of a double cage rotor or in the top portion of the bar in the case of a 
deep bar rotor. The effect of high resistance is thus achieved. As the motor speeds 
up, the rotor frequency decreases and the current distributes in both the cages of 
the double cage rotor or in the complete bar in the deep bar rotor. The effective 
resistance is small and running performance is improved. Typical torque-speed 
curves are shown in Fig. 1.23.
Variation of Applied Voltage 
The speed-torque characteristic of an induction 
motor can be modified by varying the applied voltage, Typical speed-torque char­
acteristics of the motor when supplied from variable voltage at rated frequency 
are given in Fig. 1.24(a). They are based on the fact that the induction motor 
torque (at a given slip) varies as the square of the voltage. The slip for maximum 
torque is independent of voltage. The full load torque occurs at different slips 
when the voltage is varied. This renders the speed control of induction motors 
feasible over a limited range by supply voltage variation However, the torque 
capability of the motor decreases at low voltages, because of reduction in the air 
gap flux. The power factor decreases. The motor draws heavy currents to develop 
a given torque at low voltages. The current drawn at different voltages is shown 
in Fig. 1.24(a), along with the torque developed at rated current at different 
voltages.
Figure 1.24(b) shows the advantages of high resistance in the rotor when 
the applied voltage is varied to modify the speed-torque characteristic. Besides 
increasing the range of speed control, the current drawn by the motor at low volt­
ages can be limited by a proper choice of rotor resistance.
Pole Change Motors 
The speed-torque curve of an induction motor can be modi­
fied by an armature winding reconnected to give different sets of poles. When

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
0 0 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 00
Torque
Fig. 1.24 
Effect of voltage variation on speed-torque curve
the number of poles changes, so does the speed. The type of connection decides 
the permissible loading at constant torque or constant power. This method is 
suitable for squirrel cage motors as their rotors can adopt to any number of 
poles. No reconnection of the rotor winding is required. If, on the other hand, a 
slip ring rotor is used, it must be reconnected to different sets of poles. The con­
sequent pole winding is employed for reconnection. The coil pitch effectively 
changes at different speeds.
Each phase has a winding split into halves. These are connected either in series 
or in parallel, to effectively change the number of poles. The possible combina­
tions are shown in Fig. 1.25. Constant power operation is provided by the series- 
delta connection for high speeds and parallel-star for low speeds. At high speeds, 
a low torque is developed so that the power is constant. Voltage per half is V/2 in 
the high speed connection and V/y/3 at low speeds.
Constant torque operation is possible at both speeds if parallel-star is used for 
high speed operation and series-delta for low speed. In this case, the voltage per 
half is V/^3 at high speeds and V/2 at low speeds. Series-parallel and series- 
star connections for high and low speeds respectively make variable torque 
loading possible. The half winding voltages are V/2^l?> and V/y/3 respectively.
Different pole changing connections and typical speed-torque curves are 
depicted in Fig. 1.25(a), (b). Several possible connections for high and low speeds 
are given in Fig. 1.25(c) and compared in Table 1.3.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
ao---- ^üüü^-
o------ ''dUtA
c
-/THRA-
-^ÖÜQV b
-'ÜütA-
-'TJÜtA-
Series parallel connections of winding to produce a field of 
required number of poles (6-pole field).
Parallel star high speed 
Series delta high speed 
Constant torque 
Constant output
Variable torque
Fig. 1.25(a) 
Pole change connections
Fig. 1.25(b) 
Speed-torque curves of connections

The McGraw Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
(3)
Y 
B 
R
R 
B 
Y
High speed (h)
R 
Y 
B
B 
Y 
R
High speed
Fig. 1.25(c) 
Pole change connections

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Table 1.3 
Comparison of pole change windings
Con­
nection
Fig.
Low speed 
subscript 7 ’
High speed 
subscript ‘h ’
Flux
density
B ß ,
Type of 
operation
Half
winding
connection
Phase
connection
Half
winding
connection
Phase
connection
1.
Series
Star
Parallel
Delta
0.58
Variable
torque
2.
Series
Star or 
delta
Parallel
Star-star 
or delta
1.00
Constant
torque
3.
Series or 
parallel
Star
As with 
low speed 
operation
Delta
1.16
Constant
torque
4.
Series
Delta
Parallel
Star-star
1.73
Constant
horse
power
5.
Series or 
parallel
Star or 
delta
As with 
low speed 
operation
Star or 
delta
2.00
Constant
horse
power
N o . o f p o les on h igh  speed operation 2P 
N o . o f p o les on low  speed operation 2 x 2 P
T
_ B \
F
Tx
n x
_  n x
B x
F
B u
P u
T u
«h
n h
B u
Slip Power Recovery Schemes 
The modification of the speed-torque characteristic 
using a variable rotor resistance has the major disadvantage of poor efficiency, 
thus making it uneconomical. Continuous low speed operation is not possible due 
to overheating of the rotor. These low speeds can be very effectively achieved with 
reasonable efficiency using slip energy recovery schemes. The slip power which 
is wasted in the external resistance in the rotor circuit is returned to the mains in 
these schemes.
The conventional methods of slip power recovery employ rotating machines, 
such as rotary converters, alternators, dc machines, etc. in the rotor circuit to 
convert the power at slip frequency to power at line frequency. Some typical 
conventional schemes, known as Scherbius and Kramer controls, are shown in 
Fig. 1.26.
When these methods are employed, the motor may be operated to drive both 
constant torque and constant power loads. These are illustrated in Fig. 1.27(a) 
and (b), in principle. In Fig. 1.27(a) the rotor power at slip frequency is converted 
to line frequency by means of a slip converter. If the slip power converter allows 
power flow in both directions, the motor may be operated both at sub and super 
synchronous speeds. This scheme is used to drive constant torque loads. In sub

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
Fig. 1.26 
A typical conventional slip energy recovery schemes
synchronous operation the slip power is converted to line frequency and fed to the 
mains. In supersynchronous operation the power at line frequency is converted 
to slip power and fed to the motor. One significant feature of this modification is 
that the developed torque is proportional to rotor current under the assumption of 
constant flux in the motor. The speed torque curves for this scheme are depicted 
in Fig. 1.28(a). The desired modification of the torque speed curves shown in 
Fig. 1.28(a) is achieved by controlling the slip power converter to match the 
motor voltage at a given slip. The control of the converter is represented by the 
parameter a. Increase in a increases the voltage on the rotor side of the slip power 
converter causing a speed drop, a may be fixed for no-load conditions. It may 
be varied in a closed loop control to maintain constant speed. When it is fixed at 
no-load value the motor has a drooping speed-torque characteristic. For exam­
ple a can be the firing angle of the line-side converter in the case of static slip 
power schemes.
The scheme shown in Fig. 1.27(b) uses the slip power to drive an auxiliary 
machine. In this case the slip power converter is coupled to the rotor of the induc­
tion motor and gets power from it. Here too both sub and super synchronous 
speeds are possible. In subsynchronous operation the auxiliary machine converts 
slip power to mechanical power. In supersynchronous operation the additional 
power is fed to the rotor windings through the slip converter from the auxiliary 
machine. The connection maintains constant power. The speed-torque characteristics

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
3-phase AC
of the motor are shown in Fig. 1.28(b). Here also a is a parameter of the slip con­
verter chosen in a manner as to cause the speed control as described above, when 
varied in a given manner. The slip power is handled by the main motor shaft. The 
torque decreases with an increase in speed.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
Fig. 1.28 
Speed-torque for slip energy recovery schemes
With the availability of thyristor power converters static converter (rectifier- 
inverter) cascades are being used in the rotor circuits of induction motors to get 
the abovementioned modifications to the speed-torque characteristic. The schemes 
are depicted in Fig. 1.29(a). The slip power is rectified and fed to the line com­
mutated converter which feeds the power to the mains. The speed-torque curves 
obtained by the variation of firing angle of the inverter, are shown in Fig. 1.29(b). 
A cycloconverter may also be used in the rotor circuit.
Injection of Voltage Into the Rotor Circuit 
The torque-speed characteristic of an 
induction motor can be modified by injecting a voltage into the rotor circuit 
(wound rotor) of an induction motor. The voltage injected must be at slip frequency.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
(a) Static coverter cascade.
Fig. 1.29 
Static slip energy recovery schemes
If the voltage injected opposes the rotor voltage, the effective rotor current 
decreases, which instantly affects the torque. The reduced torque cannot drive 
the load. The rotor speed decreases to a value which ensures sufficient induced 
rotor voltage and hence rotor current to drive the load. If, on the other hand, the 
injected voltage aids the rotor voltage, it results in an increased rotor current. The 
increased torque developed accelerates the rotor to a speed at which sufficient 
rotor current flows to drive the load. The speed torque curves for the two cases

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
are shown in Fig. 1.30. For comparison, the torque-speed curve of a short circuit­
ed rotor with zero injected voltage is also shown. From the figures it can be in­
ferred that it is possible to change the torque capability of the motor by changing 
the injected voltage. When the injected voltage opposes the rotor current torque 
capability decreases, whereas it increases when the injected voltage aids the rotor 
voltage.
r, 
x-i 
r'2/s 
x'2
Speed
(i) Ej is phase with rotor voltage.
(ii) Ej is out of phase by 180° with rotor voltage.
Fig. 1.30 
Speed control by injection of rotor voltage
Variation of Supply Frequency The speed of a synchronously rotating magnetic 
field is a function of supply frequency. Therefore, by varying the supply fre­
quency the synchronous speed and hence the rotor speed can be varied. To 
avoid saturation due to an increase in the flux at low frequencies, the applied 
voltage to the motor is also varied so that the flux remains constant at its rated

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
value at all frequencies. To achieve this a simple method is to vary both voltage 
and frequency so that V/f is constant. The torque-speed curves with constant V/f 
are depicted in Fig. 1.31. There is a depletion of torque at low frequencies. The 
motor has reduced torque capability and overload capacity. This is because of 
the dominant effect of stator resistance at low frequencies. The resistance drop 
become appreciable as compared to the applied voltage. This causes a deple­
tion of flux, whose constancy cannot be maintained at low frequencies. The 
torque developed with V/f constant is
Ta = pm 1 
In V
J i /
f  1*1,1 rí
n + A .
A
-a
(x2m-x n x22)
f2n
+ xu _ —
 x22 
2
-|2
(1.34)
where x{ { = xm + xx; x22 = x 2 + xm
o
o
o
o
oooo
o
o
o
Cage rotor
(.Py impedance is compensated)
Fig. 1.31 
Speed-torque curve for variable voltage variable frequency supply 
(V/f constant)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
To have the same torque and overload capacity at all frequencies it is neces­
sary to compensate for the stator (resistance) drop in order to keep Elf constant. 
V/f is no longer constant since it increases as the frequency decreases. The torque 
developed in this case is given by
m l 
2n
Í2r2
r? + (2nf2L ’-i,Ÿ
(1.35)
where L'2g is rotor leakage inductance.
The torque-speed curves for constant E/f are shown in Fig. 1.31(b).
With V/f (constant) control the starting torque increases with a decrease in the 
frequency, up to a certain value. Below this value of frequency the starting torque 
decreases. This effect is considered similar to that achieved by changing rotor 
leakage reactance. As the frequency decreases, the rotor leakage reactance. As 
the frequency decreases, the rotor leakage reactance decreases. Effectively, an 
increase in the rotor, resistance relative to leakage reactance takes place. There­
fore, the starting torque increases up to a certain frequency, where the rotor leak­
age reactance equals the rotor resistance. If the frequency is decreased further the 
starting torque decreases. The variation of starting torque with frequency is shown 
in Fig. 1.31(c). However, with constant E/f control the starting torque increases 
as the frequency decreases up to a value decided by the parameters. If the fre­
quency is further decreased the starting torque decreases. The acceleration may be 
achieved at constant torque and armature current by varying the stator frequency 
from a low value keeping Elf constant.
VIf constant 
Elf constant r'2 = x'2
Fig. 1.31 
(c) Starting torque as a function of stator frequency
Speed-torque characteristics above the base characteristic are obtained by 
increasing the supply frequency beyond the rated value. The flux in the motor 
decreases, since the voltage cannot be increased beyond the rated value. The 
motor is said to be operating in the flux weakening mode.
The torque-speed curves run parallel to each other at all frequencies. They 
extend to the second quadrant, showing that regeneration is possible.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The starting of the motor can be easily accomplished using a variable voltage, 
variable frequency supply. This decreases the starting current, giving a reasonably 
good accelerating torque at a good power factor even with low resistance cage 
motors.
1.3.2 
Speed Control of Induction Motors
A three-phase induction motor is essentially a constant speed motor. It is not 
possible to achieve smooth speed control of the motor over a wide range, when 
supplied from a conventional three-phase constant voltage, constant frequency 
supply. Thyristor power converters have made variable frequency and variable 
voltage supplies possible. These are employed to get a smooth speed control of 
induction motors over a wide range.
The methods of modification of speed-torque characteristics discussed are 
more or less the methods of speed control also. Thyristor power converters are 
being employed widely in adopting the methods of speed control, e.g. a chopper 
to control the rotor resistance, ac voltage controller to vary supply voltage, static 
converter cascades for slip energy recovery, etc. A comparison of these methods 
is given in Table 1.4.
1.4 
CHARACTERISTICS OF SYNCHRONOUS MOTORS
Synchronous motors are constant speed motors. The speed of the motor is 
decided by the number of poles and frequency. Compared to an induction motor, 
it is very sensitive to sudden changes of load. This causes a hunting of the rotor 
and finally leads to stability problems. It has no starting torque and requires start­
ing equipment to bring it to its rated speed. When it is running at its rated speed 
the field is excited. The damper windings on the field poles help in damping the 
hunting and providing the starting torque. The motor can be operated at differ­
ent power factors by changing the excitation. Overexcited synchronous motors 
operate at leading power factors whereas underexcited ones operate at lagging 
power factors. They are reasonably efficient. Their efficiency and ability to cor­
rect the power factor by varying the excitation make synchronous motors attrac­
tive in large power applications. They are preferred as constant speed drives in 
the industry.
The phasor diagram of a synchronous motor is shown in Fig. 1.32. The theory of 
these motors has been developed on the basis of synchronous reactance, which 
takes care of leakage reactance and armature reaction. A salient pole machine, 
which has a non-uniform air gap, is described by direct and quadrature axis reac­
tances. Variation of the armature current of the motor when its excitation is varied 
is described by V-curves when the motor develops a given power. The variation of 
excitation brings about the following:
i. change in armature current
ii. change in line power factor
iii. slight change in the load angle.

Table 1.4 
Speed control of three-phase induction motors
Basis o f
Signifi-
Variable voltage at
Rotor resistance
Variable voltage
Slip power
Pole change
Injection of 
voltage into 
rotor
comparison
cance
constant frequency
control
variable frequency
recovery
motors
1. Range
With normal squirrel
Variable resistance
Speed control
Speed range
Speed range
A wide range
of speed
cage induction motor
in the rotor circuit
can be obtained
depends on the
of 1:2
of speeds is
control
the speed control
provides speed control
from 1.2 times
system. Larger
possible by
range is limited. To
over a limited range.
the base speed to
speed control
injecting volt-
increase the range a
Mainly suitable for
almost zero speed.
range is possible.
age into the
high resistance rotor
slip ring motors. Using
A speed range of
Speeds below
secondary at
is required. A wound
a suitable value of
20:1 is possible
base speed are
slip frequency.
rotor induction motor
rotor resistance the
can also be used
possible. With
adopts itself very
operating point may be
to start the motor
cycloconverter
well to this, as an
made to occur in the
with good starting
speeds above base
external resistance
braking region so that
performance. Low
speed are also
can be included in
the acceleration of the
starting current
possible. Speed
the rotor circuit.
motor by the load may
at good starting
ranges 1:3 to 1:4
Inferior speed regu-
be avoided. Range of
torque and power
may be possible.
lation. At low slips
speed control depends
factor. The char-
speed control is not
upon rotor resistance
acteristic has suf-
effective for normal
and load speed control
ficient hardness.
motor.
range can be increased
by having voltage con­
trol on stator side. Poor 
speed regulation. Hard­
ness decreases with 
increase in resistance.
('Continued)
Characteristics of Electric Motors

Basis o f
Signifi- 
Variable voltage at
Rotor resistance
Variable voltage
Slip power
Pole change
Injection of 
voltage into 
rotor
comparison
cance 
constant frequency
control
variable frequency
recovery
motors
2. Smooth-
Depends on how the
As the variation of
A smooth speed
Speed control
Stepped
Smooth speed
ness of
stator voltage is var-
rotor resistance is
control is possible
is smooth in the
speed con-
control.
speed
ied. Speed control
accomplished in steps,
over the complete
given range.
trol.
control
may be smooth in
only stepped speed
speed range.
the specified range.
control is possible.
A smooth variation 
may be possible with 
a chopper controlled 
resistance in the rotor.
3. Econom-
Motor operates at
When employed
Operates with
The initial cost
No initial
Special com-
ics of
very low values of
with wound rotor the
reasonably good
of the equipment
cost. The ar-
mutator motor
speed
flux. Rotor currents
external resistance
efficiency at all
is decided by the
mature may
is required.
control
are high to drive the
may be connected
speeds. The capi-
range of speed
have to be
Thus initial
torque. Efficiency is
in the rotor circuits
tal cost is more.
control. Efficiency
reconnected
cost is more.
poor. Economical and
power is dissipated in
Rotating machines
is high. Running
for different
simple for low power
the external resis-
were used. But
cost is low. Rotat-
sets of poles.
drive where efficiency
tance. Rotor heating
at present power
ing machines
Regenera-
is not a criterion.
is not present. With
electronic equip-
like commutator
tion may be
With ac voltage con-
squirrel cage motors a
ment are used
machines, dc ma-
possible
trailers the method is
high resistance rotor is
for providing the
chines, synchro-
when speed
simple. At large slips,
required. Besides poor
required supply.
nous machines
changes
which are possible
q rotor heating also
This equipment is
and static convert-
from high to
with large resistance
there. Not suitable or
costly.
ers are used in the
low values.
rotors, the operation
economical for con-
rotor circuit.
is inefficient.
tinuous operation.
The McGraw-Hill Companies

4. Stability
Depends on the load
Stable operation.
speed torque curve.
Region of stable
Stability problem 
may occur at very 
low voltages.
operation increases.
5. Direc-
Speeds below base
Speeds below base
tion of
speed. Loss of
speed. Low speed op-
speed
control
torque at low speeds.
eration is inefficient.
6. Permis-
Constant torque
Constant torque loads
sible
loads cannot be
can be driven as the
load.
driven at low speeds
rotor current remains
due to heavy cur-
constant at every r'2
rents. Suitable for
to fully utilise the
fan type loads where
T a (jo 2 .
motor.

Operation may 
show low frequen­
cy instability when 
speed control is 
accomplished with 
static converters.
Stable
Stable
Stable
Speeds below and
Speeds below
Two sets of
Speeds below
above base speed
base speed if dc
speed are
and above
are possible. Flux
link conversion is
possible.
synchronous
weakening occurs
employed. With
speeds are
at speeds above
a cycloconverter
possible.
syn. speed.
speeds below and 
above base speeds 
are possible.
Constant torque
Constant torque
The connec-
Shunt motor
loads up to
and constant
tions may
characteristic
base speed and
power drives are
be made to
for constant
constant power
available.
give constant
torque
loads beyond base
torque or
loads below
speed.
constant
synchronous
power at all
speed and con-
speeds. Vari-
stant power
able torque
loads above
operation 
is also pos­
sible.
syn. speed.
{Continued)
Characteristics of Electric Motors

a
Basis o f 
comparison
Signifi­
cance
Variable voltage at 
constant frequency
Rotor resistance 
control
Variable voltage 
variable frequency
Slip power 
recovery
Pole change 
motors
Injection of 
voltage into 
rotor
7. General
Suitable for low 
power drives. Power 
factor is poor.
Used for fan type 
loads and also for 
loads where the power 
reduces with decrease 
in speed.
Very popular 
drive.
The power 
factor is poor. 
Special methods 
are employed 
to improve the 
p.f. Transformer 
is connected 
between the line 
and converter 
for this purpose. 
Efficiency is 
good.
P.f. is differ­
ent at differ­
ent speeds.
Power factor 
control 
may also be 
employed.
The McGraw-Hill Companies

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
ra 
*•
+°-
Î
V
i
■A/Vv-
s
'TTCKT-
+
E©
(b) Leading
(c) UPF
Fig. 1.32 
Phasor diagram based on synchronous impedance
Et
However, there are minimum and maximum excitations for a given power 
developed.
An increase in the mechanical load at constant excitation would tend to retard 
the rotor. The angle by which the rotor tends to fall behind the no-load position is 
called the load angle. In the process of attaining a final position the rotor under­
goes oscillations which are damped by damper windings.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Power Developed by Synchronous Motor The phasor diagram of a cylindrical rotor 
synchronous motor at a lagging power factor is shown in Fig. 1.32. The power 
developed by the motor is given by
Pd = 
cos(3 -  3) -  —  cos 6 
(1.36)
Zs 
zs
where 3 is the load angle
V is the terminal voltage 
Et is the induced voltage
The torque developed by the motor is
rA = - 3 -  
(1.37)
2 nns
The power developed depends on the excitation. An increase in the excitation 
results in an increase of Pd. Consequently, the load angle decreases for a given 
power developed. The overload capacity of the motor increases with an increase 
in excitation and the machine becomes more stable. If the resistance of the arma­
ture is negligible, the power developed is given by
£ tFsin 3
Xs
(1.38)
For a salient pole rotor the use of a single synchronous reactance gives unreliable 
results. The performance of the motor is determined by the use of two reactances, 
namely direct axis and quadrature axis reactances (Xd, X), The former being 
greater than the latter.
The phasor diagram of an overexcited salient pole synchronous motor is 
shown in Fig. 1.32(b). Neglecting armature resistance the power developed is 
given by
Pi = 
~sin 
Ad 
2AdAq
and the torque developed
T _ Pa
Ci -  “
When compared with round rotor machines, the following differences are clear:
i. The power (torque) developed by a salient pole rotor has an additional 
component due to saliency, which depends upon the difference of the 
two axes reactances. This is called reluctance power (torque). A salient 
pole rotor develops more power for a given load angle. This means the 
power per degree of load angle is greater in a salient pole rotor than that 
in a round rotor when excitation is the same in both the cases (the two 
motors are otherwise identical).

The McGraw Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
ii. The maximum torque in a salient pole rotor occurs at a torque angle 
which is less than the corresponding one of a round rotor motor.
iii. Torque is available in a salient pole rotor even at zero excitation.
The power angle characteristics of both types of rotor are shown in Fig. 
1.33, for different excitations. The torque developed in a synchronous motor is 
directly proportional to the applied voltage unlike in an induction motors where 
it is proportional to the square of voltage. Hence it is less sensitive to voltage 
variations.
Fig. 1.33(a) 
Power-angle diagrams of a synchronous motor at different excitations
Fig. 1.33(b) 
Power-angle characteristic of salient pole motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The torque-speed characteristic of a synchronous motor is shown in Fig. 1.34. 
The characteristic is parallel to the torque axis since the motor is of constant speed 
type.
"s
■o
CD
CD
Q.
œ
Torque
Trmax
Fig. 1.34(a) 
Speed torque characteristic of a synchronous motor
Fig. 1.34(b) 
Speed torque characteristic of a synchronous motor during starting for 
different damper resistances showing the effect of damper resistance on 
starting and pull in torques
The damper windings provided on the pole faces to suppress hunting may 
also be used to start the motor using the induction motor principle. The torque- 
speed characteristic of the motor during starting is similar to that of an induction 
motor, and is depicted in Fig. 1.34 for different damper resistances. To get a better 
starting torque the damper winding must have a high resistance. Ffowever, this 
inhibits their primary function of damping the oscillations, since a low resistance 
damper is more effective for this task. A judicious choice of resistance is required, 
depending upon the application of the motor.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
1.4.1 
Desirable Modifications to the Speed-Torque Curve of the Motor
The speed of a synchronous motor can be changed only by varying the frequency,
i.e. the speed-torque characteristic can be modified only by a variation of the sup­
ply frequency. To avoid possible saturation, the voltage is also varied as a function 
of the frequency. Variable voltage, variable frequency supplies are used to achieve 
modifications in the speed-torque curve.
Thyristor power converters provide this supply to the motor. Three modes of 
operation may be identified:
i. 
VIf and Elf constant
ii. 
V and £//'constant
iii. 
VIf and E constant
In the first mode of operation the motor operates at constant flux, disregarding 
the effects of resistance. The current drawn by the motor is independent of stator 
frequency. Thus speed-torque curves similar to those of a shunt motor are pos­
sible. The performance characteristics are shown in Fig. 1.35. In the second mode 
of operation the motor possesses a series motor characteristic, but the effects of 
saturation are present. The current drawn at low frequencies is high. The perfor­
mance characteristics are shown in Fig. 1.36. The third mode of operation gives a 
mixed performance, as depicted in Fig. 1.37.
F'g- 1-35 
(a) V/f and E/f constant (b) current-feeding
Frequency
Fig. 1.36 
V/f and E constant
Frequency
Fig. 1.37 
V and E/f constant

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
1.4.2 
Speed Control of Synchronous Motors
With the availability of thyristor power converters, synchronous motors are 
becoming increasingly popular as variable speed drives. Two types of con­
trol are possible for synchronous motors, when fed from thyristor power 
converters.
i. 
Separate control
ii. 
Self control
The type of control employed affects both the dynamic and the steady-state 
performance of the motor. In the former (Fig. 1.38), the motor is fed from a vari­
able frequency supply, the frequency being controlled externally from a crystal 
oscillator. The motor has the normal synchronous motor operation with all its 
stability and hunting problems. In self control (Fig. 1.39), the frequency of the 
input is decided by the rotor speed or stator voltages. A rotor position sensor 
is used to control the inverter firing pulses. By the time the rotor moves by two 
pole pitches, all the thyristors in the inverter are fired once in the sequence. 
Thus the input frequency and rotor speed are related. The firing pluses may be 
derived by sensing the stator voltages also. With self control the motor has good
Fig. 1.38 
Separate control using crystal oscillator (converter can be either 
cycloconverter or dc link inverter)
Rotor
position
sensing
1-39 
Self control of synchronous motor (using either cycloconverter 
or dc link converter)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
stability as well as good dynamic performance. The motor acquires dc motor 
characteristics. The inverter with rotor position sensing or induced voltage sens­
ing is equivalent to a six-segment commutator. A self controlled synchronous 
motor can replace a dc motor, which has limitations due to its mechanical com­
mutator. In this mode of operation it is also called a commutator-less motor 
(CLM). The motor may be fed from a VSI or CSI or cycloconverter. When fed 
from a CSI the motor may be overexcited to make use of the machine voltages 
for commutation.
The input voltage waveform and current to the synchronous motor are non- 
sinusoidal. The time harmonics of the waveform result in torque pulsations and 
armature heating. These effects are minimal with a cycloconverter In the case of 
CSI feeding, voltage spikes are present. These affect the motor insulation and 
voltage rating of the inverter.
1.5 
BRAKING OF ELECTRIC MOTORS
While operating electrical drives it is often necessary to stop the motor quickly 
and also reverse it. In applications like cranes or hoists the torque of the drive 
motor may have to be controlled so that the load does not have any undesirable 
acceleration, e.g. in the case of lowering of loads under the influence of gravity. 
The speed and accuracy of stopping or reversing operations improve the produc­
tivity of the system and quality of the product. For both the applications stated 
above, a braking torque is required, which may be supplied either mechanically or 
electrically. In the former case, the frictional force between the rotating parts and 
brake drums provides the required braking. Mechanical equipment, such as brake 
linings and brake drums are required. On the other hand, in electrical braking a 
braking torque which opposes the motion of the rotating member is developed 
during the braking operation. This is achieved by suitably changing the electrical 
connections of the motor. The motor operates on a speed-torque characteristic 
depending upon the method of braking employed. Whether mechanical or electri­
cal, the braking of the drive should be such as to stop the motor at the specified 
point of time and location, for reasons of safety.
A comparison of electrical and mechanical braking is given in Table 1.5, to 
bring out the effectiveness and superiority of electrical braking. However, in 
hoists a stand by mechanical brake system is also provided, to avoid accidents in 
case of power failure.
From the preceding discussion it is clear that electrical braking is prefer­
able However, in view of the severe operating cycle of the motor, it should be 
employed only when it is highly desirable to control the retardation and limit the 
braking time.
Electric braking is of two kinds, depending upon the application of the drive:
i. To bring the driving motor completely to rest in a given amount of time 
and at exactly specified points. While doing so, the K.E. is fed back to 
the mains.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Table 1.5 
Comparison of electrical and mechanical braking
Mechanical
Electrical
Maintenance
Mechanical brakes require 
frequent maintenance, like 
adjustment of brakes re­
placement of brake linings. 
They are prone to wear and 
tear.
Very little maintenance 
dust free operation due 
to absence of mechanical 
equipment.
Utilisation of energy of 
rotating parts
The energy of the rotating 
parts is wasted as heat in 
friction. Heat generation 
during braking.
The energy of the rotating 
parts can be converted to 
electrical energy which can 
be utilised or returned to 
the mains. This happens 
during braking or while 
preventing the drive from 
attaining undue accelera­
tion.
Depending upon the condi­
tions the braking may not 
be smooth.
Braking is smooth, without 
snatching.
Brake shoes, brake linings, 
brake drum are required.
Equipment of higher rating 
than the motor rating may 
be required in certain types 
of braking.
This braking can be applied 
to hold the system at any 
position.
Cannot produce holding 
torque. Requires electrical 
energy for operation.
ii. To restrict the speed to safe values. This arises normally while lower­
ing loads using a hoist or crane. While maintaining constant speed the 
excess of K.E. and P.E. of the load tending to accelerate the motor is fed 
back to the mains.
1.5.1 
Methods of Braking of Electric Motors
Electric braking may be accomplished in any of the following three ways:
i. Regenerative braking
ii. Dynamic or rheostatic braking
iii. Counter current braking.
We have seen that electrical braking makes it possible to convert the K.E. of 
the rotating parts to electrical energy. This energy can be returned to the mains 
or dissipated in an external resistance. The braking is called regenerative when 
the energy is returned to the mains. It is called dynamic or rheostatic braking 
when the energy is dissipated in a resistance. In either case the machine operates

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
as a generator. Electric machines are capable of smooth transition from motor to 
generator action.
The load forces the motor in some applications to accelerate beyond no-load 
speed. The induced voltage becomes greater than the supply voltage to which the 
motor is connected and the current flows from the machine to the supply. It devel­
ops a torque to oppose the motion and hence to control the acceleration. The K.E. 
and P.E., minus the losses of the motor, are returned to the mains and the motor 
runs at constant speed. Thus, regenerative braking eliminates any tendency of the 
load to accelerate the motor.
Regenerative braking is also possible if the terminal voltage can be instantly 
decreased. The machine can be braked to zero speed. Reconnection of the motor 
is not necessary for regeneration. On the other hand, in dynamic braking the motor 
must be switched to the load resistance keeping the field constant.
Counter current braking is accomplished by reconnecting the supply to the 
armature of the motor so that the motor draws a current to develop a torque to 
oppose its already existing rotation. The motor acts as a brake and comes to rest 
very fast but has a tendency to accelerate in the reverse direction. If reversal is 
not required the supply to the motor must be cut off at zero speed. In the case of 
dc motors this is achieved by reversing the polarity of the supply voltage to the 
armature, while for ac motors the phase sequence is altered. The method is inef­
ficient because of power loss in the resistors used for limiting the current, due to 
interconnection. The mechanical energy is converted to heat; there is additional 
power input from the supply. This method of braking is also employed to maintain 
a constant speed when the load tries to accelerate the rotor to high speeds, e.g. in 
the case of induction motors a suitable resistance of the rotor shifts the point of 
operation to the fourth quadrant.
1.5.2 
Characteristics of DC Motors During Braking
Regenerative Braking 
This type of braking is possible in the case of drive mo­
tors where the speed can go beyond no-load speed or the terminal voltage can 
be momentarily decreased, e.g. in Ward Leonard control by decreasing the 
excitation of the generator. The armature current reverses and braking takes 
place.
S h u n t Motors 
The speed and armature current are related by the equation
V 
I r
N = ---------- 2JL 
(1.40)
ATe <t>
where 
7a = —— — 
(1.41)
During braking 7 is negative because E > V The torque developed Th = K{cj) /  is 
negative, and hence is a braking torque. During braking
N =
V 
I 
V a 
Ke<|> 
KeK ^ 2
(1.42)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The speed-torque curve of the motor extends into the second quadrant. It passes 
through the no-load speed point with the same slope as in the first quadrant 
(motoring). The characteristics with different armature resistances are shown in 
Fig. 1.40.
Fig. 1.40 
Regenerative braking: Torque-speed curve of a separately 
excited (shunt) motor
Any tendency of the motor to accelerate to speeds beyond no-load speed 
is offset by means of the torque Tb. This occurs, for instance, in a hoist lower­
ing the load which overhauls the motor and tries to accelerate it. The transition 
takes place to the second quadrant and the torque developed maintains constant 
speed. The slope of the characteristic can be varied by an additional resistance 
in the armature. The speed-torque curves in the second quadrant, as affected by 
a smooth variation of applied voltage, are shown in Fig. 1.41. The braking can 
be accomplished here at constant torque Tw as shown in the figure. The armature 
current is also constant.
Fig. 1.41 
Regenerative braking by smooth variation voltage

The McGraw Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
This kind of situation also occurs when the hoist is raising an empty cage. The 
counterweight moving under the influence of gravity tries to accelerate the motor 
and a transition to the second quadrant takes place. The torque developed is Tb, 
which maintains the speed constant. The K.E. trying to accelerate the rotor is 
regenerated to the mains.
Series Motors 
The nature of the speed-torque curve of a dc series motor is such 
that it does not extend to the second quadrant. As no-load is approached, the speed 
increases asymptotically to the speed axis. This implies that an increase in speed 
of a dc series motor is followed by a decrease in the armature current and field 
flux. The induced emf cannot be greater than the terminal voltage. Regeneration 
is not possible in a plain dc series motor since the field current cannot be made 
greater than the armature current.
However, in applications such as traction and hoists, where series motors are 
used extensively, regeneration may be required. For example, in locomotives 
moving down a gradient a constant speed descent may be necessary and in hoist 
drives the speed needs to be limited whenever it becomes dangerously high. The 
regeneration in such cases is achieved by separately exciting the field, as shown 
in Fig. 1.42. The motor has characteristics similar to those of a separately excited 
motor.
Fig. 1.42 
Reconnection of a series motor as separately excited one for regeneration
Dynamic Braking Regenerative braking is not possible if it is impossible for the 
motor speed to be greater than the no-load speed or if the armature voltage is con­
stant and cannot be varied smoothly. Dynamic braking is employed in such cases 
where the K.E. of the rotating parts is dissipated in an external resistance.
S h u n t M otors 
The connections for dynamic braking are shown in Fig. 1.43. 
The motor operates at its rated voltage. When braking is required, the arma­
ture is switched on to an external resistance R . The field remains connected to
e
the supply with full excitation, and the induced voltage in the armature has the 
same polarity. The armature current reverses and flows in a direction opposite

The McGraw Hill Companies
Fig. 1.43(a) 
Connections for dynamic braking. Pm—Power flow during motoring 
Pb—Power flow during braking
Fig. 1.43(b) 
Braking characteristics
to the current during motoring (Fig. 1.43), developing a braking torque. Even 
though the motor is braked by generator action the method is not similar to 
regenerative braking. The braking is effective and the motor stops very fast if 
the field is available at its full value, for which reason it is separately excited. If 
the field is shunt excited, the field current falls with speed leading to very poor 
braking below critical speed.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
If E is the induced voltage, the armature current during braking is
-E  
- K ^ N
L =
( ra +  K
 ) 
( ra +  
)
(1.43)
The torque developed
-  ^ t^ a  -  
-
-K t
(7a + 
)
(1.44)
If separate excitation is employed the speed-torque characteristic is a straight 
line, as shown in Fig. 1.43. The slope of the line —K K  ty2N/(r +RJ decreases 
with an increase in Re. This shows that the braking torque decreases with an 
increase in the armature resistance, which increases the time of braking. A 
suitable value of Re can be chosen such as to obtain stopping in the required 
time. The method is adopted for non-reversing drives where regeneration is 
not possible.
Series Motors 
When dynamic braking 
is employed the armature current would 
reverse. Obviously the field mmf also re­
verses, causing demagnetisation. To avoid 
this, the field connections are reverse con­
nected before the series combination of 
armature and field is switched on to the 
braking resistance. The machine is then 
able to self excite in this case. The connec­
tions of a series motor during braking are 
shown in Fig. 1.44(a). The speed-torque 
curves during braking are shown in Fig. 
torque during braking is
Fig. 1.44(a) 
Methods of connecting a 
series motor for dynamic 
braking
.44(b), in the second quadrant. The
r,i = Tb = - K tKe
(j)2jV
(>"a +  
)
(1.45)
Fig. 1.44(b) 
Torque-speed curves of a series motor with dynamic braking

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
At the instant of initiating the braking, the current is more and hence the flux 
builds up. The torque developed is approximately proportional to the square of 
the armature current. At this instant the braking effect is more and there may be a 
jump in the torque developed, causing an objectionable shock to the load.
In case this torque is objectionable, dynamic braking is employed by sepa­
rately exciting the field (Fig. 1.44(c)). This braking is similar to that in shunt 
motors and has already been discussed.
Dynamic braking with 
self excitation
Fig. 1.44(c) 
Dynamic braking with separate excitation
Counter Current Braking This braking is employed in the following cases:
i. For quick stopping of the motor.
ii. For reversing drives requiring a short time for reversal.
iii. In cranes and hoists the motor is switched on to raise the load at the 
instant when the associated gearing operates in the direction to lower 
the load.
Shunt Motor The counter current braking in a shunt motor is accomplished by 
reversing the supply to the armature, while the connection to the field winding 
remains unchanged. When the polarity of the armature terminals of the running 
motor is reversed, the applied voltage and back emf reinforce each other in the 
circuit. Consequently, a current flows in a direction opposite to the one existing 
during normal motoring. The braking current may be limited by a resistance 
in the armature circuit. As this current flows only for a short duration of brak­
ing time, the starter resistances may be used. The torque-speed characteristic is 
given by
N _ y  
1 
| Th (ra + Rc )
KA(r> +«e) 
KtK ^ 2
(1.46)
The torque developed is
Td -  Tb -  + K tW a
(1.47)
If there is a load torque T , the total braking torque is Tb + T . In Fig. 1.45(b), the 
curve (1) indicates the speed-torque curve of the motor and curve (2) indicates 
the speed-torque curve during braking. In both cases of braking and acceleration

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
Fig. 1.45(a)
Connections for reverse current braking plugging
the same resistance Rc is connected. Let the motor be operating at Point A before 
plugging takes place. The operation is in the first quadrant. When the armature is 
reversed for braking, it may be assumed that the speed remains the same due to 
inertia (the limiting resistor is in the circuit). The point shifts to B in the second 
quadrant. The developed torque added to the load torque retards the rotor and the 
speed decreases along BC. If speed reversal is not required the motor must be 
switched off when the speed reaches zero at C.
If the motor is not switched off at zero speed, the developed torque accelerates 
the rotor in the reverse direction. Now the polarity of the induced voltage changes. 
The applied voltage and induced voltage oppose each other. The motor operates in 
the third quadrant. The series resistance can be short circuited, so that the motor 
operates on its natural characteristic.
Plugging or reverse current braking may be employed to lower the load at con­
stant speed. If the friction torque is greater than the load torque the motor is station­
ary. In the opposite situation the motor accelerates in the direction of the load. At 
this moment the armature supply is reversed, with a suitable resistance to limit the 
current. The torque developed retards the load being lowered and runs it at constant

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
speed. The torque-speed curves are as shown in Fig. 1.45(c). The point B on the 
curve corresponds to the stalling point. The current drawn by the motor is ( V + E)/ 
(ra + Re). The torque developed lowers the load at constant speed to point C.
Fig. 1.45(c) 
Speed-torque curve of a dc separately excited motor with counter current
braking while lowering a load. Controlled lowering of load by counter torque
Series Motors 
When the supply to the armature of a dc series motor is reversed, 
care must be taken to see that the field current retains its direction, for effective 
braking. The circuit conditions of a series motor are as shown in Fig. 1.46. When
Reconnection of dc series motor for reverse current 
braking (plugging)
Fig. 1.46(a) 
Reverse current braking (plugging) of a dc series motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
the supply terminals are reversed, the polarity of the field must also be reversed so 
that there is no demagnetisation. To limit the current during braking, an external 
resistance may be required in the armature circuit. Compared to dc shunt motors 
the braking torque of dc series motor falls very rapidly with speed and below a 
certain speed braking may not be effective, because the field flux also decreases 
with speed. In the case of shunt motors the flux is constant in the complete braking 
region. A typical speed-torque curve of a series motor during braking with exter­
nal resistance is shown in Fig. 1.46(b) The curve of the motor with zero resistance 
is also shown. The braking torque depends on the load the motor is drivint at the 
instant of braking. The braking of the motor by this method is effective only if the 
load torque is less than the short circuit developed torque. Alternatively, the field 
may be separately excited during braking. The braking characteristics in this case 
are obviously similar to those of a separately excited motor.
1.5.3 
Braking of Induction Motors
The three types of braking, namely regenerative, dynamic and counter current 
braking can be accomplished with induction motors also.
Regenerative Braking 
When the rotor of an induction motor runs faster than the 
stator field the slip becomes negative and the machine generates power. Therefore, 
whenever the motor has a tendency to run faster than the rotating field, regenera­
tive braking occurs and the K.E. of the rotating parts is returned to the mains. 
The speed-torque curve extends to the second quadrant (Fig. 1.47). The speed of 
the motor decreases. The braking torque makes the motor run at constant speed, 
arresting its tendency to rotate faster. Due to the effects of stator resistance, the 
maximum torque developed during regeneration is greater than the maximum 
torque during motoring. In hoists and cranes the drive motor has a tendency to
Fig. 1.46(b) 
Torque-speed curves with counter current braking

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 1.47 
Speed-torque curves of a three phase induction motor during regeneration R2 
additional rotor resistance
run faster than the synchronous speed. This situation occurs when the hoist is 
raising an empty cage. Due to the counterweight, the case may acquire dangerous 
speeds. The transition takes place almost automatically and a torque is developed 
to arrest the acceleration and regeneration takes place. This kind of operation is 
also possible when the load overhauls the motor during the descent of the load. 
Automatic regeneration arrests undue acceleration. Rotor resistance control may 
be employed to get better braking torque.
Regenerative braking is also possible with a pole change motor when the speed 
is changed from high to low. It can easily be accomplished in a variable frequency 
drive also. By decreasing the frequency of the motor momentarily, the synchro­
nous speed decreases and conditions favourable to regeneration take place. As 
the motor speed decreases, the frequency is continuously reduced so that brak­
ing takes place at constant torque and stator current, till the motor comes to zero 
speed.
During regenerative braking there is a possibility of dangerous speeds if the 
operating point during braking falls in the unstable portion of the characteris­
tic. This happens if the load torque is greater than the breakdown torque of the 
motor. The torque developed cannot brake the motor and undue acceleiation 
takes place. This possibility can be eliminated by means of a high resistance in 
the rotor.
Dynamic Braking Dynamic braking is employed to brake a non-reversing drive. 
The stator is transferred from ac mains to dc mains (Fig. 1.48(a)). The dc flow­
ing through the stator sets up a stationary field. This induces rotor currents which 
produce a torque to bring the rotor to rest quickly. The torque developed and the 
retardation during braking may be controlled by the amount of dc power. Addi­
tional resistances r and r2e in the stator and rotor circuits respectively control the 
dc excitation and braking torques.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
Fig. 1.48(b) 
Speed-torque curve during dc dynamic braking
The equivalent circuit and phasor diagram of the motor during dynamic braking 
are shown in Fig. 1.48(c). When the stator is fed from dc the mmf produced is sta­
tionary. This mmf depends upon the stator connections for feeding dc, the number 
of turns, and the current. The possible connections of the stator for feeding dc are
Fig. 1.48(c) 
Equivalent circuit and phasor diagram during dynamic braking

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The amplitude of mmf produced by 
lac = 3/2 V2 IX N \
The amplitude of mmf produced by
/dc = V3 /dcNV 
/dc = V3/2
'ac
The mmf amplitude of mmf produced by 
dc = 3/2 ldcN \
/dc = ^2 /ao
Fig. 1.49 
Possible connections of stator for dc dynamic braking
shown in Fig. 1.49. The dc equivalent current can be determined by equating the 
mmfs produced by this equivalent current and the ac current.
The equivalent primary current is responsible for the magnetisation and the 
secondary current for the torque. The torque is given by
T = t—— 
I2 — 
2nns 
s
where 5 is p.u. slip.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
From the equivalent circuit we have
X
j/  _  j
q 4  c 'i c f  +  O 2 +  x m ÿ
(1.49)
Also, from the phasor diagram we have
C q  
=  I I  +  
4 2 + 2 
COS <fe
(1.50)
from which Im can be determined. The value of x is given by
r  
=  F  U
•/Vm 
1 1 m
(1.51)
The torque is
T _ 
3 
J 2 
x i( r '2/s)
2nns eq ( 4 Is ) 2 + ( x m +  x'2f
(1.52)
The torque slip curve can be determined using this expression. The maximum 
torque occurs at a slip
^mb
and the maximum braking torque is
^rnb -
r2
(*m 
+
It
Xm
27ins 
2 (xm + x'2)
The characteristic can also be drawn using the relation
(1.53)
(1.54)
T 
2
^mb 
^mb ! $ 
^mb /$
(1.55)
The braking torque is proportional to /f. However saturation plays its own 
role and there is a depletion of the torque. The effect of r[ is similar to the 
effects during motoring, i.e. it does not change the value of Tmh, but changes the 
value of the speed at which Tmh occurs. Typical speed-torque curves are shown 
in Fig. 1.48.
The values of Ix and r[ are controlled to provide the desired braking. The 
former is limited by R r This method is applied commonly to brake the motors 
driving active loads. Dynamic braking is employed in conjunction with automatic 
control. The induction motor is more popular in hoists than the dc motor, due to 
this feature.
The methods of feeding a dc supply to the stator are depicted in Fig. 1.50. 
It may be provided by a dc supply using a limiting resistor R in the circuit for 
controlling dc excitation. Torque control is achieved by rotor resistance variation. 
Alternatively, an ac supply may be rectified by means of a diode rectifier and the 
resulting dc may be fed to the motor.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(a) Separate dc source 
(b) Bridge rectifier
Fig. 1.50 
Methods of feeding dc to the stator for dynamic braking
In ac dynamic braking the stator is switched to a capacitance bank. The machine 
runs as a self excited induction generator. All the mechanical energy is dissipated 
as electrical energy in the rotor resistance. This method is uneconomical, due to 
the cost of the capacitors.
Counter Current Braking By changing the phase sequence of the input to an in­
duction motor, the direction of the stator field can be reversed. In practice this is 
done by interchanging the supply to any two terminals of the motor (Fig. 1.51(a)). 
A braking torque is developed and the motor comes to rest very fast. The motor 
must be switched off from the mains when zero speed is approached. Else the 
torque developed accelerates the motor in the reverse direction. This method is 
also called plugging.
Fig. 1.51(a) 
Connections for plugging of a three phase induction motor with rotor 
resistance for current limiting and braking torque

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
When the motor is plugged, the induced voltage E in the armature and the 
applied voltage V aid each other and the current during braking is caused by 
E + V. This may result in very high currents, which are limited by the high rotor 
resistance, and also effectively increase the braking torque.
The speed-torque curve of an induction motor can be modified by varying the 
rotor resistance. The maximum torque point can be made to occur in the range of 
slips 1-2, where the torque developed tends to brake the rotor. This torque can 
also be used to arrest the tendency of the rotor to accelerate due to one reason 
or the other (e.g. load overhauling the motor or a hoist raising the empty cage). 
A high resistance is introduced in the rotor, so that the operating point shifts to the 
fourth quadrant. The braking torque developed prevents any acceleration of the 
rotor, and the rotor works at uniform speed (Fig. 1.51(b)).
If the motor is operating at a slip s at the instant of plugging, the total braking 
torque is the sum of the plugging torque at (2 -  s) and the load torque
Tp = Tp + Tl(1.56)
T may be controlled by a variable rotor resistance which limits the braking 
current.
1.5.4 
Braking of Synchronous Motors
The methods that are employed for braking synchronous motors are:
i. Regenerative braking while operating on a variable frequency supply
ii. Rheostatic braking
iii. Plugging.
Regenerative Braking When the motor operates as a variable speed drive motor 
utilising a variable frequency supply, it can be regeneratively braked and all the 
K.E. returned to the mains. As in an induction motor, regeneration is possible if the

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
synchronous speed is less than the rotor speed. The input frequency is gradually 
decreased to achieve this at every instant. The K.E. of the rotating parts is returned 
to the mains. The braking takes place at constant torque. With a CSI and cyclocon­
verter, regeneration is simple and straightforward. With VSI an additional converter 
is required on the line side.
Rheostatic or Dynamic Braking A synchronous motor is switched on to a three- 
phase balanced resistive load after disconnecting it from the mains, keeping the 
excitation constant. To achieve greater braking torque for effective braking, the 
excitation may be increased. The terminal voltage and current (change) decrease 
as the speed decreases. At very low speeds the resistance effect becomes consider­
able. The value of resistance affects the speed at which the maximum torque oc­
curs. It can ideally be made to occur just before the stopping of the motor.
The braking current at any instant is given by
h r  =  
, 
E  
,  
0 - 5 7 )
r j r j 2  +  ( a > L , )
where E = coLafI f jy fl is the induced voltage.
In the above equations r{ = stator resistance per phase
Ls = synchronous inductance per phase 
L = mutual inductance between armature and field
af
/f. = field current
The braking torque = ^ br/l = K -------—------- 
(1.58)
0
3
rf+ {coLs )
The speed at which the Tu is maximum can be obtained as com = r{/Ls. By 
proper choice of r , the maximum braking torque can be made to occur just before 
stopping.
Plugging The braking of a synchronous motor by plugging has serious dis­
advantages. Very heavy braking current flows causing line disturbances. The 
torque is also not effective. However, if the motor is synchronous induction type 
it ran be braked effectively by plugging only if the machine is working as an 
induction motor.
1.5.5 
Energy Relations During Braking of Electric Motors
In conventional methods of braking, such as rheostatic braking and plugging, it is 
necessary to know the energy wasted, so as to satisfactorily carry out the design 
of the braking equipment.
i. When a shunt motor is braked dynamically using a resistance the energy 
dissipated in the resistance is equal to the K.E. of the motor:
(1.59)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
Where J is the moment of inertia and col is the speed at which the brak­
ing is initiated.
ii. During counter current braking (plugging) the energy dissipated is
— Jco2. If speed reversal is required, it is 2 Jco2. The extra energy drawn
from the mains is due to the application of the voltage in the reverse 
direction.
iii. For a three-phase induction motor which is braked by dc in the stator
wbr = | / aV br 
( 1.60)
where tbr is the braking time, which can be estimated from the dynamics 
of the motor during braking as
tbr -  Jj ° s- b~ f 
( 1/5, ) 
(1.61)
* dm
where s] is the slip at the instant of braking.
iv. When an induction motor is plugged, the energy wasted during braking
is —Jco2. If it is allowed to reverse, the energy is 2 Jco2. If the stator 
2 
s 
3
losses are also added, these are — Jco2 (1 + q /r2 ) and 2Jco2 (l + rx!r[ ) 
respectively.
v. For a synchronous motor the energy dissipated during rheostatic braking is
^ b r  =  3 / b r V b r  +  ^
J ( 0 s  
O - 6 2 )
Knowing the various torques occurring in the motor during dynamic braking the 
dynamic behaviour of the motor can be established.
1.6 
STARTING OF ELECTRIC MOTORS
Transient processes involved with the starting of the (drive) motor in a variable 
speed drive require a detailed study. The electric motor and connected load accel­
erates to the rated speed from rest under the influence of the starting torque. The 
transient operation during starting is satisfactory if a sufficiently good starting 
torque is developed with a reduced value of starting current, to accelerate the rotor 
in the desired amount of time.
The need to limit the starting current arises due to heavy dips of the voltage of 
the motor following starting peaks of current. The starting equipment used should 
be capable of minimising these dips in the voltage to a tolerable value, so that the 
other equipment on the network is not affected.
The starting current affects the motor also. High starting currents heat up 
the rotor. If starting is frequent, the heating needs to be reduced or limited. In 
dc machines high starting currents produce sparking at the brushes. For good

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
commutation the starting currents must be limited. In converter operation 
additional harmonics of current affect the commutation.
These problems of commutation in dc motors due to ripple may be solved by 
(properly) increasing the pulse number of the power converter, and modifying the 
design of the motor itself, e.g. laminating the interpoles.
The starting torque must produce uniform acceleration. Acceleration time must 
be reduced with a view to improving the productivity and to reduce the energy lost 
during starting.
1.6.1 
Methods of Starting Electric Motors
The purpose of starting equipment in an electric motor is to limit the starting current 
and to provide a reasonably good starting torque, if possible, so that the motor accel­
erates in the desired period to the rated speed. For dc motors the starting current is 
limited by using an additional resistance in series with the armature. The motor is 
switched on with full field. This is effectively reduced voltage starting. Thyristor 
power converters used for speed control may also be used for the purpose of start­
ing, since the voltage is smoothly variable and starting losses are absent.
Induction motors are started by any of the following methods:
i. Direct on line starting
ii. Low voltage starting
iii. Rotor resistance starting
iv. Low frequency starting
v. 
Special rotor construction.
A comparison of these methods is given in Table 1.6.
Fig. 1.52 
Comparison of starting a synchronous 
motor on mains and variable frequency 
supply. (1) Mains starting (2) Low 
frequency starting
Synchronous motors are not 
self starting, but are started by 
an auxiliary motor or using the 
induction motor principle. The 
damper windings are used as 
starting windings. To make a 
synchronous motor self starting, 
a wound rotor is employed. It is 
short circuited with an additional 
resistance during starting and fed 
from a dc when accelerated to syn­
chronous speed. A synchronous 
motor can also be started using a 
variable frequency inverter sys­
tem. The application of this kind 
of starting is discussed in Chapter 
7. A comparison of variable fre­
quency starting with mains start­
ing is given in Fig. 1.52.

Table 1.6 
Comparison of starting methods of induction motors
Basis 
o f com­
parison 
Direct on starting 
Low voltage starting 
Rotor rheostat 
Low frequency starting 
Special rotor
General
Small squirrel 
cage motors up to 
2 kW are started 
using full rated 
voltage. This 
is not suitable 
for motors of 
higher rating.
The starting 
current depends 
upon blocked 
rotor impedance. 
The saturation 
effects on leakage 
reactance will 
increase the start­
ing current. The 
high starting cur­
rent causes dips 
in line voltage as 
well as heating of 
the motor if the 
acceleration time 
is large.
Squirrel cage motors are started 
normally with reduced voltage to 
limit the starting current. The as­
sociated motor heating and voltage 
dips are controlled. After the motor 
attains 80% of rated speed the full 
voltage is applied. Reduced voltage 
starting may be accomplished using 
an autotransformer, a star/delta 
switch or a series reactor.
Employed for slip 
ring induction mo­
tors. The resistance 
which provides the 
desired starting per­
formance is inserted 
in the rotor circuit.
A suitable resistance 
may also be chosen to 
provide fast accelera­
tion. The resistance 
is slowly cut off as 
the motor accelerates 
so that the accel­
eration takes place at 
constant torque. The 
resistance is fully cut 
off when the motor 
reaches rated speed.
This can be employed if 
the motor is fed from a 
frequency converter. A 
variable frequency con­
verter may be developed 
only for starting. The 
motor frequency is slowly 
varied such that the slip 
frequency is constant.
This maintains the input 
current at a constant value 
and acceleration takes 
place at constant torque. 
Both VSI and CSI may be 
used for starting the mo­
tor. The starting dynam­
ics are improved. The 
current and acceleration 
during starting may be 
maintained at the desired 
value by controlling slip 
frequency. If used only 
for starting the system is 
costly.
Squirrel cage motors 
have double cage or 
deep bar to improve 
starting conditions. 
The starting current 
decreases whereas 
torque increases. 
Direct on line starting 
may be used. The 
running perfor­
mance of the motor 
is reasonably good. 
However, depending 
upon the cage pa­
rameters the full load 
efficiency and power 
factor may be poorer 
than plain cage mo­
tors. The desired per­
formance at starting 
may be achieved by 
designing the motor 
with proper choice of 
cage parameters.
(Continued)
nrrCi
qn
r-+-ro
r+n*
LO
on*O
1/1

Basis 
o f com­
parison 
Direct on starting 
Low voltage starting 
Rotor rheostat
Starting 
/ 1, = (6 to 8)/fl 
current
Starting
torque
[st
full load
v Ai J  
slip (1.5 to 2 
times full load 
torque)
Starting 
Poor
power
factor
Auto trans­
former
Star/ delta
Series
reactor
vx
x 
v
r r
7st = x2
1/3 times
x times
times that
DOL
that of
of DOL
DOL
starting x2
starting
starting
times that
1/3 times
x2 times
of DOL
that of
that of
starting
DOL
DOL
starting
starting
Rotor resistance may 
be designed to obtain 
the desired values of 
starting torque and 
current
better
Low frequency starting 
Special rotor
Characteristics are similar 
300 to 400% of full 
to those of rotor rheostat 
load current 
starting.
V/fis kept constant 
300% full load
and the acceleration is 
torque 
achieved at constant slip 
frequency.
better
reasonably good 
power factor
m
TOn
n0
<'
TO
01
The McGraw-Hill Companies

The McGraw Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
1.6.2 
Energy Relations During Starting
In order to select a proper starting equipment, e.g. the starting rheostat in a shunt 
motor, it becomes necessary to determine the energy loss during starting.
i. The energy loss during starting is the K.E. of the rotating parts at final 
speed. The same energy is drawn from the supply. Therefore the total 
electrical energy drawn from the supply during starting is
We = 
Jwl
where cu. is the final speed at no-load.
When started against a load of torque Tx the total loss in the armature 
circuit is
/
= J
cos ^  L
CO2
+ Tl F
(1.63)
where co, is the speed with load T{ and T{ F is the energy loss due to the 
load torque and is given by
*st
F — (Oq 
— J codt
In the case of dc series motors the energy loss depends on R, and is given by
JR
Tl R
+ - ^ - t  
K
St
(1.64)
ii. In the case of an induction motor, an additional rotor resistance is 
employed. The energy loss in the rotor resistance is the K.E. of the rotat­
ing parts. Part of the energy is dissipated in the stator resistance also. The 
total energy lost during starting is
Jcol
~ Y
r
V
a
1 + i
ri )
(1.65)
An increase in rotor resistance decreases the energy loss in the stator resistance, 
whereas it does not affect the loss in the rotor resistance itself. This decreases the 
time of acceleration.
When the motor is started on load the loss dissipated is greater than at no-load, 
and is given by
AIVSI = Jws
r  
r  
\  
T
1 + — ------—  5 ds
V 
r2 ) Td ~ TL
( 1.66)
where Td and Tx are functions of slip. The integration of A WSL from 0 -  cos gives 
the total energy loss. When squirrel cage motors are started directly from the 
line, there is minimum energy dissipation because the torque developed is large 
with full voltage. With low voltage starting, Td decreases and the energy wasted

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
increases, even though starting current decreases. This may be attributed to the 
increase of acceleration time at low voltage starting.
In squirrel cage motors the entire energy is lost in the machine itself, whereas 
in slip ring rotors an external resistance may be used for the dissipation of energy, 
thus minimising the motor heat but increasing the starting time.
1.6.3 
Starting Dynamics of Electric Motors
The starting, of electric motors is normally done with graded resistances which 
are cut off slowly as the motor accelerates. The grading is based on two limits 
between which starting current is allowed to vary. The dynamics during starting 
may be necessary to actually find out the values of these resistances.
DC Shunt Motor When a shunt motor is accelerated under load, the equations are
V = Ktco + Iãrã
^ 
„ r 
r dm 
m
Td -  Kth -  J  —  + tl
dt
Using these relations we have
dm 
m _ m0 -  coL
dt 
Tm 
Tm
(1.67)
(1.68)
(1.69)
where mQ is the no-load speed
is the speed drop under load
x is the mechanical time constant.
m
If the motor is accelerated from co , to m2 the solution of this equation may be 
obtained as
oj =  m2 +  (oj\ -  co2 ) e~t'Zm 
( 1-7 0 )
If the acceleration is from zero to co0 we have
co — co0 (1 — e~^Xm ) 
(1.71)
During starting, the current drops as the motor speeds up, due to the building up 
of back emf. The armature current drops exponentially as
i = IL + { l l - I L)e-'/**(1.72)
where /, is the starting current and IL the final value. If the acceleration is at no-load
/ = /,£ -'/r” 
(1.73)
The time of acceleration can be determined using these relations. If a multi- 
stepped starter is used, the time taken for the current to drop from 
to I2 is
' h  - V
= T„>
U -  I
\ 22
L y
(1.74)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
The mechanical time constant is different at different steps, and is given by
JR,
T 
=
‘'mx
R* =
K}
V - E .
(1.75)
(1.76)
The value of Ex is obtained by using the value of speed, which increases exponen­
tially. Finally, the total accelerating time
A  -  X
 *2 r
(1.77)
r— 1
Induction Motor We can analyse the transient conditions in a three-phase induc­
tion motor with a view to determining the time of acceleration. It is well known 
that by properly adjusting the rotor resistance, maximum torque may be made to 
occur at starting. But analysis shows that this does not give the minimum time 
of acceleration, which is obtained if the rotor resistance is selected such that the 
maximum torque occurs at a slip of 0.407.
The torque developed at any slip is given by
T =
2Zdm
s/s„ + s.,Js
(1.78)
'm
m '
Assuming the acceleration takes place at no-load, the torque developed acceler­
ates the rotor
Td = J 
(1-79)
Also, we have
dt
oj = ms(\ -  s)
(1.80)
assuming the no-load speed is synchronous speed. Using the above equations 
we have
2Tim 
, 
ds
form which
s j s  + s/sm
dt =
= -Jco, dt
(1.81)
’m
+ 'm
ds
(1.82)
Jcoc
where im = — -  is the mechanical time constant of the motor. The motor starts
Zdm
from rest and runs up to no-load speed. The slip varies from 1 to s. Integrating 
Eq. 1.82 between these limits we have
.2 
( ^ A
^st
1
2s
+ Smln
m
J
(1.83)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
If the final slip is assumed to be s = 0.03, the starting time t is
1
6>t 
An
4s
+ 1.5sm
m
(1.84)
The minimum value of t is obtained by
St 
J
dtSt
ds
= 0
(1.85)
m
which gives s = 0.407. The ratio t h  as a function of 5 is shown in Fig. 1.53.
°  
m 
st 
m 
m 
0
To accelerate the rotor in the time t the effective torque is
71eff st
d(Os _ 
7jm^m
íst 
0.25 +1.55^
( 1.86)
This shows again that the starting time is a minimum if the starting torque is 0.81 
T . This happens again if Tdm occurs at sm = 0.407. An induction motor can be 
made to accelerate in minimum time if the starting torque is 0.81 times the maxi­
mum torque and the maximum torque occurs at sm = 0.407.
Fig. 1.53(a) 
The starting tim e(tjzj as a function of slip, the slip for maximum torque 
being a parameter
Fig. 1.53(b) 
Motor torque and starting time as functions of slip for maximum torque

The McGraw Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
Worked Examples
D
A 500 V de shunt motor with constant field drives a load whose torque is 
proportional to the square of the speed. When running at 900 rpm it takes 
an armature current of 45 A. Find the speed at which the motor runs if a resistance 
of 8Q is connected in series with the armature. The armature resistance may be 
taken as IQ.
Solution 
In a shunt motor the torque developed
rd = x i.
As the load torque is proportional to the square of the speed
TL
a s 
r dy
The back emf E. «= N.
b 
1
( F 
\ 2 
^bl
V^b2 J
Therefore
'b l
Substituting
'b 2
455:
(500 -  9ia2y
KhN 2
h
h y
h i
hl_
h i
V -  h \ ra = 500 -  45 = 455 V 
500 -  9/a2
45
~hi
Cross multiplying and simplifying, 
I 22 -  167.9/a2 + 3086.4 = 0
Solving, we get /  2 = 21 A.
Eh2 = 500 -  9 x 21 = 500 -  189 = 311V 
311
The new speed = 
x 900 = 615.2 rpm
O
A 400 V, 750 rpm, 70 A dc shunt motor has an armature resistance of 
0.3Q. When running under rated conditions, the motor is to be braked by 
plugging with armature current limited to 90 A. What external resistance should 
be connected in series with the armature? Calculate the initial braking torque and 
its value when the speed has fallen to 300 rpm. Neglect saturation.
Solution 
The speed of the motor = 750 rpm = 78.5 rad/s
The back emf = 400 -  70 x 0.3 = 379 V

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The torque developed
379 X 70 
78.5
-  338 Nm
When plugged,
the voltage causing the current = 400 + 379 = 779V
current = 90 A
resistance = 779
------- 0.3 = 8.36 Q
90
The braking torque at the instant of braking
379 X 90
78.5
= 434.5 Nm
At 300 rpm the back emf = 379 x 300
Current
Torque
750
15.1.6 V 
400 + 151.6
8.356
151.6 + 63.725 
2n x 5
= 63.725 A
= 307.66 Nm
O
A 250 V dc series motor drives a fan, the load torque being proportional to 
the 1.5th power of the speed. At a certain speed the motor takes 40 A The 
machine resistance is 0.6Q. Find the extra resistance needed to reduce the speed 
to one half of the original speed. Saturation may be ignored.
Solution 
The torque developed in a dc series motor = Td oc ¥ »  oc 
as there 
is no saturation
T, 
n I 
K 5
Ti 
Ih  
N\*
But —L = 2
n 2
t2
+ -  = 2V2 = 2.828
T 2
+a2
Ia2
Eb\
Eb2
Eb2
40
V2.828
4  2^2 
Eb\ 
_ 
3.363
= 23.79 A
2 x 4 0 = 3.363
23.79 
250 - 4 0  x 0.6 
3.363
67.2 V
250-23.79^ = 67.2
R = 7.684Q
Extra resistance required = 7.084Q

The McGraw Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
A 440 V, 80 amp, 1200 rpm dc shunt motor has armature and field 
resistances of 0.550. and 1100 respectively. The shunted armature
connection is used to obtain a no-load speed of 600 rpm and full load speed of 
300 rpm (full load torque) Determine the necessary value of series and shunting 
resistances. Calculate also the line current and overall efficiency o f the system.
Fig. P1.4 
Connections and torque speed characteristics of example 1.4
Solution 
With the arrangement shown, the no-load speed = 600 rpm
co =62.8 rad/s
r
Induced voltage
= Kcor
The value of K can be obtained from the ratings as
E -  440 -  80 x 0.55 = 396 V 
Rated speed = 1200 = 125.6 rad/s
K = 2 2 5 -  = 3.153
125.6
The induced voltage with R and R . is
0  
sc 
sn
E. =3.153 x62.8 = 198 V
(
Rsh
\
The armature voltage = V
v ^sh 
*sc j
Since the current through the armature is zero
V
V
(1 +  ft)
1 + ft 
1 + ft =
= 198 V 
V
198
=  2.22
Full load torque = KI.d = 3.153 x 80 = KIa = 252.24 Nm
At 300 rpm the motor develops full load torque. As the torque is constant armature 
current at this speed I = 80 A 
The back emf is
E2 =\98 x  —
 = 99 V 
600
99 = V2 -8 0 x 0 .5 5  
V2 = 99 + 44 = 143 V

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The supply current
Also
L
440 =
143
R
+ 80
sh
ISRS + 143
(
= R,
143
\
V ^ sh
+ 80
+ 143
/
Solving R 
Rsh
1.532Q
1.256Q
440
The line current = 193.854A H-------= 197.854
Input power 
Output 
Efficiency
110
85.3 + 1.76 = 87.06 kW 
252.24 X 2nns = 7920 = 7.920 kW 
9.1%
M i«]
I f in the previous problem R = 2Q and R = 1.5Q, determine the no-load 
and full load speeds.
Solution
Rc
a =
R.sh
1.5 = 1.333
No -  load voltage
No-load speed =
440
1.333
330
3.153
= 330 V
= 104.6622 rad/s
1000 rpm
Full load speed
I = 80A
a
V2
The supply current = ------b 80
*sh
V - v2 
v2
V,
1 
1
—
 +  —
Rsh
+ 80
V
= -8 0 +  —  = -80 + 220 = 140 
R.
Rsh
F2[0.5 + 0.6667] = 140 
V2 = 120F
E2 = 120 -8 0  x 0.55 = 76 F
n (1
N2 = 1000 X -----= 230.30 rpm
330

The McGrawHill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
S
R M  A 250 V dc series motor has an armature resistance of 0.40.. From its 
WêBÊÊM magnetisation curve at 480 rpm, the armature voltage is 125 V at 40 A 
of field current when running as a motor. Determine the speed at which it will run 
while drawing a current of 40 A.
Solution 
Induced voltage of the motor = 250 -  0.4 x 40
= 234 V
234
The speed of the motor = 480 x -----= 898.56 rpm
The torque developed =
125
234 x 40 
234 x 40
2nm
94.05
= 99.52 NWm
i
p v m  In part (a) determine the value of resistance to be included in series with 
mHHM the motor so that the motor runs at 480 rpm. Determine the torque. The 
motor current is 40 A.
Solution 
The back emf = 125 V 
250 -  40(0.4 + Re) = 125
Rc =2.7250.
125 x 40
The torque developed =
2ti x 480/60 = 265.4 Nm
The series motor in the previous problem has a resistance o f2.7250 in 
series with the field and 3.5Q in parallel with the armature. Determine 
the speed of the motor when the supply current is 40 A. Assume the field has a 
resistance of 0,150.
Assume a linear magnetisation characteristic.
Solution Voltage across the motor = 250 -  40(2.725 + 0.15)
= 135 V
The current through shunting resistor = 38.57 A 
Armature current = 1.43 A
Back emf = 135 -  1.43 x 0.25 = 134.6425 V
Speed of the motor =
Torque
125
134.64
134.64 x 1.43 
2n x 446/60
x 480 = 446 rpm
= 4.128 Nm
Q
The series motor of Example 1.6 is shunted with a resistance of 3.50, 
while a resistance of 2.7250 is connected in series with the line. 
Determine the speed and torque of the motor. Assume the motor current to have 
a value = 40 A

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
E 
F
Fig. P1.7 
Pertaining to example 1.7
Solution 
Back emf at 40 A = 125 V and speed = 480 rpm 
Let the voltage across the motor be V
V
T -  — T -  T -  J
lx -  „ 
ya -  1L 
'r
r 
_250 -  Vm
I t —
2.725
40 =
3.5 
250 -  Vrm
V rm
2.725
250
2.725 
250
2.725
K
3.5 
'  
1
m
+
1
V2.725 
3.5
-  Vm0.653
= 91.743 -0.653Km
Vm = 79.24 F
Em = 79.24 -  40 X 0.4 = 63.24 V
Speed = 
x 480 = 242.8 rpm 
1 ^ 5
250 -  79.24
The supply current — I t —----------------= 62.66 A
2.725
Input = 15.67 kW 
Output = 63.24 x 40 = 2.53 
Efficiency = 16.14%
2.53 xlO 3
Torque =
2n\\
2.53 x 103 
25.41
= 99.56 Nm
The series motor connections are as shown in Fig. PI.8 to lower the empty 
container of a hoist. I f the current through the field circuit is 40 A deter­
mine the speed and torque. The motor details may be taken from the previous 
example. The supply to the armature is reversed during lowering.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
2.725 Q
Solution 
Motor voltage 
V = 0.95 L
m 
f
= 40x0.95 = 38 V 
Armature current = -  (/ -  /f)
L = /
V - K m
f
= 40
250 -  38
2 
2 
= 4 0 -1 0 6  = -6 6  A
= -38 + 66 x 0.55 = -22 V
'in
Speed = -  
Torque =
—  x480 = -84.48 
125
-22 X -6 6  
. . .  . . .
= -164.2 Nm
2n  X (-84.48/60)
B
[B The maximum torque of a 3-phase squirrel cage induction motor is 2.5 
times the full load torque, and the starting torque is 1.2 times the full load 
torque. For negligible stator resistance, compute the
i. slip at maximum torque
ii. full load slip
iii. starting current in terms o f full load value.
Fig. P1.9 
Pertaining to example 1.9
Solution 
The ratio of full load torque to maximum torque
Td 
2s sr
Tdm
___ 'm
•s2 + 4

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
also
^dm
IlL
Td
1
2Ã
i.e. s + s^ 
1.2
i + 4
s2 -  8.33sm + 1
2sm 
1 + s^
2sm 
s2 + s j 
1 4"
9 ÇÇ
+ 4
5sSm = 1Q^m
1 + Sm 
1 +
8.33sms2 -  0.6006s + 0.0144 = 0
0 
s = 0.0.25
0.120
B
S  A 3-phase squirrel cage induction motor has a starting current eight times 
■ the full load value. The full load slip is 4%. Compute the starting torque 
as a percentage o f full load torque if the motor is started
i. direct on line 
ii. by a star/delta starter
iii. using an autotransformer to limit the starting current to three times 
the full load value. What is the line current as a percentage offull load 
value?
Solution 
Direct on line starting torque =
f l1 St
h
x sn
V ^fi
= 64x0.04 = 2.56
9 Sfi
Star/A starter = ——  = 0.8533
Autotransformer
Tst = 9 x 0.04 = 0.36
hL “ 8 /fl
/  = A  A
 = 9/64/, 
8 8
3 
9
x = — x 3 1  fl -
st
8
8
m
lf in the previous example, the line current is to be limited to three times 
the full load value, determine the phase current and torque.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
ML
XI1L
Solution
/
\
st
In
3//,
Fig. PI.11 
Pertaining to example 1.11
hL
X
8
X
/I
'/i
X2 = 
^st =
8
24 X = 4.9
(4.9)2 X 0.04 = 0.96 tap = 61.25%
X 0.025 -  1.2
The starting current = 6.93 times full load value.
A three-phase, cage induction motor takes at normal voltage a starting 
current of 5 times the full load value and its full load slip is 4%. What 
ratio of autotransformer would enable the motor to be started with not more than 
twice full load current drawn from the supply? What would be the starting current 
under this condition and how would it compare with that obtained using a stator 
resistance starter under the same limitations?
Solution 
Starting torque with direct on line
= 52 x 0.04 = 1.00 times full load torque
If an autotransformer is used for starting with x% tapping, the motor current is 
5x
limited to —  x I,
100
!/i
The corresponding primary current would be such that
Í
Vß  =
100
Vn 5x
Too
X //I
But /  = 21,
p 
n
Therefore
2Ifl =
X  =
5x"
(1 00)(1 00)
/ß
x 100 = 63.3%
w  /

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The starting torque developed = 0.4 times full load torque. If a stator resistance 
starter is used, the line current and motor current are the same. Therefore the start­
ing torque '2V
J ,
(5)2 X 0.04
= 0.16 times the full load torque.
E
A 500 V, 3-phase, 50 Hz star-connected induction motor has the following 
equivalent circuit parameters:
rr — 0.13Q, r, = 0.32Q, x1 = 0.6Q 
x. = 1 .4 8 Q, r = 2 5 0 Q, x = 20Q
2 
m 
7 m
all referred to the stator side. The full load slip is 5%. The machine is to he braked 
from full load speed by plugging, after inserting a resistance ofl.5Q per phase 
referred to the stator Determine the initial braking torque. Neglect mechanical 
losses and use the approximate equivalent circuit.
0----»----
s<
/ 
À
1---------
k
Is
1
■' i ’
0----*— <; ^  I
ra - 0.55 Q
f  rm
r1 
r 2 
r 2
-A/vV— ''roo-----ajöo>------ VvV
Q  X m 
§
r'2( 1-s)
Fig. P1.13 
Equivalent circuit of induction motor
Solution 
The equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. PI. 13.
The impedance Z2 of the motor
Z2 = 0.13 + j 0.6 + 
+ j 1.48
0.05
= 0.13 + j 0.6 + 6.4 + j 1.48 = 6.53 +j 2.08 -  6.853Z17.67c 
500
Torque =
h  = ~ r
v3 x 6.853
3
= 42.13 xl
2 71 m
x (42.13)2 x 6.4 = —1— 34.07 Nm
2 n n.
2nnc
-  34.07 syn.kW

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Characteristics of Electric Motors
At the instant of plugging 
sb = 2 -  s = 1.95
1 82
Zb = 0.13 + j 0.6+ - —  + j 1.48 = 1.063+ j 2.08 = 2.3360
b 
ig 5
„ 
500 
,
Current = —=-----------= 123.6 A
V3 x 2.336
Torque = - 2 — (l236 
fx 0.93 = 42.662 syn kW 
2nns
The braking torque = 77.293 kW
Assuming four poles, this is 492.3 Nm
Problems
1.1 
A 50 hp, 220 V, 1200 rpm dc shunt 
motor has an efficiency of 85% at 
full load. The shunt field resistance is 
110Q and the armature circuit resis­
tance is 0.06Q. This motor is required 
to drive a load requiring 120% of the 
full load motor torque at a speed of 
550 rpm. Determine the additional 
armature resistance required to oper­
ate the motor.
1.2 
A 50 hp, 220 V, 1200 rpm shunt 
motor has an armature resistance of 
0.06Q. At rated speed and output the 
motor takes a current of 180 A. The 
field current is 2 A The field flux is 
reduced to 70% of its original value 
by using a field rheostat while the 
torque remains the same. Find the 
new speed and efficiency, assuming 
that the rotational losses vary as the 
square of speed.
1.3 
The armature of a dc shunt motor has 
a resistance of 0.08Q. The armature 
current drawn by the motor at a speed 
of 1400 rpm is 190 A The motor 
drives a load having a torque speed 
characteristic given by
7) = 0.65co Nm
----------------------------------------------- \
__________________________________________________
where co is rad/s. If the rated voltage 
of the motor is 230 V determine the 
torque and speed of the motor.
1.4 
(a) Determine the additional armature
resistance required to reduce the 
speed to 600 rpm in Problem 3.
(b) Determine also the voltage to be 
applied to the motor for the con­
ditions of 4(a). Assume the field 
is separately excited from a 230 V 
supply.
1.5 
A 600 V, 50 hp, 600 rpm dc series 
motor has an armature and series 
field resistance of 0.2Q. The full load 
current of the motor is 215 A. The 
armature voltage is varied to control 
the speed of the motor. Determine the 
voltage required to reduce the speed 
to 450 rpm if the torque driven by the 
motor is given by the relation
Tl = Kco2 Nm
where co is the speed in rad/s.
1.6 
A series motor having a combined 
series and field resistance of 2Q 
draws a current of 8 A from a 240 V 
supply and runs at a speed of 
400 rpm.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(a) Determine the torque developed, 
assuming a linear magnetisation 
curve.
(b) Determine the value of resistance 
to be connected in series with the 
armature circuit if the speed has 
to be reduced to 200 rpm keep­
ing the torque at its value in (a).
(c) What would be the speed of the 
motor to develop (3/4)th of the 
torque in (a) if the resistance 
connected is double the value 
in (b)?
1.7 
The magnetisation curve of a dc series 
motor, obtained by separately excit­
ing the field is given in the follow­
ing table, at 800 rpm. The combined 
armature and field resistance is 0.2Q 
when connected as a series motor 
Rheostatic 
braking 
is 
employed 
to limit the speed of the motor to 
400 rpm against a load torque of 15 
Nm. Determine the current drawn by 
the motor. The moment of inertia of 
the motor is 100 kgm2. Determine 
also the braking time.
Table P1.7
Current
h
(A)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
EMF
(V)
115
228
343
434
514
560
602
629
1.8 
A 220 V dc shunt motor with con­
stant field drives a load whose torque 
is proportional to square of the speed. 
When running at 800 rpm, it takes 
an armature current of 40 A. Find 
the speed at which the motor runs if 
a resistance of 12Q is connected in 
series with the armature. The arma­
ture resistance may be taken as in.
1.9 
A 200 V dc shunt motor has a no-load 
speed of 700 rpm with rated field cur­
rent. The resistance of the armature is 
0.9Q. The rated current of the motor 
is 20 A. A resistance of 6Q in series 
and 3T> in parallel, is connected with 
it. Determine the current drawn and 
speed at full load torque.
1.10 A dc shunt motor takes 70 A from a 
220 V supply and runs at 1000 rpm, 
when delivering an output of 11 kW. 
The annature circuit resistance is 
0.15Q. 
Determine the additional 
resistance required in the armature to 
reduce the speed to 800 rpm, if
(a) the load torque is proportional to 
the square of the speed
(b) the load torque is constant
(c) Detennine the loss in the resis­
tance in both the cases.
1.11 The armature resistance of a dc shunt 
motor is 0.6Î1 The motor draws an 
annature current of 180 A at a speed 
of 1250 rpm and operates on a sup­
ply system of 220 V It drives a load 
torque having a characteristic.
T, = 0.7co Nm
where co is in rad/s. Determine the 
torque and speed of the motor. 
Determine also the torque and speed 
when the load has a characteristic.
T, = 78.69Vm Nm
1.12 A220Vdcshuntmotorrunsat700rpm 
with full field. The armature resis­
tance is 0.5£1 The armature cur­
rent required to give rated torque is 
20 A. The speed of the motor is 
controlled by resistances connected 
in series and parallel with the arma­
ture, equal to 6Q and 5Q respec­
tively. Determine the speed-torque

The McGraw-Hill Companies
characteristic. What current would 
the motor draw to develop rated 
torque? What is the efficiency?
1.13 A 20 hp, 1200 rpm, 220 V shunt 
motor has an armature resistance of 
0.2Q and field resistance of 1240. 
The series and shunt resistances con­
nected are 0.05 and 2 0  respectively. 
Find the speed of the motor required 
to develop the rated torque. Assume 
its efficiency as 85%.
1.14 Consider a 20 hp, 1200 rpm, 220 V 
shunt motor having an armature resis­
tance of 0.20 and field resistance of 
1240. An extra resistance of 100 is 
connected in the field circuit. Find 
the speed at which the machine runs 
while developing the rated torque. 
Assume the efficiency of the motor 
without extra field resistance as 
85%.
1.15 A series motor having a combined 
series field and armature resistance 
of 1.50 drives a fan load having a 
torque speed characteristic given 
by
r, = K N 2 Nm
where Vis in rpm. At 220 V the motor 
runs at 350 rpm talking a current of 
8 A. The speed of the fan has to be 
increased to 500 rpm by increasing 
the armature voltage. Determine the 
voltage and current at the new speed. 
Neglect saturation.
1.16 A series motor working on a 500 V sys­
tem runs at a rated speed of 1000 rpm 
and develops rated torque with a cur­
rent of 95 A. The armature resistance 
is 0.15Q and series field resistance is 
0.05 ohm.
Assuming that the magnetic circuit is 
unsaturated, determine:
(a) the speed of the armature when 
the supply current is 40 A and 
the armature voltage is 450 V.
(b) the speed when the motor devel­
ops 50% of the full load torque
Characteristics of Electric Motors
with a diverter resistance of 
0.05Q connected in parallel with 
the field. The supply voltage is 
500 V.
(c) The machine is supplied with 
rated voltage and has a resistance 
of 0.15Q in series with the arma­
ture. Determine the speed when 
the motor develops 75% of rated 
torque.
1.17 A 250 V shunt motor with a constant 
field current of 3.2 A runs at a no- 
load speed of 600 rpm. The rotational 
inductance is 0.8 H, armature resis­
tance is 0.5Q and the system inertia is 
5 kgm2. Determine the braking times 
and currents if the motor is to be 
retarded to (a) 300 rpm (b) standstill, 
when braked with an external resis­
tance of 4.5Q (i) dynamically (ii) by 
reverse-current.
1.18 The 250 V shunt motor problem 1 
runs at no-load at a speed of 600 rpm. 
Find the braking time for the motor to 
be retarded to 300 rpm regeneratively
(a) by halving the armature voltage,
(b) by reducing the field circuit resis­
tance to half its value at 600 rpm. The 
field inductance is 4.5 H. Neglect 
armature inductance.
1.19 A 240 V dc shunt motor has an arma­
ture resistance of 0.06F2 and an emf 
constant of 2.2 V rad/s. The motor 
runs at a speed of 1000 rpm. It is 
overhauling a load with a torque of 
200 Nm
(a) Calculate the resistance to be 
inserted to lower the load at 
1000 rpm.
(b) If 
regenerative 
braking 
is 
employed, determine the mini­
mum speed at which the motor 
can hold the load.
1.20 A 200 V, 25 kW dc shunt motor 
runs at its rated speed of 1500 rpm. 
Reverse current braking is employed. 
The armature resistance is 0.15Q and 
the efficiency is 87%. Determine

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(a) the resistance required in series 
with the armature to limit the ini­
tial braking current to 2.5 times 
the rated value.
(b) the initial braking torque.
(c) the armature current and torque 
when the speed has fallen to 
500 rpm.
1.21 A 240 V dc shunt motor with field 
and armature resistances of 110£2 and 
0.05Q has the following magnetisa­
tion curve at 1000 rpm
7f ( A ) 
0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
E (V ) 
40 
80 
117 142 168 184 215 
Determine the speed torque curve of 
the motor when it is braked dynami­
cally by a resistance of 2.50.
1.22 A series motor having a combined 
field and armature resistance of 1.5Q 
between the terminals drives a load 
for which the torque is proportional 
to square of the speed. At 250 V the 
motor draws a current of 15 A and 
runs at 400 rpm. If the speed is to 
be decreased to 200 rpm, determine 
the value of resistance required in the 
armature circuit for the limiting cases 
of (a) linear variation of flux with 
field current, (b) constant flux due to 
saturation.
1.23 A series motor has an unsaturated 
field having armature and field resis­
tances of 0.5 and 0.7Q respectively. It 
drives a load for which the torque is 
proportional to the cube of the speed. 
The motor, while operating on a 250 V 
supply, takes 45 A and runs at 300 rpm. 
Determine the voltage required to 
raise the speed to 450 rpm.
1.24 A series motor having a combined 
series and field resistance of 1.5Q 
drives a load whose speed-torque 
characteristic is given by
T, = K N 2 Nm
where N is in rpm. At 200 V it runs at 
a speed of 300 rpm taking a current 
of 10 A. The speed of the load has
to be increased to 500 rpm; deter­
mine the voltage and current at the 
new speed by (a) neglecting satura­
tion (b) assuming the flux is almost 
constant.
1.25 A 400 V, 4 pole, 50 Hz motor delivers 
its rated load of 10 kW at 1450 rpm. 
It has a rotor resistance per phase of 
0.3Q. If an extra resistance of 2Q is 
connected in every phase, determine 
the speed of the motor. Assume con­
stant torque.
1.26 A 3-phase induction motor has a 
full load slip erf4%. It has resistance 
and standstill reactances per phase 
of 0.02 and 0.10 respectively. The 
motor drives a constant torque load. 
The speed has to be reduced to 50% 
of rated speed.
(a) Determine the percentage reduc­
tion in stator voltage.
(b) Repeat the problem if Td °c w2
1.27 The speed of a slip ring induction 
motor is varied by means of a resis­
tance in the rotor circuit. The motor 
drives a load whose torque is propor­
tional to square of the rotor speed. 
The details of the motor are: 3-phase, 
440 V, 50 Hz, 12 pole, 492 rpm, sta­
tor and rotor connected in star. The 
motor delivers a power of 200 k\V at 
rated speed. What resistance must be 
added to the rotor circuit to reduce the 
speed to 200 rpm? Assume the rotor 
resistance is 0.02£t/phase. The stator 
to rotor turns ratio is 1.2. Neglect sta­
tor impedance and rotational losses 
of the motor.
1.28 The rotor resistance and standstill 
reactance of a wound rotor induc­
tion motor are 0.15Q and 1.0£2 per 
phase respectively. The motor has a 
turns ratio of 1.2 The applied volt­
age per phase of the 8 pole stator is 
220 V at 50 Hz. Determine additional 
rotor resistance to produce maximum 
torque at (a) starting, (b) a speed of 
350 rpm.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
1.29 (a) Show that in a 3-phase induction 
motor
?dm
■S/,9m +  Sm/S 
2
where Td is breakdown torque 
5 is the slip for T,
Td is the torque at slip s
(b) A 3-phase, 50 Hz induction motor 
has a starting torque of 1,8 times 
full load torque and a break­
down torque of 2.5 times full 
load torque, while operating on 
its rated voltage rated frequency 
mains. Determine the speeds 
for maximum as well as rated 
torque.
1.30 A 3-phase, 4 pole, 50 Hz induction 
motor has a full load slip of 5% while 
operating at rated voltage and rated 
frequency. The rotor resistance and 
standstill reactance are r2 = 0,02Q 
and x2 = 0.15Q respectively. Find the 
speed of the motor when the voltage 
is reduced by 30% and the torque 
delivered by the motor is the rated 
full load torque.
1.31 A 3-phase 220 V, 50 Hz, six pole 
induction motor has the following 
parameters:
r, = 0.25Q 
x, — 0.4Q
r[ = 0.150 x'2 = 0 .16Q 
X =20£2
m
For a slip of 3%, determine the sta­
tor current, output power, torque and 
efficiency of the motor. Assume con­
stant losses = 350 W.
1.32 A 3-phase, 8 pole, 50 Hz induction 
motor has rotor parameters of r2 = 
0.15£l and x,. = 0.6Q.
Neglecting stator parameters and 
rotational losses, determine the speed 
of the motor when a rated voltage of 
234 V is applied. The load torque is 
proportional to square of the rotor 
angular velocity. The constant of pro­
portionality is 0.0136. If the voltage
Characteristics of Electric Motors
applied is reduced by 25%, determine 
the speed.
1.33 A 3-phase, 4 pole, 440 V, 50 Hz slip 
ring induction motor has a full load 
slip of 3%. The stator to rotor turns 
ratio =1.8. The rotor resistance and 
standstill reactance are 0.2Q and 
0.8Q respectively. Determine
(a) the maximum torque
(b) the slip and speed at which maxi­
mum torque occurs
(c) the resistance to be connected in 
the rotor circuit to give a starting 
torque of 0.8 times maximum 
torque.
1.34 An 8 pole, 500 V, star-connected, 
3-phase induction motor has a stator 
impedance of (0.0615 + y'0.21)Q and 
an equivalent rotor standstill imped­
ance of (0.065 + j  0.214)Q. The 
motor has a breakdown torque equal 
to 2.5 times the full load torque. The 
motor is running at its rated speed, 
delivering rated torque. The motor 
is braked with an extra resistance of 
1.75E>/phase Determine the initial 
braking current and torque for (a) 
dc dynamic braking and (b) plug­
ging. If the moment of inertia of the 
motor is 10 kg m2, determine the time 
taken for the motor to come to stand­
still from rated speed for both of the 
above cases.
1.35 A 220 V shunt motor runs at a speed 
of 1000 rpm with a constant field 
resistance of 110Q. The armature 
resistance and rotational inductances 
are 0.8 and 1.0 H respectively. The 
motor is dynamically braked with an 
external resistance of 5Q. Determine 
the time taken for the motor to attain 
speeds of 500 rpm and 200 rpm. 
Determine also the braking currents. 
The inertia of the rotating parts is 
6 kg m2.
1.36 The shunt motor of Example 35 runs 
at a no-load speed of 1000 rpm. 
The motor is braked by means of

The McGraw-Hill Companies
wm
Electric Drives
plugging. Determine the braking time 
and current to reduce the speed to (a) 
500 rpm and (b) standstill.
1.37 A 240 V, 20 hp, 1150 rpm dc shunt 
motor has an armature resistance of 
0.3fl The armature takes a current 
of 36.7 A for a given load. The rota­
tional inductance is 1.0 H and the 
inertia 5 kg m2. Neglecting armature 
inductance, find the braking time for 
speed reduction to 500 rpm regen- 
eratively (a) by halving the armature 
voltage, and (b) by doubling the field 
current.
1.38 A 3-phase, 415 V, 6 pole, 50 Hz 
induction motor has the follow­
ing parameters: 
ri 
= 
li2/phase, 
r2 = 1.5Q/phase, x, = 2.2£2/phase, 
x2 = 2.2f2/phase, all values referred 
to stator. The full load speed of the 
motor is 960 rpm. The motor is 
braked with an external resistance of 
2Q/phase (referred to stator) inserted
in the rotor circuit. Determine the 
initial braking torque for (a) dc rheo­
static braking, and (b) plugging.
1.39 If the moment of inertia of the motor 
in Problem 35 is 4 kg m2 determine 
the time taken by it to come to rest 
when plugged at a speed of 960 rpm.
1.40 The following data refer to a 12 pole, 
420 V, 50 Hz, 3-phase induction 
motor: r{ = 2.95Q, r{ — 2.08£2, x { = 
6.82Q, x'2 = 4.11Q, per phase. The 
full load slip of the motor is 3%. The 
stator is star-connected. The motor 
is dynamically braked. Determine 
the value of additional rotor resis­
tance needed to limit the current to 
three times the full load value at the 
instant of braking? What is the brak­
ing torque? With this value of resis­
tance in the rotor circuit the motor is 
braked by plugging. Determine the 
current and torque at the instant of 
plugging.
— Multiple-Choice Questions
1.1 
An unsaturated dc shunt motor runs 
at its rated speed when rated voltage 
is applied to it. If the supply voltage 
to the motor is reduced by 25% the 
speed of the motor
(a) increases by 25%
(b) remains the same
(c) decreases by 25%
(d) increases only slightly by an 
amount less than 25%
1.2 
Speed control of dc shunt motors by 
means of field weakening is suitable for
(a) constant power operation
(b) constant torque operation
(c) constant torque and constant 
power operation
(d) variable torque and variable 
power operation
1.3 
The polarity of the supply voltage to 
a dc motor running at rated speed is 
reversed. Then
(a) the motor reverses its direction 
of rotation
(b) the motor comes to a dead stop
(c) the 
motor 
speed 
increases 
slightly
(d) the motor continues to run in the 
same direction

The McGraw-Hill Companies
1.4 
The series field of a cumulatively 
compounded motor is short circuited 
when it runs at rated speed. The 
speed of the motor
(a) remains the same
(b) increases
(c) decreases
(d) becomes zero
1.5 
In an unsaturated dc series motor
(a) torque is proportional to arma­
ture current
(b) torque is proportional to field 
current
(c) torque is proportional to the 
square root of the armature cur­
rent
(d) torque is proportional to the 
square of the armature current.
1.6 
The starting torque of a three-phase 
induction motor
(a) increases with rotor resistance
(b) decreases with rotor resistance
(c) increases with rotor resistance up 
to a certain value and decreases 
as the rotor resistance increases 
further
(d) does not depend on rotor resis­
tance
1.7 
In a three-phase induction motor the 
maximum torque is
(a) directly proportional to the volt­
age
(b) inversely proportional 
to the
standstill rotor reactance
(c) directly 
proportional to the
standstill rotor reactance
(d) inversely proportional to the
rotor resistance
1.8 
A 
three-phase induction motor is
started by means of a star/delta 
switch. The starting current is
(a) three times the current with DOL
(b) 1/3 times the current with DOL
Characteristics of Electric Motors
(c) y/3 times with current with DOL
(d) 
1 / y/J times the current with 
DOL
1.9 
A three-phase induction motor has 
negligible stator impedance. When 
the motor has constant torque load, 
its speed is controlled by rotor resis­
tance The slip of the motor
(a) varies directly with rotor resis­
tance
(b) varies inversely with rotor resis­
tance
(c) does not depend on rotor resis­
tance
(d) varies directly with rotor stand­
still reactance.
1.10 A variable speed three-phase induc­
tion motor drive obtained by vary­
ing the applied voltage is suitable 
for
(a) driving constant torque loads
(b) driving fan type loads where 
T °c N 2
(c) driving loads where T <*= 1 / N 2
(d) driving all types of loads
1.11 An ideal synchronous motor has no 
starting torque because
(a) the rotor is made up of salient 
poles
(b) the relative velocity between the 
stator and rotor mmfs is zero
(c) the relative velocity between 
the stator and rotor mmfs is not 
zero
(d) The rotor contains dc winding
1.12 The locus of constant power fac­
tor points on a set of V-curves is 
called
(a) power circle
(b) excitation circle
(c) compounding curves
(d) open circuit characteristic

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
References
1.1 
Clayton, A.E., The performance and design o f direct current machines.
1.2 
Chillikin, M., Electric drive, Mir Publishers, Moscow.
1.3 
Say, M.G., The performance and design o f alternating current machines ’, Sir Isaac 
Pitman Ltd., London, 1958.
1.4 
Pillai, S.K., A first course on electrical drives, Wiley Eastern Ltd., 1982.
1.5 
Fitzgerald, A.E. and C. Kingsley Jr., Electric machinery, McGraw-Hill Book Com­
pany Ltd., London, Tokyo, 1961.
1.6 
Say, M.G. and E.O Taylor, Direct current machines, Pitman Publishing Company 
Ltd., London, 1980.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
Dynamics
of Electric Drives 
_______________ /
2.1 
INTRODUCTION
An industrial drive system basically consists of a mechanical working equipment 
or load, which has to be kept in motion to turn out mechanical work, equipment 
to do this job, called the prime mover, and a transmission to transfer energy from 
the prime mover to the mechanical load. Transmission equipment such as a gear­
ing or belt may be used to match the speeds of the prime mover and the load. The 
transmission may also be required sometimes to convert rotatory to linear motion 
and vice versa. Thus, a combination of a prime mover, transmission equipment 
and mechanical working load is called a drive.
I.C. engines, steam engine, turbines or electric motors may be used as prime 
movers. However, in industrial drives electric motors are predominantly employed 
for this purpose due to their inherent advantages, such as overload capacity, effi­
ciency, better dynamic and transient behaviour, availability in various sizes and 
designs compatible to load requirements, etc. An electric drive can be defined as 
a drive, using an electric motor as a prime mover, and ultimately converting elec­
trical energy to mechanical energy. The electric motors used may require some 
types of control equipment to achieve speed control and/or torque control. These 
controls make the motor work on a specific speed-torque curve, and may be oper­
ated using open loop or closed loop control.
The advantages and drawbacks of electric drives can be summarised as 
follows:
i. Availability of electric drives over a wide range of power from a few 
watts to mega watts.
ii. Ability to provide a wide range of torques over a wide range of speeds. 
DC motors are very versatile in this aspect. However, with the advent of 
thyristors and thyristor power converters, ac motors are also now capable 
of giving a smooth speed control.
iii. Adaptability to almost any type of environmental or operating condi­
tions, such as natural, forced ventilation, totally enclosed, submerged in 
liquids, exposed to explosive, or radioactive environment, etc.
iv. No hazardous fuel is required. No exhaust gases are emitted to pollute 
the environment. The noise level is also low.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
v. 
Electric drives have an overload capacity which can be made use of in 
selecting a smaller motor for short time duties. The efficiency is very 
good.
vi. The speed control of these motors is straightforward. Using a proper 
control they can be made to operate on a desired speed-torque curve 
to suit the mechanical load. Gearless coupling to the mechanical load, 
especially for low-speed rolling mills is possible. A smooth transition 
from one set of operating conditions to another is possible, with a high 
quality of dynamic performance.
vii. An electric drive is capable of operating in all four quadrants of the speed- 
torque plane, i.e. motoring and braking in either direction of rotation. 
Regenerative braking, in which the kinetic energy of the rotating parts 
is advantageously returned to the mains is possible only with electric 
drives.
viii. The motor can develop a steady torque because of symmetry, on a 
balanced sinusoidal supply. The operation is quiet. However, non- 
sinusoidal supplies to the motors when fed from converters may 
cause some torque pulsation due to the time harmonics of the supply 
voltage/current which may become objectionable particularly at low 
speed.
ix. Electric motors are available in a variety of design ratings to make them 
compatible to any type of load.
x. The drive can be started and accelerated to the design speed at very short 
notice. Full load may be applied almost immediately. There is no need 
for refuelling or warming up of the motor, and it requires little servicing. 
However, electric drives do have certain drawbacks:
They require a continuous power supply, particularly in vehicle propulsion if 
there is no power rail available. The power supply equipment needs to be carried 
on board, requires a lot of space, and is bulky.
Problems of saturation of iron and cooling make the electric motors have a 
lower power/weight ratio.
2.2 
CLASSIFICATION OF ELECTRIC DRIVES
Electric drives are normally classified into three groups, based on their develop­
ment, namely group, individual and multimotor electric drives.
If several groups of mechanisms or machines are organised on one shaft and 
driven or actuated by one motor, the system is called a group drive or shaft drive. 
The various mechanisms connected may have different speeds. Hence the shaft is 
equipped with multistepped pulleys and belts for connection to individual loads. 
In this type of drive a single machine whose rating is smaller than the sum total of 
all connected loads may be used, because all the loads may not appear at the same 
time. This makes the drive economical, even though the cost of the shaft with 
stepped pulleys may seem to be high.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
This method is rarely used in modem drive systems and has become of historical 
interest, because of the following disadvantages:
i. The efficiency of the drive is low, because of the losses occurring in sev­
eral transmitting mechanisms.
ii. The complete drive system requires shutdown if the motor requires ser­
vicing or repair.
iii. The location of the mechanical equipment being driven depends on the 
shaft and there is little flexibility in its arrangement.
iv. The system is not very safe to operate.
v. The noise level at the work spot is high.
If a single motor is used to drive or actuate a given mechanism and it does 
all the jobs connected with this load, the drive is called an individual drive. For 
example, all the operations connected with operating a lathe may be performed 
by a single machine. If these operations have to be performed at different speeds, 
transmission devices may be required. The efficiency may become poor over sev­
eral operations, due to power loss. In some cases it is possible to have the drive 
motor and driven load in one unit.
In a multimotor drive each operation of the mechanism is taken care of by 
a separate drive motor. The system contains several individual drives, each of 
which is used to operate its own mechanism. This type of drive finds application 
in complicated machine tools, travelling cranes, rolling mills, etc. Automatic con­
trol methods can be employed and each operation can be executed under optimum 
conditions.
2.3 
BASIC ELEMENTS OF AN ELECTRIC DRIVE
The above discussion makes clear that an electric drive system basically con­
sists of a mechanical load to which the required mechanical motion is imparted 
through a transmission drive usually equipped with gears or pulleys. Gearless 
transmission is possible sometimes, in which case there exists a direct cou­
pling between the motor and load. The system also comprises certain controls 
for the motor for precise adjustment of the speed-torque curve as demanded by 
the mechanical load. The elements of a typical variable speed electric drive are 
depicted in Fig. 2.1.
Power
supply
F ig . 2.1 
Elements of an electric drive

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The function of the control equipment is to set the desired speed or torque 
precisely. Until the advent of thyristors and associated power converters the speed 
control of motors had been achieved by means of contactors and relays which 
include or cut off the resistors. The development of power converters has made 
the control of motors quite straightforward. With this help the speed of ac motors 
is also smoothly variable. The elements of a drive system when converters are 
employed are shown in Fig. 2.2.
Power
supply
F ig . 2 .2  
Elements of an electric drive using a static thyristor power converter
Among these elements, the mechanical load and its characteristics are nor­
mally specified by means of its load diagram and torque-speed curve. A motor and 
its controls have to be selected to suit the given power supply and drive the load. 
We now discuss various types of loads and their characteristics in detail.
Mechanical System 
The mechanical system is coupled to the motor by means 
of a transmitting device. The motor has to develop a torque as required by the 
mechanical work to be carried out to drive the load, and the mechanical losses 
occurring in the system. A mechanical system is specified by a speed-torque 
curve. The motor while driving this mechanical load must provide enough torque 
to drive the load against losses like friction and to accelerate the load toque to 
the desired speed. Hence the load torque required by the load at the shaft has the 
following components.
i. Torque component to overcome friction and windage which accompa­
nies mechanical motion.
ii. Torque required to accelerate the load to the desired speed.
iii. Torque required to do the prescribed mechanical work, i.e. to run to the 
load at the desired speed.
The load torque seen by the motor at the shaft
T
l  
=  
T f „  
+
T
a  
+
T
W  
(2 . 1)
Mechanical motion is accompanied by frictional forces between the surfaces 
undergoing relative motion. Frictional forces of both the load and the transmission

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
equipment have to be considered. Also, the electromagnetic torque developed by 
the motor has to provide for its own friction and windage before appearing at the 
shaft to drive the load. The torque to overcome the friction should be delivered by 
the motor to keep the mechanism in motion when the system is on no load.
The friction existing in a mechanical system may be classified as follows:
i. 
Viscous friction: In this type of friction the torque required is directly 
proportional to the speed of rotation
Tb = Bco = B —  (2.2)
B 
A
where B is a constant of proportionality. This is depicted in Fig. 2.3. It 
occurs in well lubricated bearings and the laminar flow of lubricating 
liquids.
-T V
CO
-CO
(b) 
Dry friction
Coulomb friction
A
T
Fig. 2.3 
Types of friction in drive systems

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
ii. Coulomb friction: The torque required is independent of speed in this 
type of friction. It acts as a load torque in either direction and is also 
called dry friction. Viscous friction changes to coulomb friction at very 
low speeds.
iii. 
Static friction or stiction: Occurs due to the sticking nature of the sur­
faces. This is generally very small and can be neglected.
Windage Torque 
The torque required by the load when the air surrounding 
the rotating parts moves. It is normally proportional to the square of the speed. 
However, at normal speeds of operation it may be considered equivalent to 
viscous friction and the value of B may be taken to contain both friction and 
windage.
The working mechanism must be accelerated and brought to the desired speed. 
The motor should provide a torque at the shaft capable of accelerating the rotating 
parts against their inertia. Inertia, as seen by the motor shaft, includes the inertia 
of the mechanism as well as of transmission. The inertia of the rotating parts of 
the motor is taken care of by the internal torque developed by the motor before it 
appears as a shaft torque. Taking J  as the inertia of the mechanical system,
T
dm 
d 26
= J  
= J —-  Nm
d t
dr
(2.3)
A torque component may exist sometimes due to the torsional elasticity of the 
shaft. This has to be considered under transient conditions and is given by
Tq = K6e 
(2.4)
i.e. it is proportional to the torsion angle of coupling. The constant of proportion­
ality K is called the stiffness of coupling. Normally the shafts are perfectly stiff 
and this component does not exist. However, if it does, it represents a store of 
potential energy where T represents kinetic energy. Under ideal conditions with­
out friction, there exist oscillations leading to the shaft breaking.
The useful working torque required to do the mechanical job is a function of 
speed
rw = T(a>)
Therefore the total torque required at the shaft
^ 
r dm 
„ 
^
.
TL = J ------b Boo + T(m)
d t
Considering the acceleration of the motor against its inertia and friction, the elec­
tromagnetic torque developed is
T, = Tl + Jm ^
 + Bmco 
(2.7)
d t
Let us now study the various types of load torques that occur in industrial 
practice.
(2.5)
(2.6)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
The load torque may be 
constant at all speeds, as shown 
in Fig. 2.4 by curve (a).
This type of torque is rep­
resented by a compressor load 
and the speed-torque curve is 
as shown by the curve (b). This 
drive is unidirectional.
Another type of load has 
its torque proportional to the 
square of the speed, as shown in 
Fig. 2.5.
This speed-torque curve is found 
with pump or fan type loads.
Tw = 
(2.8)
The power developed at the 
motor shaft
P = Kco3 
(2.9)
This load is also unidirectional. 
It is required to run at constant 
speeds for a longer period of 
time or at several speed settings 
or over a range of speeds.
Another type of mechanical 
load requires constant power at 
all speeds
Pw = Twoj 
(2.10)
Fig. 2.4 
(a) Constant torque load
(b) Compressor load characteristic
(c) Constant power curve (load)
P constant at all 00. The torque- 
2*5 Fan tyPe ^oa^ characteristic TL °c co2
speed characteristic of such a
load is a rectangular hyperbola. This load is found with steel rolling mills, papers 
mills, etc. It occurs in transportation also. The torque-speed curve is shown in Fig.
2.4 (c). With certain types of loads, like winch drives, a constant torque is required 
when the mechanism is under standstill conditions. The direction of rotation may 
need to be reversed. These occur in ships when it is required to hold the ship in a 
particular location or to warp it through a lock gate.
From the above types of loads one can easily see that some operate only in 
one direction with no reversal of speed. In the speed-torque plane these are repre­
sented in the first quadrant. The forward driving of the mechanism corresponds to 
an operation in the first quadrant where motor draws electrical power to drive the 
mechanical load coupled to it.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 2.6 
Load torque proportional to speed
The mechanical load sometimes requires braking to bring it to rest quickly. 
During braking, which torque is achieved either by electrical or mechanical 
method is applied in the negative direction. Electrical methods are dynamic brak­
ing, eddy current braking, regenerative braking and plugging. In dynamic braking, 
the machine driving the load acts as a generator and the kinetic energy of the rotat­
ing parts is converted to electrical energy and dissipated in the resistances. In eddy 
current braking this energy is dissipated in eddy current losses or resistance losses 
in a specially constructed machine. The energy of the rotating masses, instead of 
being dissipated, is returned to the mains in regenerative braking. Another kind of 
electrical braking is called plugging or reverse current braking. A motor acts as an 
electric brake. The motor develops a negative torque whose nature is to produce a 
torque which would oppose the direction of rotation already existing. In mechani­
cal braking, the energy of the rotating parts of the system is dissipated as heat due 
to friction in the mechanical brake coupled to the system.
Operation in the second quadrant represents braking, because in this part of the 
torque-speed plane the direction of rotation is positive and the torque is negative. 
The machine operates as a generator developing a counter torque which opposes 
motion. The K.E. of the rotating parts is available as electrical energy which may 
be pumped to the mains or in dynamic braking, dissipated in some resistances.
In the third quadrant which corresponds to motor action in the reverse direction 
both speed and torque have negative values, while power is positive. Operation is 
similar to that in the first quadrant, with direction of rotation reversed.
In the fourth quadrant the torque and speed have opposite signs—positive 
and negative respectively. The operation can be examined in either of two ways.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
The motion in this quadrant may be under the action of load itself. The motor 
tends to attain dangerously high speeds. The motor must develop a torque which 
opposes the acceleration due to load. The motor acts as a brake. This quadrant cor­
responds to braking in reverse motoring. The transition to this may be also from 
the third quadrant if there is a tendency of the motor to accelerate in the reverse 
direction. The generator torque developed arrests the acceleration. This situation 
occurs when a hoist is lowering the load. These operations in all four quadrants 
are depicted in Fig. 2.7.
c o  A
I
Regenerative
braking
Forward
motoring
IV
>
Fl
Reverse
motoring
Plugging
co
Fig. 2.7 
Four quadrant operation
co
Braking
(regeneration)
Upward
Compressor, pump and fan type loads require operation in the first quad­
rant only, since their operation is unidirectional. They are one quadrant drive 
systems.
Transportation drives require operation 
in both directions. The method of braking 
depends upon the conditions of availability 
of power supply. Braking may be electri­
cal or mechanical. If regeneration is neces­
sary, operation in all four quadrants may 
be required. If not, operation is restricted 
to quadrants 1 and 3. Dynamic braking or 
mechanical braking may be employed.
In hoist drives a four quadrant operation 
invariably occurs. The speed-torque curve 
is depicted in Fig. 2.8. The operations are 
shown in Fig. 2.9. The first quadrant repre­
sents the operation of the hoist while going 
up. The load in the cage has to be moved
Downward
T,
Over hauling 
by load
Fig. 2.8 
Speed torque diagram of 
hoist

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
empty 
loaded
Fig. 2.9 (b) 
Four quadrant operation of a motor driving hoist
against gravity and a motoring torque occurs. In the second quadrant the cage 
movement remains upwards. The load torque is not there because of the absence 
of load. Under the action of the counter weight, very high speeds may result, 
causing regeneration. For operation in this quadrant, and as a safety arrange­
ment, a mechanical brake is provided, which brakes the mechanism in case of 
power failure. It also helps to hold the suspended load stationary at any point and

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
prevents excessive acceleration Dynamic braking may also be applied for quick 
stopping.
In the third quadrant the direction of rotating reverses; the load is lowered by 
the hoist. In case of acceleration of the load under gravity, there is a slight transi­
tion to the fourth quadrant, wherein regenerative braking or dynamic braking may 
occur, limiting the speed of motion.
The load moves downwards in the fourth quadrant. It overhauls the motor and 
may cause regeneration. Under gravity the acceleration might result in dangerous 
speeds. Therefore the motor is made to act as a brake and develop a torque to run 
the motor in the positive direction, opposite to the load.
Typical speed-torques of an induction motor and dc motor are shown in Fig. 
2.10. Under steady conditions of the drive the operation is restricted to 1, 3, and 
4 quadrants. Regenerative braking takes place in the second quadrant under tran­
sient conditions. Plugging may take place in the second quadrant for motoring 
operation in the third quadrant.
Fig. 2.10 
Typical speed-torque characteristic of an induction motor
In some types of loads the load torque depends on the position of the load dur­
ing motion. For example, a train moving up a gradient will have different torque 
compared to one moving down it, or on a level track or along a curve. Another 
example of such loads is the hoisting mechanisms where the weight of the rope 
affects the load torque, depending upon the position of the load. It may act as a 
load, requiring power from the drive motor, or as an effort moving the load in the 
required direction. This might cause a jerky operation of the hoist and needs to be 
compensated by tail ropes.
While selecting a motor for driving a load, it is necessary to consider the 
variation of load torque with both speed and time. The torque-speed curve nor­
mally decides the type of motor, whereas the variation of load with time decides

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
the rating of the motor. Loads that occur in industrial practice can be classified 
depending upon their variation with time, which is specified by the load diagram. 
A load whose torque is independent of speed may be a continuous load or appear­
ing intermittently in a periodic manner. A fan type load where T 
N 2 may also 
be continuous or occurring intermittently. Hence loads may also be classified 
depending upon the duty they have to perform. The classification, according to 
variation with time, is as follows:
i. 
Continuous constant loads: These loads occur for a long time under the 
same conditions, e.g. fan type loads.
ii. 
Continuous variable type loads: The load is variable over a period of 
time, but occurs repetitively for a longer duration. It occurs in metal cut­
ting lathes, conveyors, etc.
iii. Pulsating loads: Certain types of loads exhibit a torque behaviour 
which can be thought of as a constant torque superimposed by pulsa­
tions. They are present with reciprocating pumps and all loads having 
crank-shafts.
iv. Impact loads: Peak loads occur at regular intervals of time, e.g. in roll­
ing mills, forging hammers, etc. Motors driving these loads are equipped 
with flywheels for load equalisation.
v. Short time intermittent loads: The load appears periodically in identical 
duty cycles, each consisting of a period of application of load and one 
of rest. Cranes and hoisting mechanisms are examples of this type of 
loading.
vi. Short time loads: A constant load appears on the drive for a short time 
and the system rests for the remainder. Battery charging and household 
equipment offer such loads.
These types of loads are depicted in Fig. 2.11.
Equivalent Systems 
The load may be coupled to the shaft of the driving motor 
either directly or through a transmission system comprising, gears, pulleys or 
belts. The latter is mainly to match the speeds of the motor and the load. If it 
is impossible to select a motor having the same speed as the load, the two nay 
be running at different speeds. In such cases they are coupled to each other by 
means of gears or belts. While analysing such systems it is necessary to refer all 
the torques and inertia to a common shaft, e.g. for convenience, the load torque 
and load inertia are referred to the motor shaft. This is equivalent to direct cou­
pling between the motor and load. This is similar to referring the quantities of 
primary and secondary winding of a transformer to one side while analysing the 
same using the equivalent circuit.
The moments of inertia are referred to a common shaft on the assumption that 
the K.E. remains unchanged. Consider a motor coupled to a load of inertia./,. The 
speeds of rotation of the machine and load are co] and co2 respectively. The gear 
ratio is NJN2, as shown in Fig. 2.12(a).

The McGraw Hill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
Fig. 2.11 
Some typical common time varying loads
(b) One stage gear
Fig. 2.12 
Transmission using gears

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
If J2 is the referred value of the moment of inertia
J  
= J
J'l = J-,
f 
A2
CO2_
V œi J
(2.11)
(2.12)
The torques are referred, based on the equivalence of power. Assuming an effi­
ciency of transmission 
we have
T2co2
T2co\
n
n  = t2
( co2 ^
1 y V
The speeds are referred using the relation
co2N\ — co2N 2
or
CO 2 — CUj — C02 
m2
1 N, ^
v V  /
w, 
N2
Similarly, friction B2 can referred to the motor shaft as
B'2 = B2
Using the relation between the speeds and the gear ratio, we have
r 2 = j 2
( 
\ 2 
co2
K C°] V
N A
U  = r,
B% = B-,
\ N i J  
Nt ^ 
k N~2J
1
>1
N,'
Therefore the load torque referred to the motor shaft is
n  = Jo
<N
3
d?
+ Br co2 '
V 0J\ J
d t
l 0Ji J
CO,
T ' 
=  J 2 ^ -  +  
at
(2.13)
(2.14)
(2.15)
(2.16)
(2.17)
(2.18)
(2.19)
(2.20)
(2.21)
(2.22)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
If the system has several stages of transmission, as shown in Fig. 2.12(b), the 
referred values of torque, inertia and friction can be obtained as
n  = T,
cl
3 1
co2
3
V___
V 0J2 y
CO)
V 
y
1 
1 
1
\ 2
r  = J,
co
V C02 )
(  COo ^
I 0Jl
(
m m m
\2
C0 \
V 
J
+
^ CO'-, ^ / COi
V 
J
m
(2.23)
(2.24)
B' = B\ '^n_V ^ 2  V
y
/ m.
V 
2
(2.25)
If, in a mechanism, there is 
translational motion of a force 
driven by a rotating shaft, the 
quantities have to be referred to 
the rotating shaft and referred 
values of torque and inertia 
obtained. The torque as seen by 
the shaft when a force is moved 
upwards is determined on the 
basis of equal powers.
Therefore, referring to Fig. 2.13,
X ÍL 
Vl
(2.26)
where Fl is the force lifted, Vl is the velocity and rj { is the efficiency.
Therefore torque
r  = Ç V l
0-ltfL
Nm
(2.27)
The inertia at the motor shaft is determined from the equivalence of the kinetic 
energies
— m Vl 
2
— J'co\ 
2
(2.28)
J ’ is the inertia referred to the shaft
M
2 _ J' M
v ffll y
g
V 0 jl 2
(2.29)
It is therefore possible to reduce a complex drive system having several 
moments of inertia to a simpler system which is directly coupled to the motor. 
The dynamic performance of this system is a replica of the performance of the 
complex one.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
2.4 
DYNAMIC CONDITIONS OF A DRIVE SYSTEM
Dynamic or transient conditions occur in electric drive systems when the operat­
ing point changes from one steady state condition to another, following a change 
introduced in the system variables. These variables may be mechanical, such as 
speed, torque, etc. or electrical, such as voltage, current etc.
These conditions generally exist during starting, braking and speed reversal of 
the drive. The dynamic conditions arise in a variable speed drive when transition 
from one speed to another is required. The drive may also have transient behav­
iour if there are sudden changes of load, supply, voltage or frequency.
The energy storing elements in the drive system, such as mechanical inertia 
(J) and electrical inductance (L), are responsible for the delay in response follow­
ing a disturbance and for variations in transient behaviour.
The investigations of the transient behaviour or dynamic conditions of a drive 
are significant in the design of controllers. A knowledge of the dynamic behav­
iour is essential for the design of control circuits, for the correct choice of motors 
and for reducing losses during the starting and stopping of drives. One aims at 
achieving a drive which operates at optimum speed and takes the minimum pos­
sible time for settling down to the new steady-state after the initial disturbance. 
This is with a view to increasing the productivity of the drive. Varying parameters 
such as voltage, frequency and machine constants also influences the transient 
behaviour and a knowledge of this variation is necessary for a suitable choice of 
these parameters.
The dynamic behaviour of a drive has a close relation to its stability. A drive is 
said to be stable if it can go from one state of equilibrium to another following a 
disturbance in one of the parameters of the system. Stability can be identified as 
either steady-state or transient. The conditions of stability depend on the operating 
point. Stability will be discussed in detail in later sections.
Transient conditions normally exist in a motor and drive system for a short 
interval of time. The change in thermal processes during this interval is not sig­
nificant due to the large value of the thermal time constants compared to the elec­
trical and mechanical time constants. Therefore, it can be assumed that changes in 
thermal conditions do not affect transient behaviour.
In drives which have infrequent starting and stopping as well as very simple 
control circuits, transient behaviour need not be considered.
The fundamental equation of motion giving a balance between the various torques 
in the drive may have to be considered while investigating the dynamic behaviour.
As has been stated earlier, any complex mechanical system driven by an 
electric motor can be simplified and represented by a single moment of inertia,
friction and load, all referred to the 
motor shaft. A typical equivalent 
system is shown in Fig. 2.14. The 
dynamics of the drive can be inves­
tigated using the torque balance 
equation given by
Ai> W m
d', W m
Fig. 2.14 
Equivalent systems

The McGraw Hill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
T a -  J d co 
d t
+ Bco + 7t
(2.30)
where J= (JM +J')
B = (Bm + B')
The equation of motion considers the motor inertia JM and the inertia of the load 
as seen by the shaft (/'). It also considers the friction of the motor Bm and fric­
tion of the load referred to the motor shaft (B' |). T\ is the load torque referred to 
the motor shaft. Considering Boo also as a part of the load torque, we can further 
simplify the equation
or
Td = 
J  —  + Tl 
d t
(2.31)
r d co 
^  
„
J ----= Td -  Tl
dt 
d 
L
If the electromagnetic torque developed is greater than the load torque including 
the friction torque, the motor accelerates.
dm
i.e., if 
Ta > T ;
dt
> 0, 
m increases
If the electromagnetic torque developed is less than the load torque including fric­
tion, the motor decelerates.
i.e., if 
Td < rL; 
<0, 
m decreases
dt
This situation also occurs if Td is negative, opposing the motion, as in the case of 
braking.
If both torque components are equal, the motor runs at constant speed.
i.e., if
oo = constant
As has been stated previously, TL comprises load torque as well as friction. The load 
torques occurring in mechanical systems may be passive or active. If a torque 
always opposes the direction of motion of the drive motor it is called a passive 
torque. The nature of friction is to oppose the motion, whatever be its direction. 
This has to be properly taken care of in writing down the equation. If the sign of 
drive rotation changes, these torques also change. The torques occurring due to 
friction, metal cutting, etc. are passive torques.
Active torques, on the other hand, oppose the motion in one direction and aid 
it in the other. These are associated with the potential energy of the moving parts 
of the system. They may therefore be either positive or negative, depending upon 
whether they oppose or aid the motion. The motor has to provide sufficient torque 
when these torques oppose the motion. In the other direction they aid the motor­
ing torque. As an example, the potential energy of the cage of a crane or hoist is

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
associated with an active torque. While going up it resists the motion and while 
coming down it aids it. Active torques retain their sign, whatever the sign of rota­
tion in the dynamic equation.
J  
is the inertial torque having a positive sign (opposes motion) during
acceleration and negative sign (aids motion) during retardation. It exists only dur­
ing a dynamic condition. However, the dynamic equation is determined by the 
signs of Td and Tl .
The dynamic equation of the drive can be written based on the foregoing con­
siderations, which may be summarised as:
Td is positive during motoring
Tx is negative for passive torques during motoring
rd 
- T h —
The sign of (Td -  T{ ) determines the sign of 
; If (Td -  T{) is positive accelera­
tion takes place. 
t
If the direction of rotation is reversed the equation of motion is
d co
-Td + Th = - J d t
or
(Td - T h) = J dm
dt
If Tl is an active torque
dm
(Td -  Tl ) = J  —  when the potential energy due to Tx opposes Td
d t
ta + r, -  j —— when it aids T. 
d t 
d
In general, the equation of motion can be written as
dm
± ta + r, = j
d t
(2.32)
The sign of Td depends upon whether it is motoring (+) or braking (-). T{ has a 
sign depending upon whether it is passive or active. Using this equation we can 
investigate the torque-speed of the system during dynamic conditions. The dura­
tion of dynamic behaviour can also be obtained.
2.5 
STABILITY CONSIDERATIONS OF ELECTRICAL DRIVES
From the preceding discussion it is clear that a drive is in its state of equilib­
rium at constant speed if the developed motor torque is equal to the sum of load 
torque and friction. The basis of the investigation of the dynamics of a drive from 
one steady-state equilibrium condition to another has already been discussed in 
detail. Electrical drives have closed loop control systems. Investigations on the

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
stability of drives must include all the controls available along with the motor and 
mechanical system. A system is in an equilibrium condition, if there is no distur­
bance. In the presence of a disturbance the equilibrium conditions are disturbed 
and the drive tries to take a new equilibrium position under the new input condi­
tions. The system is said to be stable if sometime after the appearance of a distur­
bance it attains a new equilibrium condition. The system is said to be unstable if 
it comes to rest or has a continuous increase in speed following the disturbance, 
i.e. the system is unable to take up a new equilibrium position. The disturbances 
may be external or internal to the drive.
The stability of a drive may be affected very much by the parameters of 
controllers, motors, etc. A system which is stable for one set of parameters may 
become unstable for another set. The stability investigations of a drive system 
having closed loop controls and represented by means of a block diagram will 
be discussed in detail in a later chapter dealing with the control techniques of 
drives.
The stability of a drive is influenced by the inertia of the rotating masses and 
inductances of the motor, in the same manner as the transient behaviour. There­
fore in cases of sudden changes of parameter causing the drive to change its equi­
librium state, the effects of these components cannot be ignored. The stability 
behaviour of the drive taking into account the effects of these parameters is called 
transient stability. On the other hand, if the changes from one state of equilibrium 
to another take place too slowly to have the effects of the above parameters, the 
stability conditions refer to steady-state stability.
Before discussing the stability characteristics of a drive in a closed loop or 
open loop operation it is first necessary to investigate the stability of the motor 
driving the load. The motors have both steady-state and transient stability condi­
tions existing in them.
Stability Behaviour of Electrical Machines— Steady-state Stability 
The nature of 
response of an electrical machine between two states of equilibrium following a 
disturbance, which would also refer to the nature of its stability, can be obtained 
by solving the differential equations of the motor along with the dynamic equa­
tion of motion. The time response so obtained gives information regarding the 
transient response as well as stability. The motor is stable if the transient portion 
of the response dies down with time. As the equations are non-linear they are 
linearised using the method of small signals about an operating point. These 
equations give operating point stability. This tedious investigation is necessary to 
get an insight into the steady-state stability and to develop criteria for it in cases 
of disturbances. Stability studies can be easily done using the steady-state speed- 
torque curves assuming that in cases of disturbances the operating point moves 
along these curves.
The steady-state stability can be explained with reference to Fig. 2.15, in 
which some typical speed-torque curves of a motor and load are shown. Consider 
the situation at point A. A small decrease in speed is followed by an increase in 
the motor torque which accelerates the load and brings it back to the equilibrium

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 2.15 
Steady-state stability of induction motor
point. Note also that after the disturbance has occurred, the motor torque is 
greater than the load torque. In reaching the point of equilibrium, the drive may 
overshoot it, with further increase in speed. The motor torque decreases and 
becomes smaller than the load torque. Under these conditions no more accelera­
tion is possible and the drive retards. It finally comes to a state of equilibrium 
after several oscillations. In the case of an induction motor the oscillations are 
effectively damped out by the induced currents in the squirrel cage. The motor 
successfully returns to its original point of equilibrium in case of a small increase 
in speed also. It is stable at point A. Jj > Td following an increase in speed which 
effectively brakes the motor.
Consider the operation at B. A small decrease in speed decreases the torque 
developed by the motor. Further, from the figure we see that the load torque 
is greater than the torque developed by the motor. This causes further retarda­
tion. The process being cumulative, the motor finally comes to rest. If there 
is a small increase in speed, the developed torque increases, which acceler­
ates the load torque. This process is also cumulative and the speed goes on 
increasing—the motor does not return to its original operating point. Point B 
is unstable.
Following the reasoning given for point A, the operation at point C is stable. At 
point D, even though the torque developed decreases with decrease in speed it is 
able to accelerate the load, because Td> Tr  The motor reaches its original point 
of operation. It is also a stable point.
Taking these discussions into consideration, it can be concluded that the motor 
is stable if the change in motor torque following a decrease in speed is such that 
it is greater than the load torque, or smaller than the load torque following an 
increase in speed.
In the foregoing discussions, the load torque is constant at the operating point. 
If in a motor-load combination a change in speed can bring about changes in the 
motor as well as load torques, stable operation can be envisaged only if the change

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
in the load torque is greater (smaller) than the change in the motor torque in case 
of an increase (decrease) in speed. In the former case excess load torque has a 
tendency to brake the motor, whereas in the latter case excess motor torque has a 
tendency to accelerate the rotor so that the system is stable again.
These conclusions can also be drawn on the basis of the dynamic equation of 
motion applied to the operating point.
Let the motor be operating at a developed torque Td and a load torque T{. The 
speed of operation is (o. Let there be small variations of STL and STd following a 
speed variation Sco. Before the disturbance occurs we have
J d co 
d t
After the disturbance we have
J
_d 
d t
\
(co + Sco)
/
= (Td +STd) - ( T L +STL)
(2.33)
(2.34)
From these equations we get
J  —  (Sco) = 3Td -  0Tl 
d t
This can be written as
(2.35)
j
±
{ s a )  =  (
^
d t 
\ d co
(
(ho -
d rT \
L
d co
ôœ
(236)
assuming that the increments are so small that they can be expressed as linear 
functions of speed.
Solving this equation we get
Sco = (Sco)0e
dr, arni
d(x> 
dco
(2.37)
where (<5m) is the initial disturbance in speed. The speed transient can be obtained 
from Eq. 2.37. The transient will die down to zero if
' dTL 
dTm '
K dt 
d(jo j
(2.38)
making the exponential term decrease with time. When this condition is satis­
fied, the motor returns to its original operating point and the machine is said to 
be stable. Else, the speed transient increases continuously and the machine is 
unstable.
From the condition given in Eq. 2.38 we can conclude that a machine is stable 
if its load speed-torque curves are such that for
i. a decrease in speed, the motor torque is greater than the load torque.
ii. an increase in speed, the load torque is greater than the motor torque.

The McGrawHill Companies
Electric Drives
From the condition it can also be seen that a decrease (increase) in speed must 
bring about a greater (smaller) change in the motor torque than in the load torque 
so that the machine can be accelerated (retarded) under the influence of the motor 
torque (load torque) to its original point of operation.
Transient Stability The steady-state stability criterion discussed above assumes 
that the deviations in speed and torque follow the steady-state speed-torque curves 
of the motor and load. Also, the changes are so slow that the energy storage ele­
ments, such as inertia and inductance, do not affect the variation while going from 
one state of equilibrium to the other. However, if the changes are very fast the 
effects of these parameters cannot be ignored. In that case the results of steady- 
state stability are optimistic. A machine which is stable in the steady-state may 
lose its stability under transient conditions when the effects of inertia are consid­
erable. A motor can be loaded to its maximum capacity of torque or power when 
it is slowly or gradually loaded. For transient type of loads the motor cannot reach 
this limit because of kinetic energy of the rotating parts also has to be considered. 
Therefore the stability information during transient conditions is different from 
steady-state stability information. A machine which can be loaded to its maxi­
mum power under steady-state conditions may not be loaded to the same extent 
under transient loading conditions.
A knowledge of transient stability is essential for the proper design of flywheel 
and other associated controls.
In a synchronous motor drive, the steady-state speed and torque of the motor 
and load may be such that the steady-state stability criterion does not provide
any reliable information regarding its 
stability. Therefore it is necessary to 
study its transient stability.
It is well known that a synchro­
nous motor is very sensitive to sudden 
changes of load and prone to what is 
called hunting.
(The oscillatory behaviour of a 
rotor about a mean torque angle posi­
tion is called hunting.) The nature of
_ 
_ 
. 
. 
A 
, 
hunting can be discussed with refer-
Fig. 2.16 
Power angle characteristics of a 
0
synchronous motor 
ence t0 the Power an§le characteristic
shown in Fig. 2.16.
The power developed by synchronous motor, neglecting armature resis­
tance is
F V
Pd = —k— sin 5
X
assuming a cylindrical rotor. Under a steady-state this may reach a maximum 
value

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
El_
when 
S = — 
2
which cannot, however, be reached under transient conditions. Let the machine 
be operating at a power angle equal to S, giving a power of P. The torque balance 
equation may be replaced by the power balance equation due to the constancy of 
speed. The power developed in the motor is equal to the load power and damp­
ing power. The latter may be neglected while deriving the criteria for transient 
stability.
When a load is suddenly applied to the shaft of a synchronous motor there is 
a momentary slowing down of the motor. This causes the rotor to fall back from 
its old position in order to develop the required torque. Till the rotor attains its 
new position the rotor releases the kinetic energy to drive the increased load 
during retardation. The rotor angle increases to a value where sufficient torque 
is developed to drive the load. At this position rotor speed is less than synchro­
nous speed. The rotor does not remain at this new equilibrium position. It has 
to be brought back to its synchronous speed by replenishing the kinetic energy 
released by the rotating mass. Therefore the torque angle increases further. The 
torque developed is more than the load torque. Excess torque accelerates the 
rotor and eventually reduces the torque angle. The rotor may overshoot the equi­
librium position. The rotor thus oscillates like a torsional pendulum about the 
equilibrium position corresponding to new torque. The motor operation is stable
71
when the torque angle changes within 
However, during oscillations or hunt­
ing of the motor there is a possibility that the motor has a torque angle greater
71
than “ • The motor may be stable or may lose its stability. In such cases the sta­
bility of the drive can be estimated 
using equal area criterion. Refer­
ring to Fig. 2.17, So is the load angle 
before the load is applied. Sm is the 
2 
mean position of oscillation and Sf is 
p1 
the final value of torque angle during 
oscillation. For the machine to retain 
stability and remain in synchronism 
the value of A2 > A r If A2 < A { the 
motor loses its synchronism.
Fig. 2.17 
Equal area criterion
Worked Examples
a
 Use the equal area criterion to determine the maximum load that can be 
suddenly thrown on to a synchronous motor without affecting stability as­
sume that the motor is initially under no-load.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The power developed by the motor
^rnax ^ín 3
where 3 is the torque angle.
As the motor is on no-load, 3 = 0. When the load is thrown on to the motor the 
corresponding value of 3m should be such that
area OCD = area ADE
Area OCD = Area OCDD' -  Area ODD'. Let the load be
A 
rc-A
Pi 
■ 4, - J ^ a s sin 
) = J Pmax sin <5 
0
-(P d V - 24))-
After integrating and simplifying we get
PÁ = Prmax
1 +  COS 3m
n
But Pd = Pmax sin 3m, substituting and simplifying we have
2 
7i — 3m
Solution is by trial and error method to obtain 3 . The value of 3 = 46.2°.
The value of load that can be thrown on the motor Pd' = 0.722/Jliax.
This clearly shows that the equilibrium position of the rotor is well below 90° 
and transient overload capacity is 72.2% of the steady state overload capacity.
Q
A cylindrical rotor synchronous motor has 2p poles and a synchronous 
speed nrps. The moment of inertia is Jkg.m2. Show that the time period of 
natural undamped oscillation is given by
(
t = 12.88
Jm
V /2
2p ■ £ s • rs /
where Es is the induced voltage and /  is the short circuit current.

The McGrawHill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
The period of oscillation of a 4,000 kVA, 6,600 V, 50 Hz, 4 pole, 3 phase syn­
chronous machine having a synchronous reactance of 20% is found to be 1.25 sec­
onds. The machine operates on infinite busbars. Determine the moment o f inertia 
of the motor.
3 e 2
Solution 
Synchronising power = - ^ - s in # s • sin 3; 0S = 90°, 3 = <50 is very
Zs
small at no-load. There Ps = 3£ s • /s • 3 = 3Zss/s 
per mechanical radian
P 
0
Kl = -5- = 3 EH
( 2 p
\
<5m- Synchronising power
V z 7
Ó,
'SXS
2 P \
m
V
o 
i 
• • 
„
3
 E fiflp )
Synchronising torque a s = -----—------
2 
2nns
Undamped natural frequency of oscillation =
1 
Kc
2n V J
= period of oscillation
T = 12.88
Jm
\(2p)E srs
Show that the condition of stability for large angular deviations of a syn­
chronous machine is given by
d S
d t
= 0
Using this derive the equal area criterion for transient stability of a synchronous 
motor.
Solution 
The dynamic equation of motion of the motor is such that the mechani­
cal power developed is used in accelerating the rotor and driving mechanical load. 
Therefore
+ ^dyn +
The mechanical power developed comprises two parts: (a) damping power which 
varies linearly with change in load angle, (b) synchronising power which varies 
directly with load angle
pm = P * f  + r(S )
at
d^(5 
oo
The dynamic power Pdm = - P ; ----- and P . - J — where P is pairs of poles
d t2 
P
and oj = 2n n . Therefore the equation of motion is
m
s
 
1
Pj —7 - + Pd —  + Ps(S) = PL 
1 
At2 
At 
s 
L
Assuming that there is no damping
Pd = 0

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
We have
d2õ
dt2 + Ps(S) = PL
But P(d) = P sin S. Using which we have
d2<5
p , 
+  Pm  S Í n  
=  P l
from which
d2<5 
d t2
-  Pm sin Õ 
P;
when the load is suddenly thrown on the motor the motor retards, releasing the 
kinetic energy of the rotating parts to meet the load requirement. When the rotor 
angle reaches the angle corresponding to the new load, the motor is at subsyn- 
chronous speed and an accelerating torque is developed to bring it to synchronous 
speed. Thus the rotor oscillates about a mean S corresponding to the new load. 
The energy released from the rotating parts should be balanced by the acceler­
ating torque. Otherwise the value of S goes on changing, leading to instability. 
For stable conditions to be realised the load angle should stop changing at some
instant of time during oscillation, i.e., —  must be zero. If in the variation of cl
finally —  = 0, stability is assured, 
dt
dt
_d
dt
d<5 f
d / 7
„ d2<5 d<5 
„
= 2 — -----= 2
dt2 dt
V
PL -  Pm sin S 
P,
\ 6Ô
dt
(^L -  
sin S) 
P
dS
j c
But for stability —  = 0. Therefore
dt
<5f
1
2(PL -  Pm sin S) 
R
6S = 0
concluding that the energy released from the rotating parts should be exactly bal-
d(5
anced or replenished so that the motor attains synchronism at which —  = 0. If 
the oscillation of the rotor is about a mean position Sm we have 
^t
I
2 (Pl -  Pm sin S) 
R
dó
This is the energy released by the motor given by area in Fig. 2.17
1f 2(Pl -  Pm sin 3 )
R
d S

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
is the energy replenished to bring the rotor to synchronous speed and it is the area 
A2 Fig. 2.17. These two are equal for transient stability. Thus equal area criterion 
can be used to investigate transient stability. Also referring to figure if
I
2(Pl -  Pm sin Ô)
Pi
( A )
dá > I
2(Pl -  Pm sin (5)
Pi
dá
the synchronous operation and hence stability is assured. If A = A , the machine 
is just stable. If A2 < A r the machine is unstable.
Problems
■\
J
2.1 
A gear train system used to drive a 
load is shown in Fig. P2. Assuming 
the ideal conditions of no back lash 
and no elastic deformation in the sys­
tem determine the equivalent inertia 
and equivalent friction referred to
(a) motor shaft,
(b) load shaft.
2.2 
Show that the torque to inertia ratios 
referred to the motor shaft and to the 
load shaft differ from each other by a 
factor of N, where N is the gear ratio. 
Show that the torque squared to iner­
tia referred to the motor shaft or load 
shaft are the same.
2.3 
Figure P2 shows a motor lifting a 
load by means of a winch. The weight
lifted is 1500 kg at a velocity of 
0.75 m/s. The motor runs at a speed 
of 1000 rpm. The inertia of the winch 
drum and motor are 1.8 kg.mf and 3.6 
kg.m2 respectively. Calculate the total 
load torque of the system referred to 
motor shaft.
2.4 
Use the considerations of stability to 
show the equilibrium of operation of 
the motor at points P{, P2, P and P4. 
If there is a point of instability can 
you suggest the modification to motor 
speed torque curve to make the opera­
tion stable? Based on the conclusions 
suggest a method to determine the 
speed torque curve of the motor in the 
first, second and fourth quadrants.
Fig. P.2

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
2.5 
Use equal area of criterion to estimate 
the stability of a synchronous motor. 
Use the same to discuss the effects of 
damper windings on the oscillation of 
a synchronous motor.
2.6 
Set up the dynamic equation of a syn­
chronous motor during hunting and 
determine the expressions for natural 
frequency of oscillation and damped 
frequency of oscillation.
Determine the natural frequency of 
oscillation of a 50 Hz, 20 pole, 1000 
kW, 6.6 kV synchronous motor hav­
ing a total inertia of 2600 kg.m2 and 
a torque angle of 30° when the power 
developed is 1000 kW. If the damp­
ing power coefficient is 2.5 kW/elec. 
degree, determine the damped fre­
quency of oscillation.
2.7 
A synchronous motor connected to 
an infinite bus drives a mechanical 
load. When the motor is loaded to 
its rated capacity the torque angle is 
45°. The load is suddenly increased 
to a value which corresponds to 
a torque angle of 60°. Determine 
whether the motor is stable or not. 
Determine also the maximum addi­
tional load that can be suddenly 
thrown on to the motor without 
affecting stability.
2.8 
A 
cylindrical 
rotor 
synchronous 
motor having an inertia J  is operat­
ing on constant voltage constant
frequency busbars of voltage V. Show 
that its natural period of oscillation
/SSIB
tn = 9 .1 0 /7 c
J
f h c V
A 10 MVA, 11 kV, 3 phase, 6 pole, 
50 Hz star connected synchronous 
motor operates on an infinite bus. 
Its short circuit current is 3 times the 
full load current. Its natural period of 
oscillation is 1.4 seconds. Determine 
the inertia of the rotating parts.
2.9 
A 500 kW, 10 pole, 50 Hz synchro­
nous motor has a torque angle of 
35° on full load. Determine the nat­
ural frequency of oscillation if the 
moment of inertia is 1200 kg.m2.
2.10 A 150 kW, 2300 V, 3 phase, 50 Hz, 
28 pole synchronous motor is con­
nected to constant voltage constant 
frequency busbars. The motor has the 
following data:
The moment of inertia = 460 kg.m2 
Synchronising power = 12 kW/elec. 
degree.
Damping torque = 2500 Nm/mech/ 
rad/sec. Set up the electrodynamic 
equation of motion. Determine the 
natural 
and 
damped 
frequencies 
of oscillations. If the rated load is 
switched on to the motor suddenly 
when it is on no-load determine the 
electromagnetic transients with and 
without damping torque.
Multiple-Choice Questions
2.1 
A motor driving a passive load is said 
to be steady-state stable if 
dT, 
d rM
(a)
(b)
(c)
dm
dT]_
dm
dr,
dm 
(d) All
dm
ûTm
dm
&Tm
dm
= 0
< 0
> 0
2.2 
Equal area criterion gives informa­
tion regarding the
(a) transient stability of a synchro­
nous motor
(b) steady-state stability of a syn­
chronous motor
(c) steady-state stability of an induc­
tion motor
(d) transient stability of an induction 
motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Dynamics of Electric Drives
2.3 
From the characteristics of load and motor torques given below, a typical example 
of unstable system is
2.4 
In a drive system all the mechani­
cal quantities are referred to a single
rotation shaft using the principle of
(a) Power invariance
(b) torque invariance
(c) conservation of momentum
(d) All (a), (b), (c)
2.5 
Retardation test is employed
(a) to determine the losses of the 
motor
(b) to determine the moment of iner­
tia of the rotating parts
(c) to determine the speed-torque 
curve of the motor
(d) to determine the overload capac­
ity of the motor.
2.6 
Active loads
(a) have the capacity to accelerate 
as well as decelerate the drive 
motor
(b) have the capacity only to oppose 
the motion trying to retard the 
motor
(c) have the capacity to provide 
accelerating torque only
(d) All the above
2.7 
A typical active load is
(a) Hoist
(b) Blower
(c) Pump
(d) Lathe
References
J
2.1 
Slemon, S.B. Dewan and A. Straughen, Power Semiconductor Drives.
2.2 
Leonhard, W., Control o f Electrical Drives, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1985.
2.3 
Chillikin, M., Electric Drive, Mir publishers, Moscow.
2.4 
Kümmel, F., Elektrische Antriebstechnik, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1971.
2.5 
Deshpande, M. V, Electric Motors: Applications and Control, A.H. Wheeler, 
Madras, 1985.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
Converters
for Feeding
Electric Motors
_________________________________________________________________ /
3.1 
A GENERAL SURVEY OF CONVERTERS FOR FEEDING 
ELECTRIC MOTORS
The speed of a dc motor can be varied by varying the armature voltage or the field 
current, for which a variable dc supply is required. The speed of an ac motor, on 
the other hand, can be varied by varying its supply frequency. In order to achieve 
the rated torque capability of the motor it is necessary to operate it at rated flux 
(maintained constant), which can be obtained by varying the applied voltage also. 
Hence, a variable voltage, variable frequency supply is required to control the 
speed of an ac motor.
With rapid developments made in the area of thyristors, power converters 
using them have become very popular in the control of electric drives. The 
variable dc voltage needed to control the speed of dc motors can be obtained 
by means of a phase controlled line commutated converter. The basic theory 
and important fundamentals of these converters are well known from the days 
of mercury arc rectifiers. A variable frequency supply is possible by means 
of inverters employing forced commutation if the ac side of the converter is 
unable to provide the necessary reactive power for the converter. The basic 
principles of inversion have been known for long, but the devices were not 
popular because of the poor dynamic properties of mercury are rectifiers. With 
the advent of thyristors and developments in integrating circuits for the control 
of thyristors there has been a lot of development in the area of inverters making 
use of forced commutation. These find application in industry in the area of 
electric drives.
Converters are systems used to transform or control electrical energy using 
the phase control of thyristors. A thyristor in these circuits periodically pro­
vides conducting and non-conducting states alternately, which are used to 
control the output voltage or output frequency or both. Figure 3.1 summarises 
several possibilities of converting electrical energy using power converters. The 
arrows indicate the direction of power flow and the circles, the type of source 
(ac or dc).

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Converters, 
when 
used 
to control the speed of a dc 
motor, are called upon to pro­
vide a variable voltage. This 
is possible by converting the 
existing ac to dc. The process 
is called rectification and the 
converter is a phase controlled 
line commutated rectifier. The 
phase control of thyristors 
using a control voltage makes 
it possible to have a variable 
voltage at the output termi­
nals. Sometimes, the converter
Fig. 3.1 
Possibilities of converting electrical
energy using thyristor power converters
is required to allow power flow from a dc load to an ac supply, e.g. during the 
regenerative braking of a dc motor. The converter performs a function called syn­
chronous inversion. A converter which can perform both rectification and inver­
sion is called two quadrant converter. The speed of a dc motor can be varied 
very smoothly and continuously with it. The two quadrant representation is shown 
in Fig. 3.2.
Regeneration
I
Fig. 3.2 
Two quadrant converter and its representation
A dc motor is sometimes required to operate as a variable speed motor in both 
directions of rotation, with a possibility of regenerative power transfer to the ac 
supply system. The operation is called four-quadrant operation. Two two quadrant 
converters connected back to back provide this reversible drive. Four quadrant

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
operation is shown in Fig. 3.3. Depending upon the polarity of voltage Vd and 
current I , the voltage-current plane of the dc system can be divided into four 
quadrants. When both Vd and I have the same sign, the power is delivered to the 
dc system. This is possible in the I and III quadrants. When they have opposite 
signs the power flows from dc to ac.
Fig. 3-3 
Four quadrant representation
Certain applications of dc motor drives may require operation only in the first 
quadrant. In such a case the converter feeding the motor is called a one quadrant 
converter. As no regeneration is required, diodes can be used at some points as 
a substitutes for the thyristors. This, besides reducing the cost of the converter,

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Motoring
Fig. 3-4 
One quadrant converter
improves its performance with respect to the power factor, and line harmonics. 
One quadrant operation of the converter is depicted in Fig. 3.4. A summary of the 
converters for controlling the speed of a dc motor from single phase and three- 
phase supplies is given in Fig. 3.5.
A variable dc voltage can be made available, to a dc motor from a constant 
dc voltage using a two stage conversion. A two stage dc to dc converter has an 
intermediate ac link. DC is first converted to ac by means of an inverter employ­
ing forced commutation. This ac is then rectified to variable dc. The schematic is 
shown in Fig. 3.6.
The conversion of a constant dc voltage to a variable dc voltage using a single 
stage conversion equipment, known as a chopper, is very popular. The basic cir­
cuit and its operation is shown in Fig. 3.7. By operating the switch S at a constant 
frequency of ON and OFF with appropriate control, the average value of output 
voltage can be varied. The switch S is called the thyristor chopper. The FWD 
allows the flow of load current when the switch S is open, especially when the 
load is inductive. When the FWD conducts, the energy stored in L is partly dis­
sipated in R. By suitably selecting the chopper frequency and load inductance L 
the output current can be made to have a very small ripple content. A dc chopper is 
therefore suitable for controlling the speed of a dc motor efficiently. Four quadrant 
operation is possible. Figure 3.8 gives a summary of the operation of a dc motor 
on one-two- and four-quadrant choppers. The dc chopper circuit is very simple 
and straightforward.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(i) One quadrant drives
o-
o
(ii) Two quadrant drives
(iii) Four quadrant drives
Fig. 3.5(a) 
Summary of single phase converters for dc motor
The block diagram for the control of an ac machine from a constant ac supply 
is shown in Fig. 3.9. The variation of stator voltage at constant frequency is 
obtained from a three phase voltage controller as shown in Fig. 3.9(a). In the other 
schemes shown in Fig. 3.9(b) and Fig. 3.9(c) both machine voltage and frequency 
are varied simultaneously so that air gap flux is constant. Both machine voltage 
and frequency can be independently varied using control voltage (F tl) of line side

ôò
The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
o
o
o
o
I
(i) One quadrant drives
#?fW l
m
0—0
0-0
'----•--- •---- 
i--- •--- •--- •--- •
V
-V
m
y |
Ü
(iii) Four quadrant drives
Fig. 3.5(b) 
Summary of three-phase converters for speed control of dc motor 
I Inverter 
-------------------- >- 
Rectifier
Fig. 3.6 
Two stage dc to dc conversion

?<-------< -------->Q
The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
o
S
0^3------- O
H O — 'W '—1
Di
Fig. 3-7 
Basic circuit of a chopper
(a)
(b)
* m '■V
I
O —*
a
s
V,d 
?
¥  
?
 
?
 
?
+ 
\/
¥
 
?
¥  
¥
(C)
Fig. 3.8 
Summary of chopper-fed dc drives
(a) One quadrant chopper
(b) Regenerative chopper
(c) Two quadrant chopper
(d) Four quadrant chopper

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Subsynchronous converter cascade 
Fig. 3.9 (a) 
Summary of slip ring induction motor speed control
converter and the motor side converter (F ). They are varied so that optimum 
magnetic flux conditions exist in the motor corresponding to the rated torque. 
This provides an efficient operation of the motor, providing constant torque at 
every speed.
When speed control of the ac motor is required from a 3-phase system of con­
stant frequency, the line commutated phase controlled converter and the force

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
commutated inverter are connected 
in series, as shown in Fig. 3.10. The 
interconnection of these converters 
is by means of energy storage ele­
ments which decouple the convert­
ers so that, the disturbances on the 
power system feeding the line side 
converter have no effect on machine 
behaviour. Such a converter is 
called a dc link converter. Both the 
converters are linked by means of a 
dc voltage or dc current. The former is called a voltage source inverter, with the 
motor impressed with voltages, and is shown in Fig. 3.11. The dc link voltage is 
applied to the motor phases alternately by controlling the inverter. The latter is 
called a current source inverter, and the motor is impressed with currents. The two 
differ in several aspects of performance also. In the motor operation, the line side
3*9 (b) 
Voltage control of sq cage motor
AC
F'g- 3-9 (c) 
Speed control by variable frequency

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Rectifier 
-------------->. 
Inverter
Fig. 3.10 
DC link converter
converter operates as a rectifier and the one on the machine side as an inverter. 
During regeneration their functions are reversed, i.e. the machine side converter 
operates as a rectifier and the line side one as an inverter.
An inverter requires voltage control so that the operating flux of the motor 
can ensure efficient operation. This can be achieved external to the inverter. The 
control angle of the line side converter is varied to provide the required voltage 
while the machine side converter is controlled to provide the required frequency. 
The inverter operates at variable dc voltage. The main drawback is the insufficient 
voltage available for commutation at low speeds, which consequently puts a limit 
on the lower speeds. Sometimes voltage control can be obtained in the inverter 
itself, using the principles of PWM or PSM. The inverter operates at constant dc 
link voltage, and is controlled to vary both the frequency and amplitude of the 
voltage. These are invariably voltage source inverters which require an additional

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
converter during regeneration. The output voltage waveforms of these converters 
are shown in Fig. 3.12.
In the case of a current source inverter, shown in Fig. 3.13, the dc link current is 
allowed to flow through the phases of the motor alternately by suitably controlling 
the inverter. The inverter does not require feedback diodes and the configuration is 
very simple. Regeneration is simple and straightforward. The disadvantage is that 
it is not suitable for multimotor drives.
Fig. 3.12
Output voltage waveforms of a VSI. Potentials of a, b, c and line voltages
Vca

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Variable frequency supply to an ac motor can also be provided by a cycloconverter 
which is a single stage (ac to ac) frequency converter having both voltage and fre­
quency control. The output frequency of a cycloconverter can be at most 1/3 times the 
supply frequency. This gives a speed control in the range 0-33% of base speed. Line 
commutation can be made use of. The output voltage waveform has less ripple content. 
The schematic of a cycloconverter feeding a 3-phase ac motor is shown in Fig. 3.14.
Inverters can have natural commutation using load voltages if the load is capa­
ble of providing the necessary reactive power for the converter. Such a case occurs
Rectifier
Inverter
Variable
frequency
current
source
%
/d
/a
'b
1
Fig. 3.13 
Current source inverter

mn>n
n0 
ro
01
Fig. 3.14 
Cycloconverter feeding an ac motor
The McGraw-Hill Companies

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
when a variable frequency converter feeds a synchronous motor. An overexcited 
synchronous motor can provide the reactive power necessary for commutation 
and the machine voltages can be made use of to turn off the thyristors. A cur­
rent source inverter or a cycloconverter feeding a synchronous motor employs 
machine commutation. The former does not require a commutation circuit and 
has a very simple configuration. The latter does not have frequency limitations 
and the speed range can go up to base speed. The firing signals to the thyristors of 
the converter are derived from the motor position. The motor in this case is called 
self controlled and has a behaviour similar to that of a dc motor.
3.2 
PHASE CONTROLLED LINE COMMUTATED CONVERTERS
In these converters the commutation voltage, i.e. the voltage required to transfer 
current from one thyristor to the other, is provided by the supply lines to which 
the converter is connected. The classification of these converters is done in several 
ways. Depending on the direction of power flow, i.e. the type of energy conversion 
performed, they may be one quadrant or two quadrant converters. As has already 
been explained, a two quadrant converter allows power in both directions, and can 
perform both phase controlled rectification and inversion, i.e. ac to dc as well as dc 
to ac. The converter necessarily has thyristors in all positions and, is called a fully 
controlled converter. On the other hand, a one quadrant converter has a power flow 
from ac to dc and diodes can be used in a few positions of the converter. It can per­
form only phase controlled rectification, and is called a half controlled converter.
Converters are also classified according to the pulse number of the ac voltage 
superimposing the average dc voltage of the converter. Thus, we have
i. Two pulse converters
ii. Three pulse converters
iii. 
Six pulse converters
iv. Twelve pulse converters
Converters can be midpoint or bridge type converters depending upon their layout.
3.2.1 Two Quadrant Converters
Phase controlled converters which perform both phase controlled rectification and 
inversion are two quadrant converters. They are used to convert ac to dc and vice 
versa, and have thyristors in all positions.
These are further classified as midpoint converters and bridge type converters.
T w o Pulse Mid Point Converter Two pulse converters are, in general, single phase 
converters. The pulse number of the converter indicates the frequency of the ripple 
voltage superimposing the average dc voltage at the terminals. The schematic of 
a two pulse mid point converter is shown in Fig. 3.15. In the figure u and vS2 are 
midpoint to line voltages on the secondary side, which are out of phase by 180°.
osl = V2 Vs coscot = -us2 
(3.1)
The branch which has a higher voltage with respect to the midpoint can be made 
to conduct by giving a firing pulse to the thyristor in that branch. The midpoint

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
of the secondary serves as the return for the cur­
rent. The thyristor T can be fired when v is 
positive and T2 can be fired when t >s2 is positive 
with respect to the midpoint. The thyristor con­
ducts the load current when its voltage is posi­
tive, once it is turned ON. The output voltage and 
current waveforms, assuming a highly inductive 
load are given in Fig. 3.16. If a thyristor, say T , 
is switched ON when the voltage o is positive 
the current through the load builds up. 71, main­
tains conduction, depending upon the nature of 
the load, even in the period when d is negative. 
At this stage d becomes positive and thyristor 
T2 takes over if a firing pulse is given. Assum­
ing instantaneous commutation, performance, 
equations of the converter can be derived. Assuming a turns ratio of unity for the 
transformer and neglecting the commutation reactances, the average voltage at the 
dc terminals of a two pulse midpoint converter can be derived as
Kiia = 0.9FS cos a 
(3.2)
where a is the firing angle of the converter. For firing delay angles in the range 0 
to 90° the converter operates as a rectifier providing dc voltage at the load. Power
9 
0
L_________ r
Fig. 3-15 
2-Pulse mid point 
converter
Fig. 3.16(a) 
Voltage and current waveforms a -o

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Fig. 3.16(b) 
Voltage and current waveforms

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
transfer takes place from ac to dc. For angles in the range 90° to 180° (theoreti­
cally) the converter operates in the inverting mode. If there is a dc source on the 
dc side, dc power can be converted to ac. However, in practice a firing angle of 
180° cannot be reached due to overlap and the finite amount of time taken by the 
thyristor to go to a blocking state.
The average dc voltage is maximum at a firing angle of 0°, It decreases as 
the firing angle changes from 0 to 90°, and finally becomes zero when the firing 
angle is 90°. The voltage reverses its polarity for firing angles greater than 90° 
and increases with reversed polarity as a is increased beyond 90°. It reaches its 
maximum negative value at a = 180° (Fig. 3.17).
The average value of the thyristor current
/d  =  r L  =  â
 =  0 -4 5 f
 
( 3 -3 >
The rms value of the thyristor current
-^rms
S
(3.4)
Using these values of voltages and currents the ratings of the converter trans­
former can be obtained. The rating of the secondary winding is
= 1.57/h; 
(3.5)
R = 2V.
di
where P .. = V.. /.KI
di 
dio dN
The primary rating is
V J i  = K h = 1.1 l^di 
(3.6)
The design rating of the transformer is
1/2 (1.57 + 1.1 l)Pdi =1.35Pd{ 
(3.7)
The increased rating of the transformers is due to the dc component of the current.
F'g- 3-17 
Control characteristic

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
I _________ t
Ring connected primary
Fig. 3.18 
Arrangements of transformer for preventing dc magnetisation
The peak forward or reverse voltages applied to the thyristors are
2Vm = 2 j2 V s = 3.142Fdio 
(3.8)
The premagnetisation of the transformer existing in the circuit of Fig. 3.15 can be 
avoided by the ring connection of the transformer shown in Fig. 3.18.
Overlap the current through the load builds up when a thyristor is turned ON 
and the voltage across it is positive. Say, for example, T{ is fired when V is posi­
tive. T maintains its conduction till the next thyristor is fired at any instant during 
its positive voltage. V 2 becomes positive when V becomes negative. Thyristor 
T2 is fired. The current transfer takes place from T] to Tr The preceding discus­
sion has assumed instantaneous commutation. But in practice, due to the leakage 
reactance of the transformer, and the line inductances and additional inductances 
of the circuit (to protect the thyristors from di/dt), the transfer of current is never 
instantaneous, but takes a definite amount of time. During commutation both the 
thyristors conduct. The current of the outgoing thyristor decreases and that of the 
incoming one increases. The process is complete when all the current has been 
transferred to the incoming thyristor. The angle of overlap is denoted by u. The 
voltage and current wave forms of the converter, taking overlap into consider­
ation, are shown in Fig. 3.19.
The effect of overlap is to cause a kind of voltage drop at the output terminals. 
The average value of the dc voltage at the dc terminals of the converter is
Vda = 0.45 Fs (cos a + cos(a + u))
(3.9)
where cos(a + u) = cos a -  (7d / V2/k) with V2/k = V2 Vs /X k 
Therefore
Kia -  Kiia ~ Z_^io_X
2 ^ 2
V ö  / 4 )
(3.10)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 3.19 
Current and voltage waveforms taking overlap into consideration
Therefore, as the converter is loaded there is a reduction in the terminal voltage. 
This reduction is called voltage regulation. Besides overlap, the drops in the thy­
ristors and circuit resistances contribute to voltage regulation. During overlap the 
rate of change of current causes a drop in the inductive reactances in series with 
the thyristors, which is the main cause of voltage regulation.
The mean dc voltage of a two pulse converter is superimposed by a ripple volt­
age of twice the supply frequency. The ripple content is minimum at a = 0° and 
increases to a maximum at a = 90°. When a is increased further the ripple content 
decreases and falls to minimum when a = 180°.
When the load is purely resistive, the current in it becomes discontinuous. 
To explain this, note that the current is in phase with the voltage. When the 
load voltage falls to zero and the thyristor is reverse biased, conduction ceases. 
When the load has sufficient inductance one thyristor conducts for 180° and the 
other thyristor takes over before the load current falls to zero. Thus, conduction 
is made continuous. The load current becomes pure dc if the load has infinite 
inductance.
The mean value of the dc output voltage would be different for the cases of 
continuous and discontinuous conduction for the same firing angle being less for 
the former case. This is mainly because negative excursions of the voltage are 
possible across the load in the case of continuous conduction, as the load current 
is maintained even after the voltage has become negative. The back emf load on 
a converter is prone to discontinuous conduction. A resistive load inherently has 
discontinuous conduction. These cases are depicted in Fig. 3.20.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Fig. 3.20(a) 
Discontinuous conduction resistance load
Fig. 3.20(b) 
Effect of load inductance on continuous conduction
The performance of a converter is characterised by the superimposed ripple 
content of ac voltage on the mean dc voltage. The effective value of the rth har­
monic referred to VA. is
di
(r2 + (1 -  r2 ) cos2 a)1/2 
Vdi 
r 2 - l V
(3.11)
neglecting the overlap. When the effect of the overlap is taken into consideration, 
the effective value of the rth harmonic referred to V,. would be
di
Kmda
V,di
4 ï
r2 - l
{ . m  + f 2(u) + M a,u))'!2
(3.12)
where /^(w) = sin ru s^n u
f ( a )  = 1 + cos2 a + r2 sin2 a
fs(a, u) = (r2 -  1) sin2 (a + u) + 2 cos ru{cos a cos a + u) 
+ r 2 sin a sin(a + u)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The ripple content can be easily calculated as the ratio of the effective value of 
superimposed ac voltage to ideal dc voltage
(3.13)
For a two pulse converter the ripple content is 48.2% for a = 0° and 111.1% for 
a = 90°.
A smoothing inductance is necessary in the load circuit. This inductance serves 
two purposes:
i. to smooth the ripple content of output current
ii. to make conduction continuous in the load or to minimise the possibility 
of discontinuous conduction.
The value of Ld is normally determined such as to avoid discontinuous conduc­
tion rather than to smoothen out the ripple content. The layout of the smoothing 
inductance is rather large. The smoothing inductance required in the load circuit is
3.18 sin a
L
mH
(3.14)
where Vdj average value of dc voltage
a 
firing angle at which the smoothing is required
7. is the dc current at which the conduction must be continuous
a
The performance of a converter is also characterised by harmonic currents on 
the ac side. The harmonic components present on the ac side do not contribute to 
any power transfer. On the other hand, they cause undesirable effects in converter 
operation and also reduce the power factor markedly. They may cause resonance 
effects due to the line inductance and capacitance. When overlap is neglected, the 
rms value of the harmonic current referred to the fundamental is
e.g. r = 3 
33.33%
r = 5 
20%
r - 1  
14.29% and so on.
For a single phase
( j 
^
_iL 
V ^ l L  J
\_
r
(3.15)
/.L -
W
i  i 
VT
(3.16)
The effective value of the line current expressed as the ratio of the fundamental
(3.17)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
For a two pulse converter this ratio is 111.1%. This distortion of the input ac cur­
rent is also seen by examining the fundamental content of the input current. The 
ratio of the fundamental component to the total rms current, g = /  // . For a two 
pulse converter
g = 0.9
(3.18)
When the overlap u is taken into consideration
irL
h i
' 1 3 sin(rw/2) 
V r ) 
{ruí2 )
- r f ( r ,u )
ML
(3.19)
The effect of overlap is to reduce the distortion on the ac side and decrease the 
rms value of a harmonic.
The reactive power required by a converter is also a significant factor in evaluat­
ing its performance. The fundamental displacement factor is the phase difference 
between the voltage and the fundamental of input current. From the waveforms of 
Fig. 3.16 the displacement factor is cos a. The total power factor on the input side 
is somewhat less than the displacement factor. It can be shown that the total power 
factor is given by
Power factor = g cos a
(3.20)
For a two pulse converter, g = 0.9. The harmonics therefore effectively decrease 
the pf even though they do not contribute to power transfer.
The reactive power required by a converter is due to the phase control 
employed, as well as commutation. Unlike the active power which is decided 
by the fundamental only, the control reactive power is decided by the harmon­
ics also. The fundamental displacement factor is the cosine of the control angle. 
When commutation is considered there is a certain overlap angle, because of 
which the current waveform shifts further to the right, increasing the angle of 
lag of the current. The overlap angle depends upon the firing angle. The reactive 
power required because of phase control is Vdi I sin a and it increases as the firing 
angle increases, or the pf becomes poor. The reactive power due to commutation 
overlap is
a  =
2u0 -  sin 2u0 
4(1 -  cos u0)
(3.21)
where uo is the overlap angle at a = 0°. It can be shown that the reactive power 
required by the converter at a given firing angle a is
a  = v j a
2u + sin 2a -  sin 2{a + u) 
4(cos a -  cos(a + u))
(3.22)
The fundamental displacement factor, taking overlap into consideration is 
approximately cos(a + u/2) or cos(u + 2u/3) depending upon 60 < a < 90° or 
0 < a < 30°.
The characteristic curves of a midpoint converter are given in Fig. 3.21.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 3.21 
Characteristics of a 2-pulse mid point converter
Two Pulse Bridge Converter A two pulse bridge converter is achieved as shown in 
Fig. 3.22 from two midpoint converters. They are connected in series on the dc 
side and in parallel on the ac side. It is also a single phase converter. At any given 
time, two diagonally opposite thyristors conduct, one thyristor acting as a return 
path for the current, e.g. T} conducts the current to load whereas T4 returns the cur­
rent to the supply. In the next half cycle T2 and T3 take over the jobs of conducting 
the current as described above. The common point of the transformer is not used 
as return any more and the input transformer can even be eliminated. The perfor­
mance of a two pulse bridge converter is similar to that of a two pulse midpoint 
converter, but several differences between the two are worth noting. The voltage 
regulation at the dc terminals of the converter due to forward voltage drops of the 
thyristors is greater, as two thyristors conduct at any time. The control circuitry 
is slightly more complicated since two channels of gating pulses displaced by 
180° are required. The channels must have outputs to provide the firing pulses 
to the conducting thyristors. The voltage and current waveforms of the converter
are depicted in Fig. 3.23 under 
idealised conditions of instanta­
neous commutation, smooth dc 
current, etc.
The average value of the dc 
voltage in the bridge converter 
is twice that in a midpoint con­
verter, for the same inverse volt­
age of the thyristors. This means 
that the peak forward or reverse 
voltage of a thyristor in a bridge

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Fig. 3.23 
Voltage and current waveforms
converter is just half its value in a midpoint converter, for the same dc voltage at 
the terminals.
The mean voltage at the dc terminals
Vdia = 0.9Fcosa 
(3.23)
where V is the ac voltage. The peak forward or reverse voltage of the thyristors is 
equal to the peak value of the source voltage = \/2V. In terms of V it is equal to
n— Vdio. The average thyristor current 
2
V
h v  = 0.45 — = 0.5/d 
(3.24a)
K
The rms value of the thyristor current
= /d/V2 
(3.24b)
If a converter transformer is used, its design rating is considerably smaller than 
that used with a midpoint converter, and is given by
P = l. lL P di 
(3.25)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
This is because the secondary does not carry any dc in this case. However, the 
transformer is normally dispensed with as has already been discussed.
As long as the load current is continuous, the voltage can be varied from a 
maximum of 0.9 V at a = 0° to a minimum of 0 at n /2. When a is retarded fur­
ther the polarity of the voltage reverses. As the angle is increased towards 180°, 
the voltage increases in the reverse direction. It reaches a negative maximum at 
a = 180°. In practice, a = 180° cannot be realized due to overlap and the finite turn 
off time of the thyristors.
The converter’s voltage regulation, characterised by a reduction of voltage at 
the dc terminals, can also be attributed to (a) overlap, (b) the resistance drop, 
and (c) the device drop. The overlap (commutation) affects the voltage regulation 
in the same way as has been explained earlier for midpoint converters. During
Load current
Fig. 3.24 
Voltage regulation of the converter

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
commutation the rate of change of current causes a voltage drop across the reac­
tance in series with the thyristors, e.g. transformer leakage reactance, line reac­
tance and any inductive reactance in the circuit to protect from di/dt (Fig. 3.24)
Vda = 0.9V cos a -  0.9V 
-  IdR -  2VT
V2
(3.26)
where V ac supply voltage
X  per unit reactance in series with thyristor 
R 
circuit resistance 
/, mean value of load current
d
VT forward drop of the thyristor at current 7 
The voltage current waveforms, taking overlap into consideration, are depicted 
in Fig. 3.25.
Fig. 3.25 
Voltage and current waveforms taking overlap into consideration a = 6o°

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Equations 3.12-3.19 are also applicable to a bridge converter, taking the 
overlap into consideration. The performance of a bridge converter with respect 
to the ac ripple superimposing the dc voltage, harmonics in the input current, 
power factor, reactive power requirement, and discontinuous condition lay out of 
smoothing reactor, is the same as that of a midpoint converter.
Even though a large number of thyristors are required in the case of a bridge con­
nection, the voltage rating is just half that of a midpoint converter. This may offset 
the cost of the converter. The characteristics of the converter are given in Fig. 3.26.
Two pulse converters have a limited power capability, since they are basically 
single phase converters. The ripple content in the output voltage is large and the 
amount of inductance required to smooth it, as well as to avoid discontinuous con­
duction is rather large. Further, a two pulse midpoint converter requires a special 
type of converter transformer. They therefore find application only under special 
circumstances.
Three Pulse Midpoint Converter These are basically three-phase converters, and 
are very popular because a 3-phase supply is readily available. 3-phase converters 
have a greater power capability than single phase converters. With these converters 
the pulse number of the output voltage superimposing the mean dc voltage can be 
increased using suitable transformer connections. Increasing the number of pulses 
improves the converter performance with respect to the amplitude of the dc voltage 
as well as the magnitude of ripple content. The dc voltage of a 3-phase converter is 
more, with reduced ripple content. Also, the smoothing inductance becomes small.
A three pulse midpoint converter is the simplest form of a 3-phase converter. It 
is shown in Fig. 3.27. From the figure it is clear that the star point of secondary of 
the converter transformer is required to serve as a return path for the current. The

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Fig. 3.27 
Basic circuit of 3-pulse mid point converter
converter is also called a star point converter. The output voltage can be varied 
steplessly by varying the firing angle of the thyristor. A thyristor which has for­
ward voltage across it can start conducting if it receives a firing pulse. The phase 
voltages Fsl, Vs2 and F 3 are shown in Fig. 3.28. From the figure, the natural firing 
point of the thyristor can be identified. It is the instant at which the diodes would 
start conducting if the converter were uncontrolled, and is the point of intersection 
of the voltages. This instant, at which a thyristor is forward biased, occurs 30° 
after its voltage has crossed zero. A thyristor can always go into conduction if it 
receives a firing pulse when its phase voltage is greater than that of the outgoing 
one. The firing angle is reckoned from this point. The phase voltage having the 
largest instantaneous value can only appear across the load. If the firing turning- 
on takes place at the natural firing instant, the mean voltage at the output terminals 
is a maximum. The voltage and current waveforms for several firing angles are 
shown in Fig. 3.29. Each thyristor conducts for 120° and blocks for 240°.
The maximum reverse voltage across a thyristor is the line to line voltage,
which is equal to V3 times the phase voltage.
Fig. 3.28 
Phase voltage of secondary a -  0 natural firing instant

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The average thyristor current is
L /3  = 0.39 — 
(3.27)
R
V
The rms value of the thyristor current = 0.23 —
The mean output dc voltage at any firing angle is given by
Vdia = 1.17Fcosa 
(3.28)
assuming instantaneous commutation. This equation is valid for continuous con­
duction of load current, i.e. the current should not become zero when the voltage 
is zero, as happens in a resistive load or back emf load. With sufficient inductance 
in the load circuit, the load current flows even when the voltage is negative.
As the firing angle a increases from 0 to 90°, the output voltage falls from a 
maximum of 1.17V to zero very smoothly. The power flow takes place from ac 
to dc and the converter is in the rectifying mode. If the firing angle is increased 
further or retarded, the output voltage has a reversed polarity. Power flow can take 
place from dc to ac only if there is a source of dc voltage, e.g. a counter emf load, 
such as a dc motor load will be able to do this during regeneration. The converter

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
is in the inverting mode. The output voltage increases progressively in the nega­
tive direction as a reaches 180°. Therefore for angles 0 < a < 90° the converter 
is in the rectifying mode and for 90° < a < 180° it is in the inverting mode. Nor­
mally the reverse voltage must exist across the thyristor for a time greater than 
its turn off time, so that it successfully goes into the forward blocking condition. 
The turn off time of a thyristor is of the order of 100 jus to 300 jus. When a = 180° 
the conducting thyristor can never be blocked, as there is no time at all for it to 
regain its blocking state. The time for which the reverse voltage exists across a 
thyristor must be greater than cot.
Also, the negative voltage occurring across the thyristor should continue even 
after the thyristors have under gone commutation for a definite amount of time t . 
For successful commutation there should be a marginal turn off angle, and a = 180° 
cannot be realised. Figure 3.30 depicts the variation of output voltage as the firing 
angle is extended from 0-180°. (The control characteristic of the converter shown 
in Fig. 3.30 also shows the inverter limit.)
The finite angle of overlap, due to reactances on the line side of the converter, 
also affects the maximum firing angle for inverter operation.
Taking these factors into consideration, the maximum firing angle a 
is fixed 
at 150°.
Sometimes commutation failure occurs if the applied voltage is small. This 
increases the overlap which affects the inverter limit, making the lead angle of 
firing less than the sum of the overlap and turn off angle. Commutation troubles 
normally arise if circuit turn off is less than the turn off time of the thyristor. For 
successful commutation there must be a marginal quenching angle.
Under ideal smoothing conditions of dc load current the voltage Vdia is dropped 
across the resistance and the superimposed ripple content across the load inductance.
A close examination of the primary and secondary currents of transformers 
shows that there is no mmf balance because of the dc component of current in 
the secondary winding. The dc mmf premagnetises the core. Each leg of the 
transformer carries a dc flux, passing mainly through air. A heavy magnetising 
current is required by the transformer. Also, when the primary is star-connected 
there exists a third harmonic flux besides the dc flux. This produces additional 
losses and consequent heating of the transformer. It also induces additional 
voltages in the transformer windings. This harmonic flux does not exist in a A 
connection.
This dc and the third harmonic core flux can be completely eliminated by using 
a zig-zag connection, as shown in Fig. 3.31. In this connection the current of a 
thyristor is made to flow through the windings on different legs, so that the dc 
magnetisation and third harmonic flux get cancelled. However the rating of this 
transformer is 8% higher than one with a normal connection.
Even though the fundamental component of current decides the power used 
up in the dc side, the rating of the transformer must be decided using the total or 
actual current flowing through the winding.
h
RMS value of the secondary current

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Fig. 3.30(a) 
Effect of input reactance (i) Equivalent circuit of 3-pulse converter (ii) Voltage 
and current waveforms
The rating of the secondary winding
Ps = 1.48/jj 
(3.29)
where P, = V.. /,
di 
di 
d
V27
The effective value of primary current = —
The rating of the primary winding =1.21 Pdi

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
- 0.2
-0.4
- 0.6
- 0.8
- 1.0
1.0
0.5
0.0
Fig. 3.30(b) 
Control characteristics and voltage regulation of the converter
The design rating of the transformer = 
(Ps + Pp) = 1.35Pdi
Overlap 
The commutation of the current from one thyristor to the other is never 
instantaneous. The incoming and outgoing thyristors conduct simultaneously dur­
ing commutation. The period of simultaneous conduction is called overlap. The 
angle of overlap depends upon the transformer leakage reactance, line reactances 
and any other inductances in the circuit which limit the di/dt of the thyristor. The 
overlap depends upon the load current and angle of firing. The dependence of 
overlap on angle of firing can be understood from the following equation
(1 -  cos u0) = cos a -  cos(a + u)
(3.30)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
where u{) is the overlap angle at a = 0 and u is the overlap angle at a. The effects 
of total reactance (Xk) and total circuit resistance, Rv which is negligibly small on 
the terminal voltage can be derived in general. Due to overlap there is a reduction 
in terminal voltage. This can be attributed to the voltage drops in the reactances 
when there is a change of current. The voltage regulation and associated equations 
can be determined using the equations given for single phase connections.
The voltage drop due to overlap
Dx = (Fdio/2) (cos a -  cos (a + u)) 
where cos(a + u) = cos a -  Td/^2 Ik
V2 KV3
with V r/k =
zx =
2Xk
/ A
2 n / P
(3.31)
The resistance drops and device drops in the forward direction also contribute to 
voltage regulation.

Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Therefore the terminal voltage
or
= Vd[ cos a -
ljX k
(2*/P)
VT — resistance drop
(3.32)
(cos a + cos(ct + u)) -  VT — resistance drop
The control characteristic, taking regulation into consideration, is shown in Fig. 3.30.
The mean dc voltage of the converter is superimposed by a non-sinusoidal 
ac voltage. It has a ripple of three times the supply frequency. The effective value 
of the rth harmonic referred to V.. is
di
= -—  (r2 + (1 -  r2) cos2 a)2
Vdl 
r2 -  1
(3.33)
r = vP 
v = 1, 2, 3 and P is the pulse number. For a = 0
Kd
rdi
when the overlap is considered
•7 TL = -, /  
(«) + /;(" ) + 
(3.34)
"di 
2 V  
-  1)
where 
f(a )  = l + cos2 a + r2 sin2 a 
f 2 (u) = sin ru sin u
f 3 (a, u) = (r2 -  1) sin2 (a + u) + 2 cos ru( cos a cos (a + u)) 
+ r2 sin a sin(a + u))
Defining the ripple content as the ratio of the effective value of superimposed ac 
voltage to ideal dc voltage, (WJ we have
(3.35)
For a three pulse converter, Wu is 18.3% for a = 0 and 65.5% for a = 90°.
As has already been discussed, the inductance Ld smooths out the ripple con­
tent in the load current and helps to make it continuous. Under ideal smoothing, 
the load voltage is dropped across the resistance and the ripple voltage across Ld. 
Ld is normally determined such as to avoid discontinuous conduction. For a three 
pulse converter
Vi

The McGraw-Hill Companies
^ ^ 3  
Electric Drives
where a is the firing angle and Id is the value at which the current becomes 
continuous.
The input current of a three pulse converter also has a harmonic content. The 
effective value of the rth harmonic is
(3.37)
which is 50%, 25% and 20% of the fundamental for r = 2, 4 and 5 respectively. 
The effective value of the line current
h  = /lL
li +  x
T
 =  1 2 1
1L
(3.38)
The effect of overlap is to reduce the harmonic content
Ir _ 1 sin ru/2
1 \[ ~  ~r 
ru/2 
(3-39)
The converter requires reactive power for phase control as well as for commuta­
tion. This reactive power is supplied from the lines and affects the power factor 
of the input current. The harmonics in the current waveform contribute to the 
reactive power. The fundamental displacement factor is the cosine of the angle 
between the fundamental of the input current and the voltage. This and the fun­
damental current contribute to the active power. The total power factor is affected 
by the harmonics. Therefore the fundamental displacement factor must be cor­
rected properly to obtain this altered power factor. A close examination of the 
voltage and current waveforms reveals that the fundamental displacement factor 
is nothing but the cosine of the firing angle of the thyristors. For a = 0 the second­
ary phase voltage and the fundamental current are in phase and the displacement 
factor is unity. As a increases, this factor decreases. The effect of harmonics on 
the amount of reactive power can be considered by taking into consideration their 
effect on the power factors. The distortion factor g is defined as the effective value 
of the fundamental to the effective value of the total current (/,//). The total input 
power factor = g cos a. For three pulse converters this is 0.827. As g is always less 
than one, the distortion decreases the total power factor.
The reactive power due to commutation can be determined using the following 
equation.
Qx 
_ 2uQ -  sin 2u0
~ 4(1 -  cos u0) 
(3-40)
The total reactive power can be determined as a ratio of the dc power at any con­
trol angle, using
Qla _ 2u + sin 2a -  sin 2(a + u)
v Jl ~
4(cos a -  cos(a + u)
(3.41)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
The fundamental displacement factor taking overlap into consideration is 
approximately cos(a + u /2) or cos(a + 2u/3) depending upon 60° < a < 90° or 
0 < a < 30°.
Therefore, the total power factor = g cos (a + u/2) 
(3.42)
Transformer Utilisation in Controlled Rectifiers 
The expressions of device currents 
in midpoint converters discussed emphasize that the utilisation of devices as well 
as transformers decrease as the number of phases or pulses increases. The con­
duction angle decreases, adversely affecting the losses and current ratings of the 
devices. The ratio of the rms to average value of current increases, which in­
creases the copper losses of the transformer. The utility of the transformer can 
be conveniently defined by the ratio of dc output power from the rectifier to the 
effective volt amperes of the transformer, or the design rating of the transformer, 
which is the average of the primary and secondary ratings of the windings. Under 
ideal conditions it may be unity, but is normally less than 1 .
In the case of controlled rectifiers, the transformer utilisation decreases at 
reduced voltages in the same ratio as the power factor. This is evident from the 
voltage and current waveforms. We see that the firing angle variation introduces a 
phase shift in the current pulses, as compared to the uncontrolled case. This has no 
effect on the harmonics but changes the input displacement factor. The value of a 
also has no effect on the value of ac input current relative to dc output current. The 
reduction in power factor matches the reduction in output voltage and the neces­
sary power balance is thus maintained. Therefore, at reduced voltage transformer 
utilisation reduces in the same ratio as the power factor.
Six Pulse Midpoint Converter The converter transformer converts the existing 
three phase system to a six phase one, since it has six secondary windings. The 
converter connections are shown in Fig. 3.32.
A thyristor having maximum voltage can go into conduction only if it has a 
firing pulse. The natural firing instant is the point of intersection of the two phase 
voltages in the sequence of phases. The firing angle of a thyristor is reckoned from 
this instant. The secondary voltages are shown in Fig. 3.32.
The current and voltage waveforms are shown in Fig. 3.32, and Fig. 3.33 assum­
ing instantaneous commutation and ideal smoothing of dc. The average value of 
the dc voltage at the converter terminals is given by
Vdia = 1.35V cos a 
(3.43)
By varying the a, the output voltage can be varied steplessly. In the range of 
angles 0 < a < 90° the converter operates as a rectifier. In the range of angles 90° 
< a < 180° it operates as an inverter. There is a limit to the firing angle (< 180°) 
during inversion due to the reactances, as has already been discussed.
From Fig. 3.33, the effective value of the secondary current is given by
v 2 n
j2 JH
d 3
V /2
h_
•v/ó
(3.44)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
I
N
N
----------- 11----------- 11------------1t----------- «----------- i1-----•—'
k
k
V's1
\V,s2
s3
V,s4
w.s5
^ s 6
o
y.7"1 
y r 2 y r3 
y
7-4 y r= y
Fig. 3.32 
6-pulse mid point converter and secondary voltages
CD 
__ CO
's 1
's2
's3
^ s 4
's5
Fig. 3*33 
Currents in 6-pulse mid point converter
The effective value of primary current is
/
7p =
1 
-,
yd
\!/2
2 n 
3 /
The average value of thyristor current
( 1 '
V Z 7C /
, n _ h
1 a 
—
3 
6
(3.45)
2 n
(3.46)
Load

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
The rating of the secondary
(3.47)
and the rating of the primary
(3.48)
assuming a unity ratio transformer.
The design rating of the transformer
= l/2(Ps + P p) = 1.55Pdi
The peak forward or reverse voltage of the thyristor = y/2Vs.
(3.49)
The rms to average current ratio of the transformer is very large which is the 
main disadvantage of this connection. The thyristor conducts only for 60° in a 
period and blocks for the remaining 300°. Therefore the utilisation of the thyristor 
and secondary winding is somewhat poor.
The ripple content in the output voltage of the converter can be determined as 
a percentage of the maximum dc voltage using Eq. 3.13 It is 4.2% at maximum 
voltage (a = 0°, a -  180°) and 30.8% at zero voltage (a -  90°).
The load inductance, which serves the purpose of smoothing the output volt­
age and decreasing the possibility of discontinuous conduction is obtained by the 
equation
Under ideal smoothing, the average output voltage is dropped across the resis­
tance and the ripple content across the inductance.
The order of the harmonics present in the input current are 5, 7, 11, 13, etc. 
Their intensity is 20% for the 5th, 14.29%, for 7th harmonic etc. The total effec­
tive value of the rms current in the input as a percentage of the fundamental cur­
rent is 104.72% andgj = 0.955.
The performance of the converter with respect to the power factor and reactive 
power is similar to that of a 3-pulse converter. The fundamental displacement fac­
tor is the cosine of the firing angle and the power factor is g. cos a. The 6-pulse 
converter gives a better performance than a 3-pulse converter.
The effects of overlap on the terminal voltage, harmonic content and inverter 
limit are the same as those in the case a three pulse converter.
The terminal voltage of the converter taking overlap into consideration is given
Là = 0.296 sin a 
mH
R
(3.50)
by
a 
^dio COS CL 
D x
(3.51)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
where
Ox = Fh;
dio (cos a -  cos (a + u))
with
cos(a + u) = cos a -
L
Therefore
Va = Fdi0 cos a - Vrdio
(V2 4 )
/,
2 (V2/k)
substituting Ik =
Vv
K
2Xv 
2Xxk
Jdio_
V2 K
V 71 V
sin
We have
Vda = VAin cos a
( 1 
\~Pj
dio
(2 n/P)
Taking the resistance drop and device drop into consideration,
Fdf, = Kdi cos 
a —  
Iû^ l------Fr -  F
(2 n/P)
R
Kdi (cos a + cos(u + u)) -  VT -  VjR
(3.52)
(3.53)
The harmonic content of the rth harmonic decreases in the ratio of (sin ru!2)1 
(rul2) due to the overlap u. The dependence of the overlap angle on the firing 
angle is given by
1 -  cos u0 = cos(a) -  cos(a + u) 
The fundamental displacement factor is approximately cos
(3.54)
u ^
(l H---
2 7
The effect of u on the reactive power consumption can be determined using 
Eqs 3.40-3.41.
However, because of the disadvantages of poor utilisation of thyristor, trans­
former secondary winding (as effective thyristor conduction is only for 60°) and 
the high ratio of rms to average current of the transformer and thyristors, this 
convertor is rarely used.
Six Pulse Bridge Converter The conduction time of a thyristor in a six pulse con­
nection can be increased when the converter is obtained by a series or parallel 
connection of two three-pulse midpoint converters. A six pulse bridge converter

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
is obtained by connecting two three pulse converters in series on the dc side and 
in parallel on the ac side. The converter configuration is shown in Fig. 3.34. The 
three-pulse converter feeding current to the load is called the positive group and 
the other providing the return path for the current is called the negative group.
's1
J v f
's2
's3
Fig- 3-34 
Six pulse bridge converter
The star point is no longer necessary, and can be eliminated. There are some obvi­
ous advantages when compared to a three-pulse converter:
i. Because of series connection of the converters on the dc side, the mean 
output voltage is twice that of a 3 pulse converter for the same supply 
voltage. Consequently the power capability doubles.
ii. As no star point is required for the return path, a transformer can be 
avoided.
iii. The number of pulses is increased to six and the amplitude of the ac 
ripple is decreased.
iv. The dc component in the secondary of the transformer is completely 
eliminated. This aspect decreases the design rating of the transformer, if 
used.
Bridge connections are called two way circuits, since the transformer windings 
carry current in both directions. This is the reason for eliminating the dc magneti­
sation of core. On the other hand, midpoint connections have no such facility and 
thus are one way connections. The bridge connection has thyristors conducting 
for 120° which increases the utilisation of both the thyristors and the transformer, 
as compared to a six-pulse midpoint converter.
The current and voltage waveforms of three-pulse converters connected to 
form the bridge converter are shown in Fig. 3.35 for different values of the firing 
angle a. The output voltage of the bridge converter is the algebraic sum of the 
voltages of the component converters. The positive group has common cathode 
connection, and will have a thyristor with maximum positive anode voltage con­
ducting. The negative group has a common anode connection and will have a 
thyristor with maximum negative cathode voltage, conducting. Thus the output 
voltage at the dc terminals has segments of three phase voltages. Due to the phase 
difference between the positive and negative group voltages, the output voltage

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 3.35(a) 
Voltage and current waveforms 0 .-0
has a pulse frequency of 6f. The commutations occur alternately in the positive 
and negative groups. At all times, two thyristors, one in the positive group and the 
other in the negative group are in conduction. From Fig. 3.35 it is clear that the 
firing angle can be increased from 0 to 180°. Firing angle a = 0 is the natural firing 
instant, as has already been defined in the case of a three pulse converter. As the 
firing angle increases to 90°, the average dc voltage falls to zero. Power flow takes 
place from ac to dc and the converter is in the rectifying mode. When the angle 
increases further to 180°, the mean voltage increases from 0 to its maximum value 
with reversed polarity. If there is a dc source on the load side, power flow takes 
place from dc to ac and the converter is in the inversion mode. As has already been 
explained, there is an inverter limit, which is the maximum firing angle (< 180°), 
beyond which commutation failure occurs in the converter.
The mean voltage at the dc terminals can be shown to be
Vdia = 2.34FS cos a = 1.35FL cos a
(3.55)
where VL is the line to line voltage. The control characteristic is shown in 
Fig. 3.36.
The peak forward or reverse voltage of a thyristor in a six-pulse bridge con­
verter is the peak value of the line voltage, V2 VL. The average current carried by 
the thyristor is
= 0.45 
3
The RMS current carried by the thyristor is
M= = 0.78 — 
73 
R
(3.56)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Fig. 3.35(b) 
Voltage and current waveforms a = 30° 
The effective value of the secondary current is
It is clear that a bridge circuit is superior compared to a three-pulse or six-pulse 
connection, in the design rating of the converter transformer.
Considering the effects of overlap, resistance and device drop, the terminal 
voltage of the converter can be determined in the same way as for a six-pulse 
converter. It is given by
V
i
a
 =
 
r
d
l
0  cos 
a -
 
D  V
R
(3.57)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 3.36 
Control characteristics and voltage regulation
where
Dx = — Fdio(cos a -  cos (a + u))
with cos(a + u) = cos a -
L
V2A
h  =
K 
V2K
(2ATk) 
2Xk
n  
/<i*k
x 
2n/3

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
The ripple factor of the ac voltage, the smoothing inductance, harmonics in the 
line current, the power factor and the effects of overlap on these quantities can be 
determined in the same way as for a six pulse converter. The performance of the 
converter is shown graphically in Fig. 3.37.
Six channels of firing pulses are required, each separated by 60°. During con­
tinuous conduction a single pulse is sufficient, whereas in discontinuous conduc­
tion each thyristor must be gated for 60°, because an initial starting current is 
required.
Six Pulse Converter with Interphase Transformer The basic connection of a six 
pulse converter with an interphase transformer is shown in Fig. 3.38. This is ob­
tained by connecting two three pulse converters in parallel on the dc side. The 
interphase transformer absorbs the difference of the instantaneous voltages of the 
two converters. The total load current is shared by the two converters and hence is 
the sum of the individual converter currents.
h  ~ 
+ hu
The output voltages of individual converters have a ripple content of fre­
quency 3\f. Owing to the phase difference between the instantaneous values of 
output voltages, the net dc voltage has a reduced ripple content and a pulse fre­
quency of 6/  This means the output voltage is made up of six segments of dc

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
>L3
t2
voltage. A thyristor conducts for 120° and there is, therefore, a good utilisation 
of the thyristor and transformers. The current and voltage waveforms for a -  45° 
and a  = 135° are depicted in Figs 3.39(a) and (b). From these figures it is clear that 
the average dc voltage of the converters is the same, but the instantaneous values 
are different. The latter differ because of the phase difference between the output 
voltages of the converters. The parallel connection of the two converters must be 
made through an interphase transformer, so that difference between the instanta­
neous voltages becomes a voltage drop across the reactor.
If Vdl and Vdu are the voltages of the individual converters and Vtr the volt­
age across the interphase transformer, we have (referring to Figs 3.38 
and 3.39).
Fd = FdI -  
(3.58)
Vi = Vm + ^
From these equations we have
Kii + ^dii 
2
(3.59)
This shows that the pulse number is six and the amplitude of the ripple is smaller 
than that of individual converters.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
From the equation we have,
K  _ Vài -  Vm
2 
2
(3.60)
which is the voltage across one half of the interphase transformer. The voltage 
across the interphase transformer and the mean dc voltage are shown in Fig. 3.40 
for a = 90°. The voltage across the interphase transformer is non sinusoidal. This 
results in a non-sinusoidal magnetising current of the transformer. It has a fre­
quency of 3f  The dc load current is superimposed by this magnetising current. 
On the other hand, for a  = 0 the magnetising current is sinusoidal. Because of 
the centre tap, the dc current flows simultaneously in each half of the transformer 
which avoids premagnetisation of the core. The peak value of the ac current must 
be very small compared to the load current, which should not fall below a critical 
value. This critical value is the peak value of the magnetising current. In case the 
load current is less than the critical value, the converter operates as a normal six

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
a = 4 5
a -  135°
Fig. 3.40 
Voltage across interphase transformers

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
pulse midpoint converter. Considering this fact, the mean value of the dc voltage 
of the converter is
Vdia = 1.35FS cos a
h  -  h r
(3.61)
Vdia = 1.17VS cos a
ä?
VIu,
'"•f
The thyristors conduct for 60° in the former case and for 120° in the latter. There­
fore, as the load current increases there is first a significant voltage drop of 15% 
due to transition, or a sudden rise if the load current is below /  .
The mean value of the dc voltage of the converter under ideal conditions with 
an interphase transformer is
Vdi = 1.1 7Fl cos a = Vdi0 cos a 
(3.62)
The converter operates as a rectifier in the range of firing angles 0 < a < 90° and 
as an inverter for 90° < a < 180°.
Each converter group is an individual commutator group with three commu­
tations independent of each other. There are six commutations, which are not 
simultaneous.
As has already been discussed, the terminal voltage falls when the thyristor 
conduction is increased to 120° using an interphase transformer. The terminal volt­
age of the converter is affected by the overlap in the same manner as in the other 
types of converters discussed previously. If the drop due to overlap be Dx we have
and
or
with
cos u0 = 1 -  2DX
2 p  _ 
_____
l ä v s sin0r/3)
cos(a + u) = cos a -
L
ä h
ä h  =
ZX =
V2K 
JÏK
2Xk 
2Xk 
(2tc/3)
(3.63)
(3.64)
Other factors that influence the terminal voltage are the forward voltage drop of 
the device and the resistance drop. Therefore
vi = Vi[0 cos a -  Dx -  VT -  IdR 
(3.65)
The secondaries, carrying current in the same direction, are wound on the same 
core limb to avoid saturation.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The peak value of the thyristor current
(3.66)
Average value of the thyristor current = 0.167 I
RMS value of the thyristor current = 0.2891 
_
The peak forward or inverse voltage of the thyristor is 2.095 Vdj or V2FL. The 
reverse voltage occurs during inversion. The thyristors do not have a sudden rise 
of voltage in the forward direction.
Six channels of firing phases, separated by 60° each, with a single firing pulse 
in each channel are required.
The power factor, displacement factor, etc., describing the performance of the 
converter, are depicted in Fig. 3.41 in graphical form.
The secondaries share the load current. Two three pulse systems, each with 
half dc current have the secondary rating as a three-pulse connection. The rating 
of the secondary
Ps = 1.48 Pdl
The RMS value of the primary winding current is Id / y/6. 
The primary rating is P = 1.05Pdi.
(3.67)
Fig. 3.41 
Performance of a 6-pulse converter with interphase transformer

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
The design rating of the transformer is
j(1.48 + 1,05)Pdi = 1.26Pdi 
The interphase transformer acts as a common smoothing inductance. The extra 
load inductance required may be small and there is little tendency to conduct 
discontinuously.
The interphase connection is used in applications where large dc currents are 
required at low voltage outputs.
Converters with Large Pulse Number It is clear from the preceding discussion that 
increasing the pulse number to six greatly improves the performance of the con­
verter. The ac line current has only odd harmonics and the value of g increases to 
0.96, indicating that the fundamental content is 96% of the total rms value of the 
current. A six-pulse converter is obtained by suitably connecting two three-pulse 
converters. The idea can be extended to increases the pulse number of the output 
voltage to 12 or 24 by suitable interconnections of six-pulse converters. It can 
be shown that connecting two six-pulse converters with 30° phase displacement 
results in a 12-pulse converter having an input current in which the lower fifth 
and seventh harmonics are absent. Also, increasing the pulse number decreases 
the output ripple which results in a reduced layout of smoothing inductance. The 
power factor improves, consequent to the improvement of g.
A 12 pulse converter, for higher voltage applications, is obtained by intercon­
necting two six pulse converters, as shown in Fig. 3.42. The input voltage to the
Fig- 3-42 
Twelve pulse converter

The McGraw-Hill Companies
8
■
■
■
 
Electric Drives
converters should have a phase difference of 30°, which can be achieved in two 
ways.
i. The primary of one transformer is connected in star and that of the other 
in delta.
ii. The converter transformer has two secondaries, one of which is con­
nected in star and the other in delta.
These connections are depicted 
in Fig. 3.43, 3.42.
Twelve pulse converters are 
also obtained by connecting two 
six pulse converters with an inter­
phase transformer through another 
interphase transformer. 12 pulses 
are obtained due to the phase dif­
ference between the instantaneous 
values and output voltages of indi­
vidual converters. The additional 
interphase transformer has almost 
the same design as other inter­
phase transformer. The connec­
tions are shown in Fig. 3.44.
The advantages of 12 pulse converters are obvious. The ripple content of the 
ac voltage superimposing the mean value of the dc voltage is reduced greatly. 
The value of g increases (0.988) effectively improving the power factor. The line 
currents of 12 pulse converters are shown in Fig. 3.44(b). They are built up by the
3-43 
Alternative arrangement of trans­
former to achieve 30° phase differ­
ence between secondary voltages
Fig. 3.44(a) 
Twelve pulse converter in interphase transformer connection

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
'si
's2
(Turns ratio=1)
Fig. 3.44(b) 
Line current of a twelve pulse converter
individual primary currents shown in the figure. The harmonics present are = 12K ± 1, 
K= 1,2,3,....
Sometimes the advantages of increasing the pulse number are offset by the 
complexity of the transformer connection and by the difficulties of maintaining 
balance in the system. This happens when two 12 pulse converters are intercon­
nected to form a 24 pulse one. Such difficulties do not encourage increasing the 
pulse number beyond 12 or at most 24.
General Comparison of Two Quadrant Converters 
The performance of various two 
quadrant converters can be compared. From the comparison, the following con­
clusions can be drawn:
i. The input power factor improves and the ripple content of the output 
voltage decreases as the number of pulses of the converter increases.
ii. The number of thyristors required in midpoint converters is just half the 
number required in a bridge connection. The current rating of the thyris­
tors is half, whereas the voltage rating is twice that for a bridge converter.
iii. The reduction in the number of thyristors is normally offset by the 
cost of high voltage thyristors and the converter transformer. Therefore

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
midpoint converters may not be economical, when compared to bridge 
converters.
iv. The transformer is utilised well in a bridge converter. If the supply volt­
age, gives the output voltage appropriately, one can dispense with the 
transformer.
Midpoint converters are suitable for low voltage and high current use as the 
number of thyristors is a minimum. Bridge circuits are widely employed.
3.2.2 
One Quadrant Converters
In certain drive applications, operation in the second quadrant, i.e. regeneration, is 
not necessary. The converter need not perform inversion. Such converters, operat­
ing only in one quadrant, are called one quadrant converters. They perform only 
rectification, i.e. convert ac to dc. When only one quadrant operation is required 
the converter can be made up of both diodes and thyristors. Normally half the 
number of devices are diodes and the other half are thyristors. They are therefore 
called half controlled or semi-controlled converters, and their overall cost is less.
One quadrant operation can also be obtained by having a free wheeling diode 
across the load, which can be used with both midpoint and bridge type converters. 
Semi controlled converters are possible only with bridge type converters. As we 
shall see later, the effectiveness of the free wheeling diode decreases as the pulse 
number increases. Compared to two quadrant converters, these have the following 
advantages:
i. The ripple content of the output voltage is decreased.
ii. The input power factor improves resulting in less reactive power con­
sumption.
Two Pulse Half Controlled Bridge Converters 
A two pulse half controlled bridge 
converter is obtained by connecting a two pulse controlled midpoint converter in 
series with an uncontrolled one, as shown in Fig. 3.45. The controlled converter 
has thyristors T] and T2 in a common cathode connection whereas the uncon­
trolled one has diodes D, and D2 in a common anode connection. The former is 
a positive group and the latter a negative group. The bridge can also be obtained
3-45 
Two pulse half controlled bridge converter (symmetrical connection)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
with the uncontrolled converter in the positive group and the controlled one in the 
negative group.
The voltage of the controlled converter can be varied from positive maximum 
to negative maximum by changing the phase angle from 0 to 180°. The output 
voltage of the uncontrolled bridge is constant. The net voltage at the load ter­
minals is the sum of the voltages of the controlled and uncontrolled groups. The 
average voltage varies from a maximum value to zero. The output voltage cannot 
reverse its polarity, due to the uncontrolled bridge. Only rectification is possible.
Taking the inverter limit of the controlled group into consideration, the phase 
angle can be varied from 0 to near about 180°. The average dc voltage varies 
from a maximum value to near about zero. Because of the inverter limit of the 
controlled converter, zero voltage is not possible.
The average value of the voltage at the dc terminals is given by
V&a = - ! y  (1 + cos a) 
(3.69)
where
Viw =
71
The control characteristic is shown in Fig. 3.46, wherein the inverter limit is 
indicated.
2^2Vl
Fig. 3.46 
Control characteristic and regulation

The McGraw Hill Companies
■
■
 
Electric Drives
T1
T2
t2
T
D^
d 2
D,
d2
(a) Overlap neglected
"1 ' T h
1
t D' J\ 
° 2
1 \,l,^__)
ur
(b) Overlap considered 
Fig. 3-47 
Voltage and current waveforms

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
For inductive loads there is an inherent free wheeling action provided by the 
incoming diode and the reverse biased thyristor, until the incoming thyristor is 
turned on. Referring to Fig. 3.47, the thyristor T and the diode Z), conduct during 
the positive half cycle while T2 and D ] do so in the next half cycle.
There are also periods of time where T{DX or T2D2 conduct simultaneously. The 
load current free wheels and mains are relieved from supplying the current when 
the devices placed diagonally opposite conduct, the supply voltage appears across 
the load. The current flows from the supply to the load. When the devices con­
nected in series conduct, the load voltage is zero and the load current free wheels.
To start with let us assume that T, and D2 are conducting. The portion of the 
positive half cycle appears across the load (a to n). At cot = n, D{ gets forward 
biased and the current transfers from D2toD D to T continues to conduct till T2 
is fired at appropriate firing angle [a + n\. Current transfers from T{ to Tr Now T2 
and D { conduct. The supply voltage appears across the load. Thus the thyristor is 
in conduction for 180°. There is an inherent free wheeling action because of the 
diodes, and this makes the voltage across the load zero. The negative excursions 
of the load voltage are prevented by the uncontrolled bridge.
The output voltage in the working range is affected by the device drops in the 
forward directions, as well as the resistance drops. The reactances in the line side 
of the converter are responsible for overlap. The current transfer takes place in a 
definite amount of time. The rate of change of current combined with the reac­
tances causes a voltage drop. This can be determined in the same way as for a 
fully controlled converter. Therefore
Vi = 
Via -  At -  
where
Vd = —y ~ (1 + cos a); 
Dx = —
(cos a -  cos(a + u)) (3.71)
For very small firing angles and highly inductive loads, it is not possible to turn 
off the converter in this connection by a sudden removal of firing pulses. The last 
thyristor fired remains in conduction indefinitely, making the input voltage appear 
across the dc terminals every other half cycle. For example, assume that at some 
instant of time Tx and D2 are conducting and instant the firing pulses are removed. 
When T7, is reverse biased, the natural free wheeling through T] and Dx maintains 
the current in the load and the load voltage is zero. If the current has not decayed 
to zero during this time, the thyristor T] gets a forward voltage and conducts as if 
a = 0. The positive half cycle of voltage appears across the load and the load 
current flows through Tx and D2 for the complete half cycle. This phenomenon 
is called half waving. To turn off the converter is to maintain the gate pulses and 
retard the firing angle such that the load voltage is reduced. Consequently the load 
current falls below the holding current of the thyristor.
The elimination of the negative excursions of dc voltage due to natural free 
wheeling is advantageous, in that the superimposed ac ripple on the average dc 
voltage decreases with reduced smoothing equipment.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
It can also be observed from the current waveforms that the period of conduc­
tion of the input current pulses decreases as the firing angle is retarded, i.e. out­
put voltage is reduced. Thus the reactive power requirements of a half controlled 
bridge are considerably less than those of the fully controlled one at reduced volt­
age. The rms value of the input current
(3.72)
The fundamental displacement factor is cos all. The saving in control reactive 
power is considerable, as the free wheeling action takes place even at a = n. How­
ever there is no saving in commutation reactive power.
The periods of current flow in the thyristor and diode are equal. The peak for­
ward or reverse voltage of the devices is equal to
V2 F,
or
rdb
In
X -  g cos a/2  =
The harmonic components of the input current depend upon the control angle. They 
have different spectrum at different a. Therefore the value of g depends upon a. 
The total power factor is
2 V2 cos2 a/2
n 
7(1 -  a!n) 
^3’73^
The ripple content in the 
output voltage is reduced 
because of the inherent free 
wheeling action, which pre­
vents the negative excursions 
of the output voltage. The 
amount of smoothing induc­
tance in the load circuit is 
small it is only 57% of the 
value required with a fully 
controlled converter. The per­
formance of the converter is 
summarised in Fig. 3.48.
The other possible half 
controlled two pulse bridge 
connection is as shown in Fig. 
3.49. This is a symmetrical 
connection. The voltage and 
current waveforms of the con­
verter are shown in Fig. 3.50. 
The free wheeling is provided by the diodes D ] Dr The thyristor T] and diode 
D1 conduct in the positive half cycle and T and D in the negative half cycle.
Fig. 3.48 
Performance characteristics

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
At the end of the positive 
half cycle, D2 acquires a 
positive voltage and DXD2 
free wheel the load current.
This free wheeling prevents 
the negative portions from 
appearing in the output 
voltage. The operation and 
behaviour of the circuit is 
the same as the previous 
circuit as far as the output 
voltage, power factor, etc. 
are concerned. 
However 
there are two differences.
First, the half waving of the circuit is not present. From the waveforms of the 
current, it can be seen that as a increases the period of conduction of the thyris­
tor decreases and that of the diode increases. The devices can, therefore, be rated 
accordingly depending upon their maximum period of conduction. The period of 
the input current pulses decreases as a is delayed.
Half controlled 2-pulse converters of large power find application in tram 
cars in which single phase power is rectified to feed the traction motor. In these 
applications one tries to improve the reactive power saving without giving much 
importance to regenerative braking.
Three Phase Half Controlled Bridge Circuit 
This is obtained by a series connection 
of a 3 pulse controlled converter and a 3 pulse uncontrolled one. The three arms of 
the former consist of thyristors and the three arms of the latter comprise diodes. A 
typical circuit is shown in Fig. 3.51. Here the controlled converter is shown with 
a common cathode connection and forming the positive group. The uncontrolled 
one has a common anode connection and forms the negative group. It is also pos­
sible to have the converter with connections the other way around. The thyristors 
commutate at the phase angle at which they are fired. The diodes commutate at 
the natural firing instant <3 = 0. The thyristors conduct for 120° and are fired at 
intervals of 120°. The output voltages of the two converters are added to get the 
net output voltage at the dc terminals. The firing angle of the controlled converter 
ranges from 0 to 180° (under ideal conditions). The output voltage is varied from 
a positive maximum to a negative maximum. The average value of the voltage for 
the uncontrolled converter is fixed at the maximum value of the controlled one. 
The net voltage at the dc terminal varies from a positive maximum to zero. In 
practice, due to the inverter limit of the controlled converter, the voltage cannot 
go to zero.
A thyristor and a diode conduct at any given time the diode is forward biased 
at the natural firing instant. A thyristor conducts, even if it is reverse biased, until 
the next thyristor in the sequence is fired. Thus there is a natural free wheeling of 
the load current via the incoming diode and outgoing thyristor. The load voltage
F'g- 3-49 
Two pulse half controlled asymmetrical 
bridge converter

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(a) Overlap neglected XK = 0
>\ D 2 D t JI d 2 \  
°1 
j
---------- \
<L
U
------------_
æ __zu
d,/d2 \ d2y o2 p, \ p ^
_
Q
(b) Overlap considered
Fig. 3.50 
Voltage and current waveforms of a half controlled asymmetrical two pulse 
circuit
is zero during the free wheeling period. Free wheeling due to conduction of diode 
does not allow negative excursions of load voltage. This reduces the ripple content 
in the output voltage. The ripple frequency of the output voltage at a -  0 is 6/  For 
a < 60°, free wheeling does not take place since the voltage is always positive 
on the dc side. The negative instantaneous value does not occur. Free wheeling

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Fig. 3-51 
Three-phase half controlled bridge circuit
(a) Overlap neglected XK = 0
Fig. 3.52 
Voltage and current waveforms of half controlled 3-phase bridge converter 
a = 6o°
takes place only when a > 60°. The ripple frequency decreases to 3/’at these firing 
angles (a > 60°). The ripple voltage is less at a -  60° and it increases for a > 60°. 
Compared to a fully controlled converter, the smoothing inductance required is 
large at a -  90°, even though there is inherent free wheeling.
The average values of dc voltage can be obtained as (Fig. 3.52)
Kdio (1 + cos a) for 0° < a < 180°
2
(3.74)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
where 
= —— 
VL = 1.35FL
71
considering the voltage drops due to the reactances (overlap), resistances and the 
device drops, the dc voltage in the operating region
V* = Vaa -  D, -  IdR -  (VT + VD) 
(3.75)
where Dx = Vdio/2 (cos a -  cos (a -  u))
s 
\ 
I & 
2/dXk
cos a -  cos((7. + u) = —=— = --------
V2/k 
(2tt/3)
The voltage and current waveforms of the converter at different firing angles are 
shown in Fig. 3.52. The line current waveforms show that the period of the current 
pulse decreases in the line as the firing angle is increased. The effective values 
of the fundamental as well as the harmonics depend upon the firing angle. The 
value of g depends on the firing angle; it is not constant, as in the case of a fully 
controlled converter. All the harmonics can be referred to the mean value of dc 
current. Hence with larger delay angles, the effective value of line current is much 
smaller than at a = 0. However the effective value of the harmonics is much larger 
at greater delay angles, and becomes a large percentage of the input current.
The fundamental displacement factor is cos(a/2). The total power factor is 
g cos(a/2). Where g is the ratio of the fundamental rms current to the total rms 
current. From the current waveforms, we get
X = (3/71) cos(a/2) 
0 < 
a <60° 
(3-76
X = (yffUn) 
(cos2 a!2 ) /Vi -  a In 
60° < a < 180°
The rms value of current
I.. = 7d^2/3 
0 < a < 60° 
and
7  = /d-V1 ~ a /n  60° < 
180° 
There is a saving of control reactive power but not of commutation reactive power. 
The power factor as a function of VdJV di is depicted in Fig. 3.53. An improve­
ment in the power factor can be seen in the range 0° < a < 180°. The value of g is 
the same as for a fully controlled converter in the range 0 < a < 60°.
The peak forward and reverse voltage of the thyristors and diodes is V2HL 
where Vx is the rms line to line voltage. The thyristor current is 0.45 VL / R. The 
rms value of the thyristor and diode currents is
A  = 0.78 — 
V3 
R
(3.78)
For highly inductive loads and small firing angles the converter shows the phe­
nomenon of half waving. This can be prevented by means of the FWD across the 
load.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Fig. 3*53 
Performance of three phase half controlled bridge circuit
General Features of Half Controlled Converters 
When only unidirectional applica­
tions are involved it is advantageous to use half controlled converters as they 
provide the following special features over two quadrant converters: i.
i. The converters are economical as half the positions are occupied by diodes.
ii. The firing circuit provides signals only to half the number of thyristors 
and therefore are simple and less costly.
iii. The performance of the converter on the line improves as the power factor 
improves. The control reactive power is less. This is because the period of 
conduction of the input current pulse decreases as a increases. The input 
current is zero when the voltage is zero. Thus the reactive power require­
ment becomes less. There is no saving in commutation reactive power.
iv. The voltage variation is between a maximum value and (near about) 
zero when the firing angle varies from 0 to 180°. However the inverter 
limit does not allow a to equal 180° and hence the voltage cannot go to 
zero. Zero output voltage can be obtained by supplying the component 
converter with different voltages. The converter transformer having two 
secondaries of appropriate turns feeds the converters. The voltage sup­
plied to the controlled portion is 10% larger than that supplied to the 
uncontrolled one.
v. The amplitude of ripple decreases and hence the amount of smoothing 
inductance required is less. This is because natural free wheeling does 
not allow negative excursions of voltage.
vi. The ripple frequency is half that of a fully controlled converter (3-phase 
converters).

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 3*54 
Two pulse converters with free wheeling 
diode
Two Pulse Converters with 
Free Wheeling Diode One
quadrant converters can also 
be obtained by connecting a 
free wheeling diode across 
the load terminals. This is 
possible with both midpoint 
and bridge converters, as 
shown in Fig. 3.54. The free 
wheeling diode provides a 
local path for the load cur­
rent when the thyristors are 
reverse biased. The thyristor 
conducts only for (n -  a), in­
stead of n, similar to the case 
of an unsymmetrical half 
controlled bridge. The free 
wheeling of the load cur­
rent does not allow negative 
swings of the load voltage, 
and the load voltage is zero. 
The dc output voltage is
■^ -( 1  + cos a) 
2
(3.79)
Ti
To
'D
'D
\ nn [
T°\ 
P°\
Fig. 3*55 
Voltage and current waveforms of 2-pulse converters with FWD

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
The absence of negative swings in the output voltage improves the output volt­
age as far as its ripple is concerned. The associated smoothing inductance is also 
small. The reduction in the conduction angle of the input current ripple, as the fir­
ing angle increases, decreases the total reactive power demand. The commutation 
reactive power does not, however, change. The voltage and current waveforms are 
shown in Fig. 3.55.
The behaviour of these converters is same as that of symmetrical and unsym- 
metrical bridge connections. The free wheeling diode is effective in the complete 
range of firing angles, a = 0 to 180°.
Three Pulse Converter with Free 
Wheeling Diode A three pulse con­
verter with a free wheeling diode 
across the load terminals is depicted 
in Fig. 3.56. The diode is meant to 
provide an alternative path for the 
load current, which would otherwise 
have flown through the converter.
The diode becomes positively bi­
ased when the load voltage becomes 
negative, and starts conducting. At 
this time the thyristor of the con­
verter is reverse biased and stops 
conduction. Thus, negative swings 
of the load voltage are avoided and 
it is zero during free wheeling.
Inversion is not possible. In the 
converter, the FWD becomes effec­
tive only for those firing angles for which the load voltage tends to become nega­
tive. For firing angles, up to tc/6, the diode does not get a forward voltage as the 
load voltage has no tendency to become negative. For a 3 pulse converter the 
diode is effective for a > n/6.
<>
Fig. 3.56 
Three pulse converter with free 
wheeling diode
Therefore 
0 < a < n/6
n/6 < a < 5 n/6
Kiia
Vim
= 
rd
= Viio
"  V3
cos a
(1 + cos(a + n/6))
(3.80)
The effective variation of a is only from 0 to 5n/6 The control characteristic
is shown in Fig. 3.60. Until the free wheeling diode takes part in conduction, 
n
i.e. 0 < a < —, the converter operates as a two quadrant one and there is thus no
reactive power saving in this range of angles.
The terminal voltage is affected in the working range by the drops in the input 
reactances, resistance and device drops.
The free wheeling diode improves the performance in the same way as in the 
case of a half controlled rectifier. The input current pulses have a conduction angle

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
which decreases with increasing a. During free wheeling, no current is drawn 
from the mains when the load voltage is zero. This helps in reducing the control 
reactive power requirement. The current in mid point converters flows from line to 
neutral. The input power factor and harmonics are the same as in the case of half 
controlled converters. The overlap due to commutation and the necessary reactive 
power for commutation is the same as in the fully controlled case. The advantages
Ydi«
n ___n
Fig- 3 -5 7 
Voltage and current waveforms of a three-pulse converter with FWD

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
of the converter are available only when the diode participates in conduction, i.e. 
a > 60°. The voltage and current waveforms are shown in Fig. 3.57.
Bridge Rectifier with Free Wheeling Diode A 6 pulse bridge rectifier with a free 
wheeling diode across the load terminals is shown in Fig. 3.58. As has already been 
explained, the diode participates in conduction only when the instantaneous load 
voltage tends to become negative. This occurs for firing angles greater than 60°. For 
a < 60° the bridge operates as a fully controlled one and the mean output voltage is
3^  „ 
3V2 „
----- Fph cos a = ------ VL cos a
71 
71
~  fdio cos a
(3.81)
Fig. 3.58 
Three phase bridge rectifier with FWD
Fig* 3 -5 9 
Voltage and current waveforms of three phase bridge rectifier with FWD a = 750

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 3.60(a) 
Control characteristics of bridge type converter with FWD.1) two-pulse
Fig. 3.60(b) 
Control characteristics of bridge type converter with FWD
1. 2-pulse converter with FWD
2. 3-pulse converter with FWD
3. 6-pulse converter with 2 FWD
4. 6-pulse converter with 1 FWD

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
For a > 60° and < 120° the free wheeling action of the diode does not permit 
negative excursions of the instantaneous voltage and hence the average value of 
voltage is
3
*di a = ----- ^ph(l + cos(a + n/3)) 
(3.82)
n
The control characteristic is shown in Fig. 3.60. There is a distinct difference 
between the output voltage of a half controlled converter and that of a fully con­
trolled one with FWD. But for this difference, the improvement in the power 
factor, reactive power requirement, etc. during free wheeling are the same. These 
advantages are present only during the free wheeling action.
It is clear from the above discussion that as the number of pulses increases, 
the advantages of FWD get sharply reduced. For example, in a six pulse con­
verter, with a view to saving reactive power, FWD is effective only after a = 60°. 
On the other hand, in two pulse converters it is effective in the complete range 
of firing angles, from 0 to 180°. The control reactive power is reduced but not 
the commutation reactive power. The dc side voltage harmonics are smoothened, 
thereby reducing the amount of smoothing equipment. The ripple content of the 
unsmoothed dc voltage is reduced and a continuous dc is available with small 
smoothing inductances, thereby avoiding discontinuous conduction.
Series Connection of Converters—One in the Fully Controlled Mode and the other in the 
Uncontrolled Mode 
The converter connections are shown in Fig. 3.61. Operation 
is similar to that of a half controlled bridge circuit. Actually the principle of a half
Fig. 3.61 
Series connection of fully controlled and uncontrolled converters

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
controlled bridge circuit is extended to obtain the present circuit, by connecting 
two individual bridge circuits in series, one in the fully controlled mode and the 
other in the uncontrolled mode. This connection is preferred when high dc volt­
ages are required. The output voltage
fdi« =
fdio ' (1 + cos a)
V  
V‘
Kdio is the output voltage provided by the diode bridge and
dio
(3.83)
cos a is the
voltage provided by the thyristor bridge. Also
V.*dio
2 n VL =
3%/3
In
Kph
(3.84)
The control characteristic is shown in Fig. 3.62. Voltage variation up to zero is 
not possible, due to the inverter limit of the controlled converter. Zero voltage can 
be obtained by supplying the two converters with different voltages, the supply
Fig. 3.62 
Control characteristic of converter in Fig. 3.61
voltage to the controlled one being 10% greater. The inverter limit is fixed so that 
there is a margin angle of quenching of 10°.
The converter provides some saving in reactive power. The output voltage has 
a reduced ripple. The voltage and current waveforms are shown in Fig. 3.63. The 
fundamental displacement factor as seen from the waveforms on the input side is 
c o s ( g / 2 ) ,  i.e.
cos ()) = cos(æ/2) =
(3.85)
The input harmonics depend upon the firing angle. Therefore the improvement 
in the total power factor is not quite the same as that in the displacement factor. 
The total power factor as a function of firing angle is shown in Fig. 3.64.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Fig. 3*63 
Voltage and current waveforms of series connected fully controlled and 
uncontrolled bridges

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 3.64 
Performance curves of series connected half controlled six pulse converter 
(fully controlled converter in series with an uncontrolled one)
Sequence Control of Converters 
We have shown that fully controlled converters 
take lagging reactive power from the mains. This requirement is less in half con­
trolled converters and converters with a free wheeling diode, which however do 
not provide the process of inversion. In both cases the reactive power requirement 
increases as the angle of firing is retarded.
It is possible to improve the behaviour of the converter with respect to control 
reactive power requirement, by the sequential control of two or more converters 
connected in series. Besides improving the reactive power consumption convert­
ers with sequential control can also be used for high voltages at the output.
When several converters are connected in series and controlled one after 
another, it is called sequence control. The reactive power requirement of the con­
verters in this method is considerably less than the sum of each individually.
1. Series Control of 3-phase Bridge Circuits 
A 3-phase bridge circuit is obtained by 
a series connection of 3-phase converters. For a -  0 the dc voltage is zero. The 
thyristors of both the 3-phase converters are controlled simultaneously.
On the other hand, if the 3-phase converters are controlled such that converter 
I operates as an inverter (Fig. 3.65) and converter II as a rectifier, then when the 
firing angle of the former is 180° and that of the latter is 0°, the dc voltage Vdia = 0. 
The individual converters require zero reactive power.
The converter operates as a rectifier if converter II is uncontrolled (a = 0) 
and converter I has a transition from an inverter to a rectifier. Only converter I 
requires reactive power for control. When inverter operation is required, con­
verter I is always operated as an inverter and the firing angle of converter II is 
retarded from 0°.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Fig. 3.65 
Three-phase bridge employing sequence control
In sequence control, the reactive power never exceeds the value of the reactive 
power required when a single fully controlled converter is used. When two are 
used in series, the total reactive power is just half the reactive power required by 
one converter.
The operation, with respect to reactive power becomes more comfortable if the 
number of series connected converters increases. The ratio of the reactive power 
required with sequence control, to the reactive power required with a converter 
decreases. In view of the resulting complexity, however it is not advisable to use 
more than two converters in series for sequence control.
Saving is possible only for control reactive power and not for commutation 
reactive power. As the number of series connected converters increases the com­
mutation reactive power increases, even though there is a saving in control reac­
tive power.
The inverter limit should be given due consideration.
Two bridge type converters can also be used for sequence control. The individ­
ual bridges may have different initial overlap angles. The dc voltage at the output 
terminals of 3-phase bridge converters in sequence control is shown in Fig. 3.66a 
for rectifier operation and Fig. 3.66b for inverter operation.
2. Series Connection of Two Bridge Converters with Sequence Control of Both 
This ar­
rangement has a behaviour similar to that of bridge circuit with sequence control 
of individual converters. It has an advantage of reduced ripple content because of 
6-pulse operation.
3. Series Connection of Two Bridge Converters with Sequence Control of Individual 
Converters 
The arrangement is depicted in Fig. 3.67. The bridges are supplied 
from a transformer having two secondaries, each supplying one bridge. The reac­
tive power requirement of this arrangement is less than that of a single converter 
having sequence control in its halves. The converter should be controlled with 
a definite margin angle of quenching, which decides its inverter limit. It is not 
worthwhile having more than two converters in series.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
DC voltage with sequence 
control as a rectifier a
DC voltage with sequence 
control as an inverter
« ^ 90°, a11=0°I Vdia=Vdil2
«-1=150°, «=97.7°, Vdk = VdJ2
Fig. 3.66 
Voltage waveforms of dc voltage of a bridge with sequence control

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Optional Free Wheeling Optional free wheeling in the bridges using thyristors is 
given in Fig 3.68.
A fully controlled bridge converter has a disadvantage of poor powerfactor at 
small control ratios. A half controlled bridge converter has a power-factor better 
than that of a fully controlled one at the same voltage ratio. However, half controlled 
converters do not possess the capacity of inversion. Thus half controlled converters 
have limited application as one quadrant ones. It is possible to use a fully controlled 
bridge circuit as half controlled one by controlling a set of thyristors a diodes by 
triggering them at their natural firing instant. When the inversion is required they 
are operated as thyristors and their firing angles are varied from 90° to 180°. Such 
a facility is called optional freewheeling. In Fig. 3.68, two quadrant converters are 
shown with encircled thyristors to provide optional freewheeling. These are con­
trolled as diodes during rectification and as thyristors during inversion. Such a con­
trol is possible in converters with freewheeling diodes. Here the diode is replaced by 
a thyristor which is fired at its natural firing instant for freewheeling action. When
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
A  Ti 
A
7^ D1 
A  Ö2
R
L
A 
A  i t2
£  T* 
r 4
A
A
A
R
A
A
A
R
A
A
A
|aj ;_a : |a ;
L
Fig. 3.68 
Optional free wheeling in the bridges using thyristors

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
the inversion is required the control pulses to the thyristors are blocked and the 
converter operates as a two quadrant one. Optional freewheeling enables a converter 
operate in both rectification and inversion modes providing the advantages of free 
wheeling during rectification. Sequence control discussed in the foregoing is a kind 
of optional freewheeling providing the advantages during inversion also.
3.2.3 
Four Quadrant Converters
The converters described in the previous sections are suitable either for one quad­
rant or two quadrant operation. In the former case stepless speed control is possible 
by changing the applied voltage. There is no regeneration. In the latter case both 
speed control and regeneration are possible. The converter operates in the inversion 
mode as well. The sign of the dc voltage changes and the current direction is speci­
fied by the thyristor. Operation is possible in the neighbouring quadrant in the V-I 
plane (speed-torque plane). The converter fed drive has regeneration capability.
Sometimes dual converter finds application where speed control and regenera­
tive capability are available in both directions of rotation. It operates in the reverse 
direction. Such a converter can be realised by combining two 2 quadrant convert­
ers having different directions of current. A converter allowing operation in all 
the four quadrants is called a four quadrant converter. It is also called a dual or 
reversing converter. It provides control as well as regeneration in both directions 
of rotation, as shown in Fig. 3.69.
A dual converter can be realised by either an antiparallel connection of two 2 
quadrant converters or a cross connection. Figures 3.70 (a) and 3.71 (a) show the 
two possible connections of 3-pulse controlled rectifiers. Depending upon the cur­
rent direction, either converter I or converter II feeds the current to the dc motor.
Positive converter 
Negative converter
1 
•-------------------------------- 1
Fig. 3.69 
Principle of dual converter

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Fig. 3.70 
Dual converters in cross connection

The McGraw-Hill Companies
sM
Electric Drives
In an antiparallel connection a single secondary of the transformer is sufficient. 
The two converters operate in opposite directions as far as the dc load is con­
cerned. On the other hand, a cross connection has individual secondaries for the 
converters. An antiparallel connection is advantageous with 3 pulse converters, 
whereas a cross connection is better with 6 pulse converters. Figure 3.70(b) shows 
6 pulse bridge converters supplying a reversible dc motor.
The block diagram of an antiparallel connection for a dual converter is depicted 
in Fig. 3.71(b). The firing angle of the two converters must be such that the average 
values of the voltages of the two converters are the same at the dc terminals, in both 
magnitude and polarity. Because of the nature of the connection this condition is 
possible only if one converter is a rectifier and the other an inverter. Thus, if ap is the 
firing angle of the converter operating as a rectifier (say positive group), the firing 
angle of the converter operating as an inverter (say negative group) aN = 1 8 0 - ap.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
By controlling the firing angles of the converters, the average values of the 
voltages of the converters are made equal and of opposite polarity. Even though 
this condition is satisfied, the instantaneous values of the dc output voltages are 
not equal. The difference of these voltages, also called loop voltages, causes a 
circulating current. The circulating current is limited by the smoothing induc­
tance. The path of the circulating current is shown in Fig. 3.72, for different fir-
Fig. 3.72 
Loop voltage and circulating current of dual converters

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
ing angles. One can see that the current is continuous for a < 60° and becomes 
discontinuous for a > 60°. This is an additional loading on the thyristors and the 
transformer. However, it offers an advantage in that the circulating current does 
not permit the converter to go into discontinuous conduction and thus the associ­
ated difficulties are not present. The characteristics of the converter correspond 
to continuous conduction. The circulating current can be controlled. The control 
circuit adjusts the firing angles so that their sum is slightly less than 180°. This 
causes a difference in the average values, resulting in a dc component of the cir­
culating current. This may reach unacceptable values if the difference of voltages 
is large and the limiting resistance and reactance are less.
Bridge circuits in an antiparallel connection forming a dual converter are 
shown in Fig. 3.71(b). This requires four current limiting reactors of large size and
F'g- 3-73 
Schematic of control of a dc motor using dual converter of two bridges in 
cross connection

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors 
^ ^ 3
a circulating current having three pulses is established. This has a disadvantage 
with regard to its control circuit and hence is rarely used.
The cross connected converter in Fig. 3.70 (b) shows better behaviour. The cir­
culating current has a sixth harmonic ripple. The average value of the circulating 
current and the smoothing inductance are smaller than in the case of three pulse 
circuits. The schematic of the control of a dc motor using cross connected bridges 
is shown in Fig. 3.73.
A dual converter can also be operated in a non-circulating current mode. The 
converter shown in Fig. 3.74 is made up of bridge converters in an antiparallel 
connection. The control logic should be such that at any instant only one converter 
conducts and the firing pulses to the other are blocked. The control circuit needs 
to be more sophisticated. The change over from one converter to the other takes 
place in the following way:
i. The sign change is provided at the output of the speed controller.
ii. The speed controller is blocked by limiting the output voltage. The cur­
rent controller is separated from the control circuit. The firing pulses are 
retarded to the inverter limit for the rapid building up of current.
iii. The zero crossing of the current is detected and the pulses of the con­
ducting converter are blocked.
iv. The control circuit is again connected to the current controller. Control 
pulses to the converter and limiting of speed controller will be for the 
new direction of rotation.
Fig. 3.74 
Dual converter in non-circulating current mode
m
m

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
There should be a time lag of 3 ms for change over to occur, because simulta­
neous conduction of the converters must be avoided. A single control circuit and 
one smoothing inductance are sufficient. The latter can be small in size, if the 
armature inductance is large. A transformer can be dispensed with if the supply 
voltage is employed directly. The control circuit needs further refinement in case 
discontinuous conduction takes place.
3.3 
DC CHOPPERS
DC Choppers are mainly dc to dc single stage conversion devices which provide a 
variable voltage on the load side when fed from a constant dc voltage source. The 
commutation of the current from the thyristors cannot be achieved by means of 
supply voltage. The necessary reactive power for the converter must be provided 
by means of energy storage elements in the circuit itself. A continuously variable 
voltage is available at the output terminals for feeding dc motors. This is more 
effective method than resistance control because of the absence of losses. The 
choppers can be used for two and four quadrant operation of dc motors.
3.3.1 
Principles of dc Chopper
The basic circuit of a dc chopper is shown in Fig. 3.75. The main thyristor T{ is 
turned ON and OFF periodically, so that the supply voltage Vd is available at the out­
put as a pulse train. By changing the ON period of the thyristor the average voltage 
of the load can be varied. The switching of the thyristor is accomplished by means 
of a firing pulse from a control circuit. The turn off of the thyristor at the desired
instant is achieved by a series cir­
cuit of an auxiliary thyristor and 
a capacitor connected across the 
main thyristor. A firing pulse is 
provided by the same control cir­
cuit to the auxiliary thyristor. This 
goes into conduction, applying 
the capacitor voltage to the main 
thyristor in the reverse direction. 
The value of the capacitor is so 
chosen that the main thyristor has a negative voltage, and remains current free for a 
time greater than the turn off time (t) of the thyristor, so that the thyristor T] regains 
its positive blocking capability and a satisfactory commutation of the load current 
to the auxiliary thyristor takes place. The capacitor gets charged further by means of 
this constant load current, as shown in Fig. 3.76(b). When it gets charged to Vd in the 
opposite direction the auxiliary thyristor ceases conduction. The current has now 
been transferred to the free wheeling diode (D2) which is there in the circuit to pro­
vide an alternative path for the load current when the main thyristor is switched off. 
This is required when the load is inductive. The free wheeling diode conducts until 
the main thyristor is again fired after the completion of Tofr Another circuit, com­
prising a diode and an inductance is placed in parallel to the auxiliary thyristor. This 
forms a resonating circuit with the commutating capacitor of the polarity needed for
Fig. 3-75 
Basic circuit of a dc chopper

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
commutation of the main thyristor. When T} is fired in its sequence a local circuit is 
formed by the commutating capacitor, main thyristor Ty the inductance L2 and Dy 
The capacitor discharges through the circuit. After half the cycle of oscillation of the 
circuit the capacitor is charged to Vd (in ideal conditions) to a polarity required for 
the next commutation. The diode blocks further discharge of the capacitor, thereby 
trapping the charge on the capacitor for the next commutation. The voltage and 
current waveforms are depicted in Fig. 3.76. To avoid the high rates of change of 
current in the thyristors, additional inductances are provided. Sometimes the line 
inductances may suffice in protecting the main thyristor from di/dt.
During the commutation the time taken by the commutating capacitor to reach 
zero voltage after the auxiliary thyristor is fired, is
(3.86)
Fig. 3.76 
Wave forms of voltage and current of a chopper circuit

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
This is the circuit turn off time and the negative voltage appears across the main 
thyristor for t . For satisfactory commutation the thyristor must acquire its positive 
blocking capability. In other words
h ^ tq 
(3.87)
Using this equation, the minimum value of capacitance can be determined using 
the formula
C > tq
(3.88)
Thus the minimum Value of the capacitance for commutation is directly propor­
tional to the load current and the turn off time of the thyristor. The capacitance 
depends directly upon the source voltage. To limit the size of the capacitor, fast 
thyristors with a small turn off time (t ) are used. There is a chance of failure of
commutation if the capacitor is charged to a voltage lower than Vd, for which it has 
already been designed. Fluctuations in Vd may also cause difficulties in thyristor 
commutation. The load current should not be below the value of L for which the
d
capacitance is designed.
3.3.2 
Effects of Inductances of the Circuit on the Performance 
of the Chopper
The preceding discussion of the chopper assumes ideal conditions and does not 
consider the effects of inductances in series with the thyristors. With choppers of 
large power, the leads connecting the chopper to the supply have a definite amount 
of inductance (Ze). Also, reactors are placed in series with the thyristors, to protect 
them from di/dt. These inductances affect the performance of the chopper and 
sometimes cause a failure of commutation. The energy stored in these inductances 
is transferred to the capacitor, thus increasing its voltage.
The input inductance has the disadvantage of increasing the voltage across 
the commutating capacitance. If the inductance is very large this voltage may 
attain very high undesirable values. Therefore a smoothing capacitor is required 
at the input. The capacitor and input inductance must resonate at a frequency that 
is l/3rd the chopper frequency. When a chopper is used for traction purposes, 
the input inductance varies and its minimum value must be considered. This fre­
quency requirement is satisfied by an extra inductance between the line and the 
chopper. The value of this inductance is chosen such that the circuit formed by the 
capacitor, this and line inductance resonates at a frequency less than 1/3 chopper 
frequency.
The increased charge makes the corresponding energy flow to the source via 
the free wheeling diode D and D . The inductance LK and commuting capacitance 
form a resonant circuit, and a sinusoidal current is introduced which makes the 
voltage across the capacitor less than Vd (Fig. 3.77). When the thyristor T is fired 
after the successful free wheeling of £>, the voltage to which the capacitor gets 
recharged is less than Vd. Consequently the circuit turn off time ts decreases. The

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
effect is pronounced at large load currents. If ts becomes less than t , the com­
mutation failure occurs. The voltage and current waveforms as affected by the 
inductances are shown in Fig. 3.78.
Commutation failure may be avoided by replacing the diode D} with a thy­
ristor T . This introduces no additional complications in the control, since it is 
fired along with T . The commutating capability is clearly improved because the
Fig. 3.78 
Voltage and current waveforms of chopper having input inductance

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 3*79 
Modified chopper circuit taking the input inductance into consideration
capacitor voltage is larger at larger currents. The introduction of T3 (Fig. 3.79) 
and its firing along with T prevents the flow of extra current, which is responsible 
for the reduction of capacitor voltage. The voltage of the capacitor is maintained 
at V..d
The duration of the charging process of the condenser is dependent on the 
load current. Because of this, a minimum TOK has to be assured and the time ratio 
T J T  (a) cannot be varied up to zero. There is a lower limit for a (i.e. TQJT), 
which increases as the load current decreases. At very light load currents the 
capacitor may not be charged to sufficient voltage and commutation failure may 
occur. Therefore sufficient T0 must be provided for the capacitor to charge to Vd. 
As I approaches zero the charging and discharging of the capacitor takes very 
long time control of the chopper will not be of high quality. This difficulty can 
be avoided by making the commutation and associated processes independent of 
load current. To achieve this an additional circuit containing a series combination 
of a diode Z>4 and inductance L4 is connected in parallel to the main thyristor, as 
shown in Fig. 3.80. The charging of the capacitor is independent of load cur­
rent. When the auxiliary thyristor is fired, the current gets transferred to T . The 
load current flows through the capacitor and discharges it. The capacitor forms a
d 3 
L3
Fig. 3.80 
Modified circuit having capacitor charging independent of load current

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
resonant circuit with L3 + L4 and is quickly charged to a higher voltage. Tv there­
fore, conducts both the load current and this charging current. The charging cur­
rent flows via D4 and L4, and the charging becomes independent of load current. 
These conditions are shown in Fig. 3.81. By a proper choice of inductance in the 
resonating circuit, the resonant frequency can be varied. The minimum value of 
Ton is decided by the resonant frequency. It must be half the period of this fre­
quency. The lower limit of T()N can be made as small as possible by selecting the 
inductance properly.
/
100 ps
/1
\
1
----- ►
1
\
t
/
/ \ \
1 \
\
----- >-
1 DO mV
t
(a)
Fig. 3.81 
(a) Capacitor voltage and diode D1
T3 current
s
100ps
1
\
1i1
\
//
\
\
10OmV
(b)
current (b) Capacitor voltage and thyristor
3.3.3 
Performance of Chopper
Assuming steady-state conditions of the chopper, we have during TON
L —  + iR = V,
At 
d
The solution of Eq. 3.89 is
R
(
Ir
Va ^ 
*
R
— t
e L
/
where 7n is the current at the starting of T()N. At T()K = aT, the current is
d
7a = —  + 
R
Í 
Vr '  
R
h -
R
- - a T
e L
/
(3.89)
(3.90)
(3.91)
when the thyristor is OFF, free wheeling takes place and the operation is 
described by
L ^ - +  RiD = 0  
di
(3.92)
which has the solution
iD 
= Iae
Again taking t -  0 at the start of T()1 F, at the end of 7^ = (1 -  d)T the current is
I0 - I ae-Ri'-a)TIL 
(3.94)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Using these equations
A)
f e -R (\-a )T IL e -(RIL)T >
1 _  P- ( R !L ) T
V 
v a  
y
(3.95)
The value of /  can also be determined. The difference /  -  7() gives the peak to 
peak amplitude of the ripple superimposing the average dc current.
The amplitude of the ripple depends upon the time ratio a. Figure 3.82 depicts 
the variation of load current for different values of a. It can be seen from the figure 
that the ripple amplitude is maximum at a -  0.5 and decreases for both a > 0.5 and 
a < 0.5. These can be derived for d.c. series motor assuming it to be an R-L load 
using the above equations. For a separately excited motor, the back emf has to be 
considered. Assuming no losses in the motor, E = aVd. In this case,
di
L —  + aVd = Vd 
d t 
d 
d
(3.96)
solving which we get
i — I q + 
(1 
ci)t 
L
(3.97)
The current at the end of T0N = aT is
h  = A) + A  0 -  a)aT
(3.98)
Fig. 3.82 
Constant frequency; variable TQN control of a dc chopper

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
from which
Ia
(1 -  a)aT
(3.99)
The solution for i shows a linear variation of current. The ripple superimposing 
the average dc current becomes triangular. The peak value of the ripple is
M
T
2 k
2 L
(1 -  a)aT
(3.100)
The rms value of the current
2 j h T '  a)aT 
(3-101)
From Eq. 3.100, we can see that the ripple has a maximum amplitude at a = 0.5. 
The ripple makes the load current discontinuous at very low values of load cur­
rent. This lower limit of load current is influenced by the type of load. For R-L 
loads one can go down to very low values of current if the time constant is suf­
ficiently large. For the back emf loads discontinuous operation occurs early. The 
lower limit of load current is high in this case.
The ripple in the load current can basically be reduced by increasing the chop­
per frequency and by introducing an extra inductance in the load circuit.
3.3.4 
Methods of Controlling a Chopper
The basic principle of control of a chopper is the effective change of the value of 
the time ratio. This is done in two ways:
i. Time ratio control
ii. Current limit control
In the former, the ratio TQJ T  is varied. This can be achieved by varying Tm , 
keeping the chopper period T constant, which is called pulse width control or 
constant frequency control. The waveforms of voltage and current for this type of 
control are shown in Fig. 3.83. The variation of the time ratio can also be achieved
Fig. 3.83 
Control of a dc chopper

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
by keeping 7 
constant and varying the chopper period 7, which is called pulse 
frequency control or variable frequency control. The waveforms of voltage and 
current for this method are depicted in Fig. 3.83. From the waveforms it is clear 
that the maximum and minimum values of load current are decided by the ratio of 
Tqn/T. The variable frequency control is more prone to discontinuous conduction 
than constant frequency control.
In current limit control (Fig. 3.84), the load current is allowed to vary 
between two given (upper and lower) limits. The ON and OFF times of the 
chopper adjust automatically. When the current increases beyond the upper 
limit the chopper is turned off. The load current free wheels and starts to 
decrease. When it falls below the lower limit the chopper is turned ON. The 
current starts increasing in the load. The load current and voltage waveforms 
are shown in Fig. 3.84. The amplitude of the ripple can be controlled in this 
case by assuming proper limits of current. The lower the ripple current, the 
higher the chopper frequency. By this switching losses increase. Discontinuous 
conduction can also be avoided in this case, which makes this method superior 
to time ratio control in this regard.
R
L
Current limit control of a dc chopper.
Fig. 3.84 
Current limit control of dc chopper

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
3.3.5 
Multi Quadrant Choppers
Regenerative Chopper 
Sometimes the energy of the load may have to be fed to 
the supply system. A Chopper in this mode is called regenerative. The chop­
per working as a switch is connected across the load, which is normally a dc 
machine and the diode is connected in the line. The dc machine works as a gen­
erator during this mode. Thus a regenerative chopper is obtained by changing 
the positions of the diode and thyristor switch of a normal chopper, as shown in 
Fig. 3.85. As long as the thyristor is ON, the generator and Ld are short circuited, 
the current in the load increases and energy is stored in the inductance. When 
the chopper is switched off a large voltage occurs across the load terminals. 
This voltage is greater than Vd and the energy stored in the inductance is fed 
to the supply system. When the voltage of the load falls to Vd, the diode in the 
line blocks the current flow, preventing any short circuit of the supply when the 
thyristor is switched on. Thus the complete energy of the load can be supplied 
to the source. Very effective braking of the motor is possible up to extremely 
small speeds. Regenerative braking is achieved here by changing the direction 
of current flow. A remote control may be arranged by a suitable logic to switch 
the normal chopper to a regenerative chopper and vice versa. A small delay is 
required, for transition from one mode to the other.
<
Fig. 3.85 
Regenerative chopper (a) Basic Circuit, (b) Equivalent Circuit

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
D1
—
W*—
Chopper
Fig. 3.86 
Two quadrant dc chopper
'd
Fig. 3.87 
Current and voltage waveforms 
of 2-quadrant chopper
Two Quadrant Chopper 
Sometimes a 
chopper may be required to provide 
a two quadrant operation by retaining 
the current direction in both motoring 
and braking modes. Such a two quad­
rant converter is shown in Fig. 3.86, 
and its waveforms in Fig. 3.87. The 
chopper permits a change in the po­
larity of terminal voltage keeping the 
direction of current constant. In Fig. 
3.86 St and S2 are the choppers work­
ing as electronic switches and D, and 
D are the feedback diodes. Assuming 
continuous conduction, both S] and S2 
operate simultaneously.
When they are ON, the load cur­
rent I increases, with the rate of rise 
depending upon the back emf and 
torque of the machine. When they are 
OFF, the load current is fed to the sup­
ply through the diodes D, and Dr The 
current decreases in this stage. From 
Fig. 3.87, it is clear that the load volt­
age is effectively negative when the 
diodes conduct. The average value of 
the output voltage of the chopper

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
(  T 
7 O N  
«
T 
\
J  Vidi~
J  Váàt
0
T ) n  
y
Vda = Vd (2 a -  1) wh ere a =
(3.102)
(3.103)
F)a is zero for a = 0.5, the output voltage is an ac waveform with average volt­
age equal to zero. For a > 0.5 the average value of the dc voltage is negative. The 
chopper works in the regeneration mode. The power flows from the load to the 
supply and the dc machine operates as a generator. For control ratios a < 0.5, 
the operation is similar to the inversion of a line commutated converter (a > 90°). 
For a > 0.5 the chopper has normal operation. The power flows from the supply 
to the load. This operation of the chopper is similar to rectification of a line com­
mutated converter (a < 90°). For, a = 0.5 the load voltage is zero. The control 
characteristic of a two quadrant chopper is shown in Fig. 3.87.
Four Quadrant Chopper A chopper circuit for four quadrant operation is shown in 
Fig. 3.88(a). This is obtained by connecting two 2-quadrant choppers antiparallel 
to each other. The circuit has characteristics similar to a dual converter. The load 
side voltage and current waveforms have both polarities. The dc machine connected 
to this chopper can be accelerated, braked and controlled so as to have smooth 
speed variation in both directions of rotation. This four quadrant chopper is a start­
ing point for the development of a force commutated inverter, to obtain a variable 
frequency voltage at the load terminals from a constant dc supply. The sketch of 
the output voltage of the circuit operating as an inverter is given in Fig. 3.88(b).
3.3.6 
Selection of Ratings of Devices of a Chopper
The waveforms of currents and voltages are useful in deciding the ratings of devices. 
The main thyristor carries the load current. Superimposed on this there is a cur­
rent pulse during the recharging process of the capacitor, through the resonating
Fqn I
Fig. 3.88(a) 
Four quadrant chopper

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 3.88(b) 
The output voltage waveform of a four quadrant chopper as a force com­
mutated inverter
circuit. Therefore the peak value of the main thyristor current is roughly thrice the 
load current. The maximum conduction time of the current of the main thyristor 
occurs when <3 = 1. Based on these facts, the current rating of the main thyristor 
can be decided. Besides, it must be an inverter grade thyristor with a small turn off 
time, which helps while using a small capacitor. The free wheeling diode conducts 
load current. Its period of conduction is a maximum and is equal to the chopper 
period when the time ratio a -  0. It must also be a fast diode, since normal diodes 
cause increased switching losses. The auxiliary thyristor conducts only for a short 
period which is independent of chopper frequency (80 to 200 jus). The peak value 
of the auxiliary thyristor current is twice the load current. A reactor may be placed 
in series with the thyristor for protection against high values of di/dt. In case the 
line inductance is not sufficient for this purpose it should be supplemented with 
an additional inductance. The thyristor T3 (replacing the diode D2) need not be of 
inverter grade. Its conduction time is 70 to 100 jus and it carries a current of peak 
value equal to the main thyristor current minus the load current. The diode D4 
conducts only pulses of current, for the same period as the auxiliary thyristors. 
The devices T2, Tv and T4 are loaded for short intervals of time.
3.3.7 
General Application of Choppers
Choppers are used in drives requiring loss free, efficient speed control with the 
possibility of regenerative braking. They can be used with reversible drives. Chop­
per fed dc motors are used in traction. They enjoy smooth starting, acceleration 
and braking. They can also be used to obtain a variable resistance from a fixed 
resistance, which is called a chopper controlled resistance. We shall now discuss 
the principles of chopper controlled resistance.
3.3.8 
Chopper Controlled Resistance
By interrupting the flow of current through a resistance R in a periodic fashion 
using a switch, the value of resistance can be effectively varied. The interruption 
of the current can be accomplished by means of a dc chopper connected across the 
resistance, working as a switching device. When the chopper is on, the resistance 
is short circuited and the current is diverted through the chopper. When it is OFF, 
the supply voltage is connected to the resistance and the current flows through the

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
resistance. If the chopper is always ON the effective resistance is zero. The effec­
tive resistance is R if the chopper is always OFF. Thus by controlling the ON/OFF 
ratio of the chopper, the effective resistance can be controlled in the range 0-R. 
Under ideal conditions the effective resistance can be shown to be
R* = R 
^QFF
^ON +  ^OFF
The chopper controlling the resistance is depicted in Fig. 3.89(a). The figure also 
gives the current waveform through the resistance. The voltage is in the form of 
pulses and the resistance is also called a pulse controlled resistance. The smooth­
ing inductance L is used to reduce the ripple in the load current.
Fig. 3.89(a) 
Chopper controlled resistance parallel connection R* = (0 to R)
Sometimes a correction for the simple expression above may be required if 
the R-C time constant is not negligible compared to the chopper period T. In this 
case the capacitor current flowing through the resistance alters its effective value. 
Taking this into consideration
7qff
T
RC
~Y
Q  _  g- F0FF / RC ^ (
1 +
V
V \
r c
L
L
The resistance can be varied from 0 to °° by a simple modification in the circuit, as 
shown in Fig. 3.89(b).
A condenser is connected 
in series with the resistance 
and an R-C combination is 
placed across the chopper.
When the chopper is always 
OFF, the capacitor does not 
allow any current through 
the resistance and the value 
of effective resistance is 00.
However, there is now a dan­
ger of high voltage across the 
main thyristor.
Fig. 3.89(b) 
Modification to vary the range of resis­
tance variation R* = (0 to °°)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
L
Fig. 3.89(c) 
Series connection of chopper with 
resistance R* = (R to 00)
The chopper can also be 
connected in series with the 
resistance, as shown in Fig. 
3.89c. When the chopper is 
ON the resistance is R and 
when it is OFF it is infinity. By 
varying T0JT (wr, the resistance 
can be varied from R to infin­
ity. In this case
/ 
\
R* =
R
7qn 
'v T )
T J T can be varied from 1 to 0 and R* varies from R to <*>.
3.4 
INVERTERS
Inverters are static power converters for converting dc to ac. By controlling the 
conducting periods of the thyristors it is possible to obtain variable frequency at 
the output terminals of the inverter. This variable frequency supply can be used 
to feed an ac motor, so as to control its speed. The commutation of the inverters 
requires reactive power, which a dc supply cannot provide. If the ac side of the 
inverter is also not in a position to provide this reactive power, special circuit ele­
ments which do so must be made available in the inverter circuit. The inverter in 
such a case is called a force commutated inverter. Sometimes the inverter can be 
commutated naturally, if the load is able to provide the necessary reactive power. 
This happens if the inverter feeds an over excited synchronous motor of a three 
phase system at constant frequency. However, an inverter feeding a three phase 
induction motor must necessarily employ force commutation as the latter cannot 
provide the requisite reactive power.
A force commutated inverter is equipped with capacitors and auxiliary thyris­
tors, chosen such that satisfactory commutation takes place. The commutation 
can be a single stage one, using a counter voltage, or a two stage one providing an 
auxiliary passage to the current.
We know that a thyristor can be switched on and brought to a conducting state 
by providing firing pulses when it has a positive voltage. It does not cease to 
conduct, if the firing pulse is removed, but when the current through the thyristor 
falls below the holding value and stays at this value for a time greater than the turn 
OFF time of the thyristor. A commutation circuit must be designed to satisfy the 
following conditions:
i. The current through the conducting thyristor must go to zero.
ii. At the end of conduction the thyristor must continue to have a negative 
voltage (to maintain this zero current) for a definite amount of time,

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
called the turn off time, so that the thyristor regains its positive blocking 
capability.
iii. The change over of the current to the next thyristor.
The condition for the successful commutation of a thyristor is that a negative 
voltage must exist across the thyristor for a definite amount of time, after which 
the thyristor attains its forward blocking capability and a positive voltage can be 
applied across it. Normally it is sufficient that the time of application of the nega­
tive voltage be 25% greater than the turn off time of the thyristor.
The turnoff time of the thyristors considerably influences the design and choice 
of commutating circuit elements. The commutating capacitance is directly pro­
portional to the turn off time. The latter also influences, in direct proportion the 
charge required to turn off the thyristor. If the capacitance is charged via the load, 
the load voltage cannot go below a certain value. The turn off time also limits the 
upper frequency of the inverter. Therefore it is desirable to use thyristors with the 
minimum possible turn off time for force commutated inverters.
A negative voltage to the outgoing thyristor of an inverter is normally applied 
by means of a capacitor via a commutating or auxiliary thyristor. For satisfactory 
commutation this capacitor must be charged to a sufficient voltage with correct 
polarity. The commutation circuit must have a provision to charge the capacitor. 
Basically the capacitor can be charged using
i. the input voltage of the inverter.
ii. the load current of the inverter.
iii. a separate voltage source.
Sometimes a combination of these three methods can be employed. Figure 
3.90 shows the three possibilities. The first case is illustrated in Fig. 3.90(a) and 
is suitable if the input voltage is constant. The second case is depicted in Fig. 
3.90(b), in which the capacitor charging is independent of input voltage, but on 
the load current. This circuit is not suitable for small currents, but has the advan­
tage at higher currents of practically constant turn off time. The use of a separate
Fig. 3.90 
Methods of charging inverter capacitor (a) From the input voltage (b) Load 
dependent charging (c) From a separate voltage source

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
voltage source to charge the capacitor is illustrated in Fig. 3.90(c). This method is 
suitable if there is a possibility of the input voltage falling below a certain value, 
or even disappearing.
To get an inverter which has an output voltage independent of the load current 
and which can provide the reactive current for the load, additional circuit ele­
ments are required. Sometimes diodes are connected antiparallel to the thyristors. 
These diodes enable one to use an inductive load on the inverter. They operate 
in the free wheeling as well as feed back modes. Commutating inductances are 
provided to prevent short circuits when both the incoming and outgoing thyris­
tors conduct simultaneously. They also prevent the discharge of the commutating 
capacitance when commutation takes place through feed back diodes. Sometimes 
diodes are used in series with the thyristors to avoid the discharge of the commu­
tating capacitance if the load contains a back emf or if there are sudden changes 
in the load. The commutating capacitor is connected between the diodes and the 
thyristors.
3.4.1 
Three Phase Inverters
The variable frequency required for the speed control of three phase ac motors is 
obtained from a three phase inverter. To avoid magnetic saturation and to obtain 
constant flux conditions in the machine, the voltage fed to the motor must also 
be varied. Therefore an inverter feeding a three phase motor must be capable 
of providing a variable voltage, variable frequency supply. The required voltage 
control can be obtained either external to the inverter or within it (Fig. 3.91). In 
the former, the input voltage to the inverter is variable, whereas in the latter it is 
constant and the required variable voltage at the output terminals is obtained by 
controlling the inverter.
The dc voltage to the inverter is normally obtained by rectifying a 50 Hz supply 
using a bridge rectifier. The rectifier and inverter are interconnected by means of 
energy storing elements. These provide a kind of decoupling between the recti­
fier and the inverter. Such converters are called dc link converters. They provide 
a variable voltage, variable frequency supply from constant voltage, constant fre­
quency mains, and are two stage conversion devices. The inductance in the dc link 
smoothens the current while the capacitor maintains the voltage constant.
Since the voltage is a controlled quantity, these are called voltage source invert­
ers. When the voltage control is done external to the inverter, the line side rectifier 
must be a phase controlled one. By varying the firing angle the output voltage of 
the rectifier, and hence the input voltage to the inverter, can be varied. These are 
called square wave or variable voltage inverters. If the voltage control is available 
in the inverter itself, the input voltage of the inverter is constant and a simple diode 
rectifier suffices on the line side.
The inverter uses PWM for voltage control and hence is called a PWM inverter 
or constant voltage inverter (Fig. 3.93). In these inverters the voltage is maintained 
constant at a controlled value, irrespective of the load events. The capacitance 
across the inverter maintains the constant voltage.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
(a) Voltage control using an autotransformer at the converter input. 
---------------------- 
L 
----------------------
\ Voltage control 
} Frequency control
(b) Voltage control using phase controlled rectifier.
(c) Voltage control using dc chopper.
(e) Voltage control using autotransformer at the output.
Fig. 3.91 
Methods of voltage control of inverters
Features of Variable Voltage Inverters 
The inverter has an impressed dc voltage. 
The output voltage of the inverter is decided by the firing and duration of the 
thyristors. The conduction of the thyristors can be either 180° or 120°, depending 
upon the control employed. In the case of 180° conduction three thyristors con­
duct at any instant, two in one half and the third in the other half. The motor phase

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(a) 120° Conduction 
pulse control
(b) 180° Conduction 
pulse control
(c) PWM for 
sine current
Fig. 3.92 
Principles of PWM

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
+ o-------- ^OÖO''--------(
A
n
»--------
\
»-----------------<
7 T'
1------- »----------------- (
7_T3 
Z
1-------4•------------------
7_T* 
S
I I 
'
^
--------------V
7T 4
2
7_TS
2k {
I
7 ^ 2
i
i> 
i> 
<>
(b) 
T9
Resistive load
Resistive amd 
R-L load
Phase voltage for 180° 
conduction of thyristors
Phase voltage for 120° 
conduction of thyristors
Fig. 3-93 
Voltage source inverter feeding R-L load, (a) Schematic diagram, (b) Sequence 
of thyristor conduction, (c) Phase voltages of load

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
2VJ3
Vdl3
0
-Vd/3
-2VJ3
Star
(a) 180° Conduction
Fig» 3-94 
Voltage waveforms of VSI

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
voltage can be determined from the known potentials of the output terminals. The 
output voltage is in the form of a square or stepped wave and is independent of 
load. In case of 120° conduction only two thyristors conduct at any instant, one 
in the top half and the other in the bottom half. The control is simple compared to 
the 180° case, but the output voltage is dependent on the load. The voltage wave 
forms of these inverters are shown in Fig. 3.94. Due to the extensive use the 180° 
of the 180° case, a variable voltage inverter is also called a square wave inverter.
At very low speeds there are commutation problems, as the input voltage may not be 
sufficient for commutating the thyristors. This imposes a lower limit on the frequency.
A multimotor drive is possible using this type of inverter. The commutation is 
load independent, and the converter and load need not be matched. The converter 
represents a source and the motor can be plugged on.
Output frequencies up to 1500 Hz are possible using this converter which 
makes it very suitable for high speeds. Transistorised converters of rating 10 KVA 
are available up to 6000 Hz.
The converters are built up to a rating of 200 KVA. Due to commutation prob­
lems at low speeds, the lowest operating frequency is 10 Hz. The speed control 
range is 1:20. The inverter is not suitable for acceleration of the motor on load and 
for sudden load changes. The dynamic behaviour is poor at low speeds and good 
at high speeds.
Regeneration requires an additional phase controlled converter at the line ter­
minals, as shown in Fig. 3.95.
P 
----►
— > 
<-----
3*95 
VS/ for regeneration

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The output voltage has harmonic components which depend on the load. The 
load current is non-sinusoidal.
When an induction motor is fed from this type of inverter the harmonic content 
of the motor current is decided by the motor leakage reactance. The leakage reac­
tance also influences the peak current, which in turn influences the choice of the 
inverter thyristors. The higher the leakage reactance, the smaller is the harmonic 
content and the peak value of the motor current. Both the harmonic losses and the 
torque pulsations are influenced by the leakage reactance. Open loop control is 
possible but there may be stability problems at low speeds. The line power factor 
is poor due to phase control.
Inverters with Constant Link Voltage 
In the case of these inverters, the voltage im­
pressed is constant and voltage control is obtained in the inverter itself using the 
principle of PWM. The principle is illustrated in Fig. 3.93, with the resulting volt­
ages shown. The problem of commutation at low speeds is avoided, which makes 
it possible to extend the speed control up to zero speed. The voltage waveform 
is not a square wave but is pulsed, depending upon the type of modulation em­
ployed. The inverter has a very good dynamic response.
The specific features of this type of inverter can be summarised as follows:
i. It has a constant dc link voltage and uses the PWM principle for voltage 
control.
ii. The output voltage waveform is improved with respect to the harmonic 
content, which is reduced. Therefore torque pulsations are not a prob­
lem, even at low speeds.
iii. The parallel operation of many inverters on the same bus system is pos­
sible.
iv. Uninterrupted operation using a buffer battery is possible for long periods.
v. When a diode rectifier is used the power factor on the ac side is excellent.
vi. The power and control circuits are complicated, when compared to 
square wave inverters.
vii. Four quadrant operation is possible. During braking a battery or another 
converter with phase control is used on the line side.
viii. Both single and multimotor operations are possible. Speed reversal is 
very smooth and it can be achieved with full torque capability of the 
motor. The dynamic behaviour is fast.
ix. Inverters are built up to 150 Hz and a rating of450 kVA. The speed range 
is l;oo.
x. The inverter and load need not be matched. The inverter can be consid­
ered as a source and the load plugged on.
xi. The harmonic content of the load current is further reduced by the load 
inductance; by leakage reactance in the case of a motor load. The peak 
current capability of the inverter can be smaller than that of square wave 
inverters, which decreases further if the leakage reactance is large. The 
filter size can be smaller than that of square wave inverters.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
xii. 
Open loop operation is possible. The inverter has a fast response and 
very good dynamic behaviour.
3.4.2 
Current Source Inverters for Feeding Three Phase Motors
In these type of inverters, the controlled quantity is the current in the dc link. The 
current from the dc source remains constant at the controlled value, irrespective 
of the load and events in the inverter. The voltage across the load adjusts itself. 
The link current is maintained constant by means of a large link inductance. The 
capacitance in the dc link can be dispensed with.
The dc link current is made to flow through the phases of the load alternately 
by controlling the inverter. These inverters are classified depending upon the com­
mutation, and are shown in Fig. 3.96. The control of the link current is achieved 
by means of a phase controlled rectifier on the line side. As the current is a con­
trolled quantity, feed back diodes are not required. The current source inverter 
shown in Fig. 3.96(a) employs individual commutation of phases. Auxiliary thy­
ristors are used for commutation. The inverter shown in Fig. 3.96(b) employs 
sequential commutation and is rapidly gaining popularity. The diodes D1-D5 are 
used to prevent the discharging of capacitors through the load. They thus trap the 
charge on the capacitors. The inverter shown in Fig. 3.96(c) is a special case of an 
auto sequential commutated inverter.
The special features of current source inverters can be summarised as follows:
i. These inverters have load dependent commutation. As the load circuit, 
elements form a part of the commutation circuit, the inverter and the 
load (motor) must be matched with each other.
ii. The inverter has a very simple configuration due to the absence of free 
wheeling diodes.
iii. These are suitable for single motor operation.
iv. 
Since the dc link contains only inductance two/four quadrant operation 
is straightforward. No additional converter is required on the line 
side.
v. A phase controlled rectifier is invariably required on the line side. The 
variable dc link voltage is converted to constant current by means of a 
high inductance.
vi. Inverters employ forced commutation to give variable frequency currents.
vii. The currents are non-sinusoidal.
viii. Converter grade thyristors are sufficient and thyristor utilisation is good. 
The capacitance used for commutation has a value which is a compro­
mise between the voltage spikes and the highest operating frequency of 
the inverter.
ix. The inverter can recover easily from commutation failure. In case of any 
fault, the link inductance prevents a fast rise of fault current so that by 
the time it reaches a large value, the fault can be suppressed.
x. There are stability problems at light loads and high speeds. A minimum 
current is required for satisfactory commutation.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
-Zöötyv
Ti
T2
t3
Ta
T5
rR
T*
X X
y y
To
y y
H
T*
(b) CSI with independent commutation.
T*
y y
r*
yy
Fig. 3.96 
Current source inverters

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
xi. Open loop operation is not possible, while operation over a wide range 
of frequencies is possible. Inverters have a sluggish dynamic response.
xii. The power factor is poor due to phase control on the line side. When a 
three phase motor is used as a load on the inverter, the leakage, reac­
tance of the motor influences the harmonic voltage. It also causes volt­
age spikes during commutation. Being a parameter of the commutation 
circuit, it determines the time of commutation which limits the upper 
frequency. Therefore a motor must have low leakage reactance to have 
reduced harmonic voltages, small voltage spikes, and an increased range 
of speed control. The spikes in voltage influence the choice of the thyris­
tors and affect motor insulation.
3.4.3 
Comparison of Voltage Source and Current Source Inverters
The two types of dc link converter systems available for the speed control of ac 
motors are voltage source converters and current source converters. The dc link 
voltage is controlled in the former and the dc link current in the latter.
Both systems comprise a rectifier, which is usually a line commutated static 
converter, an intermediate circuit with energy storage and a force commutated 
inverter giving a variable frequency output.
In the case of a VSI the energy is stored in the capacitance. The commu­
tation of the inverter takes place independently of the load, and the inverter 
can be considered as an alternating voltage source with variable frequency and 
amplitude.
In the current source inverter an inductor stores the intermediate circuit energy. 
The load becomes a part of the commutation circuit. The inverter is a source of 
alternating current of variable frequency.
The dc supply of voltage source inverters has a low impedance at all frequen­
cies. The current in the load depends upon the load impedance.
The dc supply of current source inverters has a high impedance due to the 
link inductance holding the current constant. The output current is decided by the 
operation of the inverter and the voltage by the load impedance.
Voltage source inverters are suitable for loads of high impedance while current 
source inverters are suitable for loads of low impedance and unity power factor.
Voltage source inverters employ inverter grade thyristors, whereas CSI use 
converter grade ones.
Regeneration requires an additional phase controlled converter in a VSI, while 
it is straightforward in a CSI.
Voltage source inverters allow multimotor operation, unlike CSIs.
Thyristor utilisation is very good in current source inverters, whereas it is poor 
in voltage source inverter.
3.4.4 Voltage Control of Inverters
It has already been mentioned that inverters providing a variable frequency sup­
ply to three phase motors should be capable of providing a variable voltage. This

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
is required to avoid saturation and ensure operation at constant flux density. The 
voltage control can be affected either external to the inverter or within it.
The voltage control external to the inverter can be done in two ways.
i. by varying the dc link voltage
ii. by varying the ac voltage at the output using a variable ratio transformer.
i. The variation of dc link voltage can be achieved in many ways. It has the advan­
tage that the output voltage waveform is maintained over a wide range of frequen­
cies. But at very low frequencies, the dc link voltage may be too low to commutate 
the inverter. This limits the lowest operating frequency and hence the frequency 
range. The dynamic response is also poor.
A variable dc supply can be obtained by using a phase controlled rectifier on 
the line side. A closed loop control varies the firing angle depending upon the 
frequency. The function generator (Fig. 3.97) gives a relation between the stator 
frequency and applied voltage to the stator for constant air gap flux or given flux 
conditions in the motor. The output of the function generator is voltage for a given 
value o f/\ This voltage is compared with the measured value of voltage and the 
error so obtained is used to change the firing angle of the converter on the line 
side. The frequency is obtained by controlling the firing and conduction of the 
thyristors of the machine side converter. A current loop is also employed to limit 
the current to safe values during dynamic operation of the system.
Rectifier 
Inverter
F'g* 3*97 
Schematic of the inverter control for variable link voltage
A combination of a diode rectifier and a dc chopper is used for varying the dc 
link voltage. Closed loop control in this case changes the time ratio of the chopper.
Yet another way is to use a variable ratio transformer which operates at con­
stant frequency, before the diode rectifier.
These methods are shown in Fig. 3.97.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
ii. The voltage control of the inverter can be affected by means of a variable ratio 
transformer interposed between the motor and inverter. The method is very sim­
ple. Even in this case the waveforms of output voltage remain the same over a 
wide frequency range. The line side converter can be a simple diode rectifier. This 
provides a good pf. The main disadvantage of this method is that the transformer 
has to be designed for low frequencies and its size is large. The system also has an 
extremely poor dynamic response.
Voltage Control within the Inverter 
The dc link voltage is constant and the in­
verter is controlled to provide both variable voltage and variable frequency. 
As the link voltage is constant a simple diode rectifier may be employed on 
the line side. Variable voltage variable frequency supply to the motor is ob­
tained within the inverter itself using suitable control based on the principles 
of PWM or PSM (phase shift modulation). The block diagram of control of 
the constant voltage inverter is shown in Fig. 3.98(a). The voltage is sensed 
and compared with the output of the function generator. The error is used to 
change the amplitude of the reference wave in order to obtain the desired value 
of voltage. The frequency of the reference wave is changed in order to get the 
desired frequency. As the inverter is supplied at constant voltage commutation 
problem at low frequencies disappears. The operating frequency extends to 
zero and the system has a very good dynamic response. The voltage waveform 
is not the same at all frequencies. At low frequencies the harmonic content 
may increase.
PWM techniques are very widely used. They sometimes provide harmonic 
elimination also. For this purpose, sinusoidal modulation is used. The principles 
of PWM are illustrated in Fig. 3.98.
Fig. 3.98(a) 
Voltage control within the inverter

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
V,Ro
^So
V,RS
~ ^ r ~
V'd__
Fig. 3.98(b) 
Representation of three phase inverter, (i) Voltage waveform for 180°
(ii) voltage waveform for 120° for motor load
The PSM technique for voltage control is illustrated in Fig. 3.99. This method 
has some disadvantages. The voltage waveform has a high harmonic content at
Fig. 3.98(c) 
PWM principle using
rectangular reference and 
triangular modulation
lower frequencies and the utilisation of 
the thyristors is very poor. The tech­
nique involves two inverters, making it 
costly for low power applications.
3.4.5 
Harmonic Neutralisation
The output voltage waveform of an 
inverter is non-sinusoidal. It contains a 
rich harmonic content. The harmonics 
cause additional losses and torque pul­
sations if a three phase motor is used 
as a load. These torque pulsations pose 
a problem at low speeds. Therefore it

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
H
y
7 = 0°
7=30° 
I 
y = 60°
7= 120°
7 = 90°
Fig. 3-99 
Phase shift modulation
is necessary to improve the voltage waveform of an inverter and minimise the 
harmonic content. The following methods are employed to achieve this:
i. 
Reduction or even elimination of lower order harmonics by means of 
a switching process in the inverter. This method is called selective 
harmonic reduction and reduces the fifth and seventh harmonics to a 
minimum. The filter size decreases. The voltage waveform is shown in 
Fig. 3.100.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
^ ^ 3  
Electric Drives
Fig. 3.100 
Selective harmonic reduction to eliminate 5th and yth harmonics <5 = 16.6 
S2 -  22.6

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
o—'ÜÜTT'—o--------------- o—
—o---------------- o—'RHRT'—o
ò 
Ô
Fig. 3.101 
Series addition of inverter output voltages to form a stepped voltage 
waveform
A 
R
Fig. 3.102 
Synthesis of a three phase, 
12 step wave
Fig. 3.103 
Six phase motor. Two sets of 
three phase windings having a 
displacement ofy°
ii. The number of pulses of the output wave can be increased to effectively 
reduce the harmonics. Several methods employed to increase the pulse 
number are shown in Figs 3.101, 3.102 and 3.103. A three phase output 
may be obtained using three single phase bridge converters as shown 
in Fig. 3.101. The resulting waveform has reduced harmonic content. 
The synthesis of the three phase waveform from two six-step inverters 
is illustrated in Fig. 3.102. The resultant twelve step waveform has a 
reduced harmonic content. The harmonics which are multiples of three 
are eliminated. The interconnection of the outputs of six-step inverters 
to get a twelve stepped waveform is shown in Fig. 3.103. Multistepped 
waveform with reduced harmonic content can be obtained using mul­
tiple phase shifted inverters. It is possible to get 12, 18, 24, ... stepped 
waveform using suitable number of inverters and phase shift.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
^ ^ 9  
Electric Drives
V
(a)
-------------------t
V = Reference voltage
(b)
Fig. 3.104 
(a) Pulse width modulation methods, (b) Line voltage with synchronous
modulation, (c) Principle ofPWM using d.c. (d) Control range and output 
voltage for two different control (e) Extension of control range

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
iii. Increasing the number of phases minimises the harmonic content. A 
twelve pulse inverter provides an output voltage free from fifth and sev­
enth harmonics. The principle of the method and the waveforms are given 
in Fig. 3.103. Using this method, harmonics of order 5, 7, 17, 19 can be 
eliminated without affecting harmonics order of 11, 13, 23, 25, etc.
iv. 
Several harmonics can be eliminated by combining the phase displaced 
outputs of two inverters. This method has poor inverter utilisation and is 
not used.
v. Multiple pulse width control — By increasing the switching of the 
inverter voltage, waveforms having several pulses can be obtained, in 
which the content of lower order harmonics is minimised. The voltage 
waveforms are shown in Fig. 3.104.
vi. Pulse width modulation is also used to minimise the lower order har­
monics. Using sinusoidal modulation it is possible to get an output volt­
age waveform which has a very low harmonic content, as shown in Fig. 
3.104. In this process, the pulse duration is sinusoidally modulated. The 
modulation process and output voltage are shown in Fig. 3.104.
3.5 
CYCLOCONVERTERS
A variable frequency supply for feeding a three phase motor can be obtained from a 
cycloconverter which operates on a 50 Hz supply and provides a variable frequency 
supply at the output (Fig. 3.105). These are single stage frequency conversion 
devices which make use of both line commutation as well as forced commutation.
The phase control of line commutated cycloconverters provides a variable volt­
age. The firing angle is varied over the period of the input voltage. The output 
voltage is made up of segments of the input voltage. The voltage control is pos­
sible in the inverter itself. Because of the phase control, the power factor is poor. 
A cycloconverter can be used to interconnect two three phase systems (Fig. 
3.106). The firing angle is so varied that the output voltage has a small distor­
tion and is nearly sinusoidal. The load inductance further reduces the harmonic 
content in the current. The utilisation of the thyristors is poor at low frequencies. 
The cycloconverter allows power flow in both directions at any power factor of the 
load. The converter has a complex control system, and the output frequency can 
be varied from 0-1/2 input frequency. They are normally developed for 400 MHz, 
so that the output frequency is in the range 0-200 Hz.
The disadvantages of a poor power factor and a limited frequency range can 
be eliminated if forced commutation is employed. In this method, each converter 
has antiparallel three phase bridges provided with a common control circuit. The 
circuit details are given in Fig. 3.108.
The main features of cycloconverters can be summarised as follows:
i. Voltage control can be achieved in the converter itself.
ii. A cycloconverter functioning by means of line commutation has poor 
p.f. and limitation of output frequency. Forced commutation can be

The McGraw Hill Companies
^ ^ 3  
Electric Drives
12-Pulse waveform to eliminate lower 
order harmonics
Fig. 3.105 
A method for synthesising twelve-pulse waveform

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
3  V jz | | î  jz i  V O
S
A
én^mré-
■mTT*---- »
Fig. 3.106 
Three phase cycloconverter using mid-point three pulse converters
employed to improve 
the p.f. and working 
range of frequencies.
However this introduces 
switching losses.
iii. It is capable of power 
transfer in both direc­
tions between the source 
and the load. It can feed 
power to a load at any p.f.
Regeneration is inherent 
over the complete fre­
quency range.
iv. It delivers high quality 
sinusoidal output wave­
forms at all operating 
frequencies.
v. It requires many thyris­
tors, which offsets the 
advantage of line com­
mutation. However, no shut down is required if a thyristor fails. Output 
can be made available without any interruption, albeit with a slightly 
distorted waveform.
Fig. 3.107(a) 
Single phase cycloconverter using 
three phase midpoint converter
The above discussion of cycloconverter shows that an a.c. motor (synchro­
nous or induction), when fed from a cycloconverters will have a very smooth low 
speed operation with least torque ripple. Four quadrant operation of the motor is 
straight forward as the cycloconverter allows power flow in either direction. Thus 
the cycloconverter is very attractive for feeding low speed, large power reversible 
ac motor drives.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
^ ^ 9  
Electric Drives
Fig. 3.107(b) 
Three phase cycloconverter using antiparallel bridges
3.6 
AC VOLTAGE CONTROLLER
In earlier sections of this chapter, a detailed discussion of power conversion equip­
ment which convert ac to dc and vice versa has been given, dc choppers do not 
actually perform the power conversion, but take part in controlling the current and 
voltage in the load from a constant dc voltage mains. AC voltage controllers also 
belong to this class of equipment to regulate the flow of current in the load. The 
load voltage can be varied in a stepless and smooth fashion and the load current 
can be controlled using this variable voltage. However, the frequency of the output 
is the same as that of the input. The source has a fixed frequency and fixed voltage. 
Introducing an ac voltage controller provides a variable voltage across the load at 
the same frequency as the source.
There are several areas, both in industry and household, where a variable volt­
age is required. Examples are control of lighting, heating, induction heating and

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
II
R
L
Fig. 3.108(a) 
Basic circuit and control of a cycloconverter using antiparallel bridges
Fig. 3.108(b) 
Principle of a cycloconverter and output voltage waveforms

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 3.108(c)
the control of single phase 
and three phase motors. 
Till the advent of thyris­
tors, voltage control for such 
appliances had been accom­
plished using resistances, 
reactors, transformers, auto­
transformer, potential divid­
ers, etc. The development 
of thyristors has provided 
a way of getting a smooth 
stepless control of voltage 
without any delay. The class 
of converters used for volt­
age control and employing 
thyristors are called ac volt­
age controllers, ac voltage 
regulators or ac choppers.
Principle of a cycloconverter with sinu­
soidal output voltage and output volt­
age waveforms
These voltage controllers are used in electrical drives to control the speed of 
a single phase or three phase induction motors by varying the applied voltage of 
the motor. A brief description of the important features of these regulators is now 
given.
3.6.1 
Single Phase AC Voltage Controller
A single phase ac voltage controller comprises a pair of back to back connected 
thyristors interposed between the source and the load. The load can be a pure 
resistance, pure inductance, or a combination of both. A single phase ac motor 
is also fed from the regulator. This kind of load consists of a back emf, besides 
a resistance and reactance. A control unit sends the firing pulses to the thyristors 
during the respective half cycles at the desired instant. The thyristors are sym­
metrically triggered if the firing instant is the same in both the half cycles, taking 
the zero of the half cycles as a reference. A simple single phase ac voltage con­
troller is depicted in Fig. 3.109. The thyristor T conducts during the positive half 
cycle and thyristor T2 during the negative half cycle a is the firing angle. Up to the 
firing instant the supply voltage is across the thyristors in the corresponding half 
cycles and after this instant (1cot > a) the source voltage is transferred to the load. 
Therefore, by changing the value of a the load voltage can be controlled both in 
the positive and negative half cycles. However, the waveforms of current and load 
voltage depend upon the load parameters and its impedance angle. To determine 
the average and effective values of these, their waveforms must be determined.
When the load is a pure resistance the current in the load is in phase with the 
voltage. At the end of each half cycle when the voltage passes through zero so 
does the current and the thyristor ceases conduction. Hence both the load voltage 
and the load current are known.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Fig. 3.109 
Antiparallel thyristors as ac voltage controller
Fig. 3.110 
A single phase ac voltage controller feeding pure resistance. Voltage and 
current waveforms
The thyristor voltage, load voltage and load current waveforms are depicted in 
Fig. 3.110 for a pure resistive load. The firing angle can be varied from 0 to 180°. 
The average and rms values of the voltage and current can be obtained over this 
range of firing angles.
If the supply voltage is given by
Vs = Vm sin cot 
(3.104)
the load voltage at any firing angle is
VL = Vm sin cot; 
a < cot < 180°
(3.105)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The current at this instant jumps to (VJR) sin a and follows for the rest of the time.
K.
lL
m
R sin cot 
a < cot < 180c
(3.106)
From the current and voltage waveforms of Fig. 3.110 the average and rms values 
can be obtained in the usual way as
V„. „
(3.107)
V
Y ava
m (1 + cos a)
n
V -  V
'  a  
r mi
1 
( n -  a 
1 . 
^
-------- 1—  sin 2a
2 
4
71
(3.108)
respectively.
Referring these values to the average and rms values at a = 0, we get
Vava 
1 + cos a
Kavo
and —  =
K„
( 
2a -  sin 2a ^
271
7
(3.109)
(3.110)
The ratio VJV as a function of a is depicted in Fig. 3.111 and is called control 
characteristic.
Fig. 3.111 
Control characteristic of single phase controller feeding pure resistive load

The McGrawHill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
The current waveform is similar to the voltage waveform the average and rms 
values of the currents can be obtained by dividing the corresponding voltage by 
the load resistance R.
Therefore, we have
^Lava 
1 +  C O S a
/ Lavo
L
and — =
L
f 
2 a - sin 2a }
V
2n
/
(3.111)
(3.112)
The power output at any firing angle a, referred to the power in the uncontrolled 
case (a = 0), is
R. 
, 
2a -  sin 2a
- \  —
R
2n
When the load is a pure inductance, the load current 
lags the voltage by 90°. The equation governing a 
pure inductance is (referring to Fig. 3.112).
d/>
(3.114)
L
and
d t
lL
= V,r
■r K
“'
(3.115)
Again the load voltage is
VL = Vm sin cot a <cot < (2 n -  a) 
(2n -  a ) = p
(3.116)
Fig. 3.112 
Single phase ac 
voltage control­
ler feeding pure 
inductance
When the voltage becomes zero at n the thyristor 
does not cease conduction but continues to conduct 
load current till the load current naturally goes to 
zero. Therefore the load voltage contains a portion of the negative half cycle also. 
The other thyristor, which is antiparallel to the conducting thyristor cannot be made 
to conduct even though there is a firing pulse. Therefore, unlike in the resistance 
case, the effective control starts from a -  90° and extends up to a = 180°. With pure 
inductive loads control is not possible for angles less than 90°. When the voltage 
passes through zero the current passes through its maximum value. Substituting for 
VL in Eq. 3.115 and performing the integration between the limits a and cot we get
lL -
Km
ojL [cos a -  cos cot]
(3.117)
The maximum value of current occurs at cot = n and is given by
Vrm
Lma
coL
(cos a + 1)
(3.118)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
For a > 90°, cos a is negative and /, ma < VJooL. This also shows that a < nil is 
not possible, as it makes
/ Lmct >
coL
which is not a practical case. The peak amplitude decreases as a increases and is 
zero at a = 7i.
The current which attains the peak value given by Eq. 3.118 at a given a falls 
to zero at cot = {In -  a). The current wave is symmetrical about zero voltage. The 
current and load voltage waveforms are given in Fig. 3.113, for various values 
of a. The thyristor conducts for a period ranging from a to 271 -  u, given by S = 
{In -  la). The time of conduction
tc = - { n - a )
co
(3.119)
n
The time of conduction for a -  — (case of full control) is maximum, and is given by
1
t c =  —
n
CO
(3.120)
From Eq. 3.119 it can be concluded that there is no control for a less than
7i/2  . If a < n jl  the time of conduction exceeds n loo which is not practically
possible. Further, as a increases the time of conduction decreases and finally
reaches zero when a - n .  The range of firing angles for a pure inductive load 
. 
n
is — < a < n.
1
Now that the voltage and current waveforms are known, the average and rms 
values of the load voltage and load current can be determined. The average load 
voltage
Fig. 3.113 
Load current and voltage waveforms

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
vT
Lava
V 
n
(cos a -  cos n) 
— < a < n
n 
2
or
^Lava 
(1 +  COS a )  
TZ 
_
-----------= ----------------- — < a < 7i
4 a v  n / 2  
2  
2
The rms value of the load voltage
V„
/
Kn/2
(. 
a 
sin 2a \
1-
-
 +
ti 
In
\
JJ
The average value of the load current
4a va = I Lav n/2 [(^ ~  « )  COS a + sin d\
L
or
Lava
/
= (n — a) cos a + sin a
Lav n 12
(3.121)
(3.122)
(3.123)
(3.124)
The rms value of the load current
/n/2
I4
f
(
n
3 . 
'i
-
(n -  a)
cos
a H—
H—  sin a cos a
J n y
2 )
^ 
J
(3.125)
The control characteristic (VJVni2) as a function of a is shown in Fig. 3.114. From 
the characteristic it is clear that the effective control starts at a = nil. For a < n/2, 
Va > VJ2, it is not possible.
Fig. 3.114 
Control characteristic of single phase controller feeding pure inductive load

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
When the load comprises both a resistance and an inductance in series, as 
shown in Fig. 3.115, the waveforms of voltage and current differ. The equation 
describing the load is
d t
a > cot > (a + ô)
(3.126)
Again, VL follows the supply voltage waveform after the thyristor is triggered. The 
conduction time and effective range of control angles are decided by the ratio L/R 
of the load. Now, if a is the firing angle for cot>a
d t
sin cot
(3.127)
Here too the current i{ does not fall to zero at the instant the voltage becomes zero. 
Therefore the conduction of the thyristor continues for some time (after zero volt­
age) during the negative half cycle also. During this period the antiparallel con­
nected thyristor does not conduct, even though there is a firing pulse. The effective 
control (by the same reasoning as before for pure inductive loads) starts from 
a = 0, the impedance angle of the load. Equation (3.128) is solved for a general 
solution for i{, given by
K
lL =
m
Vfi2 + ~ÕÕL2
sin (cot - 0 )  + Q e Rt^L
(3.128)
Fig. 3.115 
AC voltage controller feeding R-L load 0 = 40° voltage and current 
waveforms

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
The constant C can be determined from the initial conditions, i.e., cot = a, i -  0
K
a 
R
Therefore C| 
J Ri + OJ2j 2 
Using this in Eq. 3.128 we have
sin(a -  6)e M 1
(3.129)
K
lL =
m
V«2 + (Ü2! 2
t+— IR/L
[sin(mi - 6 ) -  sin(a -  0)e v œ
(3.130)
The lower limit of integration in determining the average value is a. The upper 
limit S is the value of cot where /'L = zero again. This can be found from Eq. 3.130 
as
n 
coL , 
sin(a -  0)
ß = a + ---- loge — ------- -
' 
R 
&e s\n(ß -  6)
The time of conduction is
L , 
sm(a -  0)
L = — log----------- -
R 
sin(ß -  6)
Alternatively,
sin(/? -  0) = sin(a -  0)e
- ßR/Lco
But —  = tan 0 and 6 = a + cotc. Substituting we get 
R
tan(a -  0) =
sin cotr
e w/L/tan^_ cos(cotc)
(3.131)
(3.132)
(3.133)
using which, tc can be determined. If a < 6, tc < n/co which is not possible. There­
fore the minimum value of a = 0. If a = 0, the conduction is maximum, 
i.e.
tc -  —
71
CO
(3.134)
Knowing the value of a and (cotc = S) ft, the waveforms are found and the average 
and rms values can be determined by integration, for example
Vu 
(sin 2a -  sin2/i) + 2(ß -  a)
Vn
i
2 71
(3.135)
The average value of the current is
^Lav
Vrm
nJ(R 2 +ro2I 2)
^ Q
- O
i t c /tan 9  
_
[cos(a -  0) -  cos(ß — 0) + tan 0 sin(a -  #)
(3.136)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
and the average value of the thyristor current is
j 
_ ^Lav
Tav “ 
2
The average value of the voltage can be determined as
or
FLava
F tLava
FLav
—  [-cos(a + mtc ) + cos a]
71
— [cos a -  cos(a + cotc )]
(3.137)
(3.138)
Î
Óa) 
c
CDCo
o
■O
coo
270°
240°
210°
180°
0°
0 = 9
60o/
00 \
CO
0 0\
0° 
30° 
60° 
90° 
120° 
150° 
180°
Firing angle, a —
>■
Fig. 3.116 
Control characteristic of a single phase 
voltage controller feeding R-L load
The rms value of the current 
can be determined using the 
normal procedure of integra­
tion between the limits a and 
(a + cotc). 
The 
relationship 
between a and cot for different
C
impedance angles 6, is graphi­
cally represented in Fig. 3.116.
Power Factor and Reactive Power
The current waveform (flow­
ing through the load) can be 
resolved into a Fourier series 
given by
iL(t) = a() + ^  av cos vcot + ^  bv sin vœt
(3.139)
where ao, ay and bv can be determined easily, knowing the waveform for iL(t). As 
the thyristors are symmetrically triggered, the current / (t) is periodic and hence 
the value of a = 0. The load current
iL(t) = yjll sin (cot + <t>i)+ ^  yfïlv sin(vco/L + (|>v)
v—>2
(3.140)
where (f), = a r c ta n  — and c|)v = ar c t an —
bx 
bv
V2/1 = yj(af + bf) and y/2Iv = ^{al + b;) 
v is the order of the harmonic, > 2.
The rms value of the load current
As for the phase controlled rectifier, we define
(3.141)
(3.142)
where g = distortion factor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
a . = harmonic factor
Si
+  X\ =  1
(3.143)
()>, is the phase difference between the line voltage and the fundamental of the 
current, given by
a  
sin2 a
(ft = arc tan — = arc tan------------------------
b\ 
n -  a + sin a cos a
(3.144)
cos (|) is called the fundamental displacement 
factor and is depicted graphically as a func­
tion of a in Fig. 3.117.
The Total Power Factor The active power 
is contributed to only by the fundamental 
whereas the apparent power has both funda­
mental and harmonic content. Therefore the 
power factor
P.F. = — =
5
P.F. = gj cos <j>]
VLIX c o s j ^ / i  
VX1 
I
(3.145)
The total reactive power is Q. The fundamen­
tal reactive power V I sin § = g.
Fig. 3.117 
Fundamental displace­
ment factor as function 
of a
The reactive power due to harmonics = ^Q 2 ~ Q2\ -  Qh, called the harmonic 
reactive power.
3.6.2 Three Phase AC Voltage Controller
To control the current and voltage of three phase loads, three phase controllers 
are required. The single phase controller described previously can be introduced 
singly in each phase or line, to form a three phase controller. There exist a variety 
of connections for three phase controllers.
A three phase four wire controller is shown in Fig. 3.118. The load neutral 
and supply neutral are connected together. Each of the three controllers can be 
independently controlled to feed the load impedance. Each phase has the same 
relations as a single phase controller. The analysis is simple and straightforward 
since the system can be studied as if the loads here are supplied individually by 
single phase controllers. The neutral and line currents contain triplen harmonics 
along with other odd harmonics.
A similar connection, which can function as three groups of single phase con­
trollers, is shown in Fig. 3.119. In this connection, three single phase converters 
supplying their loads are connected in delta. Each controller supplies its own load. 
Unlike the previous four wire star-connection, the triplen harmonics are absent 
here. The other odd harmonics are present.
There are certain types of connections which are difficult to analyse. One such 
circuit is a three phase, three wire star-connected controller, which is normally 
used when the source neutral cannot be loaded or is absent. The load neutral is

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 3.118 
Three phase 4-wire voltage controller
R
Y
B
Fig. 3.119 
Delta-connected voltage controller
isolated. The circuit is depicted in Fig. 3.120. The system is complicated and has 
to be studied and analysed as a three phase circuit.
Several other possible connections of three phase voltage controllers are 
depicted in Fig. 3.121. All of them have to be studied as three phase circuits.
The operation of a three phase controller is affected by both the load and the 
type of connections of the single phase controllers used to form the three phase 
unit. The analysis also differs for each configuration. It is difficult to summarise 
the features of each circuit.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Fig. 3.120 
Symmetrical three phase, three wire voltage controller
A three phase controller has symmetrical control if both the back to back con­
nected thyristors have the same firing angle. It has asymmetrical control if the 
firing angles differ or if one of the thyristors is replaced by a diode, or if the con­
trollers are placed in only two of the three lines.
We now discuss the features of a symmetrically controlled three phase, three 
wire, star-connected controller for both ohmic and inductive loads. The voltage 
and current waveforms and control characteristics are derived.
The schematic of a three phase, three wire voltage controller feeding a three 
phase, star-connected balanced resistance is shown in Fig. 3.122. Phase control 
of the thyristors is employed. The phase and line voltages of the three phase 
system are shown in Fig. 3.122. For a controller, the control pulse is of a long 
duration, equal to the conduction period of the thyristor. This is to make sure 
that the firing pulse is available at the gate whenever the thyristor is forward 
biased, so that the thyristor can go into conduction. It also ensures the firing of 
the thyristor whenever a forward current is expected. If, because of some cir­
cuit condition, the current goes to zero the thyristor turns off. A lengthy pulse 
can bring it into conduction. Further, slow building up of current in the load 
circuit when the thyristor is fired (to give maximum load voltage) may cause 
the thyristor to go to an off state if it is not fully turned on. In cases of inductive 
loads, the current zero occurs after the voltage zero and hence a trigger pulse 
must be present continuously, so that the thyristor turns on at the desired instant 
when the forward voltage occurs. However, when long gate pulses or a train of 
pulses are applied to the thyristor to ensure the conduction whenever the volt­
age is positive to the leakage currents during reverse bias of the thyristor must 
be acceptable. Further, the operation may be upset by the voltage sharing of the 
series-connected thyristors. The angle is reckoned from the zero of the voltage. 
The conduction period for the thyristor for ohmic load is 180° and the firing 
pulse occurs for 180°.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(a) 3-Wire controller feeding a delta connected load.
o R
o Y
o B
(b) Delta-controller.
Fig. 3.121(a) 
Some practical symmetrical connections of three phase controller

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Delta load
Delta load
Fig. 3.121(b) 
Typical asymmetrically controlled three phase controllers (i) thyristor 
diode circuit (ii) control in two lines
Fig. 3.122(a) 
Three phase controller feeding a resistive load

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Thyristor
voltage
The voltage across the load impedance can be determined as follows:
i. When a controller is in the non-conducting state the corresponding phase 
voltage of the load is zero assuming a star connected load.
ii. If two controllers conduct the voltage of the conducting phases is half the 
line voltage between which the conducting controllers are placed.
iii. If all the there controllers are conducting the load is effectively a 
three phase load supplied from a three phase balanced source. So, the 
load voltages can be determined using three phase circuit analysis. 
For balanced load the load phase voltage is same as source phase volt­
age.
iv. Only one converter receives firing pulse with no other converter being in 
the conducting state, no conduction takes place. All the phase voltages
are zero.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
+ \/ry 
-V b r  
+ W b
Owing to the dependence of conduction periods on the firing angle, and the 
overlapping of these periods, the control characteristics have to be determined for 
several ranges of a. The voltage waveform is determined and its effective value is 
calculated by integration.
For a three phase resistive load.
For firing angles in the range 0 < a < 60°
a
K
'  
3a 
3
. 3
 
1--------1----- sin 2a
V
2n 
471
/
(3.146)
For firing angles in the range 60° < a < 90c
Vl
V,
/ 1 
3 
A
— H----- [sin 2a + sin(2a + 60°)]
V 2 
47t
(3.147)

The McGraw Hill Companies
•E
Electric Drives
V,RY
V,RB
\7YB
Fig. 3.122(d) 
Waveforms for a = 120C 
and finally in the range 90° < a < 150°
VL
K
(5  
4
3 a 
3
+
\
271
Vj
2n sin(2a + 60°)
7
(3.148)
The control characteristic showing —  as a function of the firing angle a is shown 
in Fig. 3.123. 
s
When the voltage controller supplies a three phase inductive load the relations 
are different. It is known that effective control starts from a > 90°. The thyris­
tor conducts for a period of 2{n -  a)lco so that the conduction is between a and 
(2n -  a). A three phase controller feeding star-connected inductances is shown in 
Fig. 3.124. The phase and line voltages of the source and load voltage for a typi­
cal firing angle are also shown. The effective value of the output voltage can be 
determined in the usual way. For the range of firing angles 90° < a < 120°
a ,
K
5 
3a 
-------- +
k2 
71
3 
. 
^
sin 2a
277
7
(3.149)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Firing angle, a —
►
Fig. 3.123 
Control characteristics of a three phase voltage controller
and in the range of firing angles 120° < a < 150°
—  + —  sin (2 a+ 60°) 
n 
In
(3.150)
The control characteristic showing the variation of VJVS as a function of a is 
depicted in Fig. 3.123.
The method of finding the load voltage waveform is now outlined for a pure 
resistance load in all the three ranges of firing angles described above. A value of 
a = 45° is considered, which falls in the range of angles 0 < a < 60°.
We refer to Fig. 3.122 where the line and phase voltages are given and the fir­
ing pulses indicated.
For a = 45° (or in general 0 < a < 60°) it can be easily observed from the fir­
ing pulse diagram that all the three controllers conduct, since they are forward 
biased. The thyristors TRP Ty2 and Tm conduct. This conduction mode is depicted 
in Fig. 3.125(a). The load and source operate as a normal three phase system. 
The load neutral is at the same potential as the supply neutral. The phase voltages 
are decided by the supply system. This mode continues till the voltage VB passes 
through zero. At this instant Tm blocks and ceases to conduct. Only thyristors TR| 
and Tyi conduct. The currents are equal and opposite. This occurs in the range 60° 
to 60° + a. The line voltage VRy is dropped across the two resistances and eventu­
ally the phase voltage is FRY/2.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Fig. 3.124 
Waveforms of a three phase controller feeding pure inductive load
In the range of angles (60° + a) to 120° the thyristor TB2 is forward biased and 
starts conducting with a firing pulse at the gate. Now again the controller is in a 
complete conduction state with all the three controllers in conduction. The thy­
ristors now conducting are TjU, Tyi and Tm. The load and source revert to a three 
phase system and the load voltages are specified by source voltages. At 120°, the 
phase voltage Vy = 0 and the thyristor Tyi stops conduction. The thyristors 7"R| and
T conduct in the range 120 to 120° + a making the load voltage equal to — FBR.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Tf
R(
-V  R
R1 
n
S o -
*Y
T o
T(
TsY2
B1
'B
Mode i) a<cot 60°
Ri
TR1
S o
T o
Ty2
M31i^
Ri
S o
T o
s * --------- <
=
-
Mode ii) 60 +a <cof <120
- W
5 -------i=
i—
—H 5--------
P * --------- < = H -
Mode iii) 120°+a<cof< 180°
Ri
S o
T o
' b
- + £ -
^ N -
■L
60°<cot<60°+a
Ri
* £ ■
S o ­
l o
120°<coi< 120°+a
F ? <
S o
T o
-c
cot =180°
Fig. 3.125(a) 
Modes of operation of three phase controller for a. < 6o° in the positive 
half cycle
Ri
S o
T o
S o
T o
R (
S o
T o
T^ 4
T,R2
p W
TB2
Mode iv) 180°+a<cof<240°
R°-------J 4 ----------
Mode v) 240°+a<cof<300c
p H -
~ ^ 4 ~
_ ^ o
Mode vi) 300°+a<tóf<360°
Ri
S o
T o
Ri
S o
T o
Ri
S o
T o
p
*240'<cot<240+a
300°<tóf<300°+a
^ W -
p X ~
cot = 360°
Fig. 3.125(b) 
Modes of operation of three phase controller for a < 6o° in the negative 
half cycle

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
This continues till 120° + a, when the thyristor Tyj is forward biased and conducts. 
Again the system goes back to a three phase one with the thyristors TRj, TYl and 
TH2 conducting. The load voltages can be determined from the source voltages. 
This continues till 180°, when TR| stops conduction. Since its voltage is zero. 
These modes of operation are also shown in Figs 3.124(b) and (c). From 180° + a 
the conduction for the negative cycle starts. The three modes for the negative half 
cycle are shown in Fig. 3.125(d, c). For the three modes of operation detailed, the 
phase currents can be determined. They are:
Mode I
zR = 0 
0 t o a
. 
'ä v*  ■
in = ------- sin cot
R
l R -
\Í2VfRS
2 R
sin cot
a and 60°
60° and 60° + a
(3.151)
Mode II
60° + a t o 120° 
(3.152)
120° to  120° + a
120° + a t o 180° 
(3.153)
For firing angles greater than 60°, only two controllers can conduct. At no 
instant do all the three controllers conduct simultaneously. The system never oper­
ates as a three phase one. The modes for a typical a > 60° are shown in Fig. 3.126.
Up to a the load voltage is zero. At a the conduction of TR1 and TY2 starts. The 
voltage VRY is available across the two resistances in series. The phase voltage 
is Vry/2. This mode continues till the line voltages pass through zero at 150°. 
The thyristor Tm does not conduct and hence connection between R and B is not 
possible. VRB > VRY and the current from Y transfers to B. In this mode, R and B 
conduct. The voltage is VRB and the phase voltage FRB/2. The modes are shown in 
Fig. 3.127. The currents are
Mode I
iR = 0 
0 t o a
lR
R
R
sin cot
l R -
s/lVRT
2 R
sin cot
1r -
'JÏVr ■
J?
sin cot
J2VRY sin cot
a t o 60° + a
1r -
2 R
(3.154)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors 
^ ^ 9
7-R1
R o_
1------ 1----
V r\
v * Y2 
1------ 1 
0
1 O 
P r\
0 ^  
1—
1 
"
D
 O
P O_
1____ 1
a<cot< 60°+a
1------ 1----
7yi^ > 
I------ 1 
„
y °
W\ 
'------ 1 
0
\M Tts2 
I------ 1
B 0 
R 0—
'------ 1----
120°+a<coi<180°
___ L^2__I------1---- ,
y 0- 
b °-
---•---
R o 
y o
B °-
r,R1 
n
T(B2
a<cof<120°+a
Fig. 3.126 
Modes of operation of three phase controller a > 6o°
R o----- --------1------ 1---1
Y °—
--------i =
i —
e o-------------1 
I—
a<ct>f<160°
RO----- --------1------ 1---
y o-------------1 
I--o
S °—
--------1 = | — I
60’a<<of<210’
y o-------►(^------1 
I-----0
B ° —
---------- i=
i—
120°+a<cof<
R o------------------i = >
y o------------- 1------ ^
150°<tof<60°+a
-------- 1 =
210°<coi<1200+a
Fig. 3.127 
Modes of operation of three phase controller a > 90o

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Mode II
lR -
y/2VrRB sin cot 
60° + 5 to 120° + a
(3.155)
For firing angles a > 90°, discontinuous conduction occurs within the half cycle. 
When the voltage VRS passes through zero the load current ceases. Conduction 
does not resume until the next thyristor with positive voltage starts conducting. 
The currents are:
ZR
ZR
ZR
ZR
-  0 
30° and a
•JÏV,—  sincot 
a to 150°
2 R
0 
150° to 60°+ a
V2K—  sin cot 
60°+ a to 210°
(3.156)
(3.157)
90° 
180° 270° 360°
n 
2k 
3k 
4k
Fig. 3.128 
Voltage and current 
waveforms of a three 
phase voltage controller 
with inductive load
The voltages and currents are shown in 
Fig. 3.128. For a > 150°, conduction is not 
possible. The current control characteristic 
showing the referred average and rms val­
ues as functions of a is given in Fig. 3.129.
Thyristor Voltages 
The voltage waveform 
of the thyristor must be known to decide 
its rating. Thyristor voltages are shown in 
Fig. 3.130 for the ranges of firing angles 
given above. The voltage of the thyristor 
between the instants of its zero current 
and the application of the firing pulse to 
make it conduct has to be considered to 
decide its rating. The voltage across the 
thyristor of R-phase is shown. For a < 
60°, when one thyristor (TR) is blocked 
the other two controllers conduct. The 
voltage between R and the load neutral is 
j  VR (phasor diagram). This is applicable 
for a in the range of 60° to 90° also, and 
the voltages are shown accordingly. For 
a > 90° discontinuous conduction occurs 
and the supply voltage during this period 
is across the thyristor. The thyristor volt­
age is shown taking this into consideration 
(Fig. 3.130).

Average current ratio
The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
A 1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4
0.2 
0.0
0° 30° 60° 90o120°150o180° 
0° 30° 60° 90o120°150o180°
Firing angle, a -*► 
Firing angle, a
Fig. 3.129 
Current control characteristics of a three-phase controller
Fig. 3.130 
Thyristor voltage waveform of a three phase voltage controller

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Pure Inductive Loads 
The voltages and currents of the load, when the controller 
supplies a pure inductive load, are shown in Fig. 3.128. These are obtained with 
due consideration to the fact that the current lags the voltage by 90° and that effec­
tive control of the regulator is possible for a > 90°. The conduction of the thyristor 
is for (2n -2a), from a to (2n -  a). Since the thyristor current goes to zero 90° after 
the voltage passes through its zero, a negative voltage exists across the thyristor.
The current control characteristic for this case is given in Fig. 3.129.
The thyristor voltage for this type of load jumps to 3/2 VR when the thyris­
tor is in a blocked condition. This voltage is the value between the line R and 
the load neutral. The load neutral has half the voltage of the line to which the 
conducting controllers are connected. The thyristor voltage for this loading is 
shown in Fig. 3.131.
A three phase controller also has a harmonic content in its load current. Reac­
tive power is required both for control purposes as well as harmonics. The former 
is identified by the fundamental displacement factor. The fundamental displace­
ment factor as a function of firing angle a, with the impedance angle as a param­
eter is shown in Fig. 3.132.
Based on the preceding discussion, the voltage and current ratings of the thy­
ristor for a three phase controller can be specified. The selection of the thyristor is 
based on the maximum voltage and maximum value of the average or rms current. 
The thyristor currents are
t 
_  -^phase 
t 
_ ^ph a se
* Ta v — 
2 
’ 
^Trms-
The voltage of the thyristor = — \Î2VR 
The foregoing discussion of three phase voltage controllers
(3.158)
(3.159)
makes it clear that
i. the topology of the circuit under study changes, depending upon the 
type of load and firing angle. The load voltages and current must be
Thyristor
voltage
Fig. 3.131 
Thyrister voltage waveform of a three-phase voltage controller feeding pure 
inductive load

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
11.
ill.
IV.
independently studied 
and 
determined. 
No 
generalised 
analysis 
applicable to all cir­
cuits is possible, 
the analysis of a circuit 
can be easily done by 
identifying the modes 
of operation, so as to 
distinguish the control­
lers 
conducting 
and 
enable one to deter­
mine the load voltages.
the load current waveform has rich harmonic content, calling for addi­
tional reactive power besides that required for control, 
the thyristor voltages and currents enable one to make a proper choice of 
the devices. The thyristors have the highest voltage of operation under 
low output conditions.
Fig. 3*132 
Fundamental displacement angle of a 
three phase controller
Worked Examples
Q
A midpoint two pulse converter feeds a load of resistance 2Q in series with 
an infinite inductance and a back emf of 150 V The converter is supplied 
by a converter transformer with a voltage o f400 Vfrom the neutral to the line. If 
the firing angle is 30° determine the current in the load.
Solution 
The terminal voltage of the converter
9 fp
Vdia = —
Vs cos a = 311.76 V
71
The average voltage across the inductance is zero. Therefore
^di a
311.76-150
~ E h
= 80.88 A
rms value of secondary current = rms value of thyristor current 
rms value of primary current = 80.88 A
80.88
■ã
57.2 A
Q
In the previous example, the firing angle is increased simultaneously 
reversing the dc voltage in the load. Determine the firing angle of the 
converter if the current has to be maintained at 80.88 A.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Solution
Because the polarity of Eh is changed, Eb = -150 V
S
 In the previous example determine the value of a  if the transformer has 
a leakage inductance of 2 mH. The supply frequency is 50 Hz. Determine 
the overlap.
Solution
177.936 = 0.9VS cos a + 150
177.936 -  150
cos a = -------------------
0.9K
a = 85.549°
= 0.0776064 -0.0898666
80.88 = ■^ ia- +- 150
2
161.76 = Vdia +150
Vdia =+11-76
+11.76
cos a =
2-JÍ/n 400
a = 88.13°
V , 
-  F,
— — ,E b = -150 V
Rá
71
71
X  = 0.628
= 0.9E cos a + 150
71
cos(a + u)
u = 5.1535°

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
A midpoint two pulse converter, shown in Fig. P 3.4 feeds an R-L load 
™ having a resistance of 12.5 Q and infinite inductance. The fine reactance is 
0.5 Q. The voltage V = 200 V. Determine the average value of converter voltage 
V , average value of dc current I and overlap angle for a  = 60°
Fig. P3.4 
Two pulse mid point converter
Solution 
The source inductance is responsible for the overlap causing a reduc­
tion in the terminal voltage of the converter. Therefore
V.H
Via =
dio [cos a + cos(a + w)]
AVda = 
[cos a -  cos (a + 1/)] =
71
Also K j a 
^di a 
^^d a 
^di a
I A
71
The average value of voltage across the inductance is zero. Therefore
K i a 
^d^d 
K iia
71
leading after simplification to
h  =
VAidi a
0.9Fscosa
90
(Rd + X c/n)(12.5 +  0.5/7i) 
12.66 
= 7.11A
The average value of the dc voltage
Vda = ldRd = 7.11 x 12.5 = 88.87 V 
The change in the terminal voltage
^dio
= 1.1321 V = - ^ [ c o s 6 0 - c o s ( 6 0  + w)]
cos 60 -  cos(60 + u) = 0.0125785
u= 0.82876°

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
S
 A two pulse bridge rectifier feeds an R-L load having a resistance of 2. 5 Q 
and infinite inductance, causing perfect smoothing. It is fed from a 220 V, 
50 Hz supply having an inductance of 5 mH. The thyristors are ideal. Determine 
the average value of load current and overlap angle for firing angles of a -  0° 
and a  = 30°.
Solution 
Because of the source inductance there is an overlap causing a drop in 
the terminal voltage of the converter. Therefore
rda =
Vadio (cos a + cos (a + «))
VAi
and Arda = 
(cos a -  cos (a +
It can be shown that
AKd„ = 2IáXc
71
Therefore
a 
^di a
2IdXc
71
As the voltage across the load inductance is zero, we have
K\a -  ^d^d
Substituting, we get
L  =
Vrdi«
“ '  
( « d  + 2 X j n )
From the data of the problem
Xc = 2 n fL c = 314 x 5 x 10-3 = 1.57Q
Rj H-------— 2.5 + 1 — 3.5
71
Vdia = 0.9Fscos a = 0.9Vs for a -  0 
= 198 V
Id = —  = 56.57 A
3.5
Therefore Vda =141.43 V 
AVda = 56.57 V

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
From equation for AVda above for a = 0 we have
56.57 = 198
[> - cos UQ
1 -  cos u0 = 0.5714 
uG = 64.62'
For a = 30'
Vdlu = 0.9 X 220 X cos 30° -  171.47 V
h
171.47
3.5
48.99 A
Therefore
AVda = 171.47-122.48 = 48.99
48.99 = ^
 [cos 30 -  cos (30 + «)]
0.49488 = cos 30 -  cos(30 + u)
= 0.866 -  cos (30 + u) 
u= 38.22°
A two pulse, phase controlled, bridge converter operating from a 220 V, 
50 Hz mains feeds a load comprising a resistance of 3 Q, an infinite in­
ductance and a dc source of voltage 200 V. The commutation inductance is 1 mH. 
For a firing angle of 120°, determine the average value of the load current and 
overlap angle.
Solution 
Because of the source inductance there is an overlap, causing a drop in 
the converter voltage. Referring to Fig. P3.6.
A A  -  K i a  ~  E g
Fig. P3.6 
Two pulse bridge convener

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
But Vda = Vdia -  E A E  
Substituting
71
D 
2VC 
Ra + — L
71
-
 K i i a  *
VA- -  E
t 
_  
v  à \ a  
L j g  
I  a — ---------------------^
Rd + 2XC /n
Vdia = 0.9VS cos a = -99 V
En = -200 va
Æd = 3ß,
Substituting
IA -
-99 + 200 
101
3 + 0.2
= 31.56 A
Vda — IaRa + En —
[diVd
3.2
31.56 x 3 -  200
= -105.31
V d a
102.26
Va; [cos a + cos (a + w)]
99 [-0.5 + cos(a + w)] 
-49.5 + 99 cos (a + u)
cos (a + u) = -0.5638
Lc = 1 X 10"3 H
u = 4.316
A three phase converter feeds a resistance load in series with a large in­
ductance, causing perfect smoothing. The average load current is 50 A. 
The line to neutral voltage on the line side of the converter is 220 V at 50 Elz. The 
commutation inductance is 1.5 mH. Determine the average value o f the dc volt­
age, and the overlap angle for a firing angle of 30°. Determine the rms value of 
thyristor current.
Solution 
The commutation inductance causes an overlap because of which the 
terminal voltage decreases. When there is overlap, we have
3/d2fc
2n
1.17VS cos a - 3/dVç
2n
X c = 314 X 1.5 X 10"3 = 0.471

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
Therefore
1.17 X 220 X cos 30
3 x 50 x 0.471 
2 n
= 222.91 -  11.25 -  211.66 V 
Change in voltage = 11.25 V
11.25 = -^i£L (cos a - c o s ( a  + w))
257.4/ 
/ 
\ \
= ——— (cos 30 -  cos (30 + w)j
0.0874125 = cos 30 -  cos (30 + u) 
u = 8.87°
A three phase three pulse converter feeds an RLE load, having a resistance 
of 2.5 Q, an inductance causing perfect smoothing and a negative voltage 
(voltage source) o f250 V The converter is supplied from a three phase balanced 
supply at 50 Hz and line to neutral voltage of 150 V Determine the mean value of 
load current at a firing angle of 120°. Assume the thyristors are ideal and com­
mutation is instantaneous.
Solution 
In the case of a converter feeding a back emf load in series with a resis­
tance and inductance, the average current in the load is
h
In the present case the load has a dc source Eb = -250 V.
Vdia = 1.17FS cos a = -87.75V
h
-87.75 + 250 
2.5
64.9 A
The thyristor currents:
Average value = 21.63 A 
rms value = 37.47 A
If in Example 3.8 the line has an inductance of 3 
angle to maintain an average current of 64.9 A 
overlap angle?
mH, determine the firing 
in the load. What is the
Solution 
Average value of load current = 64.9 A 
Average value of load voltage = 162.25 V 
When there is overlap

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
h  =
Kdi«
Rá + 3XC !2n
Therefore Vdia -  Eh = Ià
R a +
V
TT,
2n
\
= 64.9x2.95
= 191.455'
But E. = -250 V
b
Therefore Vd-m = 191.455 —250 = —58.545°
-58.545 
„ „ „ „
cos a = --------------= -0.3336
1.17x150
a = 109.5°
c o s (a + u) =
í
cos a - 3 IdX c 
2
\
Vdlo J
= -0.3336 -  0.45 X
0.17x150
X 64.9
a + u = 0.3179
u = 22.29°
A three phase fully controlled bridge rectifier is fed from a three phase bal­
anced supply at 400 V and 50 Hz. The load consists ofR -1 5  Q and a large 
smoothing inductance causing a perfect smoothing. Determine the average value 
o f the load voltage, current and power dissipation for a firing angle of a -  75°. 
Assume the thyristor and supply to be ideal.
Solution 
The average value of the load voltage of a three phase fully controlled 
bridge rectifier = 2.34 V cos a -  1.35 V cos a
Vdia = 1.35 x 400 x cos 75° = 139.76 V
The average value of voltage across the inductor is zero. Therefore the average 
value of converter voltage is dropped across load resistance. Thus
^ d ia — ^ d ^ d
_ Vdia
139.76
9.317A
15

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
The power dissipation = VdiaId
= 139.76 x 9.317 = 1302.2 W
m
For the three phase bridge of problem 3.10 determine the fundamental 
displacement factor and power factor.
Solution 
The fundamental displacement factor
c o s ^ ^  cosa = 0.2588
The power factor = g cos (]).
3
Where g is the distortion factor. For a three phase fully controlled bridge, it is —
n
for perfect smoothing.
Therefore the power factor is
3 
3 
3
= — x cos 
= — cos a = — x 0.2588 = 0.2473
71 
71 
71
M M  For the three phase bridge of problem 3.11 determine the ratings of the 
■Ü  thyristors.
Solution 
Voltage rating of the thyristor
In a three phase fully controlled bridge rectifier the maximum voltage rating of a 
thyristor is the peak value of line voltage.
Therefore
VTh = 7 1 x 4 0 0  = 565.69 V
Using a factor of safety, 1000 V thyristors may be used.
Current ratings
The rms value of supply current
L
/-9.317 = 7.607A
This current flows only for half a cycle. 
Therefore
or
^Th -
L
7.607
72 
72
= 5.379A
hh - f
 = 5.379A
7 3
These are the ratings at a -  75°
However if the firing angle ranges from 0 to 90°, the maximum current occurs 
at a = 0

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The maximum current rating of the thyristor
5.379 = 20.783 A
cos a
With a factor of safety, a thyristor of 25 A may be chosen.
A three phase fully controlled bridge rectifier is supplied from a 415 V, 
50 Hz supply having an inductance of 1.5 mH. The converter load consists 
of a resistance of 50 Q and a large inductance, causing perfect smoothing. Calcu­
late the average value of load current and voltage for firing angles of a = 0° and 
a  -60°. What are the overlap angles?
Solution 
The source inductance of the converter is responsible for the overlap, 
which causes a drop in the voltage.
Therefore
Via =
AKda =
Va;
dio
2
[cos a + cos(a + «)]
Vy
—111 [cos a -  cos (a + u)]
— V,\\n — Vr\n — Va\„ —6/cA
di a
da
dia
71
Also, the average value of the load voltage = f  Rd. Therefore,
/
Ra +
6 X
\
7i ; = Vrdi a
leading to
L  =
Vax
dia
1.35x415x1
R i+ è X jn  
5o + 6 x0471 
1.35x415
n
50 + 0.9
= 11.007 A
The average value of converter voltage = 11.007 x 50 = 550.34 V 
The ideal voltage = 1.35 x 415 = 560.25 V 
Change in voltage = 9.9 V
9 9 = 56025 [ [ _ cos Uq]
9 9 x 2
1 — cos uQ = —------= 0.3534
0 
560.22
cos u0 = 0.96466 
u0 = 15.28°
a = 60°

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
r 
1.35 X  415 X  cos 60 
280.125 
, ^
 , A
Id = ---------------------------= ------------= 5.5034 A
50.9 
50.9
The converter voltage = 5.5034 x 50
= 275.17 V
The inductive drop in terminal voltage = 4.953 V
4 953 x 2
cos(a) -  cos(a + u) -  — ------= 0.0177
560.25
cos(a + u) = 0.5 -  0.0177 = 0.4823 
u = 1.1631°
MPPB A dc chopper having an on time of 1.5 ms in a overall cycle time of 5 ms is 
■Hi® supplied from a 200 V dc source. The load voltage waveform is in the form 
of rectangular pulses. Determine the average and rms values of the load voltage. 
Also determine the rms value of the fundamental current and ripple factor.
Solution 
The waveform of the load voltage is shown in Fig. P 3.14. The control 
or time ratio of the chopper is
3.0
<—
V i
1—  T o n “ I—
 T o f f  — |
Fig. P3.14 
The load voltage waveform of a chopper
The average value of the load voltage = 0.5 x 200 = 100 V. The rms value of the 
load voltage
= y/oT x 200 = 141.42 V 
The fundamental of the load voltage
= — y/(l -  cos 2n r)2 + (sin 2n r)2 
90.08 V
n
rms value = 63.7 V
_ 
AZi- 1
" 
T
Ripple factor

The McGraw Hill Companies
•ü
Electric Drives
A de chopper feeds an R-L load having a resistance of 1.5 Q and an in­
ductance of 3 mH. The ON time of the thyristor is 2 ms in an overall cycle 
time o f 6 ms. Calculate the average value of the load voltage, the average current, 
and the maximum and minimum values of the current and power delivered to the 
load. The supply voltage of the chopper is 150 V.
Solution 
The time ratio of the chopper = — = —
The time constant of the load = t  = 1.5 = 2 ms
The angular frequency of chopper
2n 
2n
co =
xlO3
T 
6
The constant of the circuit, deciding the continuity of conduction is
2 n
cot 
1 0 0 0  
2n
The conduction is continuous because
6 
1000
X
-----------= 3
COT > time ratio.
1
Average value of voltage = — xl50 = 50V
Average value of current = 
= 33.33 A
Average power delivered = 1666.666 co 
The current in the load during r QN is
V
K
at í -  r0N
_ 150 
max '  ~L5~[1 -  e~2!6\ + I0e~^
= 28.347 + L  X  0.717
During the OFF time of the chopper
- t / r
^2 
Ana X ^
At the end of 
i. = /
OFF 2 
o
4  = A n a x O “ 4 / 6 )  = 0.5134(28.347 + / 0 x 0.717) 
= 14.554 + 0.3681/o 
I0 = 23.032 A
Imax = 28.347 + 23.032 x 0.717 
= 44.86 A 
Imin = 23.032 A

The McGrawHill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
A single phase ac voltage regulator feeds an R-L load having an imped­
ance angle of 60°. The angle of extinction is 215°. Determine the angle of 
firing. For this condition determine the fundamental displacement factor and the 
load voltage o f regulator.
Solution 
The current of a voltage regulator is given by
i = ------sin (cot
Z
At the angle of extinction / = 0 
Therefore at cot = x
-4 »
-JÏ.E
co t-a
z
sin (a -  <\>)e vtan ^
Substituting
1 co t-a  ^
sin(x -  <\>) 
x = 215°
sin (a -  ty)e 
<|> = 60°
Y t an <j) ) _= 0
0.42262 -  sin(a -  §)e
215 x n  
180
- a )
f
 =  o
0.42262 -  sin (a -  §)e
2.165-
\
-  0
0.42262 -  sin (a -  <$>)ea/ ^  e~2A65 = 0 
a = 133° 0.4187 
a = 134° 0.4255
By iteration a -  134°
The conduction angle /? = 215-134 = 81°
Applying Fourier series expansion the fundamental coefficients are
(X\ =
F =
J l e
2n
■JÏE
In
■JlE
2n
■JÏE
2n
■JlE
2n
(cos 2a -  cos 2x)
yflE
[-0.0349 -  0.34202] = -  ----- x 0.3769
2n
[2(x -  a) -  sin 2x + sin 2a]
[2.826 -0.9397 -0.9994]
[0.8869]

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The fundamental displacement angle is
, a{ 
-0.3769
tan"1 — = -----------
bx 
0.8869
¥ = 23.024° 
cos y/x -  0.920343
Problems
A
J
3.1 
A single phase, half wave converter 
operating on a 220 V, 50 Hz supply 
charges a 72 V battery having an 
internal resistance of 0.5 Q. Deter­
mine the value of the firing angle so 
that the charging current does not 
exceed 20 A. Determine the PIV of 
the thyristor.
3.2 
A two pulse mid point converter is used 
to charge the battery of Problem 1. 
The converter in this case is fed from 
a converter transformer having a sec­
ondary voltage of 220 V between the 
line and centre tap. Determine the fir­
ing angle of the converter so that the 
charging current does not exceed 20 
A. Determine also the PIV and aver­
age value of the thyristor current.
3.3 
A 500 V, 3-phase, 50 Hz source sup­
plies a 3-phase, 6 pulse bridge type 
converter, which feeds a dc load con­
sisting of a back emf of 450 V and 
a resistance of 5 Q. For firing angles 
of a = 30° and a = 60° determine the 
power supplied and the average thy­
ristor current. Determine the input 
power factor and the reactive power 
supplied to the converter.
3.4 
A 250 V, 50 Hz ac source supplies 
a single phase half wave converter 
supplying a load resistance of 10 Q. 
The maximum current in the load has 
to be limited to 50 A. Calculate the 
desired control angle, the average 
thyristor current and the PIV of the 
thyristor.
3.5 
A two-pulse midpoint converter with 
a voltage of 250 V between the cen­
tre tap and line is used to supply the 
load resistance of 10 Q. Determine 
the control angle, the average thyristor 
current and the PIV of the thyristor if 
the load current must not exceed 15 A.
3.6 
Compare the waveforms of the cur­
rent in a dc load circuit (7d), the thy­
ristor input current (/ ) and the input 
current of a phase controlled two 
pulse midpoint converter for the two 
cases of loading (a) pure resistance 
(UR = O), and (b) ideal smoothing. 
Compare also the effective values of 
line current, active power, power fac­
tor, and the output voltage as func­
tions of the firing angle a.
3.7 
A two pulse mid point converter is 
feeding a load containing a resistance 
of 10.5 Q and very high inductance, 
which causes perfect smoothing on the 
dc side. The converter operates on a 
220 V, 50 Hz supply. The reactance on 
the line side of the converter is 0.4 Q. 
For a firing angle of 30° determine
(a) the average dc voltage
(b) the average dc current
(c) the overlap angle.
3.8 
A two pulse mid point converter is 
feeding a load containing a resistance 
of 0.5 Q and very high smoothing 
inductance. The converter is operating 
as an inverter and the load has a back 
emf of 200 V. The half winding on 
the secondary side of the transformer

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
feeding the converter is 220 V and the 
frequency is 50 Hz. The commutation 
inductance (line side inductance) is 2 
mH. Assume the thyristors to be ideal. 
Determine the firing angle of the con­
verter to maintain a current of 200 A 
in the dc circuit.
3.9 
A two pulse mid point converter has a 
free wheeling diode connected across 
the load, consisting of a resistance 
of 15 Q and a large inductance giv­
ing ideal smoothing inductance. The 
converter is fed from a transformer 
having a half winding voltage on the 
secondary side of 220 V. The firing 
angle of the converter is 30°. Deter­
mine (a) the average value of the dc 
voltage, (b) the average value of the 
dc current, (c) the average value of 
the thyristor current and (d) the aver­
age value of the diode current.
3.10 A 2-pulse single phase bridge con­
verter operating on a 220 V, 50 Hz 
supply feeds the following types 
of loads:
(a) R = \0 Q, L -  0, L -  0
(b) R= 1 0 a, L = oo,Lc = 0
(c) f l = 1 0 Q, L = oo,LC= 2 mH 
Determine the average value of the 
dc voltage, dc current and the device 
currents for firing angle of a = 30°. 
Determine the overlap angle.
3.11 Determine the average value of the dc 
voltage and the dc current of a 2 pulse 
single phase bridge converter having 
the following details:
V2 = V2 x 110  sin cot,
00 — 314 rad/sec.
The converter transformer is ideal. 
The load consists of a resistance of 3 
Q, an inductance of very high value, 
causing perfect smoothing and a back 
emf of 60 V. The firing angle of the 
converter is 45°.
3.12 A 2 pulse phase controlled bridge 
converter operating from a 220 V, 
50 Hz mains feeds a load comprising
R = 2 Q, Ld = 00 and Eh = 200 V
The 
commutation 
inductance 
is 
0.5 mH. For a firing angle of 120°, 
determine the average value of the 
load current and overlap angle.
3.13 A half controlled bridge converter 
has a firing angle of 75° and oper­
ates on 220 V, 50 Hz mains. It feeds 
a load having a resistance of 2 Q and 
very large inductance sufficient to 
cause ideal smoothing. Determine 
the dc voltage and the average value 
of the dc current. Determine the rms 
and average values of the thyristor 
currents.
3.14 A 2-pulse phase controlled bridge 
converter has a free wheeling diode. 
It operates from a 220 V, 50 Hz mains 
to feed a load of 5 Q resistance and 
very high value of inductance with 
perfect smoothing on the dc side. 
The commutating inductance can be 
neglected. Determine the average 
value of the dc voltage and the aver­
age value of the dc current for a firing 
angle of 60°. What are the rms and 
average values of thyristor and diode 
currents. Determine the fundamental 
displacement factor.
3.15 A 3-phase, 3 pulse converter feeds a 
purely resistive load of 5 Q, the line 
voltage of the mains feeding the con­
verter is 380 V at 50 Hz. The firing 
angle of the converter is 45°. Deter­
mine the mean values of output volt­
age and current. Determine also the 
average and rms values of the device 
currents.
3.16 A 3-phase, 3 pulse converter feeds 
a load having a resistance of 5 Q in 
series with an inductance. Determine 
the value of the inductance in the load 
circuit to make the current just con­
tinuous.
3.17 A 3-phase, 3 pulse converter has a 
FWD connected across the load. The 
converter has an input voltage of

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
380 V at 50 Hz. The load comprises 
a resistance of 20 Q in series with a 
very high value of smoothing induc­
tance.
(a) Determine the average value of 
the dc voltage and dc current at 
a firing angle of a = 60°.
(b) If the inductance in the load is 
reduced to 80 mH and the FWD 
is removed, determine the fir­
ing angle at which the current 
becomes discontinuous.
3.18 A 3-phase, 3-pulse converter feeds 
a resistance load in series with a 
large inductance, causing perfect 
smoothing. The average load cur­
rent is 50 A. The phase voltage on 
the ac side of the converter is 220 V 
at 50 Hz. The commutation induc­
tance is 1.5 mH. Determine the 
average value of the dc voltage, and 
the overlap angle of a firing angle 
of 30°. Determine the rms value of 
thyristor current.
3.19 (a) For a P pulse uncontrolled recti­
fier in mid point connection show 
that the ideal output voltage is given
by
yái = s V
^ 71 y
V2 FS sin
{ 71 ^
where F is the voltage between the 
line and neutral on the ac side of the 
converter; s number of series con­
nected converters; q number of com­
mutations in a commutating group,
(b) Use the expression to determine 
the dc voltage of a 6-pulse mid point 
converter, 6-pulse bridge converter, 
2-pulse mid point converter, 2-pulse 
bridge converter, and a 6-pulse con­
verter with interphase transformer.
3.20 Show that under an ideal case of 
smoothing and instantaneous com­
mutation
/„ 
V
On the line side of the converter. I , 
is the amplitude (rms value) of the v 
the harmonic and /,, that of the fun­
damental.
3.21 Discuss the effects of overlap on the 
harmonic content of the ac current 
on the line side. Show for the case of 
non-instantaneous commutation
/ v) 
1 sin vu/2
/ n 
v 
vu/2
where ju is the overlap angle and v is 
the order of harmonic the fifth har­
monic. Determine the ratios for the 
case of instantaneous and non-instan- 
taneous commutations.
3.22 (a) What are the criteria for selecting 
the value of load inductance of a con­
trolled rectifier?
(b) Show that for a P pulse converter, 
the inductance required is given by
ojId
sin a , 
n 
n
1 -----cot —
p  
p
Deduce the simplified expression for 
P = 2, 3 and 6.
3.23 A fully controlled 3-phase bridge 
rectifier is supplied by a 440 V, 
50 Hz mains. The source has an 
inductance of 1 mH. The thyristors 
are ideal. Deduce a relationship 
between the average terminal volt­
age of the converter and firing angle 
a as well as load current. Draw the 
curve of voltage against firing angle 
for a constant load current of 50 A. 
Determine also the curve of voltage 
against load current for a given a 
of 30°.
3.24 A 3-phase bridge connected phase 
controlledrectifierfeedsaloadof0.5Q 
in series with a very high value of 
inductance and a back emf of 190 V. 
The line to neutral voltage on the line 
side of the converter is 220 V. Assum­
ing 
instantaneous 
commutation, 
determine the mean value of the rec­
tified voltage, and the mean value of

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
the direct current for a = 0 and a -  60°. 
Determine the rms value of the thy­
ristor currents.
3.25 A 3-phase, 6-pulse bridge converter 
has the following particulars: Line 
to neutral voltage on the line side 
is 250 V at 50 Hz. The load circuit 
comprises a resistance of 2 £2, a very 
large inductance making the cur­
rent continuous and ripple free and 
a back emf of 400 V. The commuta­
tion inductance on the ac side, L = 
2 mH. For a firing angle of a = 60°, 
determine the average value of rec­
tified voltage and the current in the 
thyristors.
3.26 If the converter of Problem 25 is in 
the inverting mode with a firing angle 
of a -  130°, determine the average 
value of the load voltage and dc cur­
rent and the power fed back to the 
supply. Consider L = 0 as well as 
2 mH. Determine also the overlap 
angle.
3.27 A 3-phase half controlled bridge con­
verter supplies a load comprising a 
resistance of 1.5 Q in series with an 
inductance which is large enough to 
effect perfect smoothing. The line to 
neutral voltage on the line side is 200 V 
and the power delivered to the load 
is 15 kW. Determine the value of a. 
Find the mean values of thyristor and 
diode currents.
3.28 A 3-phase, 6-pulse bridge rectifier 
supplies a power of 400 kW to the dc 
load comprising an R-L-E. The maxi­
mum dc voltage is 500 V. Determine 
the inductance required in the load if 
the operation has to be continuous at 
10% of the rated current and a firing 
angle of a = 90°.
3.29 A dc chopper shown in Fig. P3.29 
feeds an R-L load. The waveform 
of the load current for a definite 
operating condition is also shown in 
Fig. P3.29. The average value of the 
chopper output voltage is 150 V.
Determine the values of R and L, 
neglecting commutation effects.
3.30 The basic chopper depicted in Fig. 
P3.20 feeds an R-L load. The load 
inductance is sufficiently large to 
make the load current constant and 
its variation during commutation 
negligible.
(a) Determine the minimum value 
of capacitance for commutation 
if the main thyristor T has a turn 
off time t = 25 jus. The induc­
tance Lx can be neglected.
(b) What should be the value of 
commutating circuit inductance 
to allow an initial rise of current 
of 500 A.//s-1 in the auxiliary 
thyristors?
(c) What should be the value of L2 if 
the recharging process is to com­
plete in 100 jis?
(d) What is the maximum value of 
iT during the recharging pro­
cess?
3.31 The following information is avail­
able about a basic chopper circuit: 
Input voltage = 15 0 V, Output voltage= 
60 V, E. = 40 V, i =0.5 s , f = 3 m s .  
Determine the mode of operation of 
the chopper and the time constant of 
the load.
3.32 A 100 V dc chopper feeds an R-L 
load having R = 5 Q. and L -  40 mH. 
A free wheeling diode is placed 
across the load. The load current var­
ies between 10 and 12 A. Determine 
the time ratio of the chopper. What is 
the chopper frequency?
3.33 A chopper having a switching fre­
quency of 250 Hz feeds a load having 
a pure inductance of 15 mH in series 
with a back emf. Determine the time 
ratio of the chopper to allow a current 
variation of 10 A in the load circuit. 
The input dc voltage to the chopper 
is 250 V.
3.34 A chopper operating from a 220 V 
dc source feeds an R-L load, having

The McGraw-Hill Companies
isa
Electric Drives
R = 5 Q and L = 30 mH. The switch­
ing frequency is 200 Hz and the ON 
time of the chopper is 1.2 ms. Deter­
mine the limits of the load current.
3.35 Derive expressions for the variation 
of load current i(t) of a dc chopper 
feeding an R-L load. Use the results 
to determine the dependence of cur­
rent pulsation Ai = i 
-  t . on 
the time ratio TQJT, with the time
constant (T IT) of the load circuit as 
a parameter.
3.36 A dc chopper fed from 150 V feeds 
a load comprising R -  0.2 Q, L = 
0.1 mH and a back emf of 20 V. T0J  
T = 0.33 and the period is 3 ms.
(a) Determine the mode of operation 
of the chopper.
(b) Find the average values of output 
voltage and current.
— Multiple-Choice Questions
\
J
3.1 
A fully controlled line commutated
converter operates as an inverter
(a) in the range of firing angles 0 < 
a <90°
(b) in the range of firing angles 90° 
<a< 180°
(c) in the range of firing angles 90° 
< a < 180° with a suitable dc 
source in the load.
(d) When it supplies RLE load
3.2 
The inverter limit of a line commu­
tated inverter is due to
(a) Overlap alone
(b) Turn off time of the thyristor
(c) Turn on time of the thyristor
(d) Due to both overlap of the con­
verter and turn off time of the 
thyristor
3.3 
The overlap introduces
(a) additional reactive power require­
ment
(b) additional losses in the load
(c) additional harmonics in the load 
current
(d) a heavy short circuit current
3.4 
In the thyristor power converters dur­
ing discontinuous conduction
(a) the load current is zero even 
though the load voltage is present
(b) the load current and load voltage 
are both simultaneously zero
(c) the load current is present even 
though the load voltage is zero
(d) the current is ripple free
3.5 
A free wheeling diode in a phase con­
trolled rectifier
(a) enables the inverter operation
(b) smoothens the load current con­
sequently the smoothing induc­
tance required is small
(c) makes the converter draw addi­
tional reactive power
(d) impairs the line power factor
3.6 
A phase controlled converter is 
designed for 220 V, 50 Hz supply. 
If this converter operates on 170 V, 
50 Hz supply there is a possibility 
for
(a) commutation failure during rec­
tification
(b) commutation failure during inver­
sion
(c) increased voltage drop
(d) increased losses in the inverter
3.7 
In a 2-pulse bridge converter with 
free wheeling diode, the width of the 
diode current pulse is
(a ) 
71
(b) a
(c) 
7 i - a
(d) 7i + a

The McGraw Hill Companies
Converters for Feeding Electric Motors
3.8 
Mid point converters in general 
require input transformers. This input 
transformer is of special construction 
because
(a) harmonic currents are present in 
the load
(b) dc magnetisation of the core
(c) to give strength to the system
(d) to improve the converter behaviour
3.9 
A voltage source inverter supply­
ing an inductive load requires a gate 
pulse of long duration to turn the thy­
ristor ON
(a) to ensure the initiation of con­
duction of the thyristor immedi­
ately when its voltage is positive
(b) because a wider pulse is required 
invariably to turn on the thyristor
(c) to reduce the thyristor losses
(d) because a wider pulse effectively 
provides an output with least 
harmonic content
3.10 The phase control employed for a 
cycloconverter imparts
(a) a very good power factor
(b) a very bad power factor
(c) undesirable harmonic behaviour
(d) poor voltage regulation
3.11 The conduction angle of an ac volt­
age controller depends on
(a) the variation in the input voltage
(b) the impedance angle of the load
(c) the supply frequency
(d) both supply frequency and volt­
age
3.12 A single phase ac voltage controller 
feeds a pure inductive load. Its con­
trol angle range
(a) 0 < a < 180°
(b) 0 < a < 90°
(c) 90° <a< 180°
(d) 180° <a< 270°
3.13 In a two quadrant chopper, the 
load voltage is varied from positive 
maximum to negative maximum by 
varying
(a) time ratio of the chopper from
0 to 1
(b) time ratio of the chopper from
1 to 0
(c) time ratio of the chopper from 
0 to 0.5
(d) time ratio of the chopper from 
0.5 to 0
3.14 A dual converter with circulating cur­
rent mode
(a) has no possibility of discontinu­
ous conduction
(b) requires a more sophisticated 
control
(c) has a very sluggish behaviour
(d) offers difficulties during transi­
tion from motor to generators
References
J
3.1 
Bedford, B.D., and R.G. Hoft, Principles o f inverter circuits, John Wiley and Sons, 
Inc., New York, 1964.
3.2 
Dewan, S.B., and A. Straughen, Power semiconductor circuits, John Wiley and Sons 
Inc., New York, 1975.
3.3 
Subrahmanyam, Vedam, Thyristor control o f electric drives, Tata McGraw-Hill Pub­
lishing Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 1988.
3.4 
Berde, M.S., Thyristor engineering, Khanna Publishers, New Delhi, 1988.
3.5 
Sen, PC., Power electronics, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 
1987.
3.6 
Dubey, G.K., S.R. Doradla, A. Joshi, and R.M.K. Sinha, Thyristorized power 
controllers, Wiley Eastern Ltd., 1986.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
3.7 
Heumann, K. and A.C. Stumpe, Thyristoren, B.G. Teubner, Stuttgart, 1969.
3.8 
Bystron, K., Leistungselektronik, Carl Hanser Verlag, München, 1979.
3.9 
Jager, R., Leistungselektronik Grundlangen Und Anwendungen, VDE Verlag GmBH, 
Berlin, 1977.
3.10 Thorborg, K., Power electronics, Prentice-Hall, International (UK) Ltd., 1988.
3.11 Lander, C.W., Power electronics, McGraw-Hill, London, 1981.
3.12 Seguier Guy, Power electronic converters, North Oxford Academic, 1986.
3.13 Patel, H.S. and R.G. Hoft, Generalised techniques of harmonie elimination and volt­
age control in thyristor converters, IEEE transactions on industry applications, Vol. 
IA9, pp.310-317, 1973 and Vol.IA-10, 1974, pp. 666-673.
3.14 Steigerwald, R.L. ‘Characteristics of a current fed inverter with commutation applied 
through load neutral point’, IEEE transaction industry applications, Vol. IA-15, pp. 
538-553, 1979.
3.15 Subrahmanyam, Vedam, ‘Analysis of commutation of a current source inverter feed­
ing an induction motor using 2-axis variables’, IEE Proceedings, Vol. 130, Pt.B, pp. 
355-359, 1983.
3.16 Ward, E., ‘Inverter suitable for operation over a wide range of frequency’, Proc. IEE,
1974, Vol. Ill, pp. 1423-1434.
3.17 Farrer, W., and J.D. Miskin, ‘Quasi sine wave fully regenerative inverter’, Proc. IEE, 
1973, Vol. 120, pp. 969-976.
3.18 Bowes, S.R., ‘New sinusoidal pulse width modulated inverter’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 122,
1975.
3.19 Phillips, K.P., ‘Current source converter for ac motor drives’, Conf. Record 1971, 
IEEE IAS, pp. 385-392.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of 
Electric Motors
________________________ J
A separately excited dc motor is very versatile as a variable speed motor. Its 
speed can be varied by varying the applied voltage to the armature or field cur­
rent. The speed control using the variation of armature voltage can be used for 
constant torque application in the speed range from zero to rated speed (base 
speed). Speeds above base speed are obtained by means of field weakening, 
the armature voltage being kept at the rated value. The speed control in this 
case is at constant power. In both cases the speed control is smooth and step­
less. However, the dc motor has disadvantages as a variable speed drive, due 
to the presence of a mechanical commutator. The commutator actually limits 
the rating, highest speed of operation. It requires frequent maintenance and 
makes the dc motor unsuitable for application under certain environmental 
conditions.
With the advent of thyristors and thyristor power converters the variable volt­
age to the dc motor is obtained from static power converters. Phase controlled 
rectifiers provide variable dc voltage from constant voltage, constant frequency 
mains. The static apparatus is very efficient, compact and has a very good dynamic 
behaviour. It is very easy to provide a four quadrant drive with slight modifica­
tions in the converter.
A dc chopper can be used to obtain a variable voltage from a constant dc volt­
age. The average value of the output voltage can be varied by varying the time 
ratio of the chopper.
Besides the advantages, static converter fed dc motors have a performance 
which is very much different from the performance of the motor operating on pure 
dc. The motor current has ripple content which affects the commutation capability 
of the motor. Additional losses are present. There may be torque pulsations. When 
the phase control is used the line power factor is poor.
An ac motor is a constant speed motor. Its speed depends upon the supply 
frequency and number of poles. The mechanical commutator is not present and 
therefore an ac motor has several advantages compared to a dc motor. Besides 
robustness and simplicity of construction, e.g., cage type induction motor, an ac 
motor has advantages of less maintenance, increased power ratings, high speeds 
of operation, easily realisable explosion-proof construction, low inertia, and high

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
power/weight ratio or increased power density. Because of these advantages, the 
ac motor finds application in reactor engineering where maintenance free opera­
tion is required, in air craft drives where high power density is required, and in 
the textile industry where dust and explosion-proof construction is required. Ac 
motor drives are built for high speeds in large power ratings and due to low inertia 
they have a fast response. The main disadvantage of these motors was that an 
efficient smooth speed control in a wide range was a problem.
The problem of speed control of ac motors has been very efficiently solved 
with the development of thyristor power converters which can provide variable 
frequency, variable voltage supply. Using these converters it has been possible 
to achieve an ac motor having dc motor characteristics. Developments are now 
oriented towards replacing the dc motor by means of inverter fed ac motors with 
improved dynamic response.
Induction motors operating on thyristor power converters have non-sinusoidal 
input waveform. These cause variations in the performance, such as additional 
harmonic losses, torque pulsations, etc. The additional harmonic losses are 
responsible for increased heating and temperature rise. Consequently the motor 
has to be derated, particularly at low speeds. Torque pulsations at low speeds 
are objectionable. Hence it is necessary to modify either the motor design or the 
inverter, for better performance.
The speed of a slip ring induction motor can be varied by using power con­
verters in the rotor circuit. The rotor current waveform, which is non-sinusoidal, 
causes variations in the performance.
Synchronous motors are also becoming popular as variable speed drives 
using thyristor power converters. The variable frequency for the synchronous 
motors is given by cycloconverters, voltage fed inverters and current fed invert­
ers. A synchronous motor has an advantage over an induction motor. When it 
is overexcited it operates at leading power factor. The machine voltages can be 
used for commutation of the inverter. Load commutation is thus possible and 
consequently the power circuit becomes simple. The inverter feeding a syn­
chronous motor can have a control from the information of rotor position. All 
the six thyristors of the inverter are fired (once) in a sequence by the time the 
rotor moves by two pole pitches (i.e., 360° el.). The motor current completes 
one cycle. Thus the speed and frequency are synchronised using rotor position 
sensing. The control is called self control. The input frequency and rotor speed 
are tied together. This control imparts to synchronous motor the properties of a 
dc motor. The problem of stability disappears and the machine has a dynamic 
behaviour similar to that of a dc motor. A self controlled load commutated 
C.S.I. fed synchronous motor is now a competitor for both dc motor and induc­
tion motor.
The performance of a synchronous motor on variable frequency supply is of 
interest. This enables one to improve the inverter system or motor design for bet­
ter performance.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
4.1 
INDUCTION MOTOR DRIVES
A converter fed induction motor has the following advantages over a line fed 
motor:
i. 
Smooth start up is guaranteed by variable frequency starting from a low 
value.
ii. 
Soft starting and acceleration at constant current and torque are 
possible.
iii. The network is no longer subjected to a high switching surge current as 
with the direct switch ON of cage induction motor, and as such, special 
starting equipment can be omitted even at high ratings.
iv. High moments of inertia can be accelerated without need to over dimen­
sion the motor.
v. The converter acts as a decoupling device. Therefore, feedback from the 
motor to the point of short circuit does not take place, when line short 
circuits occur. The short circuit rating, on the basis of which the switch- 
gear has to be overdimensioned is therefore low, permitting a saving to 
be made.
As has already been stated, the induction motor speed can be controlled by 
supplying the stator a variable voltage, variable frequency supply using static fre­
quency converters. Speed control is also possible by feeding the slip power to the 
supply system using converters in the rotor circuit. Basically one distinguishes 
two different methods of speed control.
i. 
Speed control by varying the slip frequency when the stator is fed from 
a constant voltage, constant frequency mains.
ii. 
Speed control of the motor using a variable frequency variable voltage, 
motor operating at constant rotor frequency.
Speed control by variation of slip frequency is obtained by the follow­
ing ways:
(a) 
Stator voltage control using a three-phase voltage controller.
(b) 
Rotor resistance control using a chopper controlled resistance in 
the rotor circuit.
(c) 
Using a converter cascade in the rotor circuit to recover slip energy.
(d) 
Using a cycloconverter in the rotor circuit.
4.1.1 
Control of an Induction Motor by Stator Voltage Variation 
(Using a Three Phase Voltage Controller)
It is very well known that the torque of an induction motor varies directly in 
proportion to the square of the voltage. The torque of an induction motor is 
approximately given by
(4.1)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
and the torque speed curve is as shown in Fig. 4.1. The slip for maximum torque 
is given by
m
(4.2)
which is independent of stator voltage. However, this can be varied by variation in 
rotor resistance. The value of maximum torque is given by
m
2 nns
V '2
y20
2xi
(4.3)
This also changes as the square of the applied voltage. If the voltage is reduced 
to 80% the maximum torque falls to 64%. The variation in applied voltage is 
achieved by means of a voltage controller.
This method of controlling the speed of an induction motor is simple and 
economical. The stator voltage control is achieved by means of phase control of 
the antiparallel thyristors, connected as shown in Fig. 4.2. Figures 4.3(a) and (b) 
illustrate two practical connections of a voltage controller feeding an induction 
motor. In the connection of Fig. 4.2 the thyristors have to handle only phase cur­
rent. The harmonic currents become higher. In Fig. 4.3 the harmonic penalty is 
rather more.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Fig. 4.2 AC voltage controller using antiparallel thyristors for speed control of induction motor
Stator winding
Fig. 4-3 
Practical connections ofac voltage controller (a) delta connected controller 
(b) neutral connected controller

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The stator voltage can be varied from zero to full value within the triggering 
angle range. The line side power factor is very poor because of harmonics and 
reactive power due to phase control.
When a cage induction motor is fed from a variable voltage supply for speed 
control the following observations may be made:
i. The torque speed curve beyond the maximum torque point has a negative 
shape. A stable operating point in this region is not possible for constant 
torque load.
ii. The voltage controller must be capable of withstanding high starting cur­
rents. The range of speed control is rather limited.
iii. The motor power factor is poor.
To obviate the above difficulties the induction motor must have a high resis­
tance rotor. This makes the point of maximum torque shift towards s = \ , thereby 
reducing the unstable region of speed-torque curve. Due to increased rotor resis­
tance the starting current decreases, the power factor improves and the range of 
speed control increases.
The method of speed control is therefore advantageous with a high resistance 
rotor. The speed-torque curves for this control are shown in Fig. 4.4(a). The cur­
rent rating of the controller decides the possible torque at each speed. The limiting 
curve of the torque as a function of speed can be derived. Figure 4.4(b) shows this 
curve of limiting torque for design rating of the controller, which is three times 
the rated current of the motor. The current as a function of speed and stator volt­
age is depicted. During control, if the current value exceeds the limiting value, 
automatic current limit must be employed. By this the value of the firing angle 
gets adjusted until the permissible current flows.
Fig. 4.4(a) 
Speed-torque characteristics of an induction motor with variable stator 
voltage

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors 
^ ^ 3
Fig. 4.4(b) 
Typical limiting torque curve of an induction motor fed from a voltage 
controller
Even though the method is simple and economical, the motor losses increase 
with increase in slip. The increase in the losses can be attributed to increase in the 
motor current due to drop in the air gap flux as well as to the high resistance of 
the rotor. The ratio q /r2' can be taken to be representative in deciding these losses 
because increase in the resistance is instrumental in limiting the current drawn. 
The efficiency of the motor can be approximately given by
;? = (1 - s )
where s is the slip of the motor.
The type of load driven by the motor influences the current drawn and losses of 
the motor as the slip varies. The normally occurring loads are
i. constant torque loads
ii. torque varying proportional to speed
iii. torque varying proportional to the square of the speed.
Let us consider that the torque speed characteristic of the load is given by a 
general equation
I’d = A>rx
If the value of x = 0, it amounts to constant torque load, x > 0 for variable torque 
loads (Fig. 4.5a)
The rotor copper losses
A*2 = sf >o\
where PD1 is the air gap power or power input to rotor.

The McGraw Hill Companies
^ ^ 3  
Electric Drives
T
y
/
/
/
P /  
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
(a)
Speed
(i) Constant torque
(ii) Torque proportional 
to speed
(iii) Torque proportional 
to square of speed
Fig. 4.5 
(a) Typical torque speed curves of normally occurring load (b) Variation of
copper losses of a voltage controlled induction motor with speed
But the slip of the motor
5 =
V
ns /
and the power input to the rotor
PDl = 2nnsTd = 2nnsn* • kt . 
The maximum value of power transferred to rotor is
PD1 max = 2 nns • n£ ■ kt = kt • 2 tc n
X + 1
The copper losses when expressed as the ratio of Pm max we have
P
P
= y =
D1 max
Í 
\ / 
\
1 _p_
nr
K 
ns , Kns y
nr
writing — = s per unit speed we have 
nc
ds = XS*"1 - ( x  + \) s x = 0
for the value of 5 at which y is maximum. The value of
x
l5m
X + 1

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
for maximum value of rotor copper loss. The maximum values of rotor copper 
losses are given by
Tin
X  
>
X
Í x )
V X +  1 2
< X  +  1 y
\ x+1
As the value of x increases the value of y decreases. The maximum value of rotor
s  m
current and per unit speed at which it occurs can also be determined. We have
3 P  I 2^^2 
i ( 1 
\ x 
x
Td =
------------------- ----  k{ i  - s )  cox .
o js 
5
from which the rotor current
I2 = k\ yjsx (1 -  s ) = kly/sx -  sx+l 
per unit speed for maximum value of rotor current is also
x
sm ~ 
,
X  +  1
The maximum value of rotor current can be determined as
/
x + 1
x
\
X  +  1
Ä
3 P œs *
For special cases
x = 0 
y — 1.00 
s = 0.0
x = 1 
y = 0.25 
s = 0.5
x = 2 
y — 0.149 
5 = 0.67
The variation of losses are shown in Fig. 4.5(b) for different types of loads. The 
constant torque loads are not favoured due to increase in the losses linearly with 
slip and becoming maximum at 5 = 1.0. This is obvious from the variation of flux 
as the voltage is varied for speed control. To maintain constant torque the motor 
draws heavy current resulting in a poor torque/ampere, poor efficiency and poor 
power factor at low speeds.
When the torque varies in direct proportion to speed the copper losses has a 
maximum value of 25% of rated power at a speed of 0.5 cu.. For torques propor­
tional to square of the speed, per unit speed at which copper losses are maximum 
is 2/3 and the maximum value of copper losses are 0.149 of rated power. The 
method of speed control can be advantageously employed for pump or blower 
type of loads where torque is proportional to square of the speed.
From the above discussion, this method of speed control is suitable only for 
the following cases:
i. For short time operations where the duration of speed control is defined.
ii. For speed control of blowers or pumps having parabolic or cubic varia­
tions of torque with speed. This is not suitable for constant torque loads 
due to increased losses and heating.
iii. For speed control of motor having poor efficiencies under normal operation.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The type of load (torque versus speed of the load) on the drive motor influences 
the losses in the motor. The non-sinusoidal input waveforms cause non-sinusoidal 
currents which increase the harmonic losses. Hence, the total losses increase par­
ticularly at low speeds and these losses cause a possible derating of the motor, or 
an over dimensioned motor must be used when this method is employed.
For blower type loads where T oc N 2 the maximum value of current occurs 
at a speed of 2/3 base speed. This current depends upon the full load slip of the 
motor. For large slip motors (high resistance rotors) the ratio of maximum to rated 
current decreases. For constant torque loads the power losses increase with reduc­
tion in speed and reaches a maximum value at zero speed itself. For loads having 
T oc N the maximum occurs at 1/2 the base speed and the losses amount to 25% 
of the stator power.
The losses occurring in the motor are responsible for temperature rise of the 
motor. The losses must be kept within permissible value so that the motor operates 
always with permissible temperature rise. The different type of loads discussed 
have a tendency to increase the motor losses.
Further the waveform of the input voltage is distorted. The stator and rotor 
currents are non-sinusoidal with rich harmonic content. These harmonics cause 
additional losses. They can be taken as 50% of the rated copper losses.
The increase in the losses of the motor at large slips leads to a derating of the 
motor. A normal motor may be derated 5 to 6 times. If high resistance rotor is used 
the aerating factor decreases.
The total losses of the motor are
p2= /,
\
1 + 4
h Pr
(4.4)
where/' takes care of increase in losses due to distortion and is normally taken as 1.5. 
jP is the rating of the motor 
KlPt is the total copper losses of the motor.
To maintain the permissible temperature rise, the permissible losses are
1 -}] 
//
av
where rj is efficiency of the motor
a is the ratio of losses at minimum speed to the losses at rated speed.
PT rating of the motor.
The factor a depends upon the type of loading employed. For force cooled 
machines it is 1.0 and independent of speed. If the machine is self cooled it 
depends on speed. This value decreases as the lower limit of speed decreases. A 
typical characteristic for a two pole machine is shown in Fig. 4.5(c). The derating
1 — /7
is also affected by the efficiency of the motor. As the efficiency decreases ------
increases. For this type of speed control motors of large rotor resistance are used. 
They have poor efficiency. Consequently the derating of the motor decreases.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
The above discussion makes it clear that a given motor gets derated differently 
when it is driving different types of loads. In other words, the power required 
by the load is constant, the drive motor must be of different ratings for differ­
ent types of torque-speed curves of the load. The following example illustrates 
this.
Example 
A 25 kW, 2-pole, 3-phase induction motor is fed from a three phase 
voltage controller for speed control. The motor has a stator to rotor resistance ratio 
of 0.7. The speed control is required from 3000 to 1400 rpm. Determine derating 
of this motor when it drives
i. constant torque loads
ii. loads having T oc N
iii. loads having Toe N i. 2
Assuming the efficiency of the motor to be 84%.
Solution
The copper losses of the motor
Pi
1.5 (1 + 0.7) 1400 
3000 r

The McGrawHill Companies
•7!
Electric Drives
The permissible losses of the motor
= 25 -— — 0.75 = 25 x ^ - 0 . 7 5
n
0.84
where 0.75 is the ratio of the losses at minimum speed to the losses at rated speed. 
Equating the above we get
Pr = 3 kW 
25
Derating is —  = 8.33 when it drives constant torque loads.
When the torque is proportional to speed
P2 = 1.5 x 1.7 x 0.25P
Permissible losses = 25 x 
Equating we get
0.16
0.84 x 0.75
P = 5.6 kW.
when the torque is proportional to square of the speed
0.3825P = 3.57
P = 9.33 kW
The rating of the motor can also be estimated if the load requires constant power. 
Form example if
P -  2 kW at a speed range of 3000 to 1400 rpm 
For constant torque loads.
The rotor copper losses -  P2 = 1.5 x 1.7 x 1152. x 2
3000
assuming q / r2 =0.7 for the motor.
The permissible losses are
1 — rj
0.16
PT -— — 0.75 = PT ------0.75
rj 
0.84
assuming 77 = 84%.
PT = 1.5 x 1.7 x 
x 2 x 777-7 x 0.75 = 16.66 kW say 17 kW
3000
0.16
For Toc N
K = 0.25
P2 = 1.5x1.7 x 0 .2 5 x 2
= /> ^ l^ x 0 .7 5  
0.84
PT = 8.925 kW say 9 kW

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
For 
N 2 
£,=0.15
Pi
Pj
As the motors are of different ratings, actual 77 of the motor must be considered. The 
derating factor is large for constant torque loads, asx > 1 the derating factor decreases.
Typical derating factors of an induction motor fed from a voltage controller are 
shown in Fig. 4.5(d) when the motor drives a fan or pump loads (T «= N 2). The 
derating factor depends on the rated speed also.
1.5 X  1.7 X  0.15 X  2
= Pr 0.16
0.84
X  0.75
5.355 kW say 5.5 kW
Change of phase sequence changes the direction of the rotating magnetic field. The 
direction of rotation of the motor can be reversed by interchanging the connections 
to the two phases of the motor. Mechanical switches which are operated when the 
current is zero, may be employed. The method of speed reversal is shown in Fig. 4.6.
The drive is amenable for braking using the method of plugging. This is also 
called reverse current braking. The controller in this case must be designed to 
withstand the resulting currents which are greater than the starting current. If the 
current is limited, enough braking torque may not be present (Fig. 4.7). Regenera­
tive braking is possible. In this case braking till zero speed is not possible. The 
method of dc dynamic braking is illustrated in Fig. 4.8. In this method the motor

The McGraw Hill Companies
CS 
Electric Drives
Fig. 4.6 
Speed reversal using voltage controller
R
S
T
Fig. 4.7 
Braking of motor using plugging

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Fig. 4-8 
DC dynamic braking using AC voltage controller (a) basic circuit (b) under 
braking operation

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
is switched off from the ac voltage controller and switched on to dc. A stationary 
mmf is produced, which induces currents in the rotor to provide the braking torque.
4.1.2 
Chopper Resistance in the Rotor Circuit
Speed control by means of slip variation can be achieved by employing a variable 
resistance in the rotor circuit. From the equations it is clear that the maximum 
value of torque does not depend upon the value of rotor resistance. However, the 
rotor resistance influences the slip at which maximum torque occurs. A family 
of curves has been depicted in Fig. 4.9 for variable resistance in the rotor circuit.
0)3CT 
1—o•
4—»
TD
TOO
3
»4—
Z>
CL
Fig. 4.9(b) 
Effect of rotor resistance on speed torque curve

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors 
^ ^ 3
For given load conditions it is clear that the speed can be varied. The slip of the 
motor at any given value of rotor resistance is given by
/
5 = s
+ K ,
(4.5)
where 
is the rotor resistance and R'ex is the resistance included.
The external resistance can be added very conveniently to the phases of a slip 
ring rotor. Conventional methods of variation of resistance by means of mechani­
cal contactors are shown in Fig. 4.10.
With the development of thyristors it has become possible to use a chopper 
controlled resistance in the rotor circuit. The schematic diagram is shown in 
Fig. 4.11.
It has been discussed in Chapter 3 that a resistance connected across the output 
terminals of a chopper can be varied from 0 to R by varying the time ratio of the 
chopper. When the chopper is always OFF, the supply is always connected to the
Fig. 4.10 
Conventional method of rotor resistance control
Diode
Fig. 4.11 
Chopper controlled resistance in the rotor circuit

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
resistance R. The time ratio in this case is zero and the effective resistance con­
nected is R. Similarly when the chopper is always ON, the resistance is short cir­
cuited. The time ratio in this case is unity and the effective resistance connected is 
0. Hence by varying the time ratio from 0 to 1 the value of resistance can be varied 
from R to 0. The parameter Fig. 4.9 can be the time ratio instead of resistance.
The slip power of the rotor is rectified by a diode rectifier and is fed to the 
chopper controlled resistance (Fig. 4.11). The torque-speed curves can be drawn 
for different time ratios. For a time ratio of 1 we get normal characteristic of the 
motor. For a time ratio of 0 the characteristic corresponds to the one with com­
plete resistance in the rotor circuit. A smoothing inductance L is used in the circuit 
to maintain the current at a constant value. Any short circuit in the chopper does 
not become effective due to L.
The value of R connected across the chopper is effective for all phases and its 
value can be related to the resistance to be connected in each phase if the conven­
tional method has been used. Thus if R is the resistance per phase we have
m
 + 
Ra V l 3 Ri + 
J
.-. R = 3 • R
(
h
) 2
ex
V Id y
But for a three phase bridge rectifier we have
(4.6)
(4.7)
(4.8)
Using this relation in Eq. 4.7 we have
R  =  2  • *ex
(4.9)
When once the value of i?ex is determined depending upon the range of speed 
control, the value of R can be determined. If the range of speed control is required 
down to zero speed, the value of Rcx and R can be decided based on the torque 
required at standstill.
The rating of the chopper thyristor decides the maximum rotor current of the 
motor. The speed control range is limited by the resistance. The method is very 
inefficient because of losses in the resistance. It is suitable for intermittent loads 
such as elevators. At low speeds, in particular, the motor has very poor efficiency. 
Because of the increased rotor resistance, the power factor is better.
The rotor current in this case is non-sinusoidal. The harmonics of the rotor 
current produce torque pulsations. These have a frequency which is six times the 
slip frequency.
The maximum torque developed is decided by the current carrying capacity of 
the chopper.
The range of speed control can be increased if a combination of stator voltage 
control and rotor resistance control is employed. Instead of using a high resistance 
rotor, a slip ring rotor with external rotor resistance can be used when stator volt­
age control is used for controlling the speed. The method is depicted in Fig. 4.12.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
controller
Diode
rectifier
Fig. 4.12 
Combination of stator voltage control and rotor resistance control
4.1.3 
Speed Control Using Slip Energy Recovery Schemes
The foregoing discussion makes it very clear that the methods of voltage control 
and rotor resistance control have poor efficiency, particularly at low speeds, and 
find limited application. The slip power is wasted in the rotor resistance, either 
inherent in the rotor (high resistance rotors for voltage control) or connected in the 
rotor circuit. The power output of the motor is rather limited. For a given power 
output a machine which is overdimensioned must be used.
On the other hand if the slip power can be returned to the mains, the system can 
be made efficient and the capacity of the drive can be increased.
With the development of thyristors static power converters can be used in the 
conventional and Scherbius controls to recover the slip power to the supply for 
speed variation. The slip variation brings in speed control.
Figure 4.13 depicts a method of slip energy recovery. The rotary converter 
and motor generator (MG) set of the conventional system are replaced by a diode 
rectifier and phase controlled inverter. The combination is called a converter
Fig. 4.13(a) 
Conventional slip energy recovery scheme (Scherbius drive)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Line
Fig. 4.13(b) 
Slip energy recovery scheme using converter cascade in the rotor circuit 
(Static Kramer system)
Fig. 4.13(c) 
Slip energy recovery scheme using cycloconverter in the rotor circuit 
(Static Scherbius system)
cascade. The diode rectifier rectifies the slip power which is inverted and fed 
back to the mains by the inverter. The phase control of the inverter brings in speed 
control. In this method power flow is from the motor to the line via the dc link and 
therefore only speeds below synchronous speed are possible.
The rotor power is first rectified by a diode rectifier. This rectified voltage is 
fed to a line commutated inverter. The inverter applies a back emf which depends 
upon the firing angle. The output voltage of the diode rectifier must be balanced by 
the back emf of the inverter. The machine operates at a speed where this balance 
is obtained. The rotor current
r  
E'2 - E 4 
_ 
E
E ?  + ~k \
(4.10)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
To have a required value of current (I2), E must be constant. If E4 varies, E2 
must also vary to keep E constant. The speed automatically varies to bring in 
balance.
As the slip power is returned to the mains the machine has fairly good effi­
ciency. But due to the phase control of the inverter to effect the slip power recov­
ery, the operating power factor is poor. A family of torque-speed curves are shown 
in Fig. 4.14. The firing angle changes the back emf which in turn shifts the speed- 
torque curve to the left. The machine always operates with nearly constant airgap 
flux, as decided by the fixed stator voltage and frequency. The torque developed is 
proportional to the dc link current. The motor has a speed-torque curve similar to 
that of a dc motor with separate excitation. The speed is reduced by increasing the 
back emf. The largest value of firing angle can only be 150° due to inverter limit 
of the inverter. Beyond this the firing angle cannot be increased.
The current capability of the converter cascade limits the maximum torque. 
The discontinuous conduction limit of the cascade decides the lowest torque. The 
dc link inductance connecting the diode rectifier and the inverter provides the 
constancy of the link current and decreases the ripple content. The ripple content 
is limited to 10%. The ripple content is due to the control of bridge. This causes a 
voltage regulation, due to which the speed of the motor is somewhat higher than 
the speed with continuous current.
The line power factor is poor due to the phase control of the inverter and asso­
ciated reactive power for the converter. The induction motor draws a lagging cur­
rent to establish the airgap flux. The power factor can be improved if the inverter
Fig. 4.14 
Speed-torque curves of subsynchronous converter cascade for no load slips 
ofSo = 0.4, o.6; 0.8,1.0

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
can be operated near about 180° in the complete speed range. A transformer can 
be interposed in between the inverter and line. At the lowest speed the firing tri­
angle is near 180° (taking the inverter limit into consideration) so that the trans­
former voltage matches the rotor voltage. Several methods are being developed 
to improve the power factor of slip energy recovery scheme employing converter 
cascade in the rotor.
The losses in the circuits cause a slight reduction in efficiency. This efficiency 
is further affected by additional losses due to the non-sinusoidal nature of the 
rotor current. Therefore the drive motor must be slightly overdimensioned. The 
motor used must have a rating 20% higher than the required power.
The lowest speed of the speed control range decides the design rating of the 
converter. The converter cascade handles only slip power. For limited speed 
ranges the rating can be low. Only if the speed range extends up to standstill 
must the cascade have full rating. When the lowest speed is other than zero, start­
ing resistors are required to limit the starting current, as shown in Fig. 4.15. The 
changeover takes place from the starting resistors to the converter cascade very 
smoothly.
Non-sinusoidal rotor currents are responsible for torque pulsations which have 
a frequency six times the slip frequency. The harmonic currents are reflected to 
the ac line from the machine and inverter sides.
The converter cascade operates only at subsynchronous speeds due to the diode 
rectifier. Regeneration and speed reversal are not possible.
The design rating of the converter depends upon the speed control range 
required. The system is economical if this range is limited. Normally the machine 
cost is more. It finds application as a fan drive. Compared to the other methods of 
slip control this method has better efficiency but poorer power factor.
In a converter cascade the diodes and thyristors have a voltage rating decided 
by the lowest speed required. The rotor voltage at any slip 5 is given by
V2s = s V20 
(4.11)
where V2(] is the rotor voltage at standstill. If the speed range required is down to 
standstill the rotor voltage changes from 0 to F20. If the speed range is from rotor, 
the corresponding slips are s = 0 and s = s . The maximum 
voltage between the slip rings is
smV20 
(4.12)
For a three-phase bridge rectifier the dc voltage output
V a = —
smV20 
(4.13)
71
The back emf provided by the inverter must be equal to the dc voltage of the recti­
fier. The inverter voltage
Vdia =  Vdi cos a
(4.14)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
setting controller controller 
unit
Rotor of induction 
motor
To transformer
Fig. 4.15 
(a) Power circuit of interchangeable converter cascade (b) Series connection of
converters for large voltage (large slips) (c) Parallel connection of converters 
for large currents (small slips)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
where Vdj is the inverter dc voltage. Taking maximum value a -  150° taking 
inverter limit into consideration the maximum value of the dc voltage is
>di«m = Fdicosl50° = - X - r di 
(4.15)
From the relations of the three-phase line commutated inverter
V« = —
VL (4.16) 
n
where V{ is the line voltage of the inverter. A transformer is sometimes used to 
match this voltage with the supply voltage and to have the desired speed range.
The maximum torque of operation decides the current rating of the diodes and 
thyristors. The rotor current corresponding to rated torque is available from the 
machine details. Using the data the maximum current
/max = /, ^
 
(4.17)
7dr
where r represents the rated conditions.
Taking into consideration the reactive power for commutation and the form 
factor of rotor current by means of a factor K{> 1) the rated current can be 
obtained as
The corresponding dc link current is
/d
= /r
T,dm
zdr
(4.18)
(4.19)
Fs/FSmjn considers the possible fluctuation of voltage.
The converter comprising rectifier and inverter must withstand higher voltage 
at low speeds and higher current at small slips (high speeds).
The reactive power of this drive is more than that of the drive with variable 
resistance in the rotor. The power factor of the line is affected both by the reactive 
power of the motor and the reactive power of the converter. The latter depends on 
the speed range. The larger the speed range the smaller is the displacement factor. 
The fundamental displacement factor can be derived as [reference 4.24]
COS (p\ =
(1-5)
(1 - 5 )2 + sin <p]m 
cos <plm
(4.20)
An interchangeable converter cascade can be used sometimes to handle higher 
voltages at low speeds and higher currents at high speeds. By this the design rating 
of the converter unit and the size of the reactor decrease.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Figure 4.15 depicts one such interchangeable converter cascade in which the 
converter comprises two rectifiers and two inverters. Depending on the situation 
they are connected either in parallel or in series. At a lower speed range where 
the voltage to be handled is more and current is small only one rectifier G, is 
connected to the rotor. The inverters Wl and W2 are connected in series via the 
rectifier Gr In the upper speed range (voltage is small and current is high) the 
converters are connected as shown in Fig. 4.15(c). There exist two parallel paths 
of the converters, each being one half of the total bridge. A speed range of 1 : 3 
can be obtained. There is an overlap region during transition of the connection. 
This actually restricts the frequency of switching ON and OFF of G0 in operation 
around the point of interchange.
4.1.4 
Braking and Four Quadrant Operation
Subsynchronous converter cascades have been used, till now, in applications 
requiring one quadrant operation. These can be employed for drives where at least 
one electrical braking is required. A four quadrant operation can also be made 
possible in these cascades, using suitable switching.
The braking is obtained by connecting the stator to the dc supply. The rectified 
output of the rotor can be used for the purpose. The reverse rotation is obtained by 
means of plugging using contactors. The drive is similar to a dc drive fed from a 
converter with armature current reversal.
A four quadrant subsynchronous converter cascade employing dc dynamic 
braking and speed reversal is shown in Fig. 4.16. The system operates as a normal 
converter cascade when the switches s., 5«, 
and .v are closed.
F  
2 y 
3 
6
To have braking the machine is disconnected from the mains by opening 5 . 
The stator is connected to the rectified power supply from the rotor by closing s5 
and opening $ . Braking torque equal to rated torque may be developed.
Contactor s4 may be used to reverse the direction of rotation. The drive can 
operate in all four quadrants of the speed-torque plane.
The contactors must operate when the current is zero. Due to delay in operation 
of the contactors, sometimes mechanical braking is employed.
The drive operates free of loss as the energy during running and braking is fed 
back to the mains.
4.1.5 
Static Scherbius Drive
The main limitation of the Kraemer drive discussed is the operation at sub­
synchronous range due to diode rectifier. Super synchronous speeds can be 
achieved if the power is fed to the rotor from the ac mains. This can be made 
possible by replacing the converter cascade by a cycloconverter, as shown in 
Fig. 4.17. A cycloconverter allows power flow in either direction making the 
drive operate at both sub and super synchronous speeds. However, the converter 
becomes costly and has a complex control. The current in the rotor circuit is 
nearly sinusoidal. The torque pulsations and other reactions are minimal. The 
performance of the drive improves with respect to additional losses and torque 
pulsations. A smooth transition is possible from sub to super synchronous speeds

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
without any commutation problems. Speed reversal is not possible. A step up 
transformer may be interposed between the lines and the converter to reduce the 
voltage rating of the converter.
Static Scherbius drive, with power flow to and from the rotor, can also be real­
ized by replacing the diode rectifier on the rotor side by means of a controlled 
bridge rectifier using thyristors, as shown in Fig. 4.18. This provides speeds 
below and above synchronous speed. The effects of non-sinusoidal rotor current 
are present. In addition the commutation of the bridge rectifier at very small slips 
(near synchronous speed) poses problems. Either forced commutation or artificial

The McGraw Hill Companies
Fig. 4.17 
Static scherbius system using cychconverter in the rotor circuit
Fig. 4.18(a) 
Sub- and super-synchronous converter cascade
commutation of the thyristors is employed at and about synchronous speed. These 
methods are shown in Fig. 4.18. A current source inverter can be advantageously 
employed to obtain a Scherbius drive.
4.1.6 
Speed Control of Induction Motor by Variable Frequency Supply
The speed of a squirrel cage induction motor can be controlled very effectively 
by varying the stator frequency. Further, the operation of the motor is economical 
and efficient, if it operates at very small slips. The speed of the motor is, therefore, 
varied by varying the supply frequency and maintaining the rotor frequency at the

The McGraw-Hill Companies
^ ^ 3  
Electric Drives
Fig. 4.18(c) 
Alternate arrangements for the CSI for use with super synchronous 
converter cascade

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
rated value or a value corresponding to the required torque on the linear portion 
of the torque-speed curve.
The control of a three-phase induction motor, particularly when the dynamic 
performance involved is more difficult than dc motors. The is due to
i. Relatively large internal resistance of the converter causes voltage fluc­
tuations following load fluctuations because the capacitor cannot be 
ideally large.
ii. In a dc motor there is a decoupling between the flux producing 
magnetising current and torque producing armature current. They can be 
independently controlled. This is not the case with induction motors. For 
obtaining dc motor characteristics, the stator current must be separated 
into two components. The method is rather involved.
iii. An induction motor is very poorly damped compared to a dc motor.
For operation of the motor at small slips, it must be limited to the linear portion 
of the torque-speed curve. It can be shown that the torque developed is propor­
tional to the square of the air gap flux, i.e.
Td-  02 
To retain the maximum torque capability at all operating points the flux must be 
maintained at its rated value. To achieve this supply voltage must also be varied 
simultaneously with the frequency. One simple and approximate method is to vary 
the voltage proportional to frequency such that
Vi
— = constant
/
Using the equivalent circuit of the motor (Fig. 4.19) it can be derived that
Ta = Pmx
2n
f2Xi !R2
R, + - / j - ( X ^ - X uX 22)
2
+
x u , f l R\X22
J \R-2
fR i
(4.22)
where X .. =Xt + X , X = X  + X
Il 
I 
m7 
22 
2 
m
m { is number of stator phases. 
f vf 2 are stator and rotor frequencies respectively
r 1 
*1 
r 2 
* 2
Fig. 4.19 
Exact equivalent circuit of a three phase induction motor (Core loss neglected)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
A family of curves showing the variation of torque with rotor frequency f 2 with 
the stator frequency f  as a parameter is shown in Fig. 4.20. From the expression 
as well as figure it is clear that at a given f  the developed torque decreases at 
small stator frequencies. The maximum torque developed also decreases. This is 
because at smaller stator frequencies, the stator resistance drop becomes a large
Per unit speed 
V/f = constant
^
 Tmax
Fig. 4.20 
Torque speed curves of variable frequency induction motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
part of the applied voltage. Consequently the air gap flux decreases, causing a 
depletion of torque developed at a given /J, as well as maximum torque.
This control would be sufficient in some applications requiring variable torque, 
such as centrifugal pumps, compressors, and fans. In these, the torque varies as 
the square of the speed. Therefore at small speeds the required torque is also 
small and VIf control would be sufficient to drive these loads with no compensa­
tion required for resistance drop. This is true also for the case of the liquid being 
pumped with minimal solids.
However, in certain applications the pumps may require high starting torque. The 
torque developed with VIf constant may not be sufficient. In such cases the motor 
must be operated to provide its full torque capability at all frequencies. The motor 
must be supplied with an increased voltage to maintain the flux constant. Therefore 
the applied voltage to the induction motor has two components at low frequencies:
i. proportional to stator frequency
ii. to compensate for the resistance drop in the stator.
The second component depends on the load on the motor and hence on rotor 
frequency. A voltage boost proportional to slip frequency may be applied. This 
drive is the well known slip controlled drive.
The method of maintaining the flux constant by providing a voltage boost pro­
portional to slip frequency is a kind of indirect flux control. This method of flux 
control is not desirable if very good dynamic behaviour is required. Direct flux 
control is required if better dynamic behaviour is required. This can be achieved 
by direct measurement of flux using search coils or calculation of the flux using 
machine parameters, voltages and currents. In the former the machine loses its 
robust nature whereas in the latter the errors are introduced due to the use of inac­
curate parameters obtained from no-load tests. In all these methods the applied 
voltage F, is varied such that Elf is constant at all operating points, to maintain the 
air gap flux at its rated value. The inverter used to supply an induction motor must 
be capable of providing a variable voltage, variable frequency supply. The control 
used must be such that the air gap flux is constant at all operating points. The 
speed torque curves of the motor for this type of control are shown in Fig. 4.20(b).
4.1.7 
Cycloconverter Fed Induction Motor Drive
Variable frequency supply to an induction motor may be obtained by using a 
cycloconverter. As has already been discussed, a cycloconverter is a single stage 
frequency conversion device which converts ac line frequency to a variable fre­
quency. A three phase, three pulse cycloconverter feeding a three phase induction 
motor is shown in Fig. 4.21. A cycloconverter fed induction motor drive has the 
following features:
i. The voltage control is possible in the converter itself, so that the machine 
operates at its rated flux conditions.
ii. The cycloconverter operates by means of line commutation. No forced 
commutation is required as the necessary reactive power for commutation

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 4.21 
Cycloconverter feeding a three phase induction motor
is provided by the line. Losses due to forced commutation can be elimi­
nated. The converter operates at lagging powerfactor. The line power 
factor is very poor at light loads.
iii. The firing angles of the thyristors are modulated so that a mean sinewave 
voltage is synthesised from the input voltage waveform. Thus, a cyclocon­
verter delivers a high quality sinusoidal waveform at all frequencies. When 
this voltage is impressed across the machine terminals a current which is 
almost sinusoidal will flow, as the machine inductance causes harmonic

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
attenuation. The machine therefore does not have appreciable torque pulsa­
tions and harmonic losses and the operation is smooth and efficient.
iv. The cycloconverter is capable of power transfer in either direction 
between an ac source and motor load. It can feed power to a load of any 
p.f. Regeneration is inherent in the complete speed range. A four quad­
rant operation is simple and straight forward.
v. The output frequency of the cycloconverter is limited to 1/3 of input 
frequency. A speed control range of 0-33% of base speed is possible.
vi. It requires many thyristors, which offset the advantage of line commuta­
tion. However, if a thyristor fails no shut down is required. The output 
can be made available without any interruption, with a slightly distorted 
waveform.
The increased cost and complex control of a cycloconverter can be justified for 
large horsepower applications. The above features of a cycloconverter fed induc­
tion motor drive show that it provides a very smooth low speed operation with 
the least torque ripple. Thus it is very attractive for a low speed, large power, 
reversible drive. This drive finds application in gearless cement mill, or ball mill 
drives. The mill drive is directly connected to the motor which is supplied by a 
low frequency cycloconverter.
4.1.8 Voltage Source Inverter Fed Induction Motor Drive
Voltage source inverter is a kind of dc link converter, which is a two stage conver­
sion device. A three phase supply is first rectified using a rectifier on the line side. 
The rectified dc is inverted to ac of desired frequency by an inverter on the load 
side, as shown in Fig. 4.22. When the load cannot provide the required reactive 
power for the inverter, the inverter has to necessarily be a force commutated one.
Fig. 4.22 
Square wave voltage source inverter feeding a three phase induction motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The inductance in the dc link circuit provides smoothing whereas the capacitance 
maintains the constancy of link voltage. The link voltage is a controlled quality. 
The instantaneous voltage at the machine terminals (at the output terminals of 
the inverter) is at all times directly proportional to the dc link voltage (dc supply 
which is of low internal impedance) and the machine current (output) is a func­
tion of load admittance. Therefore, the ideal load for a voltage source inverter, 
in view of harmonics in load current, should be highly inductive and have a low 
powerfactor.
By proper switching of the inverter thyristors the dc link voltage is impressed 
across the phases of the induction motor alternately. The voltage waveform at 
the output terminals depends purely on this switching and conduction of thyris­
tors. If the thyristors conduct 180° in a period, the output voltage is in the form 
of a square wave. In this case the voltage control is obtained by means of a phase 
controlled rectifier on the line side. The dc link voltage is variable and the output 
voltage waveform remains the same at all loads and frequencies. The inverter is 
also called a square wave inverter, as the output voltage is a square wave.
These inverters have commutation problems at very low frequencies, as the dc 
link voltage available at these frequencies cannot charge the commutating capaci­
tors sufficiently enough to commutate the thyristors. This puts a limit on the lower 
frequency of operation. To extend the frequency towards zero, special charging 
circuits must be used. The speed control range of the induction motor operating 
on a square wave inverter is 1:20.
The polarity of the dc link voltage cannot be changed. Hence during regenera­
tion the current direction in the link circuit must be reversed. A separate phase 
controlled converter is required on the line side for regeneration, as shown in 
Fig. 4.22. Dynamic braking can be employed by means of resistors switched. The 
dynamic behaviour of the system is not very good at low frequencies.
Soft starting of the motor is possible. A machine operating on a variable fre­
quency, variable voltage converter does not require additional starting equipment. 
The machine normally operates on the linear portion of the torque-speed curve 
and does not see locked rotor torque and current in its starting. The machine has 
identical characteristics from the synchronous point to the maximum torque point, 
at every frequency. The machine torque and current can be kept constant in this 
range by varying the frequency and voltage simultaneously to assure constant 
flux. The machine can therefore be accelerated very smoothly at constant torque 
and current to the required speed, by varying the stator frequency and keeping the 
rotor frequency constant. The acceleration is at constant flux slip controlled mode. 
The mode in which the slip is kept constant and flux is controlled (constant slip 
flux controlled mode) is also possible for starting purposes. These methods add to 
the efficiency of the drive.
When the slip is used as a controlled quantity to maintain the flux constant in 
the motor the drive is called slip controlled drive. By making the slip negative 
(i.e., decreasing the output frequency of the inverter) the machine may be made to 
operate as a generator and the energy of the rotating parts fed back to the mains by

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
an additional line side converter or dissipated in a resistance for dynamic braking. 
By keeping the slip frequency constant (or controlling slip), braking at constant 
torque and current can be achieved. Thus, braking is also fast.
Since the voltage can be varied to maintain the constant flux, constant torque 
operation is possible up to rated frequency. Beyond the rated frequency, the volt­
age remains at its rated value and the machine operates in flux weakening mode. 
The motor gives constant output at all speeds and is called constant horse power 
mode. These modes are depicted in Fig. 4.23.
Per unit frquency
Fig. 4.23 
Constant and variable torque regions of variable frequency induction motor
The motor receives square wave voltages. This voltage has harmonic com­
ponents. The resulting armature current is non-sinusoidal, having peaks. These 
peaks actually decide the design rating of the inverter. The harmonics of the stator 
current cause additional losses and heating. The motor therefore requires a derat­
ing, or for a given horse power an overdimensioned motor must be used.
These harmonics are also responsible for torque pulsations. The reaction of 
the fifth and seventh harmonics with the fundamental gives rise to the sixth har­
monic pulsations in the torque developed. For a given induction motor fed from a 
square wave inverter the harmonic content in the current tends to remain constant 
independent of input frequency, within the range of operating frequencies of the 
inverter.
The peak and harmonic currents of the line as well as stator current are influ­
enced by the leakage reactance of the motor. Higher the leakage reactance smaller 
is the harmonic content and the peak value of the stator current. It is therefore nec­
essary to choose an induction motor having a large leakage reactance for opera­
tion on a voltage source inverter. As the peak currents are less, the design rating 
of the inverter decreases.
Open loop control is possible, but may have stability problems at low speeds.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Multimotor operation is possible and commutation is load independent. The 
converter represents a source and the motor can be just plugged on. Therefore, no 
matching between converter and load is necessary.
As slip controlled drive, a VSI fed motor has the following additional features:
An indirect flux control can be achieved by slip control. As the steady state 
quantities are specified in the control, the dynamic behaviour may not be sat­
isfactory.
Precise control of torque over a wide range of speeds is possible (sometimes 
down to standstill). It is a very efficient drive, having a very good efficiency and 
power factor, when the slip frequency is limited to the linear portion of the torque- 
speed curve.
No starting equipment is required and very fast acceleration is possible at 
constant torque and current. Regeneration or dynamic braking is also possible at 
constant torque and current. Four quadrant drive is possible.
Closed loop control of frequency provides a variable speed drive having char­
acteristics of dc motor in Ward Leonard system.
The features of an induction motor fed from a square wave inverter can be 
summarized as follows:
i. The inverter has impressed dc voltage of variable amplitude.
ii. Advantageous for multimotor drive.
iii. Commutation is load independent. Converter and load need not be 
matched. The converter represents a source to which the motor can be 
just plugged on.
iv. At present converter output frequencies up to 1500 Hz are possible. This 
drive is very much suitable for (motors of) high speed operation. The 
drives are available up to rating of 200 KVA.
v. The lowest operating frequency as limited by commutation is about 5 
Hz. Speed range is 1:20.
vi. Not suitable for acceleration on load and sudden load changes.
vii. Dynamic behaviour is fairly good at high speeds.
viii. Dynamic braking is possible. Regeneration (Four quadrant operation) 
requires an additional converter connected antiparallel to the line side 
one. Speed reversal is obtained by changing the phase sequence.
ix. The input voltage to the motor is nonsinusoidal. This results in additional 
losses, heating and torque pulsations.
x. Motor should have sufficiently large leakage inductance to limit the peak 
currents and decrease the harmonic content.
xi. Open loop control of the motor is possible, but may have stability prob­
lem at low speeds.
xii. Line power factor is poor due to phase control.
xiii. It can be operated as a slip controlled drive.
xiv. It finds application as a general purpose industrial drive for low to 
medium power.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
4.1.9 
Pulse Width Modulated Inverter Fed Induction Motor Drive
Voltage control in the square wave inverter has been external to the inverter, by 
means of a phase controlled rectifier on the line side. This posed some practi­
cal application problems on the drive by limiting the lowest operating frequency 
and introducing torque pulsations and harmonic heating. However, the harmonic 
effects can be decreased by using a motor of larger leakage reactance.
The problems can be reduced to a minimum if voltage control is obtained in the 
inverter itself. The inverter is supplied with constant dc voltage and the inverter 
is controlled so that the average amplitude of the output voltage is variable. By 
this, the operation of the inverter can be extended up to zero frequency, as the 
commutation is effective at all frequencies. By this control the output voltage 
is no longer a square wave but a pulsed wave, the average of which tends to 
be sinusoidal if sinusoidal modulation is used. The principle of modulation and 
output voltage waveform are shown in Fig. 4.24. The stator current also tends to 
be sinusoidal. Harmonic effects are reduced to a minimum and torque pulsations 
are minimal. The dynamic behaviour of the drive at low speeds is improved. As 
there is no limitation on the lowest frequency the speed range of the drive is 1 :©o. 
The machine need not be specially designed to have large leakage reactance. 
Normal motors can be employed and the inverter output waveform causes the 
least harmonic effects. The filter size in the dc link can be smaller. The peak cur­
rents are also small and hence the converter design rating decreases. However the 
methods of modulation employed make the control circuit complex and costly. 
The frequent switching of the thyristors introduces switching losses and these 
inverters are built to an upper frequency of 150 Hz. A slip controlled drive is pos­
sible. Dynamic braking can be employed. The K.E. of rotating parts is dissipated 
in an external resistance. If a battery is used to supply the inverter, the regenera­
tion is simple and straight forward. If the dc supply is obtained using a rectifier 
another phase controlled rectifier which is connected antiparallel to the previous 
one is required on the line side. It is suitable for both single and multimotor opera­
tion. Uninterrupted operation can be made possible when a buffer battery is used. 
During motoring a diode rectifier is sufficient on the line side and the line p.f. is 
better. Slip control can be had to keep the flux constant. Thus it has the merits of 
a slip controlled drive. Selected harmonic neutralisation principles can be used to 
eliminate lower order harmonics. Soft starting without any starting equipment is 
possible with acceleration and braking at constant torque.
The specific features of PWM inverter induction motor drive can be summa­
rized as follows:
i. The inverter has constant dc link voltage and employs PWM principle 
for both voltage control and harmonic elimination.
ii. The output voltage waveform is improved, with reduced harmonic con­
tent. The amplitude of torque pulsations is minimal even at low speeds.
iii. Parallel operation of many inverters on the same dc bus.
iv. Uninterrupted operation is possible when a buffer battery is used.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Diode
rectifier 
L 
Inverter
Fig. 4.24(a) 
Constant voltage PVVA/1 inverter
v. 
The power factor of the system is good as a diode rectifier can be 
employed on the line scale.
vi. The control is complicated.
vii. Four quadrant operation is possible. During regeneration a battery or 
another converter with phase control may be used. Dynamic braking can 
also be employed.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
V,RS
Fig. 4.24(b) 
Principle of PWM and line voltage waveforms
viii. 
Single and multimotor operations are possible. Smooth changeover of 
voltage and frequency values at zero crossing for speed reversal with full 
torque capability at standstill.
ix. Due to switching losses, the highest operating frequency is 150 Hz. 
Speed range 1: 00.
x. The inverter and load need not be matched. The converter operates as a 
source to which the motor can be plugged.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
xi. The leakage reactance of the motor further smoothens the motor current, 
effectively decreasing the harmonic content and peak values of stator 
current.
xii. The size of the filter also decreases.
xiii. The efficiency may be affected by switching losses.
xiv. Open loop operation is possible. The drive has a very good dynamic and 
transient response.
xv. 
Selected harmonic elimination techniques may be employed to eliminate 
lower order harmonics.
xvi. The drive finds application in low to medium power. Commercial drives 
are available up to 450 kVA.
xvii. Transistors may be used in place of thyristors.
4.1.10 
Current Source Inverter Fed Induction Motor Drive
In a voltage source inverter fed induction motor the applied voltage to the stator 
is proportional to the frequency, with a correction for the stator resistance drop, 
particularly at low speeds, to keep the flux constant. It is a very well known fact 
that the current drawn by an induction motor does not depend on the stator fre­
quency when the air gap flux is constant. There exists a fixed relationship between 
the slip frequency and stator current for rated flux in the air gap, as shown in 
Fig. 4.25. By controlling the slip of the motor, the stator current can be controlled. 
An indirect flux control is therefore possible. The control is simpler than voltage 
control. The curve between slip frequency and stator current can be calculated 
using the equivalent circuit. A PWM inverter can be controlled to provide the 
desired currents in the motor.
In a dc link converter, if the dc link current is controlled the inverter is called 
a current source inverter. The current in the dc link is kept constant by a high

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Fig. 4.25 
Stator current of an induction motor as a function of rotor frequency for 
constant flux
inductance and the capacitance of the filter is dispensed with. The variable dc link 
voltage is converted to a current source by means of the inductance. The dc supply is 
of high impedance. As the link current is held constant, the output current waveform 
is determined by the operation of the inverter, while the output voltage is determined 
by the nature of the load impedance. A current source inverter is suitable for loads 
which present a low impedance to harmonic currents and have unity p.f.
A current source inverter has a very simple configuration. No feedback diodes 
are required. A phase controlled rectifier is used on the line side to provide a cur­
rent control. As the dc link contains only the inductance, regeneration is possible 
by changing the polarity of voltages and maintaining the current direction. Hence, 
a four quadrant drive is simple and straightforward. It provides effective buffer­
ing of the inverter output from supply voltage variations. Direct control of stator 
current allows a precise closed loop control to be implemented with relative ease.
The commutation of the inverter is load dependent. The load parameters form 
a part of the commutation circuit. A matching is therefore required between the 
inverter and the motor. Multimotor operation is not possible. The inverter must 
necessarily be a force commutated one, as the induction motor cannot provide the 
reactive power for the inverter.
The constant dc link current is allowed to flow through the phases of the 
motor by control of the inverter, and therefore the motor current is a quasi-square 
wave. The motor voltage is almost sinusoidal with superimposed spikes, due to 
commutation. These voltage spikes decide the voltage rating of the thyristors 
and also affect the insulation of the motor. These spikes can be limited if the 
machine has small leakage reactance or if the commutating capacitors are large. 
A machine with smaller leakage reactance is suitable for current source opera­
tion to keep the voltage spikes and the harmonic losses to a minimum. The effect 
of torque pulsations decreases and the frequency of operation can be increased.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Id
Fig. 4.26(a) Auto sequential commutated CS inverter feeding a three phase induction motor
The commutating capacitance is chosen to strike a compromise between voltage 
spikes and the highest operating frequency. The commutation requires a definite 
minimum current. The inverter has the ability to recover from commutation fail­
ure. The link inductance causes a slow rise of the fault current and by the time it 
reaches high values, the fault may be cleared.
Fig. 4.26(b) 
Third harmonic A5 CSI
Fig. 4-26(c) 
CS/ employing individual commutation

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
'A
Fig. 4.27 
Current and voltage waveforms of C5 I fed induction motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The drive poses stability problems at light loads. Open loop operation is not 
possible. It has a very wide range of speed control but dynamic performance is 
poor.
The drive motor requires derating due to harmonic losses and associated heat­
ing. Torque pulsations are present and their amplitude is large at low frequency of 
operation, due to additional harmonics in the rotor flux. The line power factor is 
poor, due to phase control.
Up to the rated frequency, the drive is in a constant torque mode and above the 
rated frequency the drive is in a constant horse power mode.
The stator current of an induction motor operating on a variable frequency, 
variable voltage supply is independent of stator frequency if the airgap flux is 
maintained constant. However, it is a function of the rotor frequency. The torque 
developed is also a function of rotor frequency only. Using these features a slip 
controlled drive (Fig. 4.28) can be developed employing a current source inverter 
to feed an induction motor. The relationship between the rotor frequency and sta­
tor current for rated flux in the airgap is introduced in the control. Thus an indirect 
control of flux is possible. The output of the function generator gives the reference 
value of current. The measured current is compared with the reference value and 
the error is used to alter the firing angle of the phase controlled converter on the 
line side. The input to the function generator is the difference between the refer­
ence speed and actual speed and it can be considered as slip frequency which is 
added to the frequency corresponding to rotor speed. This gives the value of stator 
frequency and the machine side inverter is controlled to give this frequency. The 
control is operative until the rotor attains the desired speed with the required slip 
frequency. The slip controlled drive has the following advantages:
Fig. 4.28 
Slip controlled drive using CSI
i. Controlled slip drive is highly efficient.
ii. Precise control of torque is possible over a wide speed range.
iii. The slip frequency can be any value up to the value corresponding to 
breakdown torque. The operation is at a very good power factor. The 
operation is very stable.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
iv. The rotor can be accelerated at constant torque and current maintaining 
the rotor frequency at a suitable value. Fast acceleration.
v. As this leads to soft starting the motor does not see the blocked rotor cur­
rents and the associated voltage slips are not there.
vi. 
Special rotors with high starting torque are not necessary. Rotors with 
low resistance may be used so that the losses are limited.
vii. Regenerative braking can be incorporated. Braking at constant torque is 
possible.
viii. The drive has efficiency comparable to a thyristorized dc drive.
The added advantages of squirrel cage induction motors like high power to 
weight ratio, less maintenance, low inertia, no limitations on the power ranges 
and speed ranges make slip controlled drive a real competitor to dc motor 
drives.
Selected harmonic elimination methods or PWM principles can be employed 
to reduce the effects of torque pulsations, particularly at low speeds. In these 
methods control can be achieved by controlling the dc link current and PWM 
principle can then be used solely to control the harmonic content of the current 
waveform. This separation of the current and harmonic control functions allows 
the choice of PWM control strategy being directed solely towards improving the 
motor torque pulsations and reducing the harmonic losses.
The majority of PWM strategies for a current source inverter are based on 
selected harmonic elimination techniques. They are used to eliminate the lower 
order harmonics from the stator current and the methods result in the elimination 
of lower order torque ripples (Fig. 4.29).
In recent years PWM strategies have been specially developed to minimise the 
rotor speed ripple due to torque pulsation, to result in a drive having smooth rota­
tion at low speeds (Fig. 4.30).
The general features of an induction motor on a current source inverter can be 
summarised as follows:
i. Load dependent commutation: As the load parameters form part of the 
commutation circuit, the inverter and motor must be matched.
ii. The inverter has a simple configuration. FWD’s are absent.
iii. Only single motor operation
iv. The dc link contains only inductance. To maintain constant current this 
has to be very large. Two quadrant operation is straightforward
v. Invariably, a phase controlled rectifier is required on the line side. The 
variable dc link voltage is converted to a constant current source by 
means of high link inductance.
vi. The inverter is force commutated to give variable frequency currents to 
feed the motor.
vii. The value of the capacitance is a compromise between the voltage spikes 
and highest operating frequency. Larger the capacitance smaller the volt­
age spikes. The highest operating frequency is also limited.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
J __ __ 1_____ I_____ L
n 
n 
n 
In
6 
3 
2 
3
12°
8.57°
5.45°
4.61
r
5
7
11
13
i
(a)
« 1«2
ai 
5.82°
«2 
16.26° 
ri 
5
r2 
7
I ...................I____________ L
6.18° 
4 .13°
10.86° 
10.63°
5 
7
11 
11
- r - r r i ------- 
(b)
«1«2 a 3
«1
«2
«3
h
r2
3.36°
15.65° 8.74°
5
7
J___________ I 
1L 
I
'S
11
(C)
Fig. 4.29 
Pulsing the current of a C5 I for selective harmonic elimination (a) to elimi­
nate one harmonic (r) (b) to eliminate two harmonics (r, r ) (c) to eliminate 
three harmonics (r, r2, r )
viii. The leakage reactance of the motor influences the harmonic voltages. 
It is also responsible for spikes of voltage during commutation. The 
leakage reactance being a parameter of the commutation circuit, deter­
mines the time of commutation, and consequently the upper operational 
frequency is limited. A motor must have smaller leakage reactance to 
have reduced harmonic voltages and spikes of voltage and to increase 
the range of speed control. The spikes influence the rating of the thyris­
tor and affect the insulation. The motor size becomes larger if leakage 
reactance is small.
ix. Converter grade thyristors are sufficient. Thyristor utilisation is good
x. The inverter recovers from commutation failure. The link inductance 
causes a slow rise of fault current and by the time it reaches high value 
it can be suppressed.
xi. There is a stability problem at light load. A minimum current should be 
there for commutation.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Fig. 4.30 
PWM inverter for current control
xii. Open loop operation is not possible. Dynamic response is sluggish
xiii. The line p.f. is poor due to phase control.
xiv. Finds application as medium to high power drive
xv. Torque pulsations cause speed oscillations at very low speeds. PWM 
strategies are being employed to eliminate the speed oscillations and 
make the running smooth.
xvi. Both constant torque and constant horse power operations are possible.
Field Oriented Control 
In the slip controlled drives using VSI or CSI discussed 
in the foregoing sections, the stator voltage or stator current is controlled using 
slip frequency. They are controlled in magnitude only. The stator current control 
does not take care of its phase position with respect to flux. The control does not 
provide satisfactory dynamic behaviour. There exists an oscillatory response to 
changes in the rotor frequency. The dynamic response may be improved using the 
principle of field orientation where the stator current is controlled both in magni­
tude and phase position with respect to flux.
In induction motor drives the stator current has the function of providing flux 
as well as torque. The induction motor will have an operation similar to that of a 
dc motor if the stator current components, namely flux producing and torque pro­
ducing are separately controlled (Fig. 4.31). This is actually the case in a dc motor 
where the torque depends on armature current and the flux on field current. There 
is an inherent decoupling between them but for the effects of armature reaction. 
These effects can be eliminated by means of compensating windings and there is

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
q-axis
Q-axis
Fig. 4.31 
Principle of field orientation to control torque and flux individually
perfect decoupling in a separately excited dc motor. This kind of decoupling is 
being attempted in the control of induction motors. The principle is called field 
orientation or vector control. This control improves the dynamic performance of 
the drive at all speeds. The stator current is decomposed into two components 
one along the of-axis and the other along the q-axis. The reference axes have been 
chosen such that the rotor flux is available completely along the direct axis. Its 
quadrature component is zero. Thus the component of current along the d-axis is 
the flux producing component and that along the q-axis is the torque producing 
component. By varying these components independently we can have indepen­
dent flux control and torque control. These are depicted in Fig. 4.31(a) and (b). 
In the former the variation of flux is shown by varying direct axis component of 
current whereas in the latter the variation of q-axis component of stator current 
is depicted. Therefore the control of stator current amounts not only the variation 
of its magnitude but also its phase angle. The method is therefore called vector 
control.
Vector control techniques employed to keep the air gap flux constant impart 
poor dynamic characteristics to the drive, as the torque follows the slip frequency 
with a delay. Techniques have been developed to keep the rotor flux constant. 
In these methods the torque follows without any delay, thereby improving the 
dynamic behaviour. Such a high quality dynamic behaviour is required for induc­
tion motors used as actuators. Figure 4.32 depicts the implementation of the 
principle of field orientation. The actual value of rotor flux is compared with the 
reference value and the error so obtained is used to control the direct axis com­
ponent of current. Normally this component is maintained constant so that the 
rotor flux is constant. The quadrature axis component is controlled using the error 
signal obtained from the comparison of actual torque and reference torque. The 
components are in the synchronously rotating frame. Therefore the decoupling 
between flux producing and torque producing components of the armature current 
necessitates a reference coordinate system, and transformation of the quantities to 
this reference frame and finally to the stator frame.
In this control, which provides a very good dynamic behaviour without a 
torque transient, secondary flux is required, which can be made available in two 
ways:

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Fig. 4.32 
Implementation of field oriented control
i. direct measurement using flux sensing coils.
ii. 
indirect estimation of the flux using a machine model, using easily mea­
surable terminal quantities, such as voltages and currents.
The first method using direct measurement gives good results and is probably 
the most accurate control method available. The measurement is done by means 
of search coils, Hall probes or any other flux measuring techniques. The measured 
flux is used to effect the required decoupling between the torque producing and 
flux producing components of the stator current. The method is essentially insen­
sitive to parameter variations. However, the cage motor loses its robustness and 
simplicity of construction.
If one tries to retain the robustness and simplicity of the motor, the flux is 
obtained using the second method. The rotor flux is estimated from the stator volt­
age vector, current vector and rotor speed. This estimated flux is fed to the torque 
controller. This approach is sensitive to errors in parameters. The rotor resistance, 
leakage reactance and other parameters must be accurately determined to achieve 
a performance equivalent to direct measurement. Unfortunately, the parameters 
of the motor used in the calculation are determined from no-load tests and do 
not represent the values of the parameters actually present at the operating point. 
Further, these parameters vary widely with saturation, temperature, frequency and 
current amplitude. The secondary flux level may be changed by the parameter 
variation. These variations in parameters result in erroneous flux control, which 
deteriorates the dynamic performance.
To avoid the errors due to variation of values of parameters (mainly rotor resis­
tance), either due to incorrect estimation or due to operating conditions of the 
motor, automatic parameter identification or adaptation has been employed. The 
methods identify the changes in the performance due to the variation of param­
eters and correct the parameters accordingly. The error between the estimated 
value of flux and desired flux in the motor is made use of to correct the most 
influential parameter, which is the rotor resistance or rotor time constant, so that 
the machine model gives the required value of flux without any error.
Another method discussed recently is an on-line technique for establishing the 
exact value of rotor resistance of the induction motor. Identification is achieved by 
injecting a negative sequence current and detecting the negative sequence voltage.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The value of the rotor resistance is calculated using the information. The field 
oriented controller corrects the value of rotor resistance without the need for a 
thermal sensor.
The methods of state observer feed back are also employed for parameter iden­
tification.
With the advent of microprocessors (jups) and microcomputers it is now-a-days 
possible to solve the problems connected with drives effectively with little com­
plexity in the control circuitry. More sophisticated controls in the drive system are 
possible. The flux vector can be very easily determined. To achieve the matching 
of the model of the motor and the identification of rotor parameters by a correla­
tion procedure, a //p can be very effectively implemented without any additional 
measurements. The jups also facilitate the implementation of sophisticated algo­
rithms for generating firing sequences of the inverter. Also, the elaborate process 
of field oriented control of the overall drive system has become economically fea­
sible, as the expensive hardware used so far can now be substituted by software.
The field orientation can be very easily implemented with CSI feeding an 
induction motor. As the PWM inverter has good dynamic behaviour, these are 
used with a current control on the output side. Figure 4.33 depicts the principle of 
current control using PWM inverter. This has the advantages of both VSI and CSI.
Fig. 4*33 
Current control using PWM inverter

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Induction Motors in the Flux Weakening Mode 
In the case of dc motors speeds 
above base speed are obtained by decreasing the field current at constant rated 
armature voltage. The torque developed decreases. A constant power mode can be 
realised in this speed range and is called flux weakening mode.
A similar behaviour can be observed in the case of induction motors. The volt­
age reaches its rated value for rated frequency. For frequencies above this value the 
inverter voltage is kept constant. The speed of the motor increases in proportion 
to the frequency. Due to the increase in the frequency, the air gap flux decreases. 
The torque at a given rotor frequency is inversely proportional to the square of the 
stator frequency and the power developed is not constant. The dynamic behaviour 
under weakened flux conditions is very poor. This can be improved by varying 
slip frequency for maximum torque in proportion to frequency.
A motor having current feeding has a good dynamic behaviour when there is 
reserve voltage at the inverter terminals. When once a certain value of upper fre­
quency is reached, the back emf of the motor is equal to the applied voltage and 
there is no reserve voltage for current control. The actual value of stator current 
and rotor flux deviate from the desired values and the drive has a poor dynamic 
behaviour. Improvement of dynamic performance of the motor in the field weak­
ening mode is a problem of interest.
This can be done by controlling the amplitude of rotor flux and hence the back 
emf, so that sufficient voltage reserve is available in the speed range above base 
speed. Here also the direct and indirect methods of flux control can be used.
4.2 
SYNCHRONOUS MOTOR DRIVES
4.2.1 
General Considerations
Variable frequency drives employing synchronous motors are receiving consider­
able interest, and are even becoming competitors to both induction motors and 
dc motors. These are popular as drives for very high power applications, such as 
pumps, fans, conveyors, etc. The stator of the synchronous motor is supplied from 
a thyristor power converter capable of providing a variable frequency supply. The 
rotor, depending upon the situation, may be constructed with slip rings, where it 
conforms to a conventional rotor. It is supplied with dc through slip rings. Some­
times rotor may also be free from sliding contacts (slip rings), in which case the 
rotor is fed from a rectifier rotating with rotor.
An induction motor operates at lagging power factor and hence the converter 
supplying the same must invariably be a force commutated one. A synchronous 
motor, on the other hand, can be operated at any power factor by controlling the 
field current. For operation at unity power factor and lagging power factors the 
inverter must be force commutated. However if the power factor is near unity 
the inverter size is reduced, besides reducing armature copper loss. For opera­
tion at leading power factors the motor must be overexcited. The motor is in a 
position to supply the reactive power required by the inverter. In other words, the 
machine voltages can be used for commutation. The inverter in this case is load

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
commutated. The load commutation is possible with cycloconverters and current 
source inverters but not with voltage source inverters.
A machine is said to be self controlled if it gets its variable frequency from an 
inverter whose thyristors are fired in a sequence, using the information of rotor 
position or stator voltages. In the former, a rotor position sensor is employed, 
which measures the rotor position with respect to the stator and sends pulses to the 
thyristots. Thus the frequency of the inverter output is decided by the rotor speed. 
This kind of control makes it possible to control the angle between the stator and 
rotor mmf or load angle. The machine behaviour is decided by the torque angle, 
and voltage/current. Such a machine can be looked upon as a dc motor having 
its commutator replaced by a converter connected to stator. The rotor may be a 
conventional one supplied by dc power through slip rings, or it may be of special 
construction to avoid sliding contacts. In this case it is fed from a rectifier rotat­
ing with the rotor. The self controlled motor has properties of a dc motor both 
under steady-state and dynamic conditions and therefore is called commutator 
less motor (CLM). These machines have better stability behaviour. They do not 
fall out of step and do not have oscillatory behaviour, as in normal synchronous 
motors.
Alternatively, firing signals can be derived from the phase position of stator 
voltages in which case the mechanical rotor position sensor can be dispensed 
with. The synchronous machine with the inverter can be considered to be similar 
to a line commutated converter where the firing signals are synchronised with the 
line voltage. In this case the firing pulses of the inverter are synchronised with the 
machine voltages. The natural commutation using machine voltages takes place. 
Thus the machine voltages are used for both control as well as commutation. The 
frequency of the inverter is the same as that of the voltages.
The dynamic behaviour of the motor depends upon the type of control used. 
The machine however retains the properties of a dc motor in both the types of 
control.
An overexcited synchronous motor will be able to provide the necessary reac­
tive power required for commutation of thyristors. The inverter commutation 
circuit has a very simple configuration as the capacitors, diodes and auxiliary 
thyristors are absent. The converter is economical with better utilisation of the 
thyristors. However, the machine commutation has a disadvantage. At very low 
speeds (up to about 10% of base speed) the machine voltages are insufficient to 
provide satisfactory commutation. Special methods are required to run the motor 
at these speeds, beyond which machine commutation can be used. Commutation 
assistance is required only at low frequencies and hence the commutation circuit 
required will be relatively simple and cheap. Artificial commutation of conduct­
ing thyristors is possible by means of a controlled thyristor across the link induc­
tance. The motor is underutilised as it is operating at leading power factor.
A self controlled synchronous motor is, therefore, a substitute for a dc motor 
drive and finds application where a dc motor is objectionable due to its mechani­
cal commutator, which limits the speed range and power output.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
4.2.2 
Control of Synchronous Motors on Variable Frequency Supply
As has already been discussed, the speed of a synchronous motor can be varied 
by supply frequency variation similar to an induction motor. The applied voltage 
must be varied in this case also to have the maximum torque capability and to 
avoid saturation at all frequencies. A synchronous motor can receive its variable 
voltage, variable frequency supply from a cycloconverter or a dc link converter. 
The dc link converter can have a voltage source inverter to feed impressed volt­
ages or a current source inverter to feed impressed currents. Further, the voltage 
source inverter can be a square wave inverter with variable link voltage or a PWM 
inverter with constant link voltage. These types are depicted in Fig. 4.34. In all 
these cases self control can be employed with the motor in the CLM mode which 
imparts a very good steady-state and dynamic behaviour similar to a dc motor. But 
machine commutation may not be always possible.
A separate control of the inverter feeding a synchronous motor can also be 
used. In this case the speed of the motor is determined from an external frequency 
obtained from a crystal oscillator (Fig. 4.35). The performance of the motor is 
similar to a conventional synchronous motor with problems of hunting for sudden 
changes of load. Multimotor operation is possible here. This is seldom used with 
inverter feeding.
Principle of Self Control 
Self controlled mode of a synchronous motor facilitates 
unique positioning of stator voltage vector and rotor flux vector. This is similar 
to a dc motor where the armature mmf and field mmf are in space quadrature 
by proper positioning of the brushes in the neutral zone. The principle of self 
control can be explained for a three phase motor, referring to Fig. 4.36. The 
three windings of a three phase synchronous motor are 120° away from each 
other in space and are connected in star. These windings are connected to a 
dc supply through a thyristor inverter having thyristors T1 and T6. The rotor 
position decides the thyristors to be fired in the sequence. Depending upon the 
thyristors conducting, the currents in the windings flow. These produce an mmf 
fixed in space till the other thyristor in the sequence is fired and is ahead of the 
rotor mmf. The stator mmf changes its position when the next thyristor is fired. 
Thus a dc link current flows through the phases of the motor alternately as the 
inverter is controlled. These currents effectively produce an mmf which rotates 
by two pole pitches by the time all the thyristors are fired once in the sequence. 
The rotor carrying a dc excitation produces a field mmf which rotates with the 
rotor. The angle between the stator mmf and rotor mmf decreases owing to the 
rotation. When once the angle takes the value of 60°, the next thyristor in the se­
quence is fired, so that the stator mmf jumps by 60°, making the angle between 
the mmfs 120°. Thus at the start of conduction of a pair of thyristors stator wind­
ings, the mmfs have an angle of 120° which slowly decreases as the field rotates. 
When the angle reaches 60° the next two windings conduct as the next thyristor 
is fired to bring the angle to a value of 120°. Thus the angle between the mmfs 
changes from 120° to 60°.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Referring to Fig. 4.37 at the instant the phases S and R start conduction due 
to conduction of 71 and 76, the angle between the mmfs is 120°. Due to rotation 
it slowly decreases and at the instant t1 when the angle is 60°, 72 is fired. The 
commutation takes place during which 71 stops conduction and 72 takes over. 
The stator mmf has shifted to a new position by 60° making the angle again 120°.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Controlled
Fig. 4*35 
Separately controlled synchronous motor fed from V5 I
Similar operations repeat at firing of each thyristor (Fig. 4.37). Following this the 
torque developed by the motor is not a constant one but has pulsations varying 
between a maximum and 0.86 of maximum values (Fig. 4.38). These pulsations 
can be reduced to a minimum by increasing the pulse number of the inverter. In 
the case of dc motors the pulsations are almost absent because of a large number 
of commutator segments which correspond to pulses of the inverter. The brushes 
on the commutator decide the commutation instants. By virtue of their lying in 
the neutral zone the angle between the mmfs is maintained at 90°. In the case of 
a self controlled motor the commutation instants are decided by rotor position or 
synchronisation of machine voltages, as explained previously. The inverter here 
can be considered as a six segment commutator.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 4.36 
Control of thyristors either from rotor position sensor or voltages
A
Fa
T-, -  Tq conduct
Ft
f2
Ft
After T2 is fired Fa MO\ES by 60°
Fig- 4-37
In self controlled mode the power factor can be maintained at the desired 
value by using a closed loop control. A constant air gap flux can be achieved 
by independent field control. Field weakening exists, similar to the case of an 
induction motor, when the inverter voltage and field current have reached their 
rated values.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Fa = armature mmf 
Ft = field mmf
Fig. 4.38 
Pertaining to pulsating torque behaviour of an inverter fed synchronous motor
In a synchronous motor on a variable frequency supply, several modes of con­
trol exist. Both terminal voltage and excitation voltage can be varied proportional 
to frequency, i.e., V/f and Elf are constant. The value of E /f is constant if field 
current is held at a constant value. If the applied voltage is varied proportional to 
frequency and the effect of stator resistance is neglected, constant flux operation 
results in the basic speed range. However, at low frequencies the stator resis­
tance drop becomes comparable to the applied voltage and hence a correction

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 4-39 
Characteristics of a variable frequency synchronous motor (V/f and E/f constant)
is required to compensate for the resistance drop. The motor has a speed-torque 
curve similar to that of a separately excited dc motor. Also, when the effects of 
stator resistance are compensated, it can be easily seen that the stator current is 
independent of supply frequency (Fig. 4.39).

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
A control of the motor with constant V and E lf on the other hand, imparts 
a series characteristic to the motor which makes it suitable for traction pur­
poses. The problems of saturation have to be taken care of at low frequencies 
(Fig. 4.40).
Fig. 4.40(a) 
Characteristics of variable frequency synchronous motor (V and E/f constant)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 4.40(b) 
Characteristics of a variable frequency synchronous motor (V/f and E 
constant)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
When fed from a VSI the load commutation is not possible. As the power 
factor can be controlled by field excitation, UPF operation of the motor reduces 
the size of the inverter and its commutation circuit. The armature copper losses 
are also reduced.
The above controls can be realised with PWM inverters also, in which the volt­
age control is achieved in the inverter itself. By this the speed range is extended 
up to zero; the harmonic content of the stator current decreases. Consequently, the 
torque pulsations are also decreased.
An examination of the control to keep VIf and Elf constant shows that the 
armature current is independent of frequency when the effects of resistance 
have been corrected, particularly at low frequencies. This leads to a simple and 
straightforward control of stator current to maintain constant flux in the motor. 
This makes the operation of a synchronous motor for a current source inverter 
feasible. Self controlled CLM operation and load commutation are possible. 
As has already been stated, commutation assistance is required at low speeds. 
Forced commutation may be employed at low frequencies. The circuit becomes 
simple and less expensive if the p.f. is maintained at unity. Field regulation may 
also be employed to keep the air gap flux constant. Current control is advanta­
geous as it assures reserve voltage. However when the frequency reaches the 
rated value, this reserve is not present and the field weakening starts. A motor for 
CSI operation should invariably have damper windings. The subtransient (leak­
age) reactance is effective during commutation. This must be as small as pos­
sible to limit voltage spikes. The dampers actually decrease this reactance. The 
overlap decreases. The control sometimes requires force commutation in which 
case p.f. can be controlled to unity in view of the advantages discussed already. 
The field mmf required is however greater than that of an induction motor due to 
armature reaction.
A cycloconverter can also be used to provide variable frequency supply to 
a synchronous motor. This can be either line commutated or machine commu­
tated. When line commutated there exists a limitation on the output frequency. 
The speed variation can be in the range 0-1/3 of base speed. When machine 
commutation is employed the speed range can be 10%—100% base speed. The 
machine must be overexcited. Therefore, when supplied from a cycloconverter 
for lower speed range it can be line commutated and for upper speed range 
machine commutation may be employed. In both the cases self control is pos­
sible.
Margin Angle Control The difference between the lead angle of firing and the over­
lap angle is called the margin angle of commutation. If this angle is very small 
and is less than the turn off angle of the thyristor, commutation failure occurs. 
Safe commutation is assured if this angle has a minimum value equal to the turn 
off angle of the thyristor. The type of sensing influences the margin angle. When 
voltage sensing is used the firing angle of the inverter thyristors may be constant.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The angle of overlap increases as the dc link current increases. Therefore at large 
values of link current the margin angle decreases and this may cause failure of 
commutation at a particular current. To avoid this the load angle of firing has to 
be simultaneously increased. When this is done certain disadvantages, such as 
increased torque pulsations at low speeds, poor power factor on line side, and poor 
efficiency would occur.
To have better performance with respect to the above quantities, the firing 
angle is controlled such that the margin angle remains constant at the minimum 
value required and ensures safe commutation at all operating points. The con­
trol can be employed with self controlled synchronous motors using either rotor 
position sensing or voltage sensing using closed loop control, to achieve this. 
The margin angle kept constant at steady-state may not remain constant under 
dynamic conditions.
The advantages of margin angle control can be summarized:
i. Commutation failure is prevented.
ii. The maximum power output can be increased by simultaneous control 
of field current to compensate for armature reaction. This improves the 
overload capacity of the motor.
iii. There is improvement in power factor.
iv. The torque pulsations under light load conditions are reduced. The ripple 
content of the dc link current also decreases.
However, a disadvantage of the method, is a limited speed range with a limit 
on the upper speed.
To increase the upper speed limit, margin time control is employed. This 
improves the performance of the drive.
4.2.3 Voltage Source Inverter Fed Synchronous Motor Drive
An inverter fed synchronous motor has been very popular as a converter motor 
in which the synchronous motor is fed from a CSI having load commutation. 
Of late more attention is being paid towards understanding the behaviour of 
synchronous motors fed from a VSI. These drives can also be developed to 
have self control, using a rotor position sensor or phase control methods. It has 
been reported in the literature that these drives might impose fewer problems 
both on machine as well as on the system design. A normal VSI with 180° con­
duction of thyristors requires forced commutation and load commutation is not 
possible.
A typical power circuit of a voltage source inverter is shown in Fig. 4.41. Three 
combinations are possible, to provide a variable voltage variable frequency supply 
to a synchronous motor (Fig. 4.42). The voltage control can be obtained exter­
nal to the inverter using a phase controlled rectifier. The link voltage is variable. 
This has the disadvantage that commutation is difficult at very low speeds. As 
the output voltage is a square wave the inverter is called variable voltage inverter

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Fig. 4.41 
Power circuit of a VSI

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
or square wave inverter. The second alternative is to have voltage control in the 
inverter itself, using principles of PWM or PSM. The inverter is fed from a con­
stant link voltage. A diode rectifier would be sufficient on the line side. This does 
not have difficulties of commutation at low speeds. Very low speeds up to zero 
can be obtained. The third alternative is to interpose a dc chopper in between the 
rectifier and the inverter. The system may appear cumbersome at first sight, but it 
has advantages. Three simple converters are used to give the desired result. It is 
possible to reduce the size of link inductance by having a synchronous control of 
the chopper.
A voltage source inverter feeding a synchronous motor can have either separate 
control or self control. In the former the speed of the motor is determined by exter­
nal frequency from a crystal oscillator. Open loop control is possible. The motor 
has instability problems and hunting, similar to a conventional motor. In the latter 
the inverter is controlled by means of firing pulses obtained from a rotor position 
sensor or induced voltage sensor. The motor is in the CLM mode and has better 
stability characteristic (Fig. 4.43).
The output voltage of the inverter is non-sinusoidal. The behaviour of the motor 
supplied from the inverter is entirely different from the behaviour of the motor 
operating on a conventional sinusoidal supply. A knowledge of the behaviour is 
essential. The steady-state performance enables one to have a proper choice of 
the thyristors, and also to determine the effects of non-sinusoidai waveforms on 
torque developed and machine losses.
The stator current drawn by the motor when fed from the square wave inverter 
has sharp peaks and is rich in harmonic content. These harmonics can cause addi­
tional losses and heating of the motor. They also cause pulsating torques which 
are objectionable at low speeds. Thus the performance with respect to additional 
heating due to harmonics, and pulsating torques is similar to that of an induction 
motor.
When a PWM inverter is used, these harmonic effects are reduced. The stator 
currents are less peaky and have reduced harmonic content. Accordingly addi­
tional losses due to harmonics, consequent motor heating and torque pulsations 
are decreased. These effects become minimal.
The discussion on regeneration given for induction motors holds good for 
these cases also. With the square wave inverter another phase controlled rectifier 
is required on the line side. Dynamic braking can be employed. When a PWM 
inverter is used, two cases may arise. The inverter may be fed from a constant 
dc source in which case regeneration is straight forward. The dc supply to the 
inverter may be obtained from a diode rectifier. In this case an additional phase 
controlled converter is required on the line side.
A square wave inverter drive must have a phase controlled converter on the line 
side. Due to phase control the line power factor is very poor. A diode rectifier is 
sufficient in the case of PWM inverter. The line p.f. improves to unity. In either 
case the machine p.f. can be improved by field control. With a view to minimizing

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Fig. 4.42 
Possible combinations of voltage source dc link converters to obtain a vari­
able voltage variable frequency supply to feed a synchronous motor
the inverter size as well as losses in the inverter and motor, it is advantageous to 
operate the motor at UPF.
A VSI drive provides reasonably good efficiency. Converter cost is high and 
multimotor operation is possible. Open loop (separate) control may pose stabil­
ity problems at low speeds. CLM mode is very stable. PWM drive has a better 
dynamic response than a square wave drive. This finds application as a general 
purpose industrial drive for low and medium powers.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(a) Seperate control of synchronous motor fed from square wave inverter.
(b) Seperate control of synchronous motor fed from a PWM inverter.
(c) Self control of synchronous motor fed from square wave inverter.
(d) Self control of synchronous motor fed from square a PWM inverter.
Fig. 4.43 
Principles of separate and self control
General Features of VSI Fed Synchronous Motors—a Summary
i. When fed from a square wave inverter the drives have a speed range from 
medium to high speed. This is because of low voltages at small frequen­
cies, which are insufficient for commutation. When fed from a PWM 
inverter a wide range of speeds, down to zero speed is possible. Inverter 
voltage is constant at all frequencies.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
ii. Dynamic braking is possible. Regeneration reauires another phase 
controlled converter on the line side. However, if in PWM case, the 
inverter is supplied from a constant dc source the regeneration is 
straightforward.
iii. A square stepped voltage wave is applied to the motor which results in a 
current having rich harmonic content. This causes additional heating and 
torque pulsations. The effects are more at low speeds. PWM principles 
employed result in nearly sinusoidal voltage applied to the motor. The 
harmonic content of stator current decreases. The additional losses, heat­
ing, and torque pulsations are minimal.
iv. The phase control on the line side of a square wave inverter causes a poor 
line p.f. With PWM inverter a diode rectifier may be sufficient for motor 
operation and the line p.f. is near unity. Machine p.f. can be improved 
by field control. It is operated at UPF in view of better performance. It 
is usually advantageous to operate the motor at UPF as this reduces the 
armature current to a minimum for a given output. Consequently motor 
armature copper losses and inverter losses are reduced. The VA rating of 
the inverter is also small.
4.2.4 
Synchronous Motor Fed from a Cycloconverter
DC link converter is a two stage conversion device which provides a variable volt­
age, variable frequency supply. Variable voltage, variable frequency supply can be 
obtained from a cycloconverter which is a single stage conversion equipment. The 
power circuit of a cycloconverter feeding a synchronous motor is shown in Fig. 
4.44. This has several differences compared to a dc link converter.
The line voltages are made use of to commutate the thyristors of a cyclocon­
verter. The output frequency can be varied from 0-1/3 of the input frequency. 
The range of speed control is therefore limited, extending from 0-1/3 base 
speed.
Cycloconverters are inherently capable of power transfer in both directions. 
Four quadrant operation is simple.
A cycloconverter in the above speed range gives a high quality sinusoidal 
output voltage. The resulting currents are also nearly sinusoidal. The harmonic 
content of the current is small. Consequent effects of harmonic current, such as 
losses, heating and torque pulsations are minimal.
The line power factor is somewhat better because the machine power factor 
can be made unity.
A cycloconverter requires a large number of thyristors and its control circuitry 
is complex. Converter grade thyristors are sufficient but the cost of the converter 
is high.
The efficiency is good and the drive has a good dynamic behaviour. The opera­
tion in CLM mode is popular.
A cycloconverter drive is attractive for low speed operation and is frequently 
employed in large, low speed reversing mills requiring rapid acceleration and

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
R 
S 
T
Fig. 4.44 
Cycloconverter feeding a three phase synchronous motor. Self control (CLM 
mode). Cycloconverter can have either line commutation or machine com­
mutation
deceleration. Typical applications are large gearless drives, e.g., drives for revers­
ing mills, mine hoists, etc.
A cycloconverter can also be commutated using the load voltages if the load 
is capable of providing the necessary reactive power for the inverter. An over­
excited synchronous motor can provide the necessary reactive power. Hence a

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
cycloconverter feeding such a motor can be load commutated. The range of speed 
control is from medium to base speed. At very low speeds load commutation is 
not possible. The speed range can be extended to zero if line commutation is used 
at low speeds. Four quadrant operation is simple. The problems associated with 
harmonics are minimal due to high quality of the output. The line power factor 
depends on the angle of firing and is poor. The cost of the converter is high with 
complex control. Its efficiency is good and the drive has a fast response. It finds 
application in high power pump and blower type drives.
4.2.5 
Current Source Inverter Fed Synchronous Motor Drive
A synchronous motor draws a stator current which is independent of stator fre­
quency when V/f and E/f are maintained constant and armature resistance is 
neglected. The motor also develops constant torque. The flux also remains con­
stant. Therefore, by controlling the stator current of a synchronous motor we can 
have flux control as well as torque control. As has been discussed in the case of 
the induction motor, current control is simple and straightforward. A synchronous 
motor is fed from a current source inverter. A synchronous motor can have either 
separate control or self control. Due to stable operation self control is normally 
employed, by using either rotor position sensing or induced voltage sensing. The 
motor operates in CLM mode. When fed from a CSI the synchronous motor can 
be operated at leading power factor so that the inverter can be commutated using 
machine voltages. A load commutated, CSI fed self controlled synchronous motor 
is very well known as a converter motor. It has very good stability characteristics 
and dynamic behaviour similar to a dc motor.
Due to machine commutation the working speed range starts typically above 
10% of base speed and extends up to base speed. By using (assisted ) forced com­
mutation the lower speed limit can be extended to zero. During the operation in 
the speed range from 0 to 10% of base speed (above which load commutation is 
possible) the machine can be operated at UPF.
When fed from a CSI, the synchronous motor is supplied with currents of 
variable frequency and variable amplitude. The dc link current is allowed to flow 
through the phases of the motor alternately. The motor currents are quasi-square 
wave if the commutation is instantaneous. The motor behaviour is very much 
affected by the square wave currents. The harmonics present in the stator current 
cause additional losses and heating. They also cause torque pulsations, which are 
objectionable at low speeds.
A current source inverter is inherently capable of regeneration. No addi­
tional converter is required, and four quadrant operation is simple and straight­
forward.
Due to overexcitation the machine power factor is leading. The motor is utilised 
less. The phase control on the line side converter for current control in the dc link 
causes the power factor to become poor at retarded angles of firing. The cost of 
the inverter is medium, due to absence of commutation circuit. The drive has mod­
erately good efficiency and is popular as CLM in medium to high power range.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Voltage spikes during commutation occur in the terminal voltage. These depend 
on the subtransient leakage reactance and affect the insulation of the motor also. 
The motor must have damper windings to limit the voltage spikes. Application of 
this type of drive is in gas turbine starting, pumped hydroturbine starting, pump 
and blower drives, etc.
4.2.6 
Current Source Inverter with Forced Commutation
As has already been discussed, the disadvantages of machine commutation are (a) 
limitation on the speed range (b) the machine size is large and due to overexcita­
tion it is underutilised.
(i) 
Used for providing commutation at low speeds
(ii) 
Synchronous motor may be operated at UPF
Third harmonic ASC CSI for use with synchronous motor at 
low speeds for starting.
Fig- 4-45(a) 
Alternative CSIs for feeding synchronous motor. These are also used to
provide commutation assistance at low speeds until the machine commu­
tation is effective

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Sometimes it may be required to provide forced commutation for the inverter. 
Obviously the speed range can be extended from zero to base speed. The discus­
sion regarding regeneration, harmonics and torque pulsations hold good for this 
case also. The line power factor is poor. However the machine is operated at UPF 
to obtain the advantages already discussed. The cost of the inverter increases due 
to forced commutation. The efficiency of the drive is good and it is popular as 
a drive in the low to medium power ranges in CLM mode. The drive cannot be 
operated in open loop. Stability improves in CLM mode. The problem of voltage 
spikes is present here also and commutation is simple.
4*45(b) 
Self controlled synchronous motor utilising load commutation over 
exciting the field
Fig* 4.45(c) 
CSI for self controlled synchronous motor using forced commutation at UPF

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
4.2.7 Starting Schemes for LCI Fed Synchronous Motors
It has been pointed out that a synchronous motor, even though complicated in its 
construction, has an advantage that it can provide the necessary reactive power 
required by the inverter, except at low speed. Among all the drives possible with 
synchronous motor, LCI fed synchronous motor drive is popular in CLM mode, 
and is known as converter motor. At low speeds, i.e., speeds below 10% of base 
speed, commutation should be assisted. Several methods are employed for start­
ing and bringing the motor to a speed where load commutation can take over.
i. Forced commutation can be employed at very low speeds. The commutation 
circuit can be switched off when the speed is reached at which machine voltages 
are capable of commutating the inverter. As forced commutation is required only 
at low speeds, the size of the commutation circuit is relatively small. A CSI using 
individual commutation is very suitable and is shown in Fig. 4.46(a).
ii. Forced commutation at low speeds can be obtained by means of a fourth 
leg of the inverter containing auxiliary thyristors (Fig. 4.46(b)). A commutat­
ing capacitance is connected across the start point and common point of the two 
thyristors. At low speeds the voltage of capacitance is used to quench the thyris­
tors. When the motor attains the speed at which machine commutation can take 
place the fourth leg is cut off. The inverter is called third harmonic commutated 
inverter and its operation has been discussed in detail in Chapter 3.
iii. DC Link current interruption can be employed to achieve the operation 
at low speeds. This is a kind of artificial quenching. The dc link current is inter­
rupted at the instant of commutation and at the same time the line side converter is 
controlled so that it goes to inversion from rectification. The rotor position sensor 
sends information to the control unit of the machine side converter to block the 
firing pulses to the outgoing thyristor and provide them to the incoming one. The 
dc link voltage has changed its polarity due to transition of line side converter. 
Consequently the dc link current decays to zero and is maintained at zero value for 
a time greater than the turn off time of the thyristor. After this dead zone the line 
side converter is again made a rectifier. The dc link current builds up and flows 
through the machine phases via the new thyristor. There is a similar sequence if 
operations take place in the other commutations.
The interreption of link current to zero at the instant of commutation and its 
building up to the reference value after commutation are delayed by the link 
inductance. When the inductance is large and frequency is high the current may 
not even reach its reference value by the time the next commutation starts. To 
make the current variation faster, a thyristor is placed across the link inductance. 
Only machine and line inductance will be effective during variation of current. 
This thyristor is fired just at the instant when the zero current should exist. At 
the end of commutation, when the link voltage changes its sign it automatically 
ceases conduction. The link current flows through the inductance and the new 
phases via the thyristors.
The schematic diagram of connections of this method are shown in Fig. 
4.46(c). The line side converter receives its firing pulses from CUI, whereas CUII

Ò ö
The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Starting
motor
-o' «- 
-o o-
(a)
Fig. 4.46 
Starting schemes for a LCl fed synchronous motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(e) 
The commutation voltages are provided by the transformer.
Fig. 4.46 
(Contd.)
provides firing pulses to the machine side inverter. The current controller provides 
reference current. The thyristors 721 and 726 are fired in the inverter. The machine 
current builds up to the reference value. The rotor starts to move and after it has 
moved by the set amount the rotor position sensor sends information to block the 
firing pulses to 721 and provide them to 722. This is to advance the stator mmf 
by 60°. At the same time the line side converter starts working as an inverter. The 
link voltage changes its polarity. The link current is interrupted. The decay of 
current to zero is made faster by short circuiting the link inductance. The current

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
through the outgoing thyristor is zero and it is maintained for a time greater than 
turn off time to ensure its forward blocking capability. After this time, the line 
side converter is changed to rectification. The link voltage polarity changes. The 
current builds up to reference value. The thyristor across the inductance ceases 
to conduct. The thyristors 722 and 726 conduct till the next commutation in the 
sequence starts, i.e., after a definite interval when the rotor has moved by 60°, 724 
is fired and a similar process takes place to commutate 726 to 724.
iv. Use of an additional transformer A method suggested by E. Kubler, mak­
ing use of an additional inductive ac voltage for commutation of current from one 
thyristor to the other can be used. The details are given in Fig. 4.46(d). The process 
is explained assuming that the thyristors 721 and 726 conduct to start with. When 
the rotor rotates by the desired angle the pulse to 721 is removed and the thyristor 
722 is fired. When there is no induced voltage, the current divides between 721 and 
722. This induced voltage is introduced by means of a transformer. A voltage is 
induced in the current carrying winding of the auxiliary transformer. This voltage 
is short-circuited due to the conduction of 721 and 722 and acts as a commutation 
voltage. This decreases the current to zero in 721 and increases current to dc link 
value in 722. The thyristor 721 is quenched and the current commutates over to 722.
In the next commutation the thyristor 724 in the other half of the bridge is fired 
and 726 is commutated to 724. In this way in a sequence commutations take place 
to accelerate the rotor. When the desired speed is reached the machine commuta­
tion takes place. The primary of the transformer is disconnected from the line and 
secondary is short-circuited.
For satisfactory commutation the machine frequency must be smaller than the 
transformer frequency. This condition is satisfied because the commutation assis­
tance is required up to 10% of rated frequency. The rating of transformer need be 
only 10% of machine rating.
v. Sometimes when the power is small an auxiliary motor can be used to run up 
the synchronous motor to the desired speed.
Among the methods discussed above the methods using forced commutation 
are universally applicable ones. They are suitable for high speed motors having 
high starting torque. They make use of the current handling capacity of inverter 
thyristors and provide symmetrical currents during starting.
The other methods can be employed when these qualities are not of very much 
significance.
4.3 
DC DRIVES
Among the electric motors, the dc motors are very versatile in that they provide a 
smooth speed control over a wide range. They have been very widely used in the 
industry as variable speed drives. The main disadvantage of these motors is the 
presence of a mechanical commutator which limits the maximum power rating and 
the speed. With the advent of thyristors the static Ward Leonard systems have been 
developed for one quadrant, two quadrant and four quadrant operations. The follow­
ing sections deal with the aspects of dc drives fed from thyristor power converters.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(a) Seperately excited dc motor
4.3.1 
Basic Machine Equations
When dc voltage is applied to the arma­
ture of a dc motor with its field excited by 
dc, a torque is developed and the armature 
rotates. It accelerates to a speed at which 
the emf induced in the armature conductors 
balances the applied voltage and the fol­
lowing equation is satisfied.
Ka = /ara + Eb 
(4-23>
Fig. 4.47 
Circuit configurations of dc 
motor
Eb is the induced emf in the armature by vir­
tue of rotation in the uniform magnetic field 
at constant speed N. The nature of this emf is 
to oppose the terminal voltage and therefore it 
is also called back emf. The circuit conditions 
are shown in Fig. 4.47. Figure 4.47(a) depicts 
a separately excited motor where the excita­
tion is provided by a current independent 
of 7. Figure 4.47(b) depicts a series motor 
in which armature and field currents are the 
same. The generated voltage is given by
<1)ZN 1P_V 
60 
2 a
(4.24)
where 
(j) is flux per pole
Z is number of armature conductors 
N is speed in rpm 
2P is number of poles
2a is number of parallel paths in the armature 
For a given machine
where
Eb = K e<fm = ka§co 
co - 2  n n
ke = —  -2y?and&a = —  
za 
‘ 
271
(4.25)
The torque developed by the armature is given by
Td
- ( 2 ^ ) ^ Z N w « i  = «
/ a 
2 n 
2a
(4.26)
K is called armature constant of the motor.
a
Using Eqs 4.23 and 4.25 we have
n
K
I Y
Kc<t>

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
In a separately excited motor 0 can be assumed to be constant at a given field cur­
rent when armature reaction is neglected or compensated.
From eq. 4.27 it is clear that the speed of a dc motor can be varied by changing 
the value of (V -  I r).
v 
a 
a 
a7
This is normally is achieved in two ways:
i. By varying the value of applied voltage to the armature, as is done in 
Ward Leonard system (Fig. 4.48).
ii. By inserting an extra resistance in series with the armature (Fig. 4.49).
O
O
Fig. 4.48 
Conventional Ward Leonard control
«__________a a Í
_________ ^
^
 
- ________________________________a 
__________ /rtnrr*__________
v-------------------- vyv v-------------------- ^ --------------
l  
6
V
I 
t 
T
f
r  
9
_______ a__________________________________________________________
Fig. 4.49(a) Armature resistance control
t 
A
r  
?
0
V  N  v--------------
l 
'f
33
333
------------------------------------ 0
Fig. 4.49(b) 
Field control
In the former, a variable voltage supply is required. The operation is loss free 
and efficient. The torque versus speed characteristic is shown in Fig. 4.50. In the 
latter, extra resistance inserted involves extra losses and the motor becomes less 
efficient. The speed-torque characteristic is shown in Fig. 4.51. In both the cases

The McGraw·Hi,I/ Comp,anles 
I 
II Electric Drives 
"'O 
Q) 
Q) 
0. 
(j) 
V1 
V2 
------+------=- V3 
V4 
"'O 
Q) 
Q) 
0. 
(j) 
Torque 
(a) Smooth variation of armature voltage 
"'O 
Q) 
Q) 
0. 
(j) 
Torque 
(b) Armature resistance 
Fig. 4.50 
Torque-speed curves of a separately excited de motor 
+ 
Torque 
"'O 
Q) 
Q) 
0. 
(j) 
Torque 
Fig.4.51(a) 
Torque-speed curves of a series motor for different armature resistances 
or variable armature voltage 

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Fig. 4.51(b) 
Modes of operation of separately excited dc motor
very small speeds up to zero speed are possible. The motor operates at constant 
torque from zero to base speed.
The speed of a dc motor is also varied by variation of field flux. Speeds above 
base speeds are possible in this method of control. This method is suitable for 
variable torque loads. The operation of a dc motor with variable speed is depicted 
in Fig. 4.52.
Speed control by means of a variable voltage is very efficient. This variable 
voltage is obtained from a generator. The method is known as the Ward Leonard 
method. It is very versatile and has the following features:
i. The motor can be accelerated at constant torque (constant armature cur­
rent) by suitably adjusting the field of the motor.
ii. The regenerative braking of the motor is possible and the motor can be 
brought to rest very fast.
Fig. 4.52 
Speed torque curves of dc motor with flux variation

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
iii. Four quadrant operation of the motor is straightforward.
iv. The capital cost is more, as an extra M G set is required.
v. The overall efficiency is less,
vi. The equipment requires space.
The advent of thyristors and the development of power converters using thy­
ristors has made the speed control of electric motors easier and more straightfor­
ward. Phase controlled rectifiers provide a variable dc voltage to the armature of 
a dc motor (Fig. 4.53). These converters can also operate as inverters, in which 
case regenerative braking of the dc motor is possible. By suitable connection of 
these converters, a reversible drive allowing motoring and regeneration in both 
the directions of rotation is possible. These converters are more flexible, have 
a faster response and occupy less space. A static Ward Leonard system can be 
made possible using these converters. However, there are certain drawbacks, such 
as poor power factor on the ac side due to lagging current, non-sinusoidal input 
current having rich harmonic content, etc. The load voltage is superimposed by 
a ripple content. The load current also has a ripple making the ratios of peak to 
average current and rms to average current greater than one. A large inductance 
is required on the load side to smoothen the current. Sometimes the load current 
is discontinuous, which reduces the performance. The ripple content affects the 
motor heating and commutation. Therefore it is necessary to develop the rectifier 
which provides a supply to the motor causing only very little variations in the
4-53 
Phase controlled rectifier feeding a dc motor (a) Separately excited 
(b) Series motor
Fig- 4*54 
DC chopper feeding dc motor (a) Separately excited (b) Series motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
performance as compared to a normal dc supply. Sometimes the dc motor design 
is modified so that it can be used on any converter.
A dc motor on normal dc supply requires a starting resistor to limit the starting 
current. When fed from a thyristor converter the starting resistance can be dispensed 
with and soft starting is possible. The motor can be accelerated at constant torque.
The dc chopper can be interposed between dc mains of fixed voltage and the dc 
motor provide a variable voltage to the motor to control the speed. Regeneration 
is possible in this case also. A static Ward Leonard scheme is possible for two 
and four quadrant operation. The output voltage of the chopper is in the form of 
pulses. The time ratio of the chopper can be controlled to vary the average voltage. 
The output current varies exponentially during TQN and r  
of the chopper. The 
output current varies between two limits. There is a possibility of discontinuous 
conduction if the ripple is more and the load current is small. The chopper can 
also be controlled with specified current limits, the method being known as cur­
rent limit control. This fixes the chopper frequency. The ripple content can be lim­
ited by proper choice of the limits. The current limit control is less prone to dis­
continuous conduction. The increased chopper frequency introduces losses. Soft 
starting and acceleration are possible. Since the battery is supplying the power the 
problems of harmonic content and power factor are absent.
The performance of a dc motor when operating on phase controlled convert­
ers or dc choppers differs very much from the performance when operating on a 
normal dc supply. The ripple content of the load current affects the motor perfor­
mance, whereas the harmonics and poor power factor affect the line performance. 
An understanding of the behaviour helps in improving either the converter or 
motor design, to achieve better performance.
4.3.2 
Performance of DC Motors Operating on Phase 
Controlled Converters
The nature of the output voltage and output current of a phase controlled converter 
impains the performance of the dc motor operating on these converters. The output 
of the converter is in the form of pulses. The average voltage is superimposed by an 
ac ripple which results in a deterioration of the operation. The motor current also 
has ripple content. The torque produced is given by the average current whereas 
the rms current influences the copper loss and heating. The rms to average value of 
the motor current is greater than one. So, for a given armature heating the torque 
capability of the motor decreases. The ratio of peak value to average value of the 
current is also greater than unity. The peak value affects the commutating capabil­
ity of the motor. The ripple content also affects the commutation of the motor. The 
motor current is not always continuous; the ripple amplitude makes it discontinu­
ous. Under this condition both load voltage and load current are zero. There is loss 
of torque and the performance deteriorates because of poor speed regulation. Dis­
continuous conduction also affects the commutation. The performance improve­
ment can be obtained by a proper choice of the converter, e.g., using a converter 
with increased pulses. Sometimes the motor design can be altered.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Discontinuous Armature Current and its Effects on the Performance of the 
Motor When a dc motor is fed from a phase controlled converter the current 
in the armature may flow in discrete pulses or it may flow continuously with an 
average value superimposed on by a ripple. The former is called discontinuous 
conduction and the latter is called continuous conduction. In the case of discon­
tinuous conduction the load voltage is back emf and load current is zero. The 
converter output voltage (average value) is also more than what would occur if 
the conduction were continuous for the same firing angle. The control charac­
teristics are valid only for continuous conduction. The voltage waveform must 
be known to determine the average dc voltage when there is discontinuous con­
duction. The discontinuous conduction has the following effects on the motor 
performance:
i. The motor has a large speed drop as it is loaded. Speed falls very fast 
and speed regulation is very poor. As the current flows in pulses there is 
a loss of torque. The determination of the speed-torque characteristic is 
involved. For impact loads there is a substantial drop in the speed. An 
additional inductance in the load circuit improves the performance.
ii. The range of speed control is limited and speed oscillations are present.
iii. The ratios of peak to average and rms to average currents become more. 
The former deteriorates the commutating capability whereas the latter 
results in increased heating of the motor. For rated armature current 
to develop rated torque, the motor gets overheated; for normal heating 
there is loss of torque.
iv. It affects the commutation by increasing bar to bar voltage of the com­
mutator.
v. The dynamic response of the motor is very poor.
A sufficient value of inductance in the load circuit improves the performance 
of the motor.
4.3.3 
Commutation of the Motor
Commutation and commutator wear and tear of the dc motor must be given due 
consideration when the motor operates on solid state converters. Spark-less com­
mutation must be aimed at. The reactance voltage and dynamically induced volt­
age in the coil undergoing commutation affect the rate of change of current in the 
coil. Interpoles are provided to establish a flux to compensate for the above volt­
ages and to achieve sparkless commutation. The commutation is sparky when the 
field is weak, the load current is high and the speed is large. The dc motor must be 
used on power converters with a caution because commutation problems occur. 
These problems are due to
i. ripple content of the armature current.
ii. discontinuous conduction.
The commutation of a dc motor fed from a normal dc supply and rectified 
power supply is shown in Fig. 4.55.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
(a) Operation on pure do 
(b) Operation, rectifier
Commutation of current in a dc motor.
Fig. 4.55 
Commutation of a dc motor fed from a rectifier

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The commutation of a dc motor is deteriorated by the ripple of the armature 
current in the following ways:
i. Peak/average value of current is more. The increased peak value has to 
be actually commutated and causes wear and tear at the brushes if the 
number of pulses occurring per brush is more than one in number.
ii. The magnitude of armature current immediately after commutation is 
rather indefinite due to slope of the current. This also results in indefinite 
value of time when the commutation bar leaves the brush.
iii. The ripples produce eddy currents and associated fluxes in the interpoles. 
These additional fluxes react with the flux produced by average current. 
There is a phase shift in the interpoles flux. This modified flux is not in 
a position to compensate the reactance voltage.
iv. The armature current ripple increases the reactance voltage of the coil 
undergoing commutation.
v. Discontinuous conduction affects the commutation. When there is dis­
continuous conduction the output voltage of the converter is greater than 
what would occur with continuous conduction at the same firing angle. 
This deteriorates commutation by increasing bar to bar voltage and peak/ 
average current ratio.
The machine is more vulnerable to sparking if the peak/average current ratio is 
more. The commutation capability of the motor is measured in terms of the width 
of the blackband. The narrower the band, greater the possibility of sparking at the 
brushes. This band is determined by a test in which the current in the interpole 
winding is bucked and boosted from its operating point until sparking occurs. The 
limits of this current represent blackband and can be represented as per unit of 
rated current. The wider this band, more satisfactory the commutation. The band 
width decreases when the armature has increased ripple and speed is high.
Satisfactory commutation can be achieved in a dc motor by the following mod­
ifications:
i. The peak value of the armature current can be controlled by increasing 
the pulse number of the converter. Additional inductance in the armature 
circuit helps improve the commutation. The inductance may be designed 
such that it contributes at lower currents where the ripple is high. It gets 
saturated at high currents where the ripple is less. The machine itself can 
be designed so that its armature has inherently large inductance. This is 
done by making the field weak, armature large and air gap small.
ii. The commutating capability of the motor can be improved by laminat­
ing the frame as well as the interpole body. These reduce the effective 
phase shift in the interpole flux due to eddy fluxes caused by the ripple 
content. With this type of motor a converter with less number of pulses 
can also be used.
iii. Discontinuous conduction is also reduced to a minimum by the additional 
inductance. The choice of inductance is made to avoid discontinuous 
conduction rather than smooth the output ripple.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Speed-Torque Characteristic A dc motor which is fed from a converter shows a 
very poor speed regulation compared to the operation on a normal dc supply. This 
is more pronounced at low speeds and low torques. The average current is repre­
sentative of the torque developed. As has already been explained, with converter 
supplies average current is small for a given armature heating. Discontinuous con­
duction affects speed regulation. This can be improved by means of a FWD or a 
semi converter.
Line Side Performance 
The converter operation affects the line performance also. 
As the converter firing angle is retarded to get low speeds the power factor be­
comes poor. This is because of the reactive power requirement of the converter 
and also the harmonic content of the line current. The line power factor can be 
improved by use of semi converters and converters with FWD. An inductance on 
the load side also improves the harmonic content on the line side. The drive is not 
capable of regeneration.
4.3.4 Additional Losses and Low Speed Operation
The distorted armature current of the d.c. motor fed from phase controlled con­
verter causes additional losses in the armature conductors. These losses are due to 
the increased RMS value of the armature current and also the possible skin effect 
of the armature conductors. The skin effect causes an increase in the effective 
resistance of the armature. The additional losses may be present in the interpole 
winding and compensating winding. The interpoles may also have additional iron 
losses.
However, the increase in the losses is significant only in respect of tempera­
ture rise but not efficiency. The increase in temperature rise may lead to a derat­
ing of the motor. The increase in the firing angle of the converter increases the 
ripple factor of current waveform. So, as the value of a increases these additional 
losses may be more and resulting derating is also more. Further the motor speed 
decreases as a increases. At low speeds the natural ventilation is poor. If there is 
no provision for additional ventilation, this will also cause a further derating of the 
motor. Therefore a d.c. motor operating on phase controlled converters cannot be 
fully loaded, particularly at low speeds.
4.3.5 
Phase Controlled Converter Fed DC Drives
A detailed discussion has been given how the converter operation affects the 
performance. There are several types of converters which can be used for 
feeding dc motors. These were described in Chapter 3 in detail. To arrive at 
a suitable converter-motor system an evaluation of the performance of a dc 
motor operating on different types of converter may be required. A systematic 
description of these drives is given below. The parameters of importance are 
as follows:
i. on the motor side:
(a) 
average current of the motor representative of torque developed
(b) 
rms value of the current which represents the motor heating and 
losses

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(c) 
peak value of current which represents commutating capability of 
the motor
(d) 
nature of current whether continuous or discontinuous
(e) 
torque-speed characteristic, associated speed regulation, etc 
ii. on the line side:
(a) 
fundamental displacement factor
(b) 
harmonic factor
(c) 
total power factor of the system.
Single Phase Drives 
In these drives phase controlled converters operating from 
a single phase are used to drive the motor. These are used for low and medium 
power applications. These have inherently poor speed regulation with open loop 
control. This can be improved with closed loop operation.
These drives can be half wave or full wave drives. A full wave drive can be 
supplied from a fully controlled or half controlled converter. The former is capa­
ble of two quadrant operation whereas only one quadrant operation is possible 
with the latter, as it contains diodes in several positions. A dual converter can be 
obtained by a connection of two two-quadrant converters. Table 1 summarises 
these drives.
Single Phase Separately Excited dc Motor Drives 
The circuit arrangement of 
a separately existed dc motor drive fed from a single phase controlled con­
verter is shown in Fig. 4.56. The block 1 can be any one of the single phase 
converters.
Half Wave Drives 
The dc motor is supplied from a single phase half wave circuit 
(Fig. 4.56(a)). Low cost and simplicity are the advantages of this drive. This can 
provide only one quadrant operation. Regeneration is not possible. The conduc­
tion angle of the thyristor is very small, resulting in a very low average current. 
The torque developed is very small resulting in a loss of torque at the rated rms 
current. The rms to average current ratio is also more. The motor current is always 
discontinuous. The ripple frequency is equal to supply frequency. The current and 
voltage wave forms are shown in Fig. 4.57.
The freewheeling diode across the load improves the performance. The speed 
regulation is very poor. At low speeds the motor receives power in pulses and the 
motor may chug when the load is high. The speed oscillation is quite high. The 
supply transformer has premagnetisation due to dc component of the load current. 
The application of this drive is limited to low powers.
Full Wave Drives The dc motor is supplied by a full wave converter. A full wave 
drive using a fully controlled converter is shown in Fig. 4.56(b). The wave forms 
of voltage and current in the load are shown in Fig. 4.58. Having thyristors in all 
positions, the firing of the thyristors allows negative average voltages, making the 
power flow from load to the supply. The motor can be braked effectively using 
regenerative braking. This can be made possible at constant current. As the load 
current flows both during positive and negative half cycles, the average value of

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Fig. 4.56 
Summary of single phase drives using separately excited motor
Fig. 4.57 
Half wave drive and its voltage and current waveforms
U<:*>

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
h
(a) Rectilication
Fig. 4.58(a) 
Single phase full wave drive in motoring mode
the current is more than that in the half wave drive. The torque capability increases 
for a given armature heating. The ratios of peak to average and rms to average are 
better here. The speed oscillation is less. The speed regulation improves because 
of increased conduction of current in the load. The number of pulses are two and 
pulse frequency in the load is 2f  The ripple amplitude is smaller in this case. The 
speed oscillations are decreased. The discontinuous conduction is present and the 
wave forms for this case are shown in Fig. 4.59. This affects the speed regulation. 
An additional inductance in the armature improves the performance. It reduces 
the ripple content, reduces the possibility of discontinuous conduction, improves 
speed regulation, etc. This inductance also affects the performance of the drive 
on the line side. The harmonic content of the line current is more at lower values 
of inductance because of possible discontinuous load current. As the inductance 
increases the harmonic factor decreases. The peak value of current decreases with 
additional inductance. This improves the commutating capability. The losses and 
heating of the motor are less as the rms value of current decreases. The torque 
capability of the motor increases. As has already been stated the motor may be 
designed with a high value of armature inductance. Otherwise extra inductance

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Fig. 4.58(b) 
Full wave single phase drive during regeneration
Fig. 4-59 
Voltage and current waveforms in discontinuous mode
occupies space. Inductance has no effect on the fundamental displacement fac­
tor. There can be slight improvement in the power factor as the harmonic fac­
tor is affected by this inductance. The serious drawback with a fully controlled 
converter is poor power factor.
A full wave drive fed from a semi converter is depicted in Fig. 4.56(c). The 
wave forms of voltage and current are shown in Fig, 4.60. A reference to Fig. 4.60

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
shows that the supply current is in pulses and flows for (n -  a) This is due to the 
natural freewheeling provided by the diodes to maintain the load current. The sup­
ply does not provide current during freewheeling. This has the distinct advantage, 
compared to a fully controlled drive, that the fundamental displacement factor 
of the line current is better. However, as the speed decreases, i.e., as the firing 
angle is delayed, the fundamental displacement factor decreases. A semi con­
verter drive shows an increased harmonic content at low speeds. This is again 
due to the dependence of the width of the current pulse on firing angle. The peak
L
(a) Continuous conduction
Fig. 4.60 
Voltage and current waveforms of a semiconverter circuit

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
value is less due to freewheeling. This improves the commutating capability of the 
motor, particularly at low speeds and light loads. The rms current is also less in a 
semi converter, which reduces motor heating compared to a fully controlled one. 
The heating of the motor is 44% less. Discontinuous conduction is present at light 
loads and low speeds and this causes a speed regulation poorer than the full con­
verter. The freewheeling does not allow negative excursions of the load voltage 
and therefore negative average voltage is not possible. Hence, a semi converter 
is used with one quadrant drive where no regeneration is required. The advan­
tages of improved power factor, better commutating capability and low cost due 
to diodes makes a semi converter drive applicable to all cases where regeneration 
is not required.
The saving of reactive power and hence improvement in the fundamental dis­
placement factor can be achieved by a full converter with a freewheeling diode. 
The schematic diagram of the converter feeding a dc motor is shown in Fig. 
4.56(c). The diode provides an alternative path for the load current and provides 
the same effects as in a semi converter. The freewheeling diode is effective in the 
complete speed range. The diode does not allow negative voltages of the load and 
hence there is no regeneration.
It is possible to have the regeneration mode besides the advantages mentioned 
above during rectification by having thyristors with optional freewheeling. Two 
thyristors (72, 74 for symmetrical connection; 73, 74 for unsymmetrical connec­
tion) of a fully controlled converter are fired at a = 0 so that they act as diodes to 
provide freewheeling during rectification (Fig. 4.61). During inversion they are 
operated as normal thyristors. The freewheeling diode is also replaced by a thyris­
tor which is fired at a = 0 when freewheeling is required and is blocked when it is 
not required. This optional freewheeling provides all the advantages of one quad­
rant converters as well as making inversion possible. However it may be noted that 
these advantages are not present during inversion.
Single Phase dc Series Motor Drives 
In the series motor the field is connected in 
series with the armature. The field current is the same as the armature current. The 
schematic of a series motor fed from a phase controlled converter is shown in Fig. 
4.62. Series motors are capable of high starting torque and constant power opera­
tion at all speeds. They are used in traction, cranes, hoists, etc. The waveforms of 
voltage and current of a series motor fed from a thyristor converter are shown in 
Fig. 4.63. Both continuous and discontinuous conduction are considered.
It is worth noting the differences in the operation of series motors and separately 
excited motors while operating on power converters. In a separately excited motor 
there is always a back emf present which actually accelerates the decay of arma­
ture current, thereby making discontinuous conduction occur, particularly at low 
currents. Discontinuous conduction occurs over a wide range of operating condi­
tions, on the other hand, in series motors; the back emf being proportional to 7a, 
does not contribute to discontinuous conduction very much. As the motor current

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(a) 
Semi controlled bridge
z
0-------------<
-------------<
f ri z 
►
»----- O
\ \ t2
i
0
z\ t4 Z
______ i
'
à__
--------------w----- w
(b) 
Optional freewheeling of T2 
T3 to have semi controlled 
characteristic as well as in 
version______ a__
z
0-------------1
*
z
►
W 
w 
>
iz \ t4 
1
-------------(*-----0
T4 and T3 are having 
optional freewheeling
Semi converter with FWD 
j 5 has optional freewheeling
Fig. 4.61 
Optional freewheeling in semi converters and converters with FWD
decreases it tends to become continuous, unlike in the case of a separately excited 
motor. Therefore the current of a series motor is continuous over a wide range of 
speeds. It may become discontinuous at high speeds and low currents of the motor. 
In this mode the motor terminal voltage is the same as back emf due to residual 
magnetism. The ratios of peak/average and rms/average currents of a series motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Fig. 4.62 
Series motor operating on full and converters
are smaller than those of a separately 
excited motor.
Another point of difference, 
which is also a reason for better 
performance of a series motor com­
pared to a separately excited one, is 
the smoothing effect provided by 
field inductance, which effectively 
increases the circuit inductance. If 
a further improvement is required in 
the performance, a small inductance 
is sufficient.
A comparison of series motor 
operation on full and semi converters 
shows that the current is continuous 
in almost the entire region of opera­
tion when operating on semi convert­
ers. The addition of a small induc­
tance makes the current continuous 
over the complete region. This can 
be seen also when the motor oper­
ates on a converter with FWD. The 
improvement in the performance can 
also be observed with respect to p.f., 
and ratios of peak to average and rms
to average currents. This is due to the free wheeling of the current through the 
diodes of a semi converter or through the FWD of the converter with FWD.
A series motor has a torque-speed characteristic making it suitable for constant 
power operation. However, when it is fed from a converter it does not exhibit con­
stant power operation at all speeds for a given firing angle. To achieve constant 
power at all speeds, adjustment of firing angle is required. A comparison of 
constant power operation of a series motor operating on full and semi converters
Fig. 4.63(a) 
Voltage and current waveforms 
of full converter for continuous 
and discontinuous operation

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
t
(i) 
Continuous conduction 
(ii) 
Discontinuous conduction
Fig. 4.63(b) 
Voltage and current waveforms of semi converter feeding a dc motor
show that it has better operation on semi converters with respect to power factor, 
discontinuous conduction, etc. Similar improvement in performance is possible 
using a full converter with a freewheeling diode.
Three-Phase Drives 
Single phase drives discussed in the previous section are em­
ployed for low and medium powers. When the power of the drive is very large the 
three-phase converter is preferred for supplying the load. As has been described 
in Chapter 3, increase in the number of pulses of the output voltage improves 
the performance. A three-phase converter can be used to give three or six pulses 
in the output. The output voltage has less ripple when the number of pulses in­
crease. Therefore three-phase converters produce an output voltage with reduced 
harmonic content. This has an effect on the peak/average and rms/average ratios 
which effectively decrease. The filtering requirements are therefore less in the 
output circuit. The speed regulation of the drive improves and speed oscillations 
of the motor are small. In the light of the above, the motor performance will also 
be better in three-phase drives.
Three-phase drives can also be classified as
i. half wave drives
ii. full wave drives
iii. reversible drives
These are listed in Table 2.
Three-Phase Half Wave Drive 
A simple three-phase mp converter drive is shown 
in Fig. 4.64(a). The output ripple has a frequency of 3f. This is suitable for two 
quadrant operation. Among the three-phase drives this has higher peak/average 
and rms/average current ratios. These result in losses of motor and also affect the 
commutation capability of the motor. They are troublesome, particularly at low 
speeds, as the % ripple at low speeds is more. The self ventilation of the motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
(a) Three pulse converter 
feeding a d.c. motor 
(two quadrant drive)
(b) Three pulse converter with 
FWD feeding a d.c. motor 
(one quadrant drive)
(c) 3-Phase, 6-pulse 
bridge converter 
feeding a d.c. motor 
(two quadrant drive)
Half controlled 3-phase 
bridge converter
;
Io
Lr
3-Phase bridge converter 
with FWD
(d) One quadrant converter
Dual converter feeding 
Reversing contactors in
a d.c. motor 
the armature circuit
(e) Four quadrant converter
Fig. 4.64 
Summary of three-phase drives
also decreases. This may necessitate forced ventilation at low speeds. Further the 
dc component of the load current premagnetises the transformer core and a big 
transformer is required. To avoid this dc magnetisation, special transformer wind­
ing connections may be required.
The performance of the motor may be improved by an additional inductance 
in the load circuit or by suitably modifying the dc motor, as has already been

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
discussed, i.e., designing the motor with an inherently large armature induc­
tance, laminating the yoke and interpoles. The motor in such a case would have 
an improved performance with respect to discontinuous conduction, commutat­
ing capability, dynamic response, torque capability for a given heating, etc. The 
regenerative braking is possible. However, the power factor is poor and the quality 
of p.f. is affected by the delay angle and harmonic content.
The drive performance can also be improved by connecting a freewheeling 
diode across the supply. The connections are shown in Fig. 4.64(b). This drive 
is preferred to the above if no regeneration is required. The freewheeling diode 
effectively improves the line power factor, besides providing the beneficial effects 
of decreasing the ratios of peak/average and rms/average currents of the load by 
providing a kind of smoothening of the load voltage. The armature heating is 
therefore less. The amount of inductance required in the load for filtering the har­
monics is less. The load current is less prone to discontinuous conduction.
Full Wave Drive 
A three-phase full wave drive may be obtained by feeding a dc 
motor from a six pulse bridge converter or a six pulse converter with interphase 
transformer. The latter is used for large load currents. These are depicted in 
Fig. 4.64(c).
The increase of the pulses in the load is advantageous, as it effectively decreases 
the ratios of peak/average and rms/average currents. This improves the perfor­
mance of the motor, and the filtering requirements are less. The current is continu­
ous in almost all the operating points because of the faster rate of switching of 
the thyristors. The line side performance also improves because of less harmonic 
content in the line current. A slight improvement in the total power factor may be 
there. These drives have better speed regulation than single phase drives. A full 
converter allows negative average voltage at the load terminals thereby making 
regeneration possible.
To improve the line power factor, mainly the fundamental displacement factor, 
a semi converter bridge circuit is used (Fig. 4.64(d)). Half the number of thyris­
tors are replaced by diodes. These provide natural freewheeling for firing angles 
greater than 30°; up to firing angle = 30° the converter output has six pulses. 
Because of a reduction in the output pulses, the output ripple increases. The peak 
to peak value of current is more than that in the six pulse case. But the semi con­
verter is simple, reliable and less costly. There is a possibility of discontinuous 
conduction at light loads due to increased ripple, particularly at large firing angles. 
The fundamental displacement factor is better than that of a full converter. This 
improvement is slightly augmented by the harmonic content on the line side. The 
effect in the improvement in the total p.f. is not very much. The regeneration is not 
possible as the diodes do not allow negative voltage.
The semi converter bridge has only three pulses in the larger portion of the 
operating range. Even though this converter has better performance with regard 
to p.f. the peak to peak current increases and this is 3.11 times that of a six pulse 
converter(Fig. 4.65). The motor experiences more heating and the commutation 
tends to be sparky for a given torque.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
k k k
+
/A
'B
'c
-> — t
til
/A
Fundamental 
a = 60°
v — 'Rectification
Fig. 4.65(a) 
Voltage and current waveforms of a fully controlled three phase bridge 
feeding a dc motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 4.65(b) 
Voltage and current waveforms of three phase bridge with FWD feeding 
a dc motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
As the converter is simple, reliable and less costly, it seems to be worthwhile 
considering the modification of the motor design or the ways of reducing the peak 
to peak current. An inductance in the armature circuit is effective in reducing 
peak to peak current, as it smoothens the ripple content of armature current. The 
additional inductance is bulky, increases the cost, occupies space and results in 
additional losses.
Because of space considerations, it is some times imperative to dispense with 
additional inductance. In such case the motor itself is modified in its design. 
(These modifications have already been indicated). These are laminating the 
yoke, interpoles, increasing the number of commutator segments and designing 
the armature with sufficiently large inductance. The laminated structures improve 
dynamic response also.
One quadrant operation can also be obtained by a freewheeling diode across 
the load. This also provides the advantages of a semi converter, but in a limited 
range of firing angles. This is because the diode participates in conduction only 
after a = 60°. Up to this angle the advantages of freewheeling are not there. 
Therefore up to a = 60° it is six pulse converter. This circuit must be used with 
caution.
A Comparison of Three-Phase and One-Phase Drives 
The above discussions show 
that three phase drives have better operation compared to one phase drives. The 
drive motor has better commutating capability, torque capability, etc. Filtering 
requirements are less, speed regulation is better and line harmonics are reduced. 
A short comparison of three phase and single phase drive can be summarised as 
follows:
i. Three phase drives are used for large power ratings.
ii. The increased pulse frequency of the output ripple reduces the filter 
requirements as the peak to peak ripple content decreases. The amount 
of inductance required for smoothing is also less.
iii. Peak/average and rms/average current ratios in the load are smaller in 
three-phase drives. This tends to improve the performance of the drive 
motor. The outlay of smoothing inductance is also less. The heating of 
the motor for a given torque decreases compared to single phase drives.
iv. The commutating capability of three-phase drives is better than that of 
one phase drives. This is because three-phase drives are less prone to 
discontinuous conduction.
v. The line power factor is poorer in a full converter as the firing angle 
is delayed. This is because of a deterioration in the fundamental dis­
placement factor as well as harmonic factor of the line current. Semi 
converters and converters with FWD improve the fundamental displace­
ment factor. This improvement is possible in three phase drives only in 
a certain range of firing angles. On the other hand single phase drives 
offer this improvement in the complete range of firing angles. Also, in 
three phase drives when freewheeling comes into existence the number

The McGrawHill Companies
Electric Drives
of pulses reduces to three and the performance is poorer than full con­
verter. Therefore the performance improvement in single phase drives is 
considerable compared to three phase drives.
4.3.6 
Methods to Improve the Power Factor
We have seen that a phase controlled converter requires reactive power for control 
and commutation. The harmonics do not contribute to the active power loading 
but they contribute to the reactive loading of the line. Because of these the line 
power factor is poor. A semi converter has been found to improve the reactive 
power requirement which improves the line power factor. But it has a disadvan­
tage that it cannot be used if regenerative braking is required. Optional freewheel­
ing is a solution for this, but the control system becomes complex.
Several forced commutation methods are available to improve the performance 
of dc motors operating on phase controlled converters. These can be broadly 
divided into single firing and multiple firing schemes. In single firing schemes a 
thyristor is triggered once every half cycle and it is turned off using forced com­
mutation. This means that the angle of quenching of the thyristor is also varied. 
These single firing schemes are extinction angle control (EAC) and symmetri­
cal angle control (SAC) (Fig. 4.66). In normal phase angle control using natural
Bridge uses force commutation
/? Angle of extinction varied
Fig. 4.66 
Principle of EAC voltage and current waveforms

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
commutation, the turn off of the thyristor takes place naturally. The drive perfor­
mance has been discussed in detail. In EAC a thyristor is fired at its natural firing 
instant and its quenching angle /? is varied. The commutation of the thyristor is 
achieved by one of the forced commutation methods. In the symmetrical angle 
control, if a is the firing angle, the angle of quenching /?= 180 -  a. Thus both a 
and /? are varied.
The waveforms of voltage and current are shown in Fig. 4.67 for all the cases. 
PAC waveforms are also included for comparison. The waveforms of PAC show 
deteriorating fundamental displacement factor as a is varied. In the EAC the angle 
of quenching is varied to vary the applied voltage to the motor. Fig. 4.66 shows 
that the fundamental of the input current pulse leads the applied voltage. Besides 
improving the power factor, EAC provides the effects of a leading power factor. In 
SAC both angle of firing as well as quenching are varied such that a symmetrical 
current pulse is obtained. The width of the current pulse changes with the con­
trol. The fundamental of this current pulse changes in amplitude but is fixed with 
respect to the voltage wave as shown in Fig. 4.67. The fundamental displacement 
factor is always unity and is independent of a. This improves the power factor.
In all the single firing schemes there is a possibility of the load current becom­
ing discontinuous. This happens particularly at light loads and when the armature 
inductance is low. Discontinuous conduction affects both the static and dynamic 
behaviour of the motor and the drive performance is poor. The peak armature cur­
rents cannot be controlled and hence commutating capability of the motor gets 
impaired. Harmonic losses are more and the motor heating limits the torque capa­
bility of the motor. The ripple content causes torque pulsations. It also makes the 
armature current discontinuous. The peak/average and rms/average current ratios 
can be reduced by a proper additional inductance in the armature circuit. This
SAC
Fig. 4.67 
Principle of SAC voltage and current waveforms

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
adds to the bulk of the system, makes the transient response sluggish and intro­
duces additional losses.
In the multiple firing schemes a thyristor is triggered ON and OFF several times 
in a half cycle. Obviously the schemes employ forced commutation. These are 
again current limit control (CLC) and the time ratio control (TRC) (Fig. 4.68). In 
the former the converter thyristors are turned ON and OFF such that the motor cur­
rent varies between two limits. When the motor current reaches the upper limit the 
thyristor is turned off. The motor current freewheels and decays. When it decays 
to the lower limit the thyristor is again fired. The waveforms of voltage and cur­
rent are shown in Fig. 4.69. The difference between the two limits determines the 
switching frequency and ripple content in the armature current. If the difference
Fig. 4.68 
Multiple firing scheme to improve powerfactor
Fig. 4.69 
Current limit control

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
is small the ripple content is also small, but the switching frequency is large. This 
introduces switching losses. A compromise has to be made. The peak current can 
be controlled thereby improving the commutating capability of the motor. The 
discontinuous conduction can be eliminated. From the figure it is clear that the 
fundamental displacement factor is unity. As the harmonic factor is also improved 
there is a net improvement in the power factor. The inductance in the load circuit 
for smoothing purposes is rather small and this improves the dynamic response.
In the time ratio control the TQN and TQFF of the thyristor are of given value. 
These are variable for variation in the output voltage. During TQN the voltage is 
applied to the motor and the motor current increases. During T(WF the motor is 
switched off and the current decays. The waveforms are shown in Fig. 4.70. The 
switching frequency is predetermined. The ripple content is reduced by the large 
number of switchings per cycle. This increases switching losses. The peak cur­
rent is not under control. There is possibility of discontinuous conduction. The 
ripple content may be more. The performance of the motor is slightly inferior 
compared to CLC, but it is improved in comparison with single firing schemes. In 
this scheme also, the fundamental displacement factor is unity. The improvement 
in the total power factor depends on harmonic content.
The performance of a dc drive on all these schemes is compared in Table 4.1.
4.3.7 
Chopper Fed dc Drives
The variable voltage to the armature of a dc motor for speed control can be obtained 
from a dc chopper which is a single stage dc to dc conversion device. The voltage 
variation at the load terminals can be obtained by using either current limit control 
or time ratio control. In the former, as has already been discussed, the chopper is 
controlled such that the load current has a variation between two limits. When the 
current reaches the upper limit the chopper is turned off to disconnect the motor 
from the supply. The load current freewheels through freewheeling diode and 
decays. When it falls to the lower limit the chopper is turned on, connecting the 
motor to the supply. An average current is always maintained. When the chop­
per is controlled by TRC the ratio of T0 /TQ of the chopper is changed. In this

Table 4.1 
Comparison of schemes for power factor improvement
1
Basis o f comparison
Significance
Single firing schemes
Multiple firing schemes
1. 
Torque-speed characteristic
Signifies the range 
of speed control, 
constant torque 
or constant power 
operation over the 
range.
In all the schemes the 
curves are similar and 
are drooping in nature. 
Discontinuous current 
at several control angles 
makes the range of speed 
control limited.
The torque-speed characteristics of TRC scheme are 
similar to those of single firing schemes with a differ­
ence that the possibility of discontinuous conduction 
is reduced. Consequently the range of speed control 
increases. In CLC the torque-speed characteristic is 
flat at lower limits of armature current and thus the 
drive has a wide range of speed control at constant 
torque. In series motors as the limit of current rises 
increasing the average motor current range of speed 
control becomes small due to saturation.
2. 
Fundamental displacement 
factor.
Influences the total 
power factor.
PAC has a very poor dis­
placement factor. EAC has 
a leading factor and SAC 
has unity displacement 
factor.
TRC and CLC have almost unity displacement factor.
3. 
Power factor
Decides the kVA 
demand from the 
supply. A drive is 
designed to have a 
good power factor.
PAC has poor power factor 
whereas EAC and SAC 
have better power factors. 
The power factor of all 
schemes improves with 
speed and power output.
TRC and CLC provide essentially the same p.f. TRC 
has a better p.f. than CLC at low power output.
The McGraw-Hill Companies

4. 
Harmonic content or ripple
Responsible for
PAC has little harmonic
content
pulsating torques 
and harmonic 
losses. These 
increase the RMS 
value of current and 
cause additional 
heating of the 
motor.
distortion. In general 
harmonic distortion is 
very small in single firing 
schemes. Lower order 
harmonics predominate. 
Because of the symmetry 
of waveform even harmon­
ics are not present.
5. 
Peak armature current
Determines the 
commutating capa­
bility of the drive.
Peak armature current can­
not be controlled in these 
schemes. The commutat­
ing capability is impaired. 
The peak armature current 
is essentially the same in 
all schemes.
6. 
Discontinuous conduction
Affects the dynamic 
and static behaviour 
of the motor.
These exhibit discontinu­
ous conduction. Continu­
ous conduction can be 
achieved by an additional 
inductance in the motor 
circuit which adds to 
the bulk of the system, 
increases losses and 
imparts sluggish transient 
behaviour.

These have more harmonic distortion. Both lower and 
higher order harmonics are present. Higher order har­
monics can be filtered, even harmonics are not present 
in this case also.
In CLC peak armature current is controlled and hence 
the motor has good commutation capability. TRC has 
a peak current which is smaller than the single firing 
schemes. Its peak current cannot also be controlled. 
Between CLC and TRC, CLC is better as far as peak 
current and associated commutation capability is 
concerned.
The discontinuous conduction can be reduced to a 
minimum by proper control in both CLC and TRC. 
The drives employing these schemes have a wide 
range of speed control with very good dynamic and 
static behaviour.
The McGraw-Hill Companies

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
case the operation is at fixed frequency if (TON + TOFF) is kept constant. T0N only 
is varied to obtain voltage control. The operation will be at variable frequency 
with T kept constant and (roN + T ) varied. But owing to several advantages of 
simplicity, a fixed frequency TRC is normally used. Chopper circuits are used to 
control both separately excited and series motors.
Chopper circuits have several advantages over phase controlled converters:
i. Ripple content in the output is small. Peak/average and rms/average cur­
rent ratios are small. This improves the commutation and decreases the 
harmonic heating of the motor. The pulsating torques are also less.
ii. The chopper is supplied from a constant dc voltage using batteries. 
The problem of power factor does not occur at all. The conventional 
phase control method suffers from a poorer power factor as the angle 
is delayed. This means that the current drawn by the chopper is smaller 
than in a ac/dc phase controlled converter.
iii. The circuit is simpe and can be modified to provide regeneration.
iv. The control circuit is simple.
However, because of the forced commutation employed, the chopper may be 
costlier than a phase controlled converter.
Chopper Drives Using TRC
Separately Excited DC Motor
A separately excited dc motor fed from a dc chopper employing TRC strategy 
is shown in Fig. 4.71. The variation of time ratio at constant chopper frequency 
provides a variable voltage. The load current can be determined using the relevant 
equations. During ON period the current in the load grows and in the OFF period
the current decays. The cur­
rent waveform is shown in Fig. 
4.72. Due to back emf pres­
ent in the circuit the variation 
of currents is almost linear. A 
detailed study of the drive on 
TRC strategy shows that the 
motor has the following fea­
tures:
A combination of constant frequency and variable TRC strategies gives a bet­
ter performance. The question of power factor does not occur when the chopper is
A ax 
___
Aiin
"* 
A n  
*
T1 off
MT
Fig. 4.71 
Separately excited DCM fed from chopper
Fig. 4.72 
Voltage and current waveforms for timing ratio control (continuous 
conduction)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
fed from a constant voltage source such as batteries. Sometimes the dc voltage is 
obtained from a diode rectifier. In this case the power factor on the ac side is better 
than that in phase control. But regeneration is not possible in this case, whereas it 
is possible when fed from batteries.
At very low frequencies of operation and smaller time ratios the load current 
may become discontinuous. The output ripple depends on TR. At low currents 
the ripple becomes responsible for discontinuous operation. At very light loads if 
the average current is smaller than 1/2 (peak to peak) of the ripple amplitude, the 
load current becomes discontinuous, as shown in Fig. 4.73. Discontinuous con­
duction occurs if the freewheeling period is larger. In other words, ON time is 
less than a critical value. As far as the discontinuous conduction is concerned, 
choppers are similar to ac/dc converters. The peak current cannot be controlled. 
The limits between which the current varies depends upon TR. The peak current 
and discontinuous conduction affect the commutation capability of the motor 
and its speed control range. However the operation of the motor on chopper is 
better than that on ac/dc converters. In the case of a dc motor fed from a chopper 
the discontinuous conduction can be eliminated by increasing chopper frequency 
or by adding extra inductance in the armature circuit. The amount of inductance 
is rather small.
Fig. 4.73 
Voltage and current waveforms for time ratio control
The torque-speed characteristic is drooping in nature. The speed regulation of 
the motor is better with chopper control than with the phase angle control. The 
speed-torque characteristic is essentially the same at all time ratios, (Fig. 4.74).
The ratios of peak/average and rms/average current depend upon TR and 
hence speed. Therefore the chopper control shows improved performance at high 
speed. The performance can be improved by an inductance in the armature circuit. 
The peak current can be significantly reduced so that the commutating capabil­
ity increases. The heating of the motor will be less. Multi quadrant operation is 
possible.
Series Motor Series motors produce high starting torque. They are capable of 
constant power operation at all speeds. They are therefore suitable for traction 
purposes. Choppers are used to control these motors. Both the control strategies 
of TRC and CLC are used. The schematic of a series motor fed from a chopper 
operating with fixed frequency variable TR is shown in Fig. 4.75.
As in the case of separately excited dc motor, the current drawn by the motor 
is smaller than that of PAC. When a battery is used to supply the chopper, regen­
eration is possible and power factor does not pose a problem. However when the

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 4-74 
Speed-torque curves of a dc motor fed from a chopper having TRC
L
dc voltage is provided by means of diode rectifier, regeneration is not possible and 
the power factor is better than that of a phase controlled rectifier.
The ratios of peak/average and rms/average are functions of the time ratio. As 
compared to phase controlled converters, these are considerably smaller in chop­
per control. Chopper control improves the performance, the improvement being 
more at high chopping frequencies.
The discontinuous conduction takes place at very small current ratios. As has 
already been discussed previously, the series motor is less prone to discontinu­
ous conduction than a separately excited motor. This is because the back emf in 
a series motor is a function of armature current. Also the speed control range of 
a chopper fed motor is better than that of the motor fed from a phase controlled 
rectifier. The discontinuous conduction can be eliminated by means of a proper 
armature inductance. The ripple content gets reduced, which decreases the pos­
sibility of discontinuous conduction. High chopper frequency helps in eliminating 
the discontinuous conduction in the load at small time ratios.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Typical torque-speed characteristics of a series motor for different time ratios 
are shown in Fig. 4.76. The speed control range is affected only at small time 
ratios. As the time ratio increases the characteristic moves towards the left and the 
range of speed control also increases.
Fig. 4.76 
Speed-torque curves of 0 chopper fed dc series motor
The armature current pulsations may cause armature heating. However, this is 
smaller compared to the operation of motors with phase control.
As the speed increases the average current drawn decreases. A typical current 
versus speed characteristic is shown in Fig. 4.77. This can be expected in a series 
motor as the field current is the same as the armature current. At small time ratios 
and low armature current there is a possibility for discontinuous conduction. So 
high speeds may not be possible at small time ratios, as is evident from Fig. 4.76.
Fig. 4.77(a) 
Typical current vs speed characteristics of a series motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Speed
Fig. 4.77(b) 
Typical current vs speed characteristics of a series motor
Because of saturation very low speeds are not possible. As the time ratio increases 
the lower limit on the speed also increases. At smaller time ratios higher speeds 
are not possible and at larger time ratios lower speeds are not possible.
Regeneration is possible using a two quadrant chopper circuit. A stable series 
generator operation is possible using a chopper circuit.
The peak currents also depend upon the time ratio and affect the commutating 
capability. The commutating capability of a chopper fed motor is better than that 
of a motor fed from a phase controlled converter.
The above discussion shows that the motor performance is better at high chop­
per frequencies. But when the time of commutation becomes comparable to the 
ON time of the chopper, it introduces a voltage regulation. The switching losses 
are more.
A chopper fed series motor is preferable to a series motor fed from a phase 
controlled converter because of improved performance.
Chopper Drives with CLC The current limit control used with phase controlled rec­
tifiers can be used with choppers also. A schematic of a motor fed from a chopper 
employing CLC is shown in Fig. 4.78. CLC gives better performance compared 
to TRC. This is because of the defined current limits. The peak current is under 
control. The commutation capability increases. The ripple content is controlled 
by making the difference between the current limits small. The motor heating is 
less, but the chopper frequency increases, introducing losses and voltage regula­
tion due to commutation. The speed-torque characteristic is improved. At high 
currents the lowest speed is limited due to saturation. At lower currents there is 
the possibility of discontinuous conduction only if the ripple is high. By proper

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors 
^ ^ 9
Current limit control
Fig. 4.78 
Current limit control in chopper drives
control we can completely eliminate the discontinuous conduction. These advan­
tages are available with both series and separately excited dc motors.
4.3.8 
Reversible Drives
When speed control in both forward and reverse directions is required a revers­
ible drive is used. In several applications the speed reversal may be required very 
frequently in which case a regenerative reversal may be advantageous. The drive 
is very efficient as the kinetic energy of rotating parts is returned to the supply.
The conventional Ward Leonard control (Fig. 4.79) is extensively used where 
smooth speed control in either direction is required. The drive is capable of opera­
tion in all the four quadrants. A regenerative speed reversal is possible by adjusting 
the field of variable voltage generator. The acceleration and deceleration can be
Drive motor 
speed
Req. braking
Motoring
forward
Motoring
reverse
Req. braking
4*79 
Conventional Ward Leonard control of a dc motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
controlled at constant current. The kinetic energy of the rotating parts can be fed 
back to the supply. The major disadvantages of this system are (a) high initial cost, 
(b) large space requirement and (c) low efficiency of the drive.
Reversible Drives Using Phase Controlled Converters 
The advent of thyristor power 
converters has made static speed control of dc motors very popular. A two quad­
rant converter is used where regeneration is required. Due to unidirectional cur­
rent carrying property of thyristors the two quadrant operation is achieved by 
changing the polarity of voltage, retaining the direction of current. However for 
reversing the direction of rotation and achieving the speed control in the reverse 
direction, one should be able to reverse the direction of armature current with the 
voltage variation from a positive maximum to negative maximum. A static ward 
Leonard scheme is possible with the help of static power converters having the 
features of regenerative speed reversal.
The speed of a dc motor can be reversed by changing
i. the direction of armature current.
ii. the direction of field current.
The reversal of current can be achieved by using either mechanical contactors 
(change over switches) in conjunction with a two quadrant converter, or a dual 
converter, one feeding the motor in the forward direction and the other in the 
reverse direction. The possible ways of obtaining reversible drives are given in 
Fig. 4.80. Each of the drive system has its own merits and demerits.
The field current reversal to obtain a reversible drive is cheaper and simpler 
compared to armature current reversal. This is because the power level to be han­
dled by the converter is small. At weak field currents the commutation may pose 
problems. The time constant in the speed reversal is large for field current rever­
sal. Field forcing may be employed to make the current reversal fast. The response 
of the drive is faster with armature current reversal than with field current reversal, 
even when field forcing is employed. Also, when compared on the basis of control 
circuits, the field current reversal is complex.
The reversal of the current may be achieved by mechanical change over 
switches or dual converters. The use of contactors is economical whereas the use 
of dual converters is costly. When frequent reversals are needed, there will be 
wear and tear on the contactors. Therefore frequent maintenance and replacement 
of the contactors may be required. In such cases a dual converter may be preferred 
so that the maintenance problem is minimised. The change over must take place 
at zero crossing of the current when the switches are used. This gives a long life to 
the contactors. Using a current limit the speed reversal may be effected at constant 
current so that the drive has a very fast response. However a definite amount of 
time is required for the opening and closing of contactors.
When dual converters are employed, they may be operated in circulating 
current or circulating current-free mode. Current reversal is fast, particularly in 
circulating current mode. The changeover from motoring to generator is almost 
instantaneous in the case of the circulating current mode, as this mode makes one

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Reversible drive using contactors to reverse 
armature current.
Reversible drive using a dual converter in circulating 
current mode to reverse the armature current.
Reversible drive using a dual converter in non-circulating 
current mode in the armature.
Fig. 4.80 
A summary of reversible drives
converter operate as a rectifier and the other as an inverter. In the case of circulat­
ing current-free mode a time lag of 20 ms may be required for change over, once 
the zero is detected.
Reversible Drive Using Armature Current Reversal A schematic of a reversible drive 
using contactors to reverse the armature current for reversing the rotation is shown 
in Fig. 4.80. The contactors F] and F2 are provided for rotation in the forward

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
direction, whereas R , and R2 in the reverse direction. This arrangement reverses 
the current in the armature retaining the direction of current in the bridge thy­
ristors. During speed reversal, the load on the motor is removed. The following 
stages are involved in the reversal of the motor.
Stage 1: The motor is in the steady state in the forward direction. During this 
stage F and F2 are in the closed position. The armature current flows in the arma­
ture from A to B. At the instant of providing the signal to reverse, the motor is 
unloaded. A small no-load current flows through the motor.
Stage 2: The speed reversal takes place in 
this stage. The contactors must be operated 
at zero current, for an longer life. The firing 
angle is retarded such that the applied voltage 
is less than the induced voltage. This makes 
the armature current zero. The contactors F] 
and 7% are opened using a zero current detec­
tor. The switches R , and R2 are closed. Open­
ing and closing of switches introduce a kind 
of time lag. During this time the armature 
of the motor is not energised and the motor 
starts coasting. Speed may be assumed 10 be 
constant due to large inertia.
After closing the switches R ] and R2 the 
firing angle is advanced so that the armature 
current flows in the opposite direction, i.e. in 
the direction of induced voltage. The motor 
comes to rest. The firing angle is adjusted 
such that the retardation takes place at con­
stant current. The motor operates as a regenerative brake during this time. All 
the kinetic energy is returned to the mains by the time the motor approaches zero 
speed.
The firing angle is further advanced, the converter operates as a rectifier and 
the machine accelerates in the reverse direction. The motor attains rated speed in 
the reverse direction. Finally the current drops to no load value.
Stage 3: The load is reapplied to the motor. The motor takes a current to drive 
the load. There is a small drop in the speed.
Reversible Drive Using Dual Converter It is possible to reverse both voltage and 
current of the load using a dual converter. The current reversal is very fast in 
this case as the system is static without any mechanical parts. A dual converter 
can be operated in either circulating current mode or circulating current-free 
mode. In the former there will not be any discontinuous conduction and con­
trol becomes very simple. About 15 to 25% of full load current is allowed 
as circulating current. This is limited to a chosen value by means of reac­
tors. The change over from converter I to converter II is almost instantaneous. 
On the other hand, control of the converter in circulating current free mode,
i f
i f
i f
-0s*Sr
i f
oVSp
r 2
0
0p
i — 0
F2 c 
7
Ri
X jS R 
—0 •—
if -  I
Fig. 4.81 
Three-phase four quad­
rant drive using armature 
reversal

The McGrawHill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
ti«
&
T
W
- O
—
becomes complex. This is because change 
over from positive converter to negative must 
take place when the current is zero. The zero 
detection circuit should be effective during 
discontinuous conduction also.
A scheme for speed reversal using a dual 
converter is shown in Fig. 4.82. The follow­
ing stages are involved in the speed reversal.
The circulating current mode is assumed.
Stage 1: The motor is under steady state 
in the forward direction. The converter I 
operates as a rectifier and converter II as 
inverter. The motor is unloaded.
Stage 2: This is the speed reversal stage.
It is initiated with a command to reverse the 
speed. The firing angles are adjusted such 
that the converter voltage changes and the 
current is maintained at the limit. Converter
II takes over the conduction and the power goes to the supply, as the voltage 
induced and / are in the same direction. As the kinetic energy is supplied to the 
line the motor retards to zero speed.
Fig. 4.82(a) 
Three phase four quad­
rant drive using dual 
converter
Fig. 4.82(b) 
Dual converter in circulating current mode to feed a dc motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 4.82(c) 
Block diagram of speed control of dc motor
t2-  Speed reversal command,
t3 14-  Motor accelerates in 
the reverse direction
t2 t3-  Motor decelarates regeneratively 
to zero speed
t5-  Load is reapplied
Fig. 4.82(d) 
Variation of speed, current and voltage during speed reversal

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
From this point onwards converter II operates as a rectifier and converter I as 
inverter. As the firing angle is changed the motor accelerates in the reverse direc­
tion to rated speeds.
Stage 3: The load is reapplied to the motor in the reverse direction. The wave­
forms of current, voltage and speed are shown in Fig. 4.82.
Reversible Drive Using Field Reversal 
A reversible drive using field reversal can be 
realised as shown in Figs. 4.83 and 4.84. In Fig. 4.83, the armature is fed from 
a two quadrant converter with change over mechanical contactors in the field, 
which is also fed from a two quadrant converter.
5 s  zr
i
 
5  
Ï
-é ---------------- é -
Fig. 4.83 
Reversible drive using contactors in the field
In the process of reversal of speed, the field current is reversed very fast using 
field forcing. Speed reversal using the above scheme is achieved in the follow­
ing stages. Ft and F2 are for the forward direction and Rx and R, are for reverse 
direction.
Stage 1: The motor is under a steady state, running at the rated speed in the 
forward direction. The converter in the field circuit is fired at a firing angle such 
that about 30% of the maximum voltage is the rated voltage of the field and it is 
applied during running operation. For example af -  70° and Vf= Vfm cos 70 = 0.34 
Ffm, where V is the voltage of the converter at zero firing angle.
Stage 2: This stage starts with a command of speed reversal. The converter 
feeding the armature is controlled (firing angle retarded) such that the arma­
ture current is zero (applied voltage E). The firing angle of the converter feed­
ing the field circuit is retarded fully, taking the inverter limit into consider­
ation. At this instant the converter voltage reverses and its magnitude would be 
95% V .
fm
e.g., a is retarded to 170° and
Vf = Vfm cos 170° = -0.98 Vfm
This voltage is three times the rated voltage in the reverse direction. The field cur­
rent decreases very fast. The magnetic energy stored in the field is also fed back to 
the mains. During this time the motor back emf E also decreases.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
É  
-k  zr
o-------1»
7$ -k it
4------ •
Fig. 4.84 
Reversible drive using a dual converter in the field
When the field current reaches zero value, the contactors F and F2 are open 
and R , and R2 closed. The field current flows in the opposite direction and is built 
up by increased voltage (a = 10)(.95 Vfm). As the field current builds up in the neg­
ative direction the motor retards regeneratively under constant armature current. 
The firing angle of the converter is changed such that normal voltage is applied to 
the field.
The motor speed reaches zero and it accelerates to the rated speed under con­
stant armature current. At this point a load is applied to the motor.
When a dual converter is used in the field circuit for field reversal, it is prefer­
able to operate it in the circulating current-free mode because the field current 
must go to zero. When a dual converter is used, the stages of speed reversal are 
almost the same as above. Converter I allows the current for forward rotation 
and converter II for reverse rotation. The only difference is, when once the field 
current has become zero the pulses to converter I are blocked and pulses to con­
verter II are given. This requires a delay time similar to the one required by the 
contactors. Later, building up of current in the field and regenerative braking of 
the motor are similar.
These schemes have complex control circuitry. Even with field forcing, the 
response (time) of these schemes is slower than that of the schemes employing 
armature current reversal. The total speed reversal depends on the mechanical 
time constant of the drive.
Reversible Drives Using Choppers 
Using two quadrant choppers a reversible drive 
can be achieved, because this combination allows reversal of both current and 
voltage of the motor terminals. We can get a regenerative reversible drive. The 
motor can operate in all four quadrants. A scheme of a reversible drive using 
choppers is shown in Fig. 4.85(a). The modes of operation are illustrated in Fig. 
4.85(b). The two choppers are connected in antiparallel and supply the load. The 
motor operation in both the directions is achieved by operating the choppers 1 to 
4 to provide voltage and current of desired polarity.
Control of choppers S, S, with their diodes D( D2 provides operation in I and 
IV quadrants with positive current and Vi reversible by varying T0N/TQ 
ratio. 
S3 S4 with diodes D3 D4 comprise another chopper providing operation in II and

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
S1 S2 and D1 D2 are controlled 
VQ is variable /a flows from A to B
Va
J K
la
S3 S4 and D3 D4 are controlled 
Va is variable /a flows from B to A
Fig. 4-85(t>) 
Modes of operation of a four quadrant chopper (antiparallel connection 
of two quadrant choppers)
III quadrants with negative current and reversible V. Thus the load voltage and 
current can take up both possible directions. The circuit has similar behaviour of 
a dual convenor made up of two antiparallel connected fully controlled line com­
mutated converters.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The choppers can also be controlled as regenerative choppers (step up chop­
pers). To achieve this S2 is always ON and S3 OFF. The choppers S, and S4 are 
controlled to provide positive V and reversible load current. This corresponds 
to operation in I and II quadrants. The operation in III and IV quadrants can be 
accomplished by making S4 always ON, and S, OFF with control on Sj and S, 
to make V negative and Ia reversible. The modes of operation are shown in Fig. 
4.85(c).
+
A
Vd
V
J
r- S 4
s2
Va
A
S2 - always ON 
anc| $4 _ are controlled
S3 - always OFF 
ya is positive, la is reversible
Va
S4 - always ‘ON’ 
S3 and S 2 - are controlled
S-, - always ‘OFF’ 
V a is negative, la is reversible
Fig. 4.85(c) 
Modes of operation of four quadrant chopper (regenerative choppers)
Four quadrant operation can also be obtained with a two quadrant chopper 
supplying the armature and using a scheme for field current or armature current 
reversal. This scheme involves fewer power components. The response is very 
sluggish, as has already been discussed.
Closed loop control systems are being developed to obtain a precise control of 
speed with regeneration in both directions for thyristor drives.
A comparison of a reversible drive using a dual converter and a four quadrant 
chopper is rather interesting. A four quadrant chopper is costlier than a dual con­
verter. This is because of commutation circuits required by each chopper. A dual 
converter has a simpler control, if circulating current is allowed. A detailed inves­
tigation may be required to compare the performance of the drives under dynamic 
and steady state conditions.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
4.4 
PERMANENT MAGNET SYNCHRONOUS MOTOR
A conventional synchronous motor is a doubly fed machine. The stator is provided 
with a 3 phase balanced source of ac voltages or currents. The rotor contains a 
field winding excited from a dc source. For development of torque, it is necessary 
that both the stator and the rotor mmfs must have zero relative speed. The torque 
is possible only when the rotor rotates at the synchronous speed, i.e., the speed 
of the stator mmf. With the availability of permanent magnets, the field winding 
of the conventional motor is replaced by good-quality permanent magnets. This 
dispenses with the field winding which adds to the weight, cost and losses. These 
permanent magnet motors can be fed from a power electronic converter. The con­
verter devices are fired to conduction, based on the rotor position. For every 60° 
of rotation, a device is fired in a given sequence. By the time the shaft completes a 
rotation of two pole pitches, the firing of all the devices is complete and one cycle 
of the stator excitation is complete. The control needs a position sensor (i.e., a shaft 
encoder). The shaft encoder sends firing pulses to the devices of the converter. 
This type of control is well known as self-control. Here, the frequency of the stator 
excitation is made to slave the rotor speed. This is similar to the action taking place 
in a dc motor. Any changes in the rotor speed automatically changes the frequency 
of the armature excitation. The conventional control is known as separate control 
where the frequency of the stator excitation is varied to bring in the speed variation. 
The speed is slaved to the frequency which causes hunting and stability problems. 
On the other hand, self-control using a rotor position sensor imparts to the motor a 
speed similar to that imparted by a mechanical commutator to the dc motor.
DC motors have been enjoying wider application in the industry as high- 
performance servomotors with all their other weaknesses presented by mechani­
cal commutator. Obviously, a PM synchronous motor has an added advantage 
of low inertia, due to the absence of field winding, compared to a conventional 
synchronous motor, and due to absence of field winding and commutator when 
compared to a dc motor.
A synchronous motor (conventional or PM) when operated in self-control loses 
its identity as far as its behaviour is concerned. It possesses an entirely different 
behaviour with several advantageous features, mainly having behaviour similar 
to that of a separately excited dc motor. The synchronous motor is called a Com­
mutator Less Motor (CLM).
The PMSM is becoming a serious competitor to dc as well as induction motors 
for high performance applications. Its high efficiency, small size, low inertia, 
large power density and larger torque/ampere puts the motor in the forefront for 
high performance servo applications. Other industrial applications are in the area 
of robotics and aerospace actuators. The PMSM has also the following features:
• 
High speed operation
• 
Least maintenance
• 
Absence of limitations due to mechanical commutator in respect to higher 
voltage, higher current ratings and higher speed capabilities.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
4.4.1 Mathematical Modelling of a PMSM
With the advent of power converters which can feed the stator of a PMSM and also 
powerful magnets, there is a constant attention paid to this motor as a servo drive in 
closed loop control. Different current control methods are evolved in order to make 
the best utilisation of the magnets. Before the availability of these powerful mag­
nets, there was fear against demagnetization of the magnets. The only control that 
was prevalent was the current control having no direct demagnetising. Therefore, 
a surface-mounted rotor can be considered as uniform air gap motor or round rotor 
motor. It has no saliency. The IPM motor, on the other hand, has its permanent 
magnet buried into the rotor iron. Again considering the permeability of the mag­
net equal to that of the air gap, the direct axis inductance is less than the quadrature 
axis inductance, where the path of the flux is complete in iron. The modem perma­
nent magnets made are of rare-earth magnetic components. The powerful magnets 
available at present have made researchers think about developing controls having 
a direct demagnetising effect, causing demagnetisation. Also, the drive technology 
is heading towards dispensing with flux sensors and speed sensors. The estimated 
speed and flux are used in different controls. For the estimation of flux and speed, a 
mathematical model is required. Modem control techniques look forward for adap­
tive observers. Model of a PMSM can be obtained by making simple modifications 
to the model of a wound-field synchronous motor. A few of the differences are the 
following:
• 
Wound field synchronous motor has damper cage. In a PM motor the mag­
nets are embedded in the rotor structure or they are pasted to the surface of 
the rotor. The former is equivalent to salient pole type whereas the latter to 
the round rotor type.
• 
The synchronous PM motor having permanent magnets pasted to the sur­
face of the rotor is considered equivalent to a uniform air gap machine in 
which L ,- L  -  L . So the models of SPM and IPM motors can be deduced
cl 
q 
s
suitably.
• 
The permanent magnet has permeability equal to that of an air gap. There­
fore, the PM embedded in the rotor causes a reluctance equal to the air gap.
• 
On the other hand, the volume between the magnets is the quadrature axis 
made up of magnetic material. Unlike the case of a conventional synchro­
nous motor, the quadrature axis inductance 
of a PM motor will be greater 
than the direct axis inductance L,.a
• 
Also, as there are no damper windings; the damper currents, damper induc­
tances and damper resistances are zero. Also, since there is no field wind­
ing, the field current is zero. Substituting zeros for the damper and field 
winding parameters in the model of a wound-field synchronous motor, we 
get the model of a PM motor.
The stator of a PMSM is similar to that of a conventional wound-field synchro­
nous motor. It has a distributed short pitched winding. The three phases are a or 
A connected. The exciting coils on the magnetic poles are replaced by permanent

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
magnets which are fixed on the rotor surface or placed well inside the rotor structure. 
The former is known as Surface Mounted Motor (SPM), and the latter is known as 
Interior Magnet (IPM) motor. The magnet can be considered as equivalent to its 
air gap as far as its permeability is concerned, i.e., its relative permeability jur = 1 
and n = jurjuo. The materials used are of high quality. These possess high resistiv­
ity and hence the induced currents in the rotor are negligible. Between the PM 
synchronous motor and the conventional wound-field motor, there is no difference 
between the back emf induced in the stator winding by permanent magnet flux and 
the flux produced by an excited coil on the pole body. The mathematical model of 
a PMSM will be almost similar to that of a wound-field synchronous motor. The 
following assumptions are made while deriving the model of a PMSM.
• 
Neglect of saturation of parts of magnetic circuit. However, the changes in the 
motor parameters due to saturation may be considered wherever applicable.
• 
The induced emf is sinusoidal.
• 
Hysteresis and eddy current losses are neglected. The transients in the field 
flux are not present.
• 
There are no damper windings on the rotor.
• 
The system is balanced.
With the above assumptions, the two-axis model of the 3 phase stator in rotor 
(synchronous rotating) reference frame is
t r 
. 
dy/d
~ rsld 
, 
^sWq
(4.27)
T/ _ 
. ^ dV<,
Vq 
rs^q 
i 
(&s^d
(4.28)
where y/ is the quadrature axis flux linkages given by
yj —L i
T q 
q q
(4.29)
And y/ is the direct axis flux linkages given by
Vd = Ld id + Vaf
(4.30)
where y/ is the flux in the air gap due to the magnet and it is no-load flux in the 
air gap.
In the above equations which describe the mathematical model of PM synchro­
nous motor,
• 
vd and v(/ are the direct and quadrature axis stator voltages
• 
id and / are the direct and quadrature axis stator currents
• 
Ld and L are the direct and quadrature axis synchronous inductances
• 
r and co are the stator resistance per phase and angular velocity of stator 
mmf.
The electromagnetic torque developed is
P being the number of pole pairs of the motor.
(4.31)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The electromechanical dynamic torque equation of the motor is
Td =TL + J ^ - +  (4.32) 
at
where TL is the load torque
J  is the moment of inertia
cor is the rotor angular velocity
B is the damping torque coefficient
The mechanical angular velocity of the rotor is related to the electrical angular 
velocity by
cos = P cor 
(4.33)
The machine model is nonlinear due to the presence of the products showing cross 
coupling of the state variables such as speed, id and /.
The equations 4.27 to 4.32 may be written to represent the state space model of 
PMSM for dynamic simulation purposes as
1 
r
Phis -  
{v*
^ds
1 r
Piqs -  r 
\ Vqs
uqs
pcor
is
Lqs h/s }
(4.34)
The well-known Park’s transformations are applicable here to determine the 
equivalent two-axis components of 3 phase stator currents. The two axis compo­
nents of current in the rotor reference frame are Fig.
(
i j  \
lds
hjs
V lO )
2
3
cos 0S 
sin 0S
2
cos
sin
/
Os -
2 n >
(
An \
cos
0
—
V
3 J
s
V
3 /
(
Os -
2n \
(
An \
sin
Os
—
V
3 J
V
3 /
\
1
2
1
2
A
‘'a
h
V h- J
(4.35)
Suffixes a, b, c represent the three phases. Inversely, the phase currents are deter­
mined from the two-axis currents using
/
h
\ lc )
\
cos 0C
-  sin 0C
(
cos
cos
0 , -
2n \
(
o.
J 7 
An x
-  sin
-  sin
0S -
/
0S-
2n
T ,
An ^
V
/
his 
lqs
V h) J
(4.36)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
The above transformations apply equally well to the flux linkages. They apply 
to voltages by definition. The main criterion underlying the transformation is the 
power invariance.
The power input to the actual machine is
P. = v i + vj, + V i
i 
a a 
b b 
c c
(4.37)
in phase variables and the power input to the equivalent two-axis model is
+ V« ]
(4.38)
Due to balance, structures of stator and rotor, and thereby the resulting uniform 
air gap of the induction motor, there exist three different reference frames—stator 
reference frame, synchronously rotating reference frame and rotor reference 
frame. In the case of a PMSM, which is only a particular case of conventional 
wound-field motor, having saliency in the rotor structure does not result in the 
uniform air gap. The rotor reference frame is convenient here. Also, because the 
angular velocity of the stator mmf is the same as that of the rotor, the synchronous 
rotating reference and the rotor reference frame are one and the same. However, in 
SPM machines, where the air gap is uniform, we can have a stator reference frame 
by substituting zero for the speed of the reference frame (cos = 0).
4.4.2 
Current Control Methods for Permanent Magnet Motors
Permanent magnet motors are becoming very popular in a wide variety of indus­
trial applications. They are very attractive for servo applications, and robot drives 
due to their low inertia of the rotor. Their attractive power density and efficiency 
characteristics make them compete with the conventional ac motors. Their fast 
response and compactness are the most important factor responsible for generat­
ing interest. The well-established developments and findings in more powerful and 
cost-effective permanent magnet materials are serving to accelerate this interest 
further.
A very well known and widely applied control method for PMSM is to make 
the direct axis component of the stator current zero, i.e., id -  0, and the direct-axis 
component of stator current becomes nonexistent. The total stator current is made 
up of only the torque producing a quadrature component. This method avoids the 
direct demagnetisation of the permanent magnets. With recent development in the 
material technology, the magnetic materials with large coercive forces are made 
available and these do not limit the control to the above method. Several control 
methods improve the performance and ability of a PM motor. The developments 
in the rotor configurations and permanent magnet geometries have given rise to 
two types of motors. These are Surface Mounted Magnet motors (SPM) and Inte­
rior Magnet (IPM) motors. The parameters like reactances and resistances in the 
two axes of the motor are greatly influenced by the configurations.
The versatility of these control methods may be evaluated by the following 
criteria or the coefficients of the motor and power electronic converter feeding 
the motor.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Voltage Ratio K 
This ratio can be defined as the no-load terminal voltage to the 
load terminal voltage. The ratio is closely related to inverter capacity. For machines 
having larger K, an inverter of larger capacity is required. The inverter should be 
capable of providing larger voltages as the motor is mechanically loaded.
The Demagnetising Coefficient £ This coefficient is defined as the ratio of direct- 
axis armature reaction flux linkages to the permanent magnet flux linkages. This 
ratio is very closely related to the air gap flux under loaded conditions of the 
motor. The increasing value of £ indicates the decreasing value of the air gap flux. 
This, in turn, is associated with reduced developed torque and reduced output 
power.
The Power Factor cos b and the Torque Angle S The torque angle S is the space 
angle between the induced voltage (coy/J and the applied voltage Vr The param­
eters cos b, tan S effectively decide the performance characteristics and inverter 
capacity.
Referring to phasor diagram of the motor, the power factor cos b = cos(c> -  /?) and
rln sin Bn + coLf.L. cos Bn
tan 
d = --------- ------ —----q— -- —---  
(4.39)
rla cos p0 -  wLdIa sin [S0 + cot//af
The basic variables, the direct and quadrature axis synchronous inductances L(P Lq 
and the magnet flux linkages y/ are included in the parameters and equations. The 
armature current, torque developed and the resistance and reactance parameters 
are normalised as
n  = L A
d 1 a ’
R
coLd
With this, the normalised value of armature current has a range of values from 
0.2 to 0.4. The operation of the motor is confined normally to high speeds. The 
resistance drop can be neglected compared to coLd at these speeds and frequencies. 
The normalised basic equations are
j'N
K
-I.N
c o s /i + j ( p - l  
)lasin
sin ßa ) 2 +  ( p i*
S
tan S
I  a sin
pig sin ß„
1 -  I* sin ßa
(4.40)
In the above equations, p is the saliency coefficient and is the ratio of quadrature 
axis synchronous inductance to the direct axis synchronous inductance

The McGraw-Hill Companies
m
Control of Electric Motors 
wmM
The relative permeability of the permanent magnet is near unity. The magnet 
behaves like an air gap (or equivalent to a non-magnetic material). The machine 
direct and quadrature axis inductances depend on the rotor configurations and the 
geometry of the permanent magnet. The surface magnet motor (SPM) exhibits 
negligible saliency and hence p -  1. For the Interior Magnet Motor indicating that 
the quadrature axis inductance L exceeds the direct axis inductance L r
Control methods of these motors can be different for specific values of /?;, the 
angle between induced emf phasor E and the armature current phasor, 7 . Control of 
the value of p imparts to the motor effectively an altogether different performance.
Present-day permanent magnets can tolerate demagnetisation. Due to large 
coercive force they need for complete demagnetisation, two extra control meth­
ods can be considered. In one control method the power factor cos 
can be main­
tained constant, may be in particular at unity. In the other method, the flux link­
ages may be maintained constant. Both of these are effected by controlling the 
two axis components Id, I or by controlling the phase position of the current with 
respect to the applied voltage.
4.5 
CLASSIFICATION OF PERMANENT MAGNET 
SYNCHRONOUS MOTORS
The permanent magnet synchronous motors can be broadly classified into two 
major heads:
i. Interior magnet motors
ii. Exterior magnet motors
There are some similarities between these two types. Both the types of motors 
have permanent magnets in the rotor to produce the desired magnetic field. The 
stators of these motors are wire wound. There are three phases in the stator. 
The three phase winding is wound for the same number of poles as in the rotor. 
The stator is excited by a three phase balanced system of currents. This three 
phase system of currents produces a space distributed magnetomotive force rotat­
ing in electromagnetic torque is developed when the rotor speed is same as that of 
the stator mmf (flux). However, the waveforms of the exciting currents of the two 
motors are different. The waveforms of the back emfs induced in the stator phases 
of the two motors also differ. The interior magnet motors have a sinusoidal back 
emf whereas the exterior magnet ones have a trapezoidal back emf. Obviously, the 
performance characteristics of the two types of machines differ. They differ also 
in the operating requirements.
Another aspect of difference between the two motors lies in their construc­
tion. In the interior magnet motor, as the name indicates, the magnets are well 
buried in the rotor. On the other hand, in the other type, the magnets are pasted 
to the surface of the rotor. Based on the construction they are called Interior Per­
manent Magnet (IPM) motor and Surface mounted Permanent Magnet (SPM) 
motor respectively. In the SPM motor, the magnet may occupy 120 degrees to 
180 degrees of the pole pitch. This may influence the ripple torque of the motor.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The permeability of the magnet is considered to be nearly equal to that of air. In the 
interior-type motors, permanence along the direct axis is air and is smaller than that 
along the quadrature axis where it is completely iron of the rotor core. Therefore, 
the armature reaction effect is weaker along the direct axis than the armature 
reaction along the quadrature axis. The direct axis synchronous reactance (x ) is 
less than the quadrature axis synchronous reactance (x ). The construction of IPM 
motor is similar to that of salient pole construction of wound field motor. In an 
SPM motor, the magnet on the surface of the motor is equivalent to the air gap. 
The motor is considered to be a cylindrical rotor construction of the conventional 
wound field motor. Therefore, in the SPM motor the synchronous reactance along 
the direct and the quadrature axes is the same. As the permanent magnets are 
embedded in the rotor core, the IPM motor is mechanically stronger than the SPM 
motor. This feature gives the IPM motor an edge over the SPM motor in that it can 
be run at higher speeds than its counterpart, the SPM motor.
Both the types of permanent magnet motors are characterised by some unique 
advantages of very high efficiency, large power density and low inertia. High effi­
ciency permits a totally enclosed design with surface cooling. The large unsur­
passed power density is imparted by the use of rare-earth permanent magnets 
enabling high flux densities in the air gap. Lower inertia results in high torque- 
to-inertia ratio and improves the dynamic performance of the motor. These 
favourable properties make the permanent magnet motor suitable as an extremely 
compact, fast and rugged mechanical actuator. The se motors can be controlled 
to have very good torque-per-ampere characteristics. These motors do not have 
field windings. The absence of the field winding adds to the compactness and 
efficiency of the motor. This feature, on the other hand, warrants for a power elec­
tronic converter to feed the power to the stator for drive operation. This converter 
would be a costly burden if only constant speed operation is required. However, 
power conversion, being capable of providing variable frequency, variable volt- 
age/current source, makes the control versatile in making the motor a high-quality 
variable speed motor. These permanent magnet motors are becoming strong com­
petitors to both the dc and ac motor drives, particularly as a servo motor. The IPM 
motor is called a Permanent Magnet Synchronous Motor (PMSM) whereas the 
SPM motor as a Brushless DC Motor (BLDC). These are also known as sinu­
soidal motors and trapezoidal motors respectively, based on the waveform of the 
excitation.
4.5.1 
Control Issues of PMAC Motors
The differences in the construction of both the categories of the permanent mag­
net motors are in the nature of the ac waveforms they are fed with, get reflected 
in their torque production characteristics, drive or motion control characteristics, 
etc. Some of these differences are obvious as they occur due to constructional 
differences and some due to the difference in the excitation waveforms. These 
waveforms of excitation which are basically different, and typical constructional 
differences are though the differences in the excitation waveforms are very much

The McGraw-Hill Companies
e g
Control of Electric Motors
obvious, a close observation of these would reveal some similarities. The six-step 
waveform from a six pulse bridge converter contains a predominant fundamen­
tal component. The trapezoidal excitation of a BLDC motor is similar to a six- 
step waveform and has a predominant fundamental component. The sinusoidal 
excitation to the PMSM (IPM) can be obtained by PWM control of the six-step 
inverter. On the other hand, the constructional differences impart different charac­
teristics to the motor. The differences may require somewhat detailed discussion. 
The interior permanent magnet (IPM) motor has a salient pole structure; whereas 
the surface mounted magnet (SPM) motor has a cylindrical rotor structure. These 
features bring in the differences in the performance characteristics like torque per 
ampere, power factor, etc. These characteristic differences also affect the capabili­
ties of the inverter feeding the motor.
A detailed discussion of the characteristic differences and similarities between 
the two motors follows.
4.5.2 
Converter Configuration and Application to BJTs,
MOSFETs and IGBTs
When supplied from the utility sources, the PMAC machine requires a power con­
verter to transform a fixed frequency, fixed voltage source to a variable frequency 
variable voltage/current source to be fed to the motor. This power electronic 
converter is the conventional dc link converter which performs the conversion in 
two stages. These are the most preferred ones to cycloconverters which are single 
stage power converters. The dc link power converters have flexibility as far as the 
output voltage and frequency are concerned. Further, these have several advan­
tages over the single stage cycloconverter type when the frequency conversion 
in the complete base frequency range is required. Further, dc link converters are 
available as dc link voltage source converters, dc link PWM converters and dc link 
current source converters. The permanent magnet motors, both sinusoidal and 
trapezoidal ones, can be operated on these converters. A dc link voltage source 
converter transforms constant voltage constant frequency mains to variable fre­
quency variable voltage source. The output of the converter is a six-stepped quasi 
square wave voltage. The utility source is converted to dc by means of a line- 
commutated phase controlled ac to dc converter. The current ripple and voltage 
ripple are filtered by inductance and capacitance respectively of an LC filter 
in the dc link circuit. The dc link voltage is inverted to ac voltage of desired 
frequency by the six-step McMurray inverter. The necessary voltage control 
is accomplished by controlling the line side converter in the first stage itself. 
The devices of this converter are phase controlled. The conduction period of 
the machine side converter is controlled to make the output have the desired 
frequency. Thus, the applied voltage to the motor at the input has its magnitude 
and frequency such that it establishes the required rated flux in the base speed 
region.
Using PWM schemes (or principles) to the dc to ac inverter feeding the 
motor, the voltage control can be accomplished in the inverter itself. The sinu-

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
soidal PWM gives and output voltage approaching a sinusoid with the least 
harmonic component. The advantage of a PWM inversion is that both the 
voltage and frequency control can be accomplished simultaneously followed 
by harmonic neutralisation. This also allows the use of a diode rectifier on the 
line side making the converter economical and the power factor unity on the line 
side. For small power applications, the self-quenching devices like BJTs, MOS- 
FETs, and IGBTs with integrated feedback diodes can be used as the devices in 
a line-side rectifier.
Further, PWM principles can be extended to control the voltage source inverter 
to provide a sinusoidal current to the motor load. Current-controlled PWM tech­
niques like hysteresis control; delta modulation, etc., can be employed.
The dc link current source inverter can be employed to feed PMAC machines. 
This is also a two-stage converter. The variable dc link voltage at the output termi­
nals of the line side ac to dc phase controlled converter is converted to a constant 
current by a very large inductance. The capacitor in the dc link is dispensed with. 
The absence of the capacitor permits a straightforward voltage reversing capabil­
ity in the dc link. This makes the regeneration also straightforward. In the case 
of a voltage source inverter, this is not possible. An additional inverse parallel 
converter is required on the line side for this purpose.
4.5.3 
Control Structures for PMAC Motors
Even though the waveforms of excitation currents and constructional features of 
the two categories of PMAC motors are quite different, there are several impor­
tant characteristics which are shared in common by the drives developed using 
these two types of motors. A majority of PMAC motor drives and their appli­
cations incorporate closed loop control. For applications with constant air gap 
flux, a simple V/f control can be employed if there is no demagnetisation of the 
magnet flux in order to achieve a high-quality torque control. If any demagneti­
sation takes place, it can be compensated by proper current control. Current-fed 
operation, where direct torque control is neither complex nor difficult, can also 
be incorporated in closed loop control. Current control techniques can be easily 
implemented with PMAC motors, where direct association of flux and torque is 
possible for such a control.
Voltage source inverters are more flexible compared to current source invert­
ers. PWM techniques can be employed to control the current to have a desired 
waveform preferably a sinusoidal one. The salient features of a voltage source 
inverter may be summarized as follows:
i. Very fast dynamic performance compared to the conventional Cur­
rent Source Inverter (CSI) with block current waveforms due to obvi­
ous reasons. One reason to mention this is the absence of large link 
inductance. The motor winding inductances are sufficient to act as link 
inductances.
ii. For small power levels self-quenching devices like BJTs, MOSFETs and 
IGBTs can be made use of as active power-switching devices.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
iii. These have advantages over inverters having thyristors as the power 
switching devices which require special turn-off circuits.
iv. Absence of commutation problems at the low speed region. Speed 
control can go down to nearly zero speed.
v. As the above devices allow high frequency switching, the waveform of the 
current fed to the phase windings of the stator can be sinusoidal in nature. 
PWM principles are employed to control the wave shape of the current.
vi. The topology of the converter configuration will be the same for control 
of either sinusoidal or trapezoidal machines. There are, however, differ­
ences in the switching sequence of the converter to distinguish between 
the waveforms of the excitation current fed to the stator of the motor.
The conventional current source inverter configuration can be obtained by 
making simple modifications to the voltage source inverter topology. Shunt capaci­
tances may be replaced by series inductances to effectively raise the input imped­
ance of the inverter. This acts as the dc link inductance, which can effectively make 
the link current ripple free and constant. With a line-commutated phase controlled 
converter on the line side, the converter can be controlled to provide a variable volt­
age, which is converted to a constant, ripple free current source by dc link induc­
tance. However, current source implementations that are reported in the literature 
for supplying the widely popular PMAC motors are associated, in general, with the 
combinations of various factors like cost, weight and dynamic response.
4.5.4 Advanced Control Techniques
S e n so r  L ess Control 
One of the most attractive and state of the art areas of 
research and development involving the PM motors has been the development 
of the techniques for eliminating the speed and position sensors, which are nec­
essary for the self-control of these motors. Using the measured terminal-values 
of current and voltage variables and suitable mathematical model of the motor 
position, speed (and, if necessary, flux) are estimated for the desired control of 
the motor. The results, which may be sometimes not reliable due to variation of 
the parameters of the motor due to external and internal disturbances like load­
ing of the motor, winding temperature, magnetic saturation, etc., are corrected 
by proper identification of the parameters and their adaptation. For this adapta­
tion of the parameters, well-known techniques like Kalman filter algorithm and 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques like Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), 
fuzzy logic principles and the controllers obtained using suitable fusion of these 
techniques. The ongoing present-day research concentrates on the elimination 
of the mechanical speed or position sensor (shaft encoder) on the machine shaft 
without deteriorating the dynamic performance of the motor and control sys­
tem of the drive. The speed and position sensorless drives have the following 
features.
• 
Reduced hardware complexity and lower cost
• 
Reduced size of the motor
• 
Elimination of the sensor cable

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
• 
Better noise immunity
• 
Increased reliability
• 
Reduced maintenance requirement
The mechanical sensor which is fixed, normally, on the extended shaft may 
affect the mechanical strength and vibration of the shaft. It adds to the bulk of the 
machine increasing the inertia of the drive system. It adds to the cost, making the 
system expensive. It prevents the use of the system in hard environments, such as 
high temperature and pressure conditions.
Between the two kinds of PM motors, the trapezoidal machines (BLDC 
motors) prove their suitability for estimation of the speed from the measurement 
of back emf. The feature of the motor is that it has at any instant of time, only 
two phases excited during a 60° interval. The back emf of the unexcited winding 
can be utilised for estimating the speed as well as the position signal. A variety 
of algorithms have been developed in the literature which specifically employ 
the measurement of the third phase (unexcited) winding emf to determine the 
commutation instants of the devices of the inverter. This eliminates the mechani­
cal position sensor on the shaft. Some of these schemes have been successfully 
implemented and they are in commercial production.
4.5.5 Extended Kalman Filter for the State Estimation of PMSM
The Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) is an optimal recursion algorithm for state 
estimation of non-linear systems. Its features are as follows.
• 
Capability to process all the measurements regardless of their accuracy and 
precision
• 
Capability to provide a quick and accurate estimate of any state variable 
of interest
• 
Rapid convergence
The EKF approach is ideally suited for the estimation of the states of PMSM, 
which include the rotor position and speed of the rotor. Apparently, it is a viable 
and computationally efficient candidate for online estimation of speed and rotor 
position. This capability is imparted to the algorithm by
• 
A sufficiently well-laid-down mathematical model which describes the 
motor dynamics; the knowledge of the system and dynamics measuring 
equipment are easily available
• 
The system noise, both process and measurement, system disturbances and 
uncertainties of the system model can be described satisfactorily
• 
Any available information about the initial condition of the states is of 
interest
• 
Measurable motor terminal voltages and currents
All steps involved in the computation of this computationally intensive algo­
rithm require matrix or vector operations. An efficient formulation of the algorithm 
is a necessity. The computational requirements include computation time per cycle

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
and the required memory storage. Prior knowledge of these helps the choice of 
meaningful data, sampling rate and the required memory size of the system. The 
constraints on the computer would be speed (cycle execution time), calculation 
capability (instruction set), and the type of arithmetic used (floating point or fixed 
point).
The rotor position and speed can be independently estimated from the mea­
sured terminal voltages and currents given as inputs, the model and use of EKF 
algorithm.
A permanent magnet motor with surface mounted magnets, i.e., the SPM 
motor, which has the configuration of a cylindrical rotor with a uniform air gap 
can be modeled using the dynamic model in a static reference frame. The SPM 
motor can be assumed to have sinusoidal excitation. The state space model of the 
motor for the dynamic analysis has as its state variables, the two-axis components 
of stator current ias and i/k, the rotor position 0, and rotor angular velocity cor. The 
state space model in matrix notation is given by
P
ißs
CO,.
r's
4
0
Xaf sin 0r
0
rs
4
—Áaf  cos 0r
3 „
B
Xgf sin 0r
-  
xafcos
~ 7
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
l a s
1
+ -----
1—
1___
V ß s
c o r
L
s
T l
o ,  J
0
(4.41)
The two-axis components of the stator voltages v , vR and average load torque T.
as 
p s 
l
are the control inputs. y/s, v/h can be determined using Park’s transformations in 
static reference frame. Using Eqn. (4.41). The numerical solution of state space 
model provides the current components ias, i(k, cor and 6r as state variables. The 
above state space model has cross-coupling terms making it nonlinear. From this, 
the two-axis stator current components can be calculated.
4.6 
CYCLOCONVERTER-FED SYNCHRONOUS MOTOR
A cycloconverter is a single-stage static frequency converter capable of converting 
source frequency to a variable frequency. This, with a suitable transformer on the 
input side, may be interposed between the ac mains and ac motor. The converter 
transformer has three different secondaries, each for a phase of the motor. The 
frequency range of the cycloconverter output is 0 to 33% of the rated frequency. 
The upper frequency limit is in view of the distortion of the output. This converter 
can be used for speed control of both induction and synchronous motors. When 
used with a synchronous motor, it can operate both in the line-commutated and 
load-commutated modes.
Two anti-parallel connected three-phase bridge converters form a single phase 
cycloconverter converting a 3-phase input to a single-phase output of variable

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
frequency. Three of such units are required to provide a 3-phase output. The 
number of devices of a single-phase converter are 12 and those of a 3-phase unit 
are 36. The application of the cycloconverter is cost justified only at high power 
levels. The output of a cycloconverter is fabricated from the segments of the input 
voltage and hence the output voltage waveform is nearly sinusoidal. Further, the 
motor inductance smoothens the motor current waveform. The effects of harmon­
ics on the performance of the motor is least as the input voltage to the motor 
and motor current contain almost negligible harmonics. Very smooth low-speed 
operation is possible. The cycloconverter allows energy transfer in both the direc­
tions, thereby facilitating a straightforward four-quadrant operation of the motor. 
As the converter current can be adjusted to have any desirable phase difference 
with respect to phase voltage, it can feed power to loads of any power factor. 
The cycloconverter operates both in the circulating current mode and circulating 
current-free mode. In the former, both the converters operate simultaneously. In 
the latter, the conducting bridge is fired and the latter is not in operation and does 
not get firing pulses. The transfer between bridges takes place only when the 
polarity has to reverse.
The leakage inductance of the transformer forms the main part of commutation 
inductance, and it can be assumed to be concentrated in the secondary side for all 
purposes of commutation analysis. However, under line-commutated mode the 
power factor is very poor.
As has already been indicated, under line-commutated mode, the output volt­
age of the converter, which is made up of the segments of the input voltage, is 
nearly sinusoidal and the machine inductance causes further smoothing of motor 
current. Larger the inductance, better the smoothing action. During operation, 
subtransient inductance is very effective. The value of this is reduced by the pres­
ence of damper windings. In view of the smoothening of motor current, the induc­
tance must be large and no damper windings need be there.
In contrast to the above, when the converter operates in the load-commutated 
mode it can work as a current source converter, in which case the load voltage 
(motor voltage) is decided by the operating conditions of the motor. The motor 
voltage becomes the converter voltage also. To reduce the voltage spikes dur­
ing commutation, the commutation time for the subtransient reactance should be 
small. In such a case, the motor should have damper windings.
The synchronous motor is operated in the self-controlled mode, wherein the 
stator frequency is decided by the motor speed. This control is accomplished by 
means of a shaft encoder giving the rotor position information. By the time the 
rotor moves by two pole pitches, one cycle of frequency is completed. Thus, the 
frequency of the stator becomes a slave of the rotor speed [commutator action 
in the case of dc motor]. Obviously, the synchronous motor becomes free from 
hunting and instability problems. Therefore, a variable frequency synchronous 
motor in the self-controlled mode need not have damper windings. The start­
ing of the motor does not pose any problem because static frequency controller- 
cycloconverter can be used to provide good starting with variable frequency.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
The necessity of damper windings is decided by only the subtransient operation of 
the motor fed by VS or CS operation of the cycloconverter.
Another attractive feature of the synchronous motor is the possibility of load 
commutation of the inverter if the synchronous motor is over exerted. The cyclo­
converter feeding the motor offers another flexibility. At low frequencies where 
the machine voltages are too small to render load commutation, the line commu­
tation of the converter can be made use of and when once the speed increases to 
a value where the machine voltages are sufficiently large for load commutation 
to take over, one can change over to load commutation. This increases the speed 
control range of the motor up to the rated speed and also above.
Self-control imparts to a synchronous motor the performance of a separately 
exited dc motor with an additional feature that the angle between the stator and 
rotor mmfs can be controlled. This feature is not present in a dc motor. The effects 
of zero sequence voltages of the converter output may be kept away by star con­
nection of the motor with an isolated neutral.
The stator of a 3 phase synchronous motor is fed from current sources provided 
by the cycloconverter, whereas the field winding is fed from a current source 
obtained by means of a phase-controlled rectifier. The field current establishes a 
space distributed flux in the air which rotates along with the rotor structure. The 
rotor position information from a rotor position sensor is used to fire the thyristors 
of the cycloconverter to excite the stator with a frequency in synchronism with 
rotor speed. The stator currents produce an mmf rotating at the same speed as the 
rotor mmf, however with a definite space angle to produce the desired torque. The 
two mmfs produce a resultant mmf (air flux). The torque developed is propor­
tional to the area of the triangle (Fig. 4.86). The torque developed Td is, therefore, 
a function of the stator current, field current and the angle between them.
ILe j(yt
^3,b,c 
/ COS(cOf+$>/e + D) 
I = ißi<p\e
Fig. 4.86 
Phasor diagram

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The resultant stator flux linkages and the stator voltage can be represented by
y/ — LI + MIf
V =  jCDlf/
neglecting the stator resistance.
The best magnetic utilisation of the motor is accomplished if only the motor 
operates at the rated flux. The current needed from the stator side will also be the 
least (in the converter as well as the motor). The stator current, field current and 
the angle between them are controlled such that
i. resultant air flux remains constant at all load conditions and speeds at 
rated value, and
ii. the stator current is purely active in nature, i.e., it is in phase with voltage.
Neglecting stator copper losses, the power developed = power input to the 
motor.
The torque developed = —  - = Td .
2nns
The independent speed and torque control are the chief objectives. These are 
realised by maintaining the air flux as a constant at the rated value and controlling 
the stator current to be purely active.
The speed controller produces a set of current references based on the speed 
error at the input. These are stator current references as well as rotor current refer­
ences. These reference currents are decided by the control requirement and forced 
into the motor for the desired torque, whereas independent frequency variation 
provides the speed. The stator current controls via cycloconverter impress the 
required stator mmf and the rotor current control impresses the dc excitation to the 
rotor via the rectifier in the field circuit. The cycloconverter is also controlled to 
provide the required phase difference between the stator and rotor mmfs. The sta­
tor current, rotor current and the phase difference between them (which produce 
torque) are so coordinated that the (stator) flux remains constant and the stator 
current is in phase with the voltage. This coordination may be accomplished using 
suitable function generators. Using the cycloconverter on the stator side, phase- 
controlled rectifier on the rotor side and self-control independent torque and speed 
control may be realised for a synchronous motor. High torque even at every low 
speeds including standstill conditions is possible.
Feeding of the motor with a stator current having desired phase shift with 
respect to rotor mmf is possible in the self-control of the motor and this con­
trol eliminates the hunting and instability present in conventional behaviour of 
synchronous motor and imparts to the synchronous motor the performance of a 
separately excited dc motor.
There are other sophisticated controls of a synchronous motor which more 
or less can be realised based on the above principles of control. Vector or field- 
oriented control uses the machine models for determining the control parameters 
such as flux. These models make use of the motor parameters. The control of the

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
motor thus results in parameter-sensitive motor behaviour which may impair the 
concept of field orientation and the desired dynamic performance of the motor 
may not be realised. To improve the dynamic performance even at heavy peaks of 
load torques, the following may be ensured with additional loops:
— a more direct field orientation of the stator current
— a more direct stator flux control with least parameter-sensitive flux esti­
mation
The rated flux operation can be realised by operating the motor with a stator 
voltage proportional to frequency (with compensation for stator resistance volt­
age at low frequencies) and constant field current. The voltage variation can be 
accomplished by varying the firing angle a from 0° to 90°, the latter being for 
standstill conditions. The value of a decreases as the frequency increases and 
becomes zero at the rated frequency. The power factor becomes closer to unity if 
the cycloconverter operates on the trapezoidal mode a—>0.
The cycloconverter feeding the motor can also make use of machine voltages for 
commutation by overexciting the motor. The performance features of a CSI fed 
synchronous motor with load commutation are applicable for cycloconverter-fed 
synchronous motor with load commutation.
Applications 
The cycloconverter-fed synchronous motors are best suited where 
the drive requirements are four-quadrant operation at high power levels in the 
low-speed range with a limit on the maximum speed.
• 
Gearless cement mills are the first application of these drive motors. The 
motor has a large number of poles with limited frequency of operation for 
driving the tube mill.
• 
Another typical application is for mine hoists with high power ratings.
• 
Reversing steel rolling mills with very high dynamic requirements for 
torque and regenerative speed reversal.
• 
Diesel-generator-fed cycloconverter synchronous motors with power rat­
ings of about 20 MW are used in ships and ice breakers.
• 
These are also being used in diesel traction systems.
The cycloconverter-fed synchronous motor drive systems are fully developed 
mature systems. As such, they do not show any advantages from the high-speed 
self-turn off modern power semiconductor devices. They will remain a standard 
solution for high torque, low-speed reversible drives.
Worked Examples
Q
A single phase, single pulse controlled rectifier is fed from a 120 V, 60 Hz 
supply. This provides a variable voltage to the armature of a separately 
excited dc motor having an armature resistance of 10 Q. Due to high inertia

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
the motor speed is constant, providing a back emf o f 50 V when the thyristor is 
triggered continuously. Neglecting the armature inductance determine the aver­
age value o f current in the motor.
Solution 
The thyristor starts conducting when the instantaneous voltage = 50 V. 
Therefore
a = sin
50
■JÏ X  120
17.14°
The current flows in the load from a to 180 -  a. The current
-JÏV sin cot -  Eb
ÏÔ
180- a
I.av = T
 
f
2n
i
V
V2F sin cot -  Eb
R
d(cot)
/
—-— (2yllV cos a -  Eb(n -  2d)) 
2nR
1
62^8
(2 V2 X  120 cos 17.14 + 50(2.542)) 
324.288 
-127.1
= 2.89 A
Q
A single pulse converter feeds a separately excited dc motor having an 
armature resistance of 1 Q and inductance 50 mH. The supply voltage is 
220 V at 50 Hz. The firing angle is 75° and the back emf is 130 V. Assuming the 
devices to be ideal determine the current waveform, its mean value and converted 
power. There is a FWD across the load.
Solution 
If i is the current through the load from 75° to 180° the equation is
Ri + 1 T  + e  = v  
dt
from 180° to 180 + /? the equation is
Ri + L —  + Eb = 0  
dt
When the thyristor conducts the current i is given by
i -  
sin(cui -  (|))
^
 + Ae~,/Z
«a
z

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
i(a)
z
<t>
COT
i
a
i
A
i
At cot 
i
During freewheeling
i
8.892
4
e~t/r
—tlT 
cot
The current is
i
i
0
1 + y'314 X  50 X  10-3 = 1 + j\5.T = 15.732 
86.36°, t = 50 X  10~3 = 0.05 s 
314x0.05 = 15.7
19.774 sin (cot -  86.36) -  130 + Ae~(ot/l5J 
cot = 75°
0 = 19.774 sin(75 -  86.36) -130 + AO.92 
145.54
19.774 sin (cot -  86.36) -  130 + 145.54^-^//15*7
71
19.734 -1 3 0 +  119.158 = 8.892.
- ^
 + Axe~tlx 
R
-  —  +Ai = -130 + 4  
R
138.89
-  —  + 138.89e_i/T = 0 
R
130
138.89 
-0.06615
59.53°
19.774 sin(<u/ -  <|>) -  130 + \45e~at/0)T 
75° to 180°
\38.89e~œt/coT-  130 180° to 239.53°
Q
A separately excited dc motor rated at 10 kW, 240 V, 1000 rpm is sup­
plied from a fully controlled two pulse bridge converter. The converter 
is supplied at 250 V, 50 Hz supply. An extra inductance is connected in the load 
circuit to make the conduction continuous. Determine the speed, power factor 
and efficiency of operation for thyristor firing angles of 0 and 60° assuming 
the armature resistance of 0.40 Q and an efficiency of 87% at rated conditions. 
Assume constant torque load.
Solution
The input to the motor at rated conditions 
The supply current to the motor = 47.89 A
10 X  103 
0.87
= 11.494 x l0 3W

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Neglecting field copper loss the armature current = 47.89 A 
The back emf at rated conditions
= 240 -  47.89 x 0.4 = 220.843 V 
At a = 0 the converter voltage 
= 0.9x250 = 225 V
As the load torque is constant the armature current is the same. Therefore back 
emf.
= 2 2 5 - 47.89x0.4 = 200.844
speed = 200 844
-----------x 1000 = 909.4 rpm
220.843
Fundamental displacement factor = 1 
distortion factor 
=0.9
The power factor 
=0.9
The input = 240 x 47.89 x 0.9 x 10~3 = 10.344 kW 
Assuming for constant torque the output varies in the direct proportion of speeds 
output at lower speed
10 x 909.4 
1000
9.094 kW
Efficiency = 87.9%
At a firing angle a 
= 60°
The converter voltage = 0.9 x 250 x cos 60
= 112.5 V
The back emf 
= 112.5 -  47.89 x 0.4
= 93.344 V
Speed
Output
1000 x 93.344 
220.843
422.7 rpm
10 x422.7
FÕÕÕ
4.227 kW
Input 
=112.5x47.89
Efficiency =78.46
m
A single phase bridge converter fed from a 250 V, 50 Hz supply is used 
to control the speed of a separately excited dc motor having an armature 
resistance of 1.5 Cl and inductance 30 mH. The back emf at one speed of operation 
is 100 V and the converter control angle is 30°. Determine the average and rms 
values of the armature current, the power input to the motor and power factor of 
operation.
Solution 
The average value of the converter voltage at a = 30°
= 0.9 x 250 x cos 30 
= 194.85 V

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
The average value of voltage across the inductance is zero.
r 
194.85-100 
A
Ia = -----------------= 63.24 A
1.5
If the inductance is sufficiently large the rms value of
7d = 63.24 A
Power delivered to the motor = 194.85 x 63.24 x 10-3 = 12.284 kW 
Power factor = 0.9 cos 30° = 0.78
Because of the definite value of inductance the rms value of current must be 
found out from the wave form of the current.
i(t) = 
sin(co/ -(())- —  + Ae tlx
R
A can be found out from the condition
i(a/co) = i f iï +
because the current is continuous. Using the numerical val-
y 
co 
j
ues i(t) and its rms value can be determined.
Q
A separately excited dc motor is fed from a three-phase six pulse fully 
controlled bridge converter. The motor develops its full load torque at a 
rated speed o f1800 rpm taking a current of 60 A from a 400 V supply. Determine 
the rms value of supply voltage if the motor runs at its rated conditions for a - 0 .  
What is the range of firing angles for a speed control of 1800 to 900 rpm. The 
armature resistance is 0.5 £1 The supply and thyristors are ideal.
Solution 
Average value of converter voltage
= 2.34 Vs cos a = 1.35UL cos a
At a = 0 this value = 400 V.
400
cos a = ---------= 1.
2.34FS
= 400_ = |?  
= 296 V
2.34
Induced voltage = 400 -  60 x 0.5 = 370 V 
E2 at 900 rpm = 185 V
Vdja at 900 rpm 
= 185 + 30 = 215 
2.34Ucosa 
=215
s
215
cos a = --------------
2.34x171
a = 57.5°

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
A three-phase six pulse bridge converter working on a 500 V 50 Hz 
supply feeds a dc motor having a rated voltage o f 250 V. The motor is 
separately excited and draws an armature current of 181 A at 250 V and runs 
at 1500 rpm. The motor drives a load having a torque speed characteristic 
given by
Tl = 0.64 cd2
If the speed control of this motor is required from 1500 to 500 rpm determine the 
range of firing angles. I f the firing angle a = Ofor operation at rated speed, deter­
mine the line voltage. What is the range of firing angles in this case? What is the 
advantage o f the second use? Resistance of the armature = 0.1 Q.
Solution 
The back emf at rated speed
= 250 -  181 x 0.1 = 231.9 V
The back emf at 500 rpm
231.9
= ------- = 77.3 V
Firing angle for rated speed
250
cos a =
The armature current at lower
1.35 x 500 
a = 68.26°
L
speed = I.d2 -  
= 20.11 A
V2 = 77.3 + 20.11 x 0.1 = 79.31 V 
79.31
cos a
= a = 83.25°
1.35 x 500
The second case can be achieved by a step down transformer. 
At a = 0
1.35Fl = 250 
250
Vl = 1.35
-  185.2 V
Firing angle for second speed
cos'
79.31
1.35 x 185.2 -  71.505«
The reactive power requirement gets reduced. Power factor improves. However, 
the leakage inductance must be considered while determining the firing angles.
A three phase, half controlled bridge rectifier fed from a 300 V, 60 Hz 
supply provides a variable voltage supply to the armature of a separately 
excited dc motor. The specifications of the motor are

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
R = 0.02U 
L = 0.002 H
a 
a
The constant of the motor 2.25 vs/rad 
rated current is 500 A
Determine the firing angle a so that the motor runs at a rated speed o f 1500 
rpm.
Solution 
The speed of the motor = 1500 rpm
= 157 rad/s
The induced voltage or back emf of the motor = 353.25 V 
The terminal voltage 
= 363.25 V 
The converter voltage = 1.35 x 300 cos a
363.25
a = cos 
--------------
1.35 x 300
26.25°
I f in the above problem the supply has an inductance of 1.0 mH, deter­
mine the speed at which the motor would run for a = 26.25°.
Solution 
Supply reactance X = 2 n fL c -  0.3768
Km  
Rd +
- E h
3XC
n
Edict ~ 
0.38
V.. - E =  190 
/. E. = 173.25
dia 
b 
b
363.25 —Eb = 190 
speed is 49.04 % of the speed in the previous problem
A 600 V dc series motor has a combined armature and field resistances 
o f 0.16 Q. The motor draws an armature current o f 210 A while run­
ning at a speed o f 600 rpm. The motor drives a load having a torque speed 
characteristic
Tl = Aco2
Determine the constant A while running at a speed o f600 rpm.
This motor is to be controlled by a three phase fully controlled bridge con­
verter. Determine the input voltage o f the converter if the speed of 600 rpm is 
required at a = 0. Assume a linear magnetisation characteristic determine the 
range o f firing angles for a speed control range 600-0 rpm.
Solution
EbI.d _ (600-0.16x210)210 
2 u n 
2 n x 10
566.4 x210
1894 Nm
62.8

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
N
oj — 2k  —  = 2n X  10 = 62.8 rad/s 
60
Tl = A X  (62.8)2 = 1894
1894
A —---------
(62.8)2
Ta = K J l
0.4802
Therefore
X
II
— <N
II
Also
_ m
/  N
TT _ axJ,x • F
E2 
§2^2
Speed
Ia
IRa m
E
V
a
500
175
28.0
393.33
421.33
45.47'
400
140
22.4
251.73
274.13
62.85
300
105
16.8
141.60
158.40
74.69
200
70
11.2
62.90
74.10
82.90
100
35
5.6
15.73
21.33
87.96
0
90.00
A three phase dual converter feeds a 500 V, 60 A dc motor with separate 
excitation. The armature resistance is 1.5 Q.. The converter is fed from a 
420 V, 50 Hz supply. Assuming a voltage drop of 20 V in the converter determine 
the firing angle and back emffor
i. motoring operation at full load current with motor terminal voltage of 
450 V.
ii. regeneration operation at full load current with terminal voltage of 
450 V.
iii. the motor is plugged at a terminal voltage o f400 V with a current limit­
ing resistor o f 5C1.
Solution
i. 
The average value of converter voltage
= 1.35 Ft cos a = 450 + 20 = 470
470
cos a = --------------
1.35 x 420
a = 34.01°
Back emf = 450 -  60 x 1.5 = 360 V
ii. During regeneration the induced voltage = -450 -  90 = -540 V. 
The converter voltage = -450 + 20 = -430 V

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
-430
cos a = --------------
1.35 x 420
a = 139.32°
iii. When the motor is plugged the motor voltage is -400 V, 7 = 50 A 
Back emf = -400 -  90 = -490V  
The converter voltage = -400 + 20 + 5 x 60
= -80 V
—80
cos a = -------------- 
a -  98.52
1.35 x 420
A dc chopper feeds a dc series motor. The supply voltage to the chopper is 
500 V The total current is found to vary between two current limits having 
a difference of 15 A. The time ratio of the chopper is 0.6 and its pulse frequency 
80 cycles/s. Determine the armature inductance of the motor.
Solution 
The average voltage of the chopper F v = 500 x 0.6 = 300 V.
The voltage across inductance is ac with its peak value = 500 -  300 = 200 V
A/a = 200 V 
At
0 6
At = Yon = 0.6 x T  =
80
= 7.5 ms
At
200
L = 200 x -----
x 7.5
►-T
<1 x
Boo
II
15
m
A 240 V, 50 Hz, four pole star connected three phase induction motor has 
the following equivalent circuit parameters.
r = 0.25Q, 
v = 0.36f2, 
x = 17.3 Q. 
r2 = 0.60Q, 
x2 = 0.36Q
The speed of the motor is to be controlled by a three-phase voltage controller from 
1400 to 600 rpm. The motor drives a fan load having characteristic
Tl = (1.4/103 )u>2
Calculate the range o f firing angles.
Solution 
Synchronous speed of the motor = 1500 rpm
Slip at 1400 rpm s1 
Slip at 600 rpm s2
100
1500
900
1500
0.067
0.6

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Rotor impedance 8.955 + j 0.36 1 + y'0.36 
Stator impedance 0.25 + y'0.36 
0.25 + y'0.36
Z 
9.205 + y0.72 1.25+y0.72
Input impedance yT7.3|| 
y 17.3||
ZJ|Z 
(9.205 + y0.72) 
(1.25 + y0.72)
7.894Z31.530 
1.382Z33.920
Tl = 1.4 X  10-W
Tx = 1.4 X  10“3 
3 
i l A
In  X  1400^
7
60
(1 -5 0  = 39.44
2nns 
s{
12] = 13.25 A I22 = 18.17 A
30.06 Nm
Base currents at these speeds are
/ ,  = 17.55 A 
/ = 100.27
bl 
b2
Per unit rotor currents
/pi = 0.755 
Ip2 = 0.1146
, 
_ in +r±/s) + j(xt +x'2) „
ill — ----------------------------- 12
JXm
= 15.47 A 
I[2 = 18.97 A
Per unit stator currents = 0.8815
0.1892
From the graph the firing angles are 32° and 115°.
®
A 100 hp, 460 V, 60 Hz star connected squirrel cage induction motor has 
the following equivalent circuit parameters.
r{ = 0.06 i2, r2 = 0.35 Q, x{ + x2 = 0.6 Q, Xm = 8Q.
The motor drives a fan which requires 100 hp at a speed of 1000 rpm. Determine 
the firing angles required for a speed range o f200 to 1000 rpm.
Solution 
Obviously the motor must have six poles with a synchronous speed of 
1200 rpm.
Slip at 1000 rpm ,
200-1000 = 
0 167
1200
The input impedance of the motor at this slip
_ y8(2.16 + y0.6) 
2.16+ y8.6
2.02Z29.560
The stator current
460
X
y/J 
2.02
131.48 A

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Slip at 200 rpm 1000
1200 = 0.8333
The input impedance =
II
y 8(0.4 8 + y 0.6)
131.482
/,. =
0.48 + y 8.6
0.833(1 -0.833)2 
0.167(1 -  0.167)2 
58.86
= 0.7133Z54.56
Per unit value = 0.16 
The firing angle is 115°
The range of firing angles 30 -  115C
A three phase slip ring induction motor has a chopper controlled resis­
tance in the rotor circuit for speed control. With the chopper completely 
ON always, the maximum torque occurs at a slip of 0.2. With the chopper com­
pletely OFF the maximum torque occurs at a slip of 1. Determine the value of 
resistance in the chopper.
Solution 
Neglecting the stator impedance
Sm2 
r2 + ra
sml
r
>2
0.2 = 5
= 4 a
If R is the resistance in the chopper the copper loss
= 3 l\r2 + R
T(
\2
ON
T
I2
But
Copper loss = 3l\r2 + R
r T(
\
ON
= 3 I\(r2 + rad)
f  T 
^
1 ON
V
R
if
^ON
T
fad
R
~2
Substituting — = 4 r2
R = 8 r2

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
A resistance R = 8r2 must be placed so that the torque speed curve will have its slip 
for maximum torque at unity, if the chopper is always OFF.
m
A 440 V, 50 kW, 50 Hz, three phase slip ring induction motor has the fol­
lowing equivalent circuit parameters
r, = 0.07 Q 
r2 = 0.05 Q
x \ + x 2 ~  0-2 
QATm = 20 Q
The speed of the motor at rated load is 1420 rpm. Determine the resistance 
required in the chopper circuit so that the speed can be controlled in the range 
1420-1000 rpm at constant torque. Determine the TR for 1100 rpm.
Solution 
The torque is constant in the range of speeds. 1 is constant leading to 
the relation
f 2 + ra = f2_ = 5 ^
r2 
sl 
80 
r2 + ra = 0.3125 
ra = 0.3075 
R = 2ra = 0.615
Time ratio for 1100 rpm: 
slip rpm = 400 rpm
r2 +
500 = 5
n =
0.2 =
80
4r2 = 4 X 0.05 -  0.2 
0.615 '
T
V 1
T = 0.65 
T
T(ON
T
= 0.35
A slip ring induction motor incorporating slip energy recovery scheme for 
speed control drives a fan load having a characteristic ofTL = KN2. The
motor is rated at 440 V, 50 Hz, 100 kW. The speed is to be controlled from a rated 
value o f1420 to 750 rpm. The equivalent circuit parameters are
q = 0.052 U, r2 -  0.06 Q,
X m = 10 Q, 
x{ + x2 = 0.29 Q. Tp/Ts =1.2
Determine the firing angle range.
Solution 
The rated load is assumed to occur at a = 90°.
60
T500
0.04

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
The torque developed
= KN2
The Current 74 =
V
( ( 
,\2
r2
n + -
V
\ 12
'\2
I
=
5 7 
125.6 A 
60
271 X  1500
(x, + x2)
/
(125.6)2 x 1.5 = AT(1420):
from which K = 7.47 x 10 5
T 
= 150.72 Nm
rated
150 72
Slope of the characteristic = ----- -—
60
T at 750 rpm = 42.02 
The slip rpm x such that
42.02 _ 150.72
v 
60
x -  16.73
No load speed 766.73 = 767 
No load slip = 0.489
1.12cos a = -0.489
, -0.489
a = cos 
---------
1.12
a = 115.88°
Wj/fjk A three phase, 400 V, 50 Hz, four pole, delta connected squirrel cage 
induction motor is fed from a six pulse bridge inverter supplied from a dc 
source, such that the fundamental of the motor voltage is the same as the motor 
rated voltage at 50 Hz. The equivalent circuit parameters of the motor are as 
follows: Stator impedance (1 + j 2.6)0. rotor impedance (0.5 + j 2.4)0 full load 
speed is 1425 rpm at 50 Hz, calculate the current wave of the motor assuming V/f 
is constant for (a) 50 Hz (b) 25 Hz and (c) 5 Hz.
Solution The voltage waveform of a delta connected three phase motor fed from 
an inverter is as shown in Fig. p 4.16
The fundamental of this is
V,
Vic
-  Vdc V3 = 400 
n
400 x n
4 c ß
181.29 V

The McGraw Hill Companies
^ ^ 9  
Electric Drives
Neglecting magnetising impedance
0.5
Z, = 1 + / 2.6 + ------+ /2.4 = 11 + /5 = 12.083
0.05
Impedance angle is 24.444°
The fundamental current =
400
-  33.104 A
12.083
The instantaneous value of current = 46.80 sin(cttf -  24.44) A
r , , 
• 
1500 x 5 + 1425 
1
5th harmonic current: s5 = --------------------- =1.19
1500 x5
V = —
 = 80 V 
5
Z5 = 1+ y 13 + j  —  + j  12 = 1+ yl3 + 0.42 + yl2
*5
= 1.42 + y 25 = 25.04Z86.750
Fifth harmonic current
80
Z -  86.75° = 3.195Z - 86.75°
25.04
i5 = 4.518 sin(5coi -  86.75°)
0 
t l  
. 
7 x 1500 -  1425
Seventh harmonic s7 = ---------------------
7x1500
= 0.8643
Z7 = 1+ y*18.2 + 0.5785 + y'16.8 
= 1.5785 + y35 = 35.036Z87.420 
V7 = 57.143 V 
/ 7 = 1.631 
/ 7 = 2.306 sin(7cui -  87.42) 
su = 1.0864
Zu = 1 + 0.4603 + y*(28.6 + 26.4)
= 55.02Z88.14
/ 
= ---- — ---- = 0 .6 6 0 9 Z -88.14°
11x55.02
ii j = 0.9345 s in (llw /-<588.14°) 
su = 0.927
Z13 = 1.5394 + y*65 = 65.0182

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
400
n
r
0.4732Z - 88.64°
0.669 sin cot(l3cot -  88.64)
It can be shown that based on approximate equivalent circuit
/ har = Vo.0022-----^----- = 3.752
( X , + X 2 )
The wave forms may be drawn to determine the net waveform.
The above procedure may be adopted to determine the currents at other fre­
quencies.
rn =
I\3 ~
*13 =
A 500 V, three phase, 50 Hz star connected induction motor has the fol­
lowing equivalent circuit parameters: Stator impedance (0. 13+j0.6)Q 
rotor impedance (0.32+ j  1.4 8) Cl magnetising reactance xm = 20 Q. The synchro­
nous speed at 50 Hz is 1500 rpm. The full load speed is 1425 rpm. Calculate the 
approximate value ofrms stator current when the motor is supplied by a six pulse 
VSI at speeds 1425 and 675 rpm. The frequency is varied such that V/fis constant. 
The stepped voltage applied to the motor has a fundamental equal to rated voltage 
at 50 Hz.
Solution 
At 50 Hz the amplitude of dc voltage
Vic = ^ 2 - -  = 216.5 V
T  
4
Wave form of the voltage is shown in Fig. p 4.17. Slip of the motor = 5%
Zj = 0.13+ / 0.6 + 
+ j \  4g
1 
0.05
-  6.53 + y2.08 = 6.853Z17.670 
f  = 42.1 3 Z - 17.67 
ij = 59.56 sin(cot -  17.67°)
Assuming the approximate equivalent circuit
r2 
0.0022Fj2
liar = -------------- = 42.375 7h =6.51 A
har 
( X ,  +  
X 2) 2
/ = 42.62 A
At 25 Hz
ns = 750 rpm 
slip = 0.10
Zj =0.13 + ;0.6 + ^ - +  /1.48 
1 
0.1
= 3.33 + 72.08 = 3.926Z31.99c

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
A =
250
a/3 x 3.926Z31.99
0 2 2  X f 7 5 0 ï 2 = 31.782
= 36.77Z -  31.99c
2 
_ 0.0022 X (250)2
2 har —
(Xl + X'2f  
1 = 37.2 A
Making suitable assumptions show that the ratio of rms value of no-load 
current to the rms value of its fundamental is given by
A
=  . 1 +
1 i
o
a
486
n4 -  1
= J1 + 0.0021153
<7
ZAo s7zow that
Ieff
■ IN
= J l +
/ 7 
V /
ZTN
fjZ,IN 2
V 486
n
\
7
Solution 
When an induction motor is fed from a voltage source inverter.
At no-load: the slip is assumed to be zero 
The rotor is almost open circuit 
The impedance is magnetising impedance 
Also, from the Fourier analysis
Vd
and 
Zv = vvXm
The effective value of the harmonic current is
j  
Vy 
S V j 
' 
Zv 
7IV 2 oX, m
The fundamental is
Ao _
L
Therefore
The total effective value
JbVj
71 X n
I 10
GV2 *
eff
I 10 = 
+ I
/., Y
’= 5  V J 10 / --FWÃ
OO 
t
x
4 =
1,5,7 V4
486
71
The sum

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
Hence
CO 
I
1
4
=
. « -7 V4
1,5,7
486
71
eff
/
I c
=  . 1 +
G x
486
n
7
At rated slip the impedance for fundamental Zlr = 
The rated fundamental current
Vlr 
s[6Va
K
I lr
hr =
'lr
7lZlr
Assuming the simplified equivalent circuit for harmonics
V6Fd
' 
71V2(t X ,m
giving
h
 _
Zlv
/,r  
a
X
m
v 2
h
a  _ u
(
7
 
\
A
l v
/ lr
A 
y I
- \V4
0° 
^
Using the above relation of V  —  we have
< v4
I .eff
I lr
\
i +
/  y 
\  f 
Z-ir
V 
J
5 
4 
A
n -  1
>
486
A 400 V, three phase, 50 Hz, four pole squirrel cage induction motor has 
the following data:
r, = 1.0 Q X x = 2.6 Q 
r[ = 0.5 Q
^2 = 2.4 U full load slip 5% 
xm = 36.4 U
The stator winding is delta connected. The motor is supplied from a six pulse 
inverter whose dc voltage is such that its fundamental is the rated voltage o f the 
motor at rated frequency. Determine approximately the rms value of current at 
50 Hz, 25 Hz and 5 Hz at a rotor frequency of 2.5 Hz
Solution
2.5
At 50 Hz slip = —  = 0.05
Z, = (1 + /2.6) + 736-40 °  + 72-4)
10 + y'38.8

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
-  (1 + y2.6) + 36.4Z90 10.284Z13.496°
39.68Z75.403 
= 1 + y'2.6 + 9.4339Z28.093
= 1 + y'2.6 + 8.3224 + y'4.4425 
= 9.3224 + y'7.0424623 
= 11.683Z44.1270
Zj = 9.3224 + y'7.0425 Q
I,eff
I
= J l + ^ 11.683 V ^ 5 
^
lr
a36.4
486
7t - 1
-  1.028
o -  J l -
Xm
= 0.062
*1*2
At 25 Hz 
s = 2.5
25 = 0.1
Zj — 1 + y 2.3 +
— 1 + y 1.3 +
y 18.2(5 + y 1.2)
5+ y 19.4
18.2Z900 15.142Z13.5 
20.034Z75.55
= 1 + y 1.3 + 4.67Z27.95 
1+ yl.3 + 4.125 + y'2.189
= 6.199Z34.2463
V{ = 200 V
h ïf
/lr
= , 1 +
y 6.199
0-18.2
\ 2
X 0.0021153 = 1.03143
2.5
At 5 Hz 
s = ----=0.5
25
Zj — 1+ y'0.26 + y’3.64(l + y 0.24)
1 -h y*3.88

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors
= 1 + 7*0.26 + 3.64Z900 1.0284Z13.50
4.007 Z 75.55°
= 1 + y'0.26 + 0.9342 Z 27.95 
= 1 + 7*0.26 + 0.438 + j  0.825 
-  1.438 + yi.085 -1.542
l eff
/ lr
/
= J1 +
1.542
\2
V0.062 X 3.64
(0.0021153)
7
= 1.0482
A bhp 230 vdc shunt motor has armature resistance of 0.05Q. and field 
circuit resistance R o f 460 Q. The no load speed is 1000 rpm. Find the 
speed when line current is (a) 75A (b) 150A, (c) 250A. Assume that the motor has 
compensating winding.
Solution 
Speed at no-load 1,000 rpm 
Line current at no load I =0
ao
Back emf E = 0V = 230V
0
Since the motor has compensating winding, the armature reaction does not cause 
any demagnetisation and field flux is constant.
Therefore, Eh ^  N.
h
7 5 -5
^b\
^bl
Eb\
h i
Ebl
222.75
or V3
^ 5 A
46
70A
Vj _ 
1
~Nq ~  1000
V -  Iara
230.70 x 0.05
^ - x l O O O
230
1 5 0 -5  = 145
230 -  145 X.05 -  222.75V
946.7 rpm
230
1000

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Problems
4.1 
A single phase half wave phase con­
trolled rectifier feeds a separately 
excited dc motor having a resistance 
and inductance in the armature circuit 
of 1,5Q and 45 mH respectively. At a 
firing angle of 60° the back emf is 160 
V. Determine the expression for the 
instantaneous armature current. Cal­
culate the average output torque and 
speed. Neglect the converter losses 
and supply impedance. The motor is 
fed from a 220V, 50 Hz source.
4.2 
A single phase, half wave controlled 
rectifier fed from a 220 V, 50 Hz 
mains feeds a separately excited dc 
motor. The resistance of the motor can 
be neglected compared to its induc­
tance. It develops a torque of 35 Nm 
at a speed of 700 rpm and has an iner­
tia of 0.1 kgm2. Determine for a firing 
angle a = 0 the speed dip between the 
conducting periods. Assume a coast­
ing period of n radians.
4.3 
A separately excited dc motor is 
supplied from a 240 V, 50 Hz ac 
mains by a single phase half wave 
controlled rectifier. The motor has 
a resistance and an inductance of 
1.5i2 and 45 mH respectively. For 
a given condition the firing angle is 
60° and the motor has a back emf of 
160 V. Assuming the devices to be 
ideal determine the armature current 
waveform of the motor and the mean 
value of converted power.
4.4 
The motor in Problem 1 develops 
a rated torque of 15 Nm at a speed 
of 50 rad/sec. Determine the firing 
angle of the rectifier when the speed 
has to be increased to 75 rad/s at the 
constant torque. Determine also the 
speed fluctuation both at a -  60°
\
___________________________________________________
and at the new firing angle. Coasting 
period is 27t/3.
4.5 
A separately excited dc motor is sup­
plied from a 220 V, 50 Hz ac mains 
by a half wave controlled rectifier. 
The motor develops a torque of 25 
Nm at a speed of 400 rpm. The motor 
has a constant of 3.5 Vs/rad. It has an 
armature resistance of 0.5Q. Deter­
mine the firing angle for the rectifier 
and speed fluctuation of the motor. 
Assume a coasting period of 150° 
between the pulses.
4.6 
A single phase, half wave controlled 
rectifier operating on a 220 V, 50 Hz 
supply, feeds a separately excited dc 
motor having an armature resistance 
of 5 Q. The armature runs at a speed 
making a back emf of 110 V. The 
speed fluctuation of the motor can be 
neglected due to high inertia. Deter­
mine the average value of the motor 
armature current, if the armature 
inductance is neglected.
4.7 
A separately excited dc motor is fed 
from a single phase half wave con­
trolled rectifier fed from a 220 V, 
50 Hz mains. The resistance of the 
motor is 2.5 Q. It develops a torque 
of 35 Nm at a speed of 700 rpm and 
has an inertia of 0.1 kgm2. Further it 
develops a torque of 0.65 times the 
rated value for which the firing angle 
is 90°. The coasting period has been 
observed under these conditions to be 
210° and the armature constant is 3.0 
V/r/s.
Determine the average speed of the 
motor and speed fluctuation as a per­
centage of the average speed.
4.8 
A single phase, two pulse, bridge 
rectifier operating from 220 V, 50 Hz

The McGraw-Hill Companies
mains feeds a separately excited dc 
motor which has a rated speed of 
1200 rpm at full load torque of 35 
Nm. The motor inertia is 0.1 kg m2. 
A mechanical load having an inertia 
of 0.2 kg n r is coupled to the motor 
which makes the motor deliver its 
rated torque. The thyristors are fired 
at an angle of 60° and the coasting 
period has been found to be 80°. 
Determine the speed drop between 
the conduction periods.
4.9 
A separately excited dc motor having 
an armature resistance of 3 Q and an 
inductance of 25 mH is fed from a 
two pulse bridge rectifier. When the 
firing angle is 75° the motor has a 
back emf of 55 V.
(a) Determine the power output, 
input voltamperes, and power 
factor
(b) Assuming perfect smoothing of 
the load circuit determine the 
power factor.
4.10 A three phase, three pulse recti­
fier operating from a 250 V, (line 
to neutral) 50 Hz supply feeds a dc 
motor having the following specifi­
cations
r = 0.05 Q, 
L = 2 mH, 
the armature constant = 1.5 V/ 
rad/s. Rated armature current = 
400 A.
Rated speed of the motor = 1500 
rpm
Assuming 
continuous 
conduction 
determine the firing angle a for rated 
speed? Determine the range of firing 
angles to give speeds between 1500 
rpm to 750 rpm. If the rated speed 
has to be obtained at a -  0 determine 
the rms phase voltage of the supply. 
What is the range of firing angles for 
this case.
4.11 A 0.75 kW, 500 rpm dc motor has an 
armature with an inertia of 0.01 Kgm2 
sec2 and a rated torque of 20 Nm and
Control of Electric Motors
is fed by a 50 Hz half wave thyris­
tor rectifier. The coasting period is n 
radians between conduction periods 
Find the speed drop between conduc­
tion intervals. The motor is delivering 
rated torque at rated speed.
4.12 The motor in Problem 11 has an 
armature resistance of 8 Q. and induc­
tance of 0.6 H and a motor constant of
4.5 Nm/A or V/rad/s. The converter 
is fed from a 150 V single phase sup­
ply. The motor develops a torque of 
40% rated torque. The firing angle is 
80° and thyristor conducts for 120°. 
Determine the average speed and 
speed fluctuation.
4.13 A 100 hp 1500 rpm dc separately 
excited motor has an armature resis­
tance of 0.02 Q and inductance of
1.5 mH. The motor constant is 1.5 
Vs/rad. A half wave thyristor con­
trolled rectifier feeds the motor. The 
input voltage to the rectifier is 440 V 
line to line. The developed torque is 
500 Nm.
(a) Determine the firing angle of 
the thyristor converter to obtain 
the rated speed of 1500 rpm. 
Assume continuous conduction 
and forward voltage drop 1 V for 
the thyristors.
(b) The firing angle is set at 90°. 
The motor is at standstill carry­
ing the rated current. Determine 
the ripple content of armature 
current.
4.14 A 230 V dc motor having separate 
excitation has an armature resistance 
of 0.3 Q. Its rated speed is 1150 rpm 
at an armature current of 36.7 A. This 
drives a load having a torque speed 
characteristic given by
T = 0.5 co Nm
When this motor is fed from a 480 
V, 50 Hz, three phase three pulse 
rectifier, determine the firing angle

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
of the converter. If the speed is to be 
reduced to 500 rpm determine the fir­
ing angle and torque developed by 
the motor.
4.15 A three phase six pulse bridge con­
verter working on a 500 V, 50 Hz, 
supply feeds a dc motor having a 
rated voltage of 250 V. The motor is 
separately excited and draws at 250 
V an armature current of 181 A and 
runs at a speed of 1500 rpm. The 
motor drives a load whose torque- 
speed characteristic is given by
Tl = 0.64 co2
If the speed control of this motor is 
required from 1500 to 500 rpm deter­
mine the range of firing angles. If the 
firing angle a -  0 for operation at 
rated speed, determine the line volt­
age, what is the range of firing angles 
in this case?
4.16 A separately excited dc motor fed 
from a three-phase six pulse fully 
controlled bridge converter develops 
a full load torque at 1300 rpm when 
the firing angle is zero. The armature 
takes a current of 55 A from a 400 V 
supply having a resistance of 0.70 Q. 
Determine the voltage of ac system 
and range of delay angles for speed 
control from rated speed to 500 rpm, 
at constant rated torque being deliv­
ered by the motor.
4.17 The motor with specifications given 
in Problem 16 is fed from a three 
phase half controlled bridge rectifier. 
Repeat the problem and determine 
the voltage of the system required, as 
well as the range of firing angles for 
the required speed range at constant 
torque.
4.18 The armature of a separately excited 
dc motor is fed from a three phase, 
fully controlled bridge rectifier which 
is supplied from a 580 V, 50 Hz three 
phase system. The motor has an
armature resistance of 0.15 Q. and 
has a motor constant of 1.3 V/rpm. 
Determine
(a) the firing angle required to give a 
no-load speed of 600 rpm.
(b) speed at this firing angle when the 
motor draws a current of 500 A 
at a given load.
(c) the new firing angle to bring the 
speed to 600 rpm.
(d) the firing angle at starting the 
motor against the same load 
torque.
4.19 A 600 V, dc series motor has a com­
bined armature and series field resis­
tance of 0.16 Q. The motor draws 
an armature current of 210 A while 
running at a speed of 600 rpm. The 
motor drives a load having a torque 
speed characteristic
Tl = A co2
Determine the constant A when run­
ning at a speed of 600 rpm. This 
motor is to be controlled by a three 
phase fully controlled bridge recti­
fier. Determine the input voltage of 
the converter if the speed of 600 rpm 
is required at a -  0.
Assuming linear magnetisation char­
acteristic determine the range of fir­
ing angles for a speed control range 
600 to 0 rpm.
4.20 A three phase half controlled bridge 
converter feeds a dc, series motor 
having the following details:
Rated voltage = 240 V 
(ra + r$) = 
0.5 Q
Back emf at 800 rpm = 218 V 
The motor drives a load having a 
torque speed characteristic
T = 4.2 co Nm
Where co is rad/s. Select a suitable 
voltage to the converter so that the 
motor would run at 800 rpm with a = 0. 
If a speed control is required from 
800 to 400 rpm determine the range

The McGraw-Hill Companies
of firing angles. Assume linear mag­
netisation curve.
4.21 If the rectifier in Problem 20 is fed 
from a 380 V, 50 Hz supply deter­
mine the firing angle for 800 rpm of 
the motor. What is the range of firing 
angles for a speed control range of 
800 to 400 rpm.
4.22 A 600 V, 150 hp, 600 rpm series motor 
has a combined series and armature 
resistance of 0.2 Q and draws a line 
current of 200 A. The speed of this 
motor has to be controlled at con­
stant torque. The motor is fed from 
a three phase six pulse bridge recti­
fier which receives its supply from a 
580 V, three phase supply. Determine 
the range of firing angles to achieve 
speed control from 600 rpm to 
200 rpm. Assume linear magnetisa­
tion characteristic.
4.23 A 220 V dc series motor has an 
armature current of 20 A when 
developing a full load torque at 
1500 rpm. The speed is to be con­
trolled by a two pulse single phase 
bridge rectifier. The load inductance 
assures 
continuous 
conduction. 
The rectifier is fed from a 220 V, 
50 Hz supply. Determine the firing 
angle of the converter. If the speed 
of the motor has to be decreased 
to 1000 rpm requiring only 50% 
of the rated torque determine the 
new firing angle. Assume r& + rs = 
0.4 Q and linear magnetisation 
characteristic.
4.24 A 250 V three phase supply is used 
to drive a separately excited dc motor 
through a three phase, six pulse 
bridge converter. The armature resis­
tance is 0.2 O and the motor draws an 
armature current of 250 A to run the 
motor at 1500 rpm at its rated voltage 
of 220 V.
(a) Determine the firing angle a for 
the above condition.
Control of Electric Motors
(b) Determine 
the 
firing 
angle 
required to run at 1000 rpm.
(c) If the firing angle is 80° what is 
the speed?
4.25 A separately excited dc motor is con­
trolled from a dc to dc chopper. The 
motor has the following data:
r = 0.7 Q and L = 10 mH
a 
a
The motor has a constant of 1.5 
Nm per ampere. The chopper is fed 
from a 250 V dc supply and has an 
ON time of 3 ms. The frequency of 
the chopper is 200 Hz. Determine 
the average current and torque of the 
motor.
4.26 The armature voltage of a separately 
excited dc motor is controlled by 
means of a chopper having a fre­
quency 250 pulses/s. The input to the 
chopper is from a 250 V dc source. At 
a time ratio of 0.9 the motor runs at a 
speed of 900 rpm. The motor has an 
armature resistance of 0.1 f> and an 
inductance of 20 mH. It has a torque 
constant of 2.5 Nm/A. Find out the 
mode of operation of the chopper and 
the output torque of the motor. Deter­
mine the speed and torque for ratio of 
0.6 if the motor drives a load having 
a characteristic
Tl o c  n 2
4.27 A 250 V dc shunt motor has an arma­
ture current of 20 A. It develops its 
full load torque at a speed of 1500 
rpm The speed of the motor must be 
reduced to 1000 rpm at a torque of 
0.8 times full load torque. The motor 
is fed from a chopper having a fre­
quency of 400 Hz. Determine the ON 
time of the thyristor chopper, if the 
field excitation reduces to 0.8 times 
full excitation. The armature has a 
resistance of 0.5 Q.
4.28 A dc series motor is controlled by a 
dc to dc chopper circuit fed from a 
600 V dc supply. The armature and

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
field of the motor have a combined 
inductance of 0.15 H and negligible 
resistance. The chopper has a pulse 
frequency of 80 pulses/s and operates 
on a time ratio of 0.6. Determine the 
ripple of the load current. If the ripple 
has to be limited to half this value 
determine the pulse frequency keep­
ing the time ratio the same.
4.29 A dc shunt motor rated at 50 hp takes 
a current of 180.5 A from a 230 V 
supply. It runs at 1300 rpm. The 
armature and shunt field resistances 
are 0.05 Q and 115 Q respectively. 
The above motor is controlled from 
a dc chopper for speed control in the 
range of 300 -  1200 rpm at constant 
load torque. The chopper operates 
on variable frequency with a ON 
time of 4 ms. The field is supplied 
directly from a 240 V supply. Deter­
mine the operating frequency range 
of chopper.
4.30 A 230 V, 25 hp dc shunt motor has 
armature and field resistances of 0.2 
Q and 215 Q. It develops full load 
torque at a speed of 1500 rpm. The 
speed of the motor is to be controlled 
using armature voltage control using 
dc chopper. The field is supplied 
from a 230 V supply. The chopper is 
operated at a constant frequency of 
1000 Hz. Determine the time ratio of 
the chopper to run the motor at 1200 
rpm developing a torque of 0.6 times 
full load torque.
4.31 The armature of a separately excited 
dc motor is supplied from a three phase 
full wave bridge rectifier. The arma­
ture has a resistance of 0.25 Q. The 
armature current of the motor is 220 A 
when running at a speed of 1500 rpm. 
The armature is supplied from a 240 
V dc supply under these conditions. 
If the input of the rectifier is from 
a 230 V, three phase supply, deter­
mine the firing angle of the rectifier. 
If the speed of operation is 800 rpm
what is the firing angle required? 
Determine the speeds of operation for 
firing angles of a = 30° and 65°.
4.32 A small separately excited dc motor 
is supplied from a 230 V single phase 
half controlled bridge. The machine 
is rated for 220 V with a speed of 
2000 rpm taking a current of 22 A. 
The thyristors are fired at 110° and 
the armature current continues for 
50° beyond the voltage zero. Deter­
mine the motor speed at half full load 
torque. The armature resistance is 
0.35 Q.
4.33 The speed of a separately excited dc 
motor is controlled using a single 
phase half controlled rectifier oper­
ating on a 230 V single phase sup­
ply. The armature has an inductance 
of 0.065 H and a resistance of 0.36 
Q. The rated speed of the motor is 
1500 rpm. At this speed the motor 
requires an armature voltage of 220 
V to draw a current of 20 A to develop 
rated torque. The firing angle of the 
bridge is 75° when the motor runs 
at a speed of 1000 rpm. Determine 
an expression for the armature cur­
rent. Determine also the torque 
developed.
4.34 The speed of a separately excited dc 
motor is controlled by armature volt­
age control from a half controlled 
rectifier operating on a 240 V, 50 Hz 
supply. The motor has a constant of 
Kt = 3.65 Nm/A or Vs/rad. The motor 
develops its full load torque of 25 Nm 
at a speed of 45 rad/s. The armature 
resistance is 0.6 Q. Determine the 
variation of firing angle to develop 
the torque from no-load to full load 
at a constant speed of 40 rad/s. Deter­
mine also the speed fluctuation of 
the motor at the torque condition of 
20 Nm.
4.35 A single phase fully controlled rec­
tifier operating on a 230 V, 50 Hz 
supply is used to provide a variable

The McGraw Hill Companies
voltage to the armature of a dc motor 
whose inductance and resistance are 
0.07 H and 3 Q. The motor constant 
is 1.5 Nm/A or Vs/rad. For a firing 
angle of 75° the motor rotates at a 
speed of 160 rad/s. Determine the 
torque developed by the motor. 
Sketch the voltage and current wave­
forms of the motor. Determine the 
rms value of the armature current and 
compare the same with the armature 
loss that would occur on normal dc 
operation.
Determine the firing angle if the load 
torque is increased by 30% keeping 
the speed constant.
4.36 A three phase half controlled bridge 
rectifier operating from a 250 V, 50 
Hz three phase supply provides 
a variable voltage supply to the 
armature of a separately excited dc 
motor whose parameters are given 
below:
4.37
4.38
Armature inductance 
= 0.025 H
Armature resistance 
= 1 Q
Full load torque 
= 60 Nm
Full load speed 
= 1500 rpm
Rated voltage of the 
motor 
= 250 V
Determine the torque developed for a 
firing angle of 30° at speeds of 500, 
700, 1000 rpm.
Repeat Problem 36 if a fully con­
trolled three phase bridge rectifier is 
used.
A dc series motor is controlled from a 
dc chopper fed from a 500 V supply. 
The series motor has an inductance 
of 0.15 H and a resistance of 0.15 Q. 
The rated voltage of the motor is 
250 V. The motor drives a load torque 
represented by
T = 22.5 x 103/œ
Determine the time ratio of the chop­
per if the motor speed is 50 rad/s. 
Determine also the maximum and 
minimum values of armature cur-
Control of Electric Motors
rent while operating at this load 
if the chopper frequency is 80 
pulses/s.
If the chopper frequency is increased 
to 100 pulses/s determine the limits 
of armature current.
4.39 A dc series motor is fed from a 
single phase fully controlled bridge 
rectifier. The details of the motor 
are: rated voltage = 240 V, Full 
load current = 38 A, Armature and 
series field resistance = 0.6 Q, rated 
speed = 600 rpm. Determine the fir­
ing angle of the rectifier to run the 
motor driving at 300 rpm while load 
having a torque-speed characteristic 
given by
T = 0.19m2
Determine also the torque developed. 
Draw the voltage and current wave­
forms. The controlled rectifier is 
fed from 240 V, 50 Hz single phase 
supply.
4.40 (a) A three phase, mid point (bridge)
converter operates on a 250 V, 
three phase, 50 Hz supply. This 
provides a variable voltage sup­
ply to the armature of a separately 
excited dc motor whose param­
eters are as follows:
Armature 
resistance = 0.03 
Q, 
Armature inductance = 0.002 H. 
The motor constant = 1.3 Nm/A 
or Vs/rad. The full load current of 
the motor = 450 A. Neglecting the 
thyristor voltage drop and assum­
ing continuous conduction, deter­
mine the firing angle required 
to drive the motor at a speed of 
150 rad/s.
(b) If the rectifier is supplied by a 
transformer having an inductance 
of 1 mH determine the firing 
angle for the desired operating 
point.
4.41 A single phase full wave thyristor 
bridge operating on a 100 V, 50 Hz

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
supply controls the speed of a sepa­
rately excited motor whose full load 
speed is 600 rpm at a full load torque 
of 30 Nm. The moment of inertia 
of the load inclusive of the motor is 
0.22 kgm2. The thyristor and when 
the coasting period of the motor is 
80°. (Firing angle is adjusted to 80°). 
Determine the speed drop of the 
shaft.
4.42 (a) A two pulse bridge rectifier oper­
ating on a 110 V, 50 Hz supply 
provides a variable dc voltage 
to the armature of a separately 
excited dc motor. The resistance 
of the armature is 6 Q. The back 
emf of the motor is 70 V and can 
be assumed to be constant due 
to high inertia of the motor and 
constant excitation. The armature 
inductance is negligible. Deter­
mine the average value of the 
armature current for a firing angle 
of 0° and 30°.
(b) What would be the average value 
of armature current if the arma­
ture has an inductance of 2 mH?
(c) If the load inductance is extremely 
large determine the currents.
4.43 A single phase half wave controlled 
rectifier is fed from a 220 V, 50 Hz 
supply and is used to provide a vari­
able voltage to the armature of a dc 
motor. The thyristor firing angle is 0°. 
The armature has a resistance of 6 Q 
and a back emf of 75 V which can be 
assumed to be constant due to inertia 
and constant excitation of the motor. 
The armature has a negligible induc­
tance. Determine the average value of 
the current.
4.44 A dc motor having a separately 
excited field develops a torque of 31 
Nm at a speed of 500 rpm. Its iner­
tia is 0.05 kgm2. This motor has an 
inductance playing an important role, 
and negligible resistance. A single 
phase half controlled rectifier is used
to control the speed. If the thyristor 
is fired at a = 0, determine the speed 
dip if the coasting period is n radians 
between two conduction periods.
4.45 Repeat Problem 4.44 if the armature 
resistance is 2.3 Q and the load torque 
is 0.7 times the full load value. The 
thyristor is fired at 80°. The coasting 
period has been found to be 240° and 
the motor constant 3.2 V/radian/s.
4.46 A three phase, eight pole, 50 Hz 
induction motor has the following 
parameters:
r2 = 0.15 Q 
x2 = 0.7 0
Neglect the stator impedance, mag­
netising current and rotational losses. 
The motor speed is controlled by 
varying the applied voltage by an ac 
voltage controller, which operates 
from a 380 V, 50 Hz supply. Deter­
mine the applied voltages per phase 
of the motor to have slips of 0.15 and 
0.25 respectively. The motor drives a 
load with a characteristic
7j = 0.014 co2 Nm 
Determine also the angles of firing of 
the converter as well as the conduc­
tion angles of the thyristors.
4.47 A three phase, four pole, 50 Hz squir­
rel cage induction motor has the fol­
lowing equivalent circuit parameters:
r, = 0.05 Q; r{ = 0.09 Q; xx + x'2 = 
0.55 Q. The motor is star-connected 
and rated voltage is 400 V. It drives a 
load whose torque is proportional to 
speed and is given by
7j = 0.05 co Nm
Determine the speed and torque of 
the motor for a firing angle of 45° of 
the ac voltage controller operating on 
a 400 V, 50 Hz supply.
4.48 A three phase, 420 V, 50 Hz delta 
connected induction motor has the 
following parameters:
r, = 2.95 Q xx = 6.82 Q.
r{ — 2.08 £2 x2 = 4.11 Q per phase

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Neglect core loss. The motor draws a 
current 6.7 A at no load. This motor 
drives a load with torque-speed char­
acteristic given by
7j = 0.11m2 Nm
Determine the speed and torque for 
the following cases:
(a) The voltage controller operating 
on 440 V supply is fired at a fir­
ing angle of 30°.
(b) The voltage controller provides 
an rms voltage of 250 V between 
the lines of the motor.
4.49 Repeat Problem 4.48 for a rotor resis­
tance of 5 T>, the other data being 
unchanged.
4.50 The speed of a three phase slip ring 
induction motor is controlled by vari­
ation of rotor resistance. The full load 
torque of the motor is 50 Nm at a slip 
of 0.03. The motor drives a load hav­
ing a characteristic
T oc N 2
The motor has four poles and oper­
ates on 50 Hz, 400 V supply. Deter­
mine the speed of the motor for 0.8 
times the rated torque. This operat­
ing condition is obtained with addi­
tional resistance in the circuit. The 
resistance is controlled by chopper in 
the rotor circuit. Determine the time 
ratio of the chopper to give an aver­
age torque 75% of the rated torque. 
Determine also the average torque 
developed for a time ratio of 0.4.
4.51 The motor of Problem 48 has its 
speed controlled by a chopper con­
trolled resistance. A resistance of 
rQ  has been controlled by the chop­
per. Determine the value of r, to 
get a speed control range of 1500 
to 500 rpm, assuming a turns ratio 
of two between the stator and rotor. 
The torque and speed of the load are 
related by
T oc N
Control of Electric Motors
Determine the characteristic giving 
the speed vs time ratios of the chop­
per. Assume a star-connection to the 
rotor.
4.52 Repeat Problem 4.51 if the motor 
drives a constant torque load.
4.53 An eight pole, 50 Hz, 380 V, star- 
connected induction motor has a star- 
connected slip ring rotor. The stator/ 
rotor turns ratio is 1.25. The speed of 
the motor is controlled by a converter 
cascade in the rotor circuit. Deter­
mine the firing angles of the inverter 
to get 600 rpm and 400 rpm at no- 
load. The inverter is connected to a 
380 V, three phase system. Assume 
no overlap in the rectifier as well as 
in the inverter. What is the minimum 
possible speed?
4.54 Repeat Problem 53 for overlap angles 
of 25° on the diode rectifier and 5° on 
the inverter. Assume also voltage 
drops of 1.5 and 2.0 V in the thyristor 
and diode Determine the minimum 
possible speed.
4.55 If a 
transformer 
is 
interposed 
between the inverter and supply with 
Np/Ns = 2 determine the firing angles 
for the above two cases. Find out the 
minimum possible speed in these 
cases.
4.56 A slip ring induction motor has rotor 
resistance and standstill reactance of 
0.2 Q and 0.6 Q per phase. The stator 
is delta-connected with an operating 
voltage of 400 V. The rotor is star- 
connected having an effective stator/ 
rotor turns ratio of 1.3. The inverter 
is connected to a 400 V, three phase 
system. The motor has a six pole 
winding. The firing angle is adjusted 
such that the motor runs at 600 rpm 
at no-load.
(a) Determine the firing angle.
(b) The machine is loaded so that a 
torque of 250 Nm is developed. 
Determine the speed.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(c) What should be the firing angle of 
the inverter if the speed under load 
is to be maintained at 600 rpm?
4.57 Repeat Problem 4.56 taking the sta­
tor impedance of (0.2 + /0.6) Q into 
consideration.
4.58 A three phase four pole 50 Hz induc­
tion motor has the following data:
r, = 0.05 Q 
r[ — 0.09 Q 
x, = 0.35f2 
*2 = 0.35 Q
V = 440 V, 
the stator is star-con­
nected.
The motor operates on a variable fre­
quency variable voltage supply such 
that Vlf is constant. The motor drives 
a load with a torque-speed character­
istic given by
Tx = 0.009 co2 Nm
where cor is the rotor speed in rad/s. 
Determine the operating speed and 
torque when the motor has supply fre­
quencies of 5 Hz, 25 Hz and 50 Hz.
4.59 Repeat Problem 4.58 if the motor is 
controlled to have constant flux, i.e., 
E /f is constant.
4.60 Consider the motor of Problem 
4.58. Find the lowest possible fre­
quency and voltage for proper oper­
ation. Determine the starting torque 
and speed at maximum torque for 
this frequency as well as 30 Hz and 
50 Hz.
4.61 A 50 hp, 440 V, 50 Hz six pole star- 
connected induction motor has the 
following equivalent circuit param­
eters:
r, = 0.1 Q 
r[ — 0.12 £2
x, = 0.3 Q 
X2 = 0.3 Q
x = 15 Q
m
For a slip of 0.03 at rated frequency 
determine the torque developed. 
If the motor drives a load having a 
torque-speed characteristic
Tx = A co2 Nm co rad/s Determine A.
The speed of the motor is controlled 
using variable frequency with Vlf
constant. Determine the torque and 
speed of the motor when 220 V is 
applied to the motor.
4.62 Consider Problem 4.61. What voltage 
must be applied at an operating fre­
quency of 5 Hz? Determine the perfor­
mance of the motor at this condition.
4.63 A 15 hp, 220 V, three phase, 50 Hz, 
six pole star-connected induction 
motor has the following equivalent 
circuit parameters
r = 0.128 Q. 
r{ = 0.0935 O 
x, = 0.25 Q 
x'2 = 0.25Q. 
x = 8 Q, all at 50 Hz.
(a) Determine the starting torque vs 
frequency and starting current vs 
frequency of the motor when the 
stator frequency is varied from 0 
to 50 Hz, the voltage being simul­
taneously varied using the rela­
tion Vlf= constant.
(b) The motor is operated by a square 
wave inverter whose peak ampli­
tude is such that its fundamental 
has an amplitude equal to rated 
voltage at 50 Hz.
(c) The motor operates at 40 Hz and 
has a slip of 0.04. Determine the 
torque and input current wave­
form when the voltage is varied 
such that Vlf= constant.
(d) The stator frequency is varied 
to 5 Hz keeping the rotor fre­
quency the same. The voltage is 
varied such that Vlf is constant. 
Determine the torque and current 
waveform.
4.64 Consider Problem 4.63. The motor is 
controlled such that E /f is constant. 
Repeat the problem for the cases of 
the above problem.
4.65 A 50 hp, 440 V, 50 Hz, six pole star- 
connected induction motor has the fol­
lowing equivalent circuit parameters:
r, = 0.15 Q 
r[ = 0.2 Q.
x, = 0.40 Q 
X2 — 0.45 Q 
x -  15 Q., all at 50 Hz.
m

The McGraw-Hill Companies
The motor is fed from a constant 
current source of 70 A of variable 
frequency.
Determine torque-speed characteris­
tics at 5 Hz, 25 Hz, and 50 Hz.
4.66 (a) Based on equivalent circuit show
that the torque developed and 
input current of a variable fre­
quency induction motor are inde­
pendent of stator frequency but 
depend on rotor frequency for 
constant airgap flux.
(b) Use the above result to determine 
the relationship between the sta­
tor current and rotor frequency as 
well as the relationship between 
torque and rotor frequency.
4.67 A 10 kW, 380 V, three phase, 50 Hz 
four pole synchronous motor has the 
following equivalent circuit parameters: 
Ra = 1 Q 
xd = 12.5 i2/phase. 
leakage reactance = x 
= 1.5 Ql 
phase.
The motor is fed from a VSI and 
drives fan toad whose torque-speed 
characteristic can be represented by
7j = A co2 Nm co rad/s
Neglecting 
rotational 
and 
excita­
tion losses determine the value of 
A, assuming that the motor operates 
at UPF. The speed of the motor is 
required to be controlled in the range 
1500-600 rpm. The Elf of the motor 
is kept constant in the complete speed 
range. If the field current is adjusted so 
that the motor operates at UPF at 1500 
rpm, determine the line current and 
powerfactor at 600 rpm. If the field 
current is adjusted so that the motor 
operates at UPF at 600 rpm determine 
the line current and powerfactor at 
1500 rpm. Assume a turns ratio of the 
field to annature as N IN =10.
re 
sc
4.68 Consider a salient pole synchro­
nous motor operating on a variable 
frequency, variable voltage supply. 
Neglecting the effects of stator resis-
Control of Electric Motors
tance prove the following based on 
phasor diagram.
(a) When the applied voltage is var­
ied in proportion, to frequency at 
constant field current, the motor 
draws a constant current inde­
pendent of stator frequency.
(b) The stator current under these 
operating conditions is a func­
tion of torque angle.
4.69 A synchronous motor rated at 100 hp, 
500 V, three-phase star-connected has 
a resistance and synchronous reac­
tance of 0.03 Q and 3 Q respectively. 
The leakage reactance of motor may 
be taken as 0.7 Q/phase. The motor 
has a ratio N IN = 15.00. The motor
re 
se
drives a load whose speed torque 
curve is represented by
Tl = A + B rnm Nm
Above the base speed the termi­
nal voltage is held constant at rated 
value. The speed control is achieved 
by frequency variation only and a 
limit is introduced on the line current 
as 80% rated line current. In the com­
plete speed range the power factor is 
maintained at UPF. Determine the 
maximum speed possible.
4.70 A 11 kV, three phase star-connected 
synchronous motor has effective 
resistance and synchronous reactance 
of 1 Q and 30 Q per phase. Leakage 
reactance is 5 Q. The field system 
of the motor is designed for UPF 
operation. The ratio of N IN =25. 
Neglect rotational and exciter losses. 
The motor operates from a CSI and is 
coupled to a load whose
f  = a + c.N
(a) When the motor operates at its 
rated load and UPF determine 
E lf line current /  field at f  and 
the torque angle S.
(b) The motor operates at field 
current to keep Elf constant.

The McGraw Hill Companies
w
m
Electric Drives
The motor operates at the value 
of S obtained in (a). Determine 
the performance of the motor at 
an armature current of 60 A.
4.71 An induction motor is described as a 
rotating transformer comment on the 
statement. With suitable reasons.
4.72 Give a comparison of induction 
motor and synchronous motor.
4.73 The speed of an induction motor can­
not be equal to synchronous speed. 
Give the reason.
4.74 When the mechanical load on a 
3 phase motor is increased, how does 
input current increase to meet the 
new conditions?
4.75 The rotating magnetic fields of the 
stator and rotor are stationary with 
respect to each other justify the state­
ment.
4.76 A 3 phase induction motor develops 
a starting torque but a single phase 
cannot develop a starting torque. 
Why?
S 3
0
—
1 Multiple-Choice Questions
\
J
4.1 
A three phase ac voltage controller 
feeding a three phase induction motor 
has an output of
(a) constant voltage of variable fre­
quency
(b) variable voltage of variable fre­
quency
(c) variable voltage 
of constant 
frequency
(d) constant voltage of constant fre­
quency
4.2 
The method of speed control using a 
three phase voltage controller is suit­
able for loads
(a) whose torque is proportional to 
speed
(b) having constant torque
(c) whose torque is proportional 
to J n
(d) having torque proportional to N2
4.3 
A three phase ac voltage controller 
feeds an induction motor. The motor 
has
(a) very good efficiency and power 
factor at all speeds
(b) very good efficiency but poor 
power factor at all speeds
(c) poor efficiency but good power 
factor at all speeds
(d) poor efficiency and poor power 
factor at low speeds
4.4 
A three phase induction motor hav­
ing speed control using chopper 
controlled resistance is character­
ised by
(a) poor power factor and good effi­
ciency
(b) poor efficiency and poor power 
factor
(c) good efficiency and good power 
factor
(d) good power factor and poor effi­
ciency
4.5 
A three phase induction motor with 
chopper controlled resistance has its 
torque proportional to
(a) rotor current
(b) square of rotor current
(c) stator resistance
(d) square root of rotor current
4.6 
A three phase induction motor having 
a combination of diode rectifier and 
line commutated inverter in the rotor 
circuit can give
(a) speeds below synchronous speed 
only
(b) speeds above synchronous speed 
only

The McGraw-Hill Companies
(c) both sub and super synchronous 
speeds
(d) speeds varying 0 to 50% of syn­
chronous speeds
4.7 
A three phase induction motor having 
subsynchronous converter cascade in 
the rotor circuit is characterised by
(a) good power factor and poor effi­
ciency
(b) good power factor and good 
efficiency
(c) poor power factor and poor effi­
ciency
(d) poor power factor and good effi­
ciency
4.8 
The motor having slip energy recov­
ery scheme can be braked by means of
(a) regenerative braking
(b) plugging
(c) dc dynamic braking
(d) all the methods of (a), (b) and (c)
4.9 
The speed of an induction motor can 
be varied by means of variable fre­
quency supply from a static power 
converter. A simultaneous voltage 
variation is also effected in order to
(a) avoid saturation and provide 
optimum torque capability
(b) the torque pulsations decrease if 
supplied from variable voltage 
supply
(c) to limit the peak value of stator 
current
(d) to minimise the additional losses
4.10 A three phase induction motor is sup­
plied from a variable voltage variable 
frequency supply such that air gap 
flux is constant {Elf is constant). The 
armature current of the motor now
(a) is independent of stator fre­
quency but depends on rotor fre­
quency
(b) is dependent on stator frequency 
but does not depend on rotor fre­
quency
(c) is dependent on both stator and 
rotor frequencies
Control of Electric Motors
(d) is independent on both stator and 
rotor frequencies
4.11 A current source inverter fed induc­
tion motor is inherently unstable 
when it operates on
(a) open loop
(b) closed loop
(c) a variable 
frequency supply 
keeping air gap flux constant
(d) a variable 
frequency 
supply 
keeping stator flux constant
4.12 A three phase induction motor oper­
ates at constant rotor frequency when 
the stator frequency is varied from 
zero to rated value. The torque devel­
oped by the motor is
(a) constant from zero to rated speed
(b) proportional to speed
(c) proportional to square of the 
speed
(d) inversely proportional to speed
4.13 A variable frequency variable voltage 
induction motor
(a) can be accelerated at constant 
torque or constant current
(b) suffers from poor starting char­
acteristics as in the case of mains 
fed motor
(c) has only stepped variation of 
speed
(d) suffers from stability consider­
ations
4.14 When operated with variable fre­
quency a synchronous motor has 
an advantage over an induction 
motor in
(a) that it is free from torque oscil­
lations
(b) that it has very good efficiency
(c) that the line power factor can be 
improved by varying excitation
(d) that in certain cases the inverter 
can be of simpler configuration 
due to the possible load commu­
tation.
4.15 In a three phase synchronous motor 
operating 
on 
variable 
frequency

The McGraw-Hill Companies
^ ^ 3  
Electric Drives
supply the armature resistance is 
neglected. The voltage to the motor 
is varied keeping VIf constant and 7f 
constant. The stator current would 
now
(a) increase as the frequency incre­
ases
(b) decrease as the frequency incre­
ases
(c) increase with frequency up to 
certain value of frequency and 
decreases as the frequency is 
increased beyond this value
(d) is constant as long as the load 
torque is constant
4.16 By self control of a synchronous 
motor we mean that
(a) elimination of torque ripple
(b) the speed of the motor is varied 
in steps
(c) the speed of the motor is a func­
tion of input frequency
(d) the input frequency is controlled 
from the speed of the motor
4.17 The disadvantage of Load commuta­
tion is
(a) harmonic torques
(b) loss of efficiency due to losses
(c) the speeds from 0 to 10% of base 
speed are not possible
(d) the speed control range is limited 
to 0 -  10% of base speed
4.18 The operation of ac motors fed from 
current source inverters in character­
ised by
(a) sinusoidal line voltage
(b) peaky armature voltage
(c) good harmonic torques
(d) sinusoidal armature voltage with 
spikes
4.19 While operating on a phase con­
trolled converter the commutation 
capability of the motor deteriorates 
because of
(a) increase in the RMS current
(b) harmonic content of armature 
current
(c) peak value of armature current
(d) peak value of armature current, 
harmonic content of armature 
current and possible discontinu­
ous conduction
4.20 When only one quadrant operation is 
required the converter normally pre­
ferred is
(a) fully controlled converter
(b) fully controlled converter with 
FWD
(c) half controlled converter
(d) sequence control of two series 
connected converters
4.21 A 
separately 
excited 
dc 
motor 
designed for operation on phase con­
trolled converter has laminated inter­
poles
(a) to improve the commutation of 
the motor
(b) to facilitate easy construction
(c) to decrease the losses in the 
interpole
(d) to improve the power factor
4.22 For low speed high power reversible 
drives
(a) cycloconverter-fed ac drives are 
suitable
(b) current source inverter-fed ac 
drives are suitable
(c) voltage source inverter (square 
wave inverter) fed drives are 
suitable
(d) induction motors fed from ac 
voltage controller are suitable
4.23 Turn of a thyristor takes place
(a) When anode to cathode voltage 
is positive
(b) When anode to cathode voltage 
is negative
(c) When there is positive current 
pulse at the gate
(d) When the anode to cathode 
voltage is positive and there is 
also a positive current pulse at 
the gate

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors 
^ ^ 3
4.24 When a voltage is applied to a thyris­
tor making anode negative and cath­
ode positive
(a) all the junctions are negatively 
biased
(b) outer junctions are negatively 
and inner junctions are positively 
biased
(c) outer junctions are positively 
biased and central junction is 
negatively biased
(d) all the junctions are positively 
biased
4.25 Turn off time of a thyristor affects its
(a) operating voltage
(b) operating frequency
(c) overload capacity
(d) thermal behaviour
4.26 The sharing of the voltages between 
thyristors operating in series is influ­
enced by their
(a) di/dt capability
(b) dv/dt capability
(c) v.i characteristics (leakage cur­
rents)
(d) junction temperatures
4.27 In the state of saturation a MOSFET 
acts as
(a) closed switch
(b) an open switch
(c) an amplifier
(d) pure resistor
4.28 The dL capability of a thyristor is
dt
decided by
(a) The spreading velocity of the 
current across the junction
(b) The voltage rating of the thy­
ristor
(c) Reverse blocking capability of 
the device
(d) The steady state forward losses 
of the device
4.29 When operated with variable fre­
quency, a synchronous motor has an 
advantage over an induction motor 
in
(a) that it is free from torque oscil­
lations
(b) that it has very good efficiency
(c) that the line power factor be 
improved by varying excitation
(d) that 
in 
certain 
cases 
the 
inverter can be simpler con­
figuration due to possible load 
commutation
4.30 By 
self-control 
of asynchronous 
motor, we mean
(a) the elimination of torque ripple
(b) the speed of the motor is varied 
in steps
(c) the speed of the motor is func­
tion of input frequency
(d) the input frequency is controlled 
from the speed of the motor
4.31 A separately excited dc motor is 
driving a centrifugal pump whose 
torque is proportional to the square 
of the speed. The armature current 
is 20A at a speed of 500 rpm. The 
armature current at the speed of 
200 rpm is
(a) 6.4 A
(b) 3.2 A
(c) 9.6 A
(d) 8 A
4.32 A variable frequency variable voltage 
induction motor
(a) can be accelerated at constant 
torque or constant current
(b) suffers from poor starting char­
acteristics as in the case of mains 
feds motor
(c) has only stepped variation of 
speed
(d) suffers from stability consider­
ation
4.33 A three phase induction motor with 
chopper-controlled resistance has its 
torque proportional to
(a) rotor current
(b) square of rotor current
(c) stator resistance
(d) square root of the rotor current

The McGraw-Hill Companies
^ ^ 9  
Electric Drives
4.34 In static Scherbius drive of 3 phase 
slip ring induction motor converter- 1 
is a diode rectifier connected to the 
rotor converter-2 is a thyristor con­
verter connected to 3 phase mains. 
This drive can’t be used for
(a) speeds above synchronous speed 
only
(b) speeds below synchronous speed 
only
(c) speeds both above and below 
synchronous speeds only
(d) speeds varying from 0 to 50% of 
synchronous speeds only
Solid State DC and AC Drives
4.35 A line commutated converter driving 
a DC motor can be considered as
(a) linear load
(b) non-linear load
(c) linear load at low speed and non 
linear at high speed
(d) linear load at high torque & non­
linear at low torque
4.36 Starting current of a motor is kept 
low
(a) to avoid excessive heating
(b) to safeguard the life of the motor
(c) to reduce the fluctuation in the 
supply voltage
(d) to reduce the acceleration time
4.37 For quick and efficient starting of a 
load requires
(a) a motor torque to be more that 
load torque
(b) a motor torque to be equal to 
load torque
(c) a motor torque to be less than 
load torque
(d) none of the above
4.38 Ward Leonard method of speed con­
trol achieves speed change by
(a) varying field flux
(b) varying armature voltage
(c) varying field voltage
(d) varying armature resistance
4.39 The acceleration speed under steady 
state condition
(a) 10
(b) 0.999
(c) 1.265
(d) 0
4.40 Determine the steady state condition 
for T = -  1- 2 W T 
=
m 
load 
V 
m
when W = 1, T = -3
m 
7
(a) unstable
(b) stable
(c) partially stable
(d) partially unstable
4.41 What is the effect when viscous fric­
tion coefficient is negligible?
(a) no oscillations
(b) shaft breaks
(c) smooth operation
(d) no effect
4.42 Load torques which always oppose 
the and change their sign on the 
reversal of the motion called
(a) active
(b) passive
(c) reactive
(d) none of the above
4.43 The inverter limit of a line commu­
tated inverter is due to
(a) overlap
(b) turn off time of the thyristors
(c) turn on time of the thyristors
(d) both (a) and (b)
4.44 Regenerative braking is employed in 
series motor when
(a) armature connections reversed
(b) field winding reversed
(c) field 
winding 
is 
separately 
excited
(d) (b)and(c)
4.45 What is effect of regenerative braking 
when input side load is negligible
(a) speed decreases
(b) terminal voltage rises
(c) improves power factor
(d) (b)and(c)
4.46 When friction torque is greater than 
load torque, then motor
(a) stalls
(b) runs at -50 RPM runs at 50 RPM

The McGraw Hill Companies
4.47 In a discontinuous mode of conduc­
tion for converter fed dc drive which 
is true
(a) peak current increases
(b) average current increases
(c) Rms current decreases
(d) average currents decreases
4.48 What is the condition for continuous 
mode of conduction for converter fed 
dc drive
(a) torque is greater than the rated 
value
(b) torque is lesser than the rated 
torque
(c) rated torque is greater than 
torque
(d) rated torque is lesser than 
torque
4.49 A conducting thyristor can be suc­
cessfully turned off
(a) by making the current zero
(b) by maintaining the current at 
zero value for reverse recovery
(c) time (7r) + gate recovery time
( y )
(d) by simply applying reverse 
voltage between anode and 
cathode
4.50 An amplifying gate thyristor has 
advantages of
(a) high gate current at low gate 
drive
(b) a poor 
rating even at high gate 
current
(c) its c-
jj improving only at high gate 
currents
(d) very slow spreading velocity
4.51 Peak inverse rating of a triac
(a) is the same as that of a thyristor
(b) is greater than that of a thyristor
(c) is inferior and very less than that 
of a thyristor
Control of Electric Motors
El.
(d) is not significant due to the 
nature of its application
4.52 A dc chopper has an ontime T 
= 
lms and its frequency is 500 Hz. The 
time ratio of chopper is
(a) 100%
(b) 75%
(c) 50%
(d) 25%
4.53 A chopper feeds an RL load com­
prising a resistance R = 10 Q and an 
inductance 5 mH chopper frequency 
of 500 Hz an it fed from 220 VDC. 
Determine minimum and maximum 
of load current peak to peak ripple 
average value of load current
Solution:
Source voltage 220 V, chopper fre­
quency = 500 Hz, chopper period 
2 ms, Time ratio of chopper 0.5
7’on= 1 ms r„ff= 1
The load time constant
L_ _ 15 
~~ R ~ 10 
= 1.5 ms
The maximum values of the ct = /,
Ttsk / T
VB 1 -  e-yON
R l - e
-2/1.5
220 
220 1 -  e-r°N/T
10 
40 
\ - e ~ T/x
22 (.487)
10 073640 
The minimum value
= 14.5490
14.5491 e-1/1.5 _ 7.4697A
(b) 
Peak to peak ripple 7.0793 A
(c) 
Average value of L load ct = 
220 x 0.5
10
= 11.0A

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
References
J
4.1 
Bose, B.K., Adjustable ac drives, IEEE Press, New York, 1980.
4.2 
Leonhard, W., Control o f electrical drives, Springer Verlag, New York, 1985.
4.3 
Bose, B.K., Power electronics and ac drives, Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, 
1986.
4.4 
Dcwan, S.B., G.B. Slemon and A. Stranghen, Power semiconductor drives, John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc. New York 1984.
4.5 
Murphy, J.M.D., Thyristor control ac motors, Pergamon Press Ltd., Oxford, 1973.
4.6 
Kusko, A, Solid-state dc motor drives, The M.I.T. Press, 1969 Cambridge Mass and 
London.
4.7 
Ramshaw, R.S., Power electronics, thyristor controlled power for electric motors, 
Chapman and Hall, London, 1973.
4.8 
Subrahmanyam, Vedam, Thyristor control o f electric drives, Tata McGraw-Hill Pub­
lishing Company Ltd., New Delhi, 1988.
4.9 
Sen, PC., Thyristor dc drives, John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York, 1981.
4.10 Campbell, S.J., Solid-state ac motor controls, selection and application, Marcel 
Dekker, Inc., New York.
4.11 Lipo, T.A, The analysis of induction motors with voltage control by symmetrically 
triggered thyristors’, IEEE Trans, on PAS, Vol. PAS, 90, pp. 515-525, 1971.
4.12 Sen, PC., and KJ. Ma, ‘Rotor chopper control of an induction motor drive: TRC 
strategy’, IEEE Trans. Ind. App., Vol. 1A-11, pp. 43-19, Jan./Feb. 1975.
4.13 Kleinrath, H. ‘Torque pulsation of an induction motor with speed control by a static fre­
quency converter in the slipring circuit’, Proc. ICEM, Bnissels, E3/8-1-E-3/8-9, 1978.
4.14 Smith, A, ‘Static Scherbius system for induction motor speed control’, Proceedings 
IE E , Vol. 124, 1977, pp. 557-565.
4.15 Meyer, A., ‘Network reactions and Oscillating torques caused by subsynchronous 
converter cascades,’ B.B.C. Review, 1982, p. 133.
4.16 Sharpenberg, H., and A. Streck, ‘Subsynchronous Converter Cascade for Large Cen­
trifugal Pumps’, ibid, p. 142.
4.17 Klors, A., J. Heinrich, ‘Large Induction Motors of Medium Rating with Current 
Source Inverters’, ibid, p. 163.
4.18 Lipo, T.A., and E.P. Cornell, ‘State variable steady state analysis of a current con­
trolled induction motor drive, Conference Record, IEEE IAS, 1974.
4.19 Subrahmanyam, V., S. Yuvarajan, B. Ramaswami, ‘Analysis of commutation of a 
current inverter feeding an induction motor load’, IEEE Trans, on IA, Vol. 1A-16, 
1980, pp. 332.
4.20 Yuvarajan, S., B. Ramaswami and V. Subrahmanyam, ‘Analysis of a current con­
trolled inverter-fed induction motor drive using digital simulation’, IEEE Trans, on 
IE CI, Vol. IECI-27, 1980, pp. 67-76.
4.21 Reddy, D.S., M.V.I. Prakash and Vedam Subrahmanyam, ‘State space approach 
for the analysis of multiple inverter-fed three-phase induction motor’, Journal IE 
(India), Vol. 69, 1989, pp. 126-133.
4.22 Subrahmanyam Vedam and K. Surendran, ‘stability analysis of variable frequency 
induction motors using D-decomposition technique,’ Electric Machines and Power 
Systems, Vol. 11, 1986.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control of Electric Motors 
^ ^ 9
4.23 Masato, K. M. Yano, I. Kamiyana, and S. Yano, ‘Microprocessor-based vector con­
trolled system for induction motors drives with rotor time constant identification’, 
IEEE Transactions on IA, Vol. IA-22, No. 3, 1986, pp. 453-459.
4.24 Eder, E., ‘Stromrichter zur Drehzahlsteurung von Drehfeldmaschimen,’ Teil 1 -Teil 4, 
Siemens, AG, West Germany.
4.25 Meyer, A., H. Schweickardt and P. Strozzi, ‘The converter-fed synchronous motor as 
a variable speed drive system’, B.B.C. Review, p. 151, 1982.
4.26 LeHuy, H., R. Perret and D. Roye, ‘Microprocessor control of a current fed synchro­
nous motor drive’, IEEE Industry Applications Society Conference Record, 1980, 
pp. 562-569.
4.27 Terens, L., J. Bommell and K. Peters, ‘The cycloconverter-fed synchronous motor’, 
B.B.C. Review, 1982, p. 122.
4.28 Steigerwald, R.L., and T.A. Lipo, ‘Analysis of a novel forced commutation start­
ing scheme for a load commutated synchronous motor drive’, IEEE Trans, on IA, 
Vol. IA-15, p. 14-24, 1979.
4.29 Subrahmanyam, Vedam and N. Gopalakrishnan, ‘Steady state performance of a cur­
rent controlled synchronous motor’, ETZ-Archiv, Vol. 8, 1986.
4.30 Subrahmanyam, Vedam and N. Gopalakrishnan, ‘Analysis of a self controlled syn­
chronous motor, Journal o f IE (India), Vol. 68, 1987.
4.31 Sen, P.C., and M.L. McDonald, ‘Thyristorized dc drives with regenerative braking 
and speed reversal,’ IEEE Transactions IECI, Vol. IECI-125, 1978, pp. 347-354.
4.32 Sen, P.C., and S.R. Doradla, ‘Evaluation of control schemes for thyristor controlled 
D.C. motors’ IEEE Transactions IECI, Vol. IECI-125, 1978, pp. 247-255.
4.33 Subrahmanyam, Vedam ‘A state space approach to the performance analysis of 
a separately excited dc motor using state transition signal flow graph technique’, 
Journal o f IE (India), EL, Vol. 67, Pt. ELI, 1986.
4.34 Blaschke, F., ‘The principle offield orientation as applied to the new TRANSVECTOR 
closed loop control system for rotating field machines’, Siemens Review, 
Vol. 34, pp. 217-220, May 1972.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
[5
\
Rating and
Heating of Motors
>
l
5.1 
REQUIREMENTS OF A DRIVE MOTOR
While selecting a motor for a drive, it must, besides providing suitable torque-speed 
characteristic and adequate power, satisfy the following requirements:
i. 
The rating of the motor selected should be in accordance with the 
mechanical work required by the driven machine. When loaded to do 
this mechanical work its final steady-state temperature rise must be 
within the permissible value for the class of insulation used.
ii. 
The motor selected should be capable of driving the load satisfactorily 
both under steady-state as well as transient conditions. The choice 
of the motor rating to suit this requirement is based on the load dia­
grams which depict the motor torque, power and current as functions 
of time.
iii. When a motor is selected based on a given load diagram and is fully 
loaded it must not have excess temperature rise. It must be capable of 
withstanding short time overloads and must have enough starting torque 
to accelerate the motor to the desired speed in a given time.
Motors are selected for a given class of duty after giving due consideration to 
the thermal as well as overload capacity.
Selection of a motor has a bearing on the economic interest of the establish­
ment. A motor chosen should neither be too small nor too big to drive a particular 
load. In the former case it may not be able to drive the load satisfactorily and 
may get unduly overloaded with a temperature rise much greater than the permis­
sible value. Some times it may run the risk of damage or even bum out. In the 
latter case, the drive motor is not fully loaded, operates with poor efficiency and 
involves capital investment. In the case of ac motor the line pf is poor at light 
loads.
5.2 POWER LOSSES AND HEATING OF ELECTRIC MOTORS
An electric motor has power losses occurring in its various parts such as copper 
losses occurring in armature and field, core losses occurring due to hysteresis and 
eddy currents in the magnetic material used as a core, and mechanical losses due

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
to friction and windage. These unavoidable power losses cause localised heating 
and are responsible for temperature rise of the motor. The heat flows from the 
point of origin to the external surface where it is dissipated to the surrounding 
cooling medium. Hence, heating and temperature rise of an electric machine are a 
function of the losses occurring in it.
Losses in an electric machine can be broadly classified into constant and vari­
able losses. Constant losses remain independent of load current whereas variable 
losses vary as the square of the load, expressed as a fraction of the rated load. The 
losses occurring in a machine are
W = W c + x 2Wv 
C5-1)
where W -  constant losses
c
W = variable losses at full load
v
x = load on the motor expressed as a fraction of rated load.
If there is no cooling and the machine cannot dissipate heat to the external 
medium its temperature increases to a very high value. Hence, it must be pro­
vided with cooling to limit the maximum temperature rise to a permissible value, 
depending upon the class of insulation employed. The heat generated in the 
machine is dissipated to the surrounding cooling medium. However, a portion 
of heat is stored in the material itself causing a temperature rise. In the begining 
all the heat is stored in the material and no heat is given to the medium. As the 
temperature rises, the component of heat stored decreases and the component of 
heat dissipated increases. Finally when the machine attains a steady temperature 
it can no longer store any more heat and all the heat generated is dissipated. Under 
these conditions the temperature remains constant, heat generated being equal 
to heat dissipated. The time taken by the motor to reach these final steady-state 
values depends upon the effectiveness of cooling. If a machine is well ventilated 
it reaches the steady-state quickly.
If the machine is switched off or its load is reduced it cools. It cools to the 
ambient temperature when it is switched off. In the second case of temperature 
rise drops to a lower value, corresponding to the new load.
An electric machine is normally designed for a given temperature rise as 
decided by the class of insulation used. The design rating of the motor is called its 
continuous rating because the final steady-state temperature rise of the motor is 
within permissible limits if the machine delivers the power continuously over an 
extended period of time. In case a machine operates at a temperature higher than 
the specified one this result in thermal breakdown of the insulating materials. This 
may not occur as an immediate consequence, but deteriorates the quality of insu­
lation used and reduces the life of the motor. The Classes of insulating materials 
and their permissible temperatures are given in Table 5.1.
An electric machine has sufficient overload capacity. The thermal restrictions 
as stated above do not allow a continuous overloading of the motor. This is because 
the losses rise more steeply than the power. The corresponding final steady-state

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Table 5.1 
Classes of insulating materials and permissible temperatures
Class
Materials
Temperatures
Y
Cotton yam, fabrics, fibrous materials of 
cellulose or silk, neither impregnated with 
nor immersed in a dielectric paper
90°C
A
The above materials but impregnated or im­
mersed in a liquid dielectric
105°C
E
Certain synthetic organic films and other 
materials having the same thermal stability
120°C
B
Mica, asbestos, or glass fibre base materials 
with an organic binding agent
130°C
F
The above materials combined with suit­
able synthetic binding agent as well as 
impregnating one
155°C
H
Mica, asbestos or glass fibre combined with 
silicon binding and impregnating agents
180°C
C
Mica, ceramic materials, glass or quartz 
used without or with inorganic binding 
agents
exceeds 180° but is limited 
by the properties of the ma­
terials (physical, chemical 
or electrical)
temperature rise is also more. However, there is a time lag between the losses of 
the motor and resulting temperature rise. This allows a overloading of the motor 
for short periods limiting the final temperature rise to the permissible value.
Several classes of duty of an electric motors are possible. Before discussing 
these classes of duty and selecting a suitable motor rating for a given class of 
duty let us discuss in detail the heating and cooling of an electric motor under the 
influence of losses.
5.3 
HEATING AND COOLING OF AN ELECTRIC MOTOR
The geometry of an electric motor is too complex to predict accurately the heat 
flow and temperature distribution. This is a difficult task. A portion of the conduc­
tors of armature winding are embedded in slots and some portion is outside the 
iron material as overhang. The heating calculations are also complicated by the 
loading of the motor. The direction of heat flow does not remain the same at all 
loaded conditions. At no-load or lightly loaded conditions heat flows from iron 
parts to the winding due to the temperature gradient. When once the load increases 
the gradient changes as the heat (loss) generated in the winding is greater than the 
heat (loss) generated in iron and consequently heat flows from the winding to 
iron core. A considerable simplification is therefore necessary to compute the 
temperature rise of a motor.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
The heating and cooling calculation of an electric motor are based on the fol­
lowing simplifications:
i. The machine is considered to be a homogeneous body having a uniform 
temperature gradient. All the points at which the heat is generated have 
the same temperature. All the points at which the heat is dissipated to the 
cooling medium are also at the same temperature.
ii. Heat dissipation taking place is proportional to the difference of tem­
peratures of the body and surrounding medium. No heat is radiated.
iii. The rate of dissipation of heat is constant at all temperatures.
Under these assumptions a machine develops heat internally at a uniform rate 
and gives it to the surroundings proportional to the temperature rise. It can be 
shown that the temperature rise of a body follows an exponential law. Assum­
ing the heat developed is proportional to the losses, we have the heat balance 
equation.
Wdt = AXOdt + GsdO 
(5.2)
where 
W is the power loss on the motor responsible for heat, Watts.
G weight of active parts of the motor in kg 
^ specific heat of the material of the body in J/degree/kg 
A cooling surface in m2
X specific heat dissipation or emissivity in J/s/m2/degree difference in 
temperature
0 is temperature rise of the body 
dO temperature rise in a small interval dt
Equation (5.2) indicates that the total heat generated in the body (W dt) is equal 
to the sum of the heat dissipated to the surrounding medium (AaO dt) and the heat 
stored in the body causing a temperature rise 0 above the ambient (Gs dO).
The following results may be obtained by a close examination of Eq. 5.2.
• 
When the temperature rise reaches a constant value, the body is said to have 
reached maximum temperature rise 0m. When this condition is reached 
dO -  0. The heat developed in the body is completely dissipated to the sur­
roundings. No more heat is stored in the body and the body attains thermal 
equilibrium. Therefore,
W = Ak9m 
(5.3)
and the maximum temperature rise
W
°m = TT 
(5.4)
Rearranging Eq. 5.2 we have
dQ_
dt
W
----- h
Gs
Aa
~Gs
0
(5.5)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
If the cooling were not there the machine would heat up enormously and 
the temperature rise would attain very high values. But 0 must be limited 
to 0 . The time taken by the machine to reach this temperature rise in the 
absence of dissipation can be determined using
W dt = Gs dO 
(5.6)
which gives a linear relation between 0 and t. Therefore
o 
w
7 =  -Gs 
( 5 '7 )
If Tj is the time taken to reach 0 (Fig. 5.1). We have
< L _ w
_
Tj 
Gs
Substituting for 0 from Eq. 5.4 we have the value of zv the time taken by 
the body to reach the maximum temperature rise
Gs
AX
(5.9)
Tj is called the thermal (heating) time constant. In other words this hap­
pens to be the time taken by the motor to reach the final steady-state tem­
perature rise if the initial rate of rise of temperature continues.
Heat balance equation (Eq. 5.2) must be solved to obtain a relationship between 
the temperature rise and time. Rearranging Eq. 5.2 we have
from which
[W -  AaO) dt = Gs dO
dt =
Gs dO 
(W -  AaO)
Integrating both sides we have
(5.10)
(5.11)
t = -  —  (log ( W - A A O ) - l o g  Ct )(5.12)
where log C is a constant of integration. It is evaluated using the initial conditions 
at the start of heating. This equation can be written as
e- , ( t )  = W - A M
C,
(5.13)
For simplicity, it is assumed that the machine is started from cold. Therefore 
6 = 0, at t = 0.
C l = W
(5.14)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
Substituting for Ct and rearranging the terms we have
W
0 =
Ak
\
\ -  e- '' Gs )
V
/
Using relations of Eqs 5.8 and 5.9 we have
e = em{ \ -c-'/")
Figure 5.1 depicts the temperature rise curve.
(5.15)
(5.16)
Fig. 5.1 
Temperature rise of an electric motor starting from cold. Time constant = time 
taken to reach 0.632^
However while considering the heating and cooling of an electrical machine, in 
many cases the initial temperature rise is not zero, i.e., at t = 0, 0 = 0 . Substituting 
the initial conditions in Eq. 15.12 we have
C, = W -  AX0o 
(5-17)
Using the value of C in Eq. 5.13.
Gs_ 
a 'a) — W -  A/M 
W -  Ak6n
Rearranging the terms we get
Using again
0 = W_
~Äi
Gs_
1 — e~l Aa-
Gs_
+  On e
W
om = —
m 
Ak
and 
Tj
Aa
~Gs
(5.18)
(5.19)
(5.20)
~
t
/
r
\
We have
0 = 0m( l - e  l/r<) + 00e
(5.21)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The heating curve can be looked upon (Fig. 5.2) as the sum of two curves:
i. heating curve when the machine has a load to give a maximum tempera­
ture rise of 0 .m
ii. cooling curve when the machine is disconnected from supply with an 
initial temperature rise of 0 .
Fig. 5.2 
Temperature rise curve of a motor having some initial temperature
Heating Time Constant r 
r, in Eqs 5.16 and 5.21 is called the heating time con­
stant. It can be seen from Eq. 5.5 that it would have been the time taken by the 
machine to reach the maximum temperature rise had the cooling been completely 
ineffective or had the initial rate of rise of temperature been continued, i.e,
d6 
6m
dt \
/=0
(5.22)
But the machine has cooling, machine takes longer time to reach the maximum 
temperature rise and the time is greater than r {. Substituting t -  t, in equation 
we see that the temperature rise of the body is 63.2% of 0 . Therefore it can be 
defined as the time taken by the machine to reach a temperature rise of 63.2% of 
maximum temperature rise. These are all depicted in Fig. 5.1.
The value of t gives an idea of the effectiveness of cooling. Well ventilated 
machines have smaller time constants. The time constants of open machines are 
of the order of 25 minutes. The totally enclosed machines have poor ventilation.
Heating time constant can be determined from the experimental curve using 
the definition that it is the time taken to reach the 63.2% of 0 . The time constant
(initial slope of the curve)
Cooling Curve 
When a machine is switched off from the mains or when the load 
on the motor is reduced, the machine cools. In the first case it cools to the ambi­
ent temperature and in the second case it cools to a temperature determined by

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
the power losses at reduced load. The cooling curve is also an exponential curve. 
When the machine is switched off there is no heat generation in the motor and all 
the heat stored in the machine is now dissipated to the surroundings. In this Eq.
5.2 reduces to
0 = AAO dt + Gs dO 
(5.23)
Solution of this equation with proper initial values
o = eme~'^ 
(5.24)
Where x2 is the time constant during cooling. Fig. 5.3 depicts the curve.
Fig. 5.3 
Cooling curve of an electric motor switched off from the mains
The machine sometimes is not switched off but load on it is reduced in which 
case it cools to a temperature
where W is the total loss at reduced load. The cooling curve in this case deter­
mined as
0 = 0f  + (0m -  Of) e-'fo 
(5.25)
which can also be written as
0 = 
+ ef  (1 -  e“ , / r j )
The cooling curve is shown in Fig. 5.4. This may also be looked upon as the sum 
of two curves
i. heating curve as if the machine is loaded to give a maximum temperature 
rise of 0f
ii. cooling curve as if the machine is disconnected from the supply when it 
had a temperature rise of 0 .
t2 in the cooling curve is the cooling time constant. The heating time constant 
T| and cooling time constant x2 are not equal in self cooled machines. x2 is two to

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
three times greater than x, All other conditions being equal, the time taken by the 
motor to cool to ambient temperature is longer than the time taken by the motor 
for heating. If forced cooling is employed t2 = rr In such cases the heating curve 
and cooling curve are mirror images of each other.
The power rating of a motor for a particular operating condition is selected 
based on the thermal rating of the motor, so that it meets the specification regard­
ing the final steady-state temperature rise, i.e., it must be equal to or slightly less 
than the permissible temperature rise.
As has already been pointed out, an electric motor has a very good overload 
capacity. The fact that the temperature rise lags the steep rise in power loss due 
to over loading allows a short time overloading of the motor. The duration of 
overload is normally till the motor reaches the permissible temperature rise. This 
overload must be within pull-out torque capability of the motor.
A motor can therefore be selected for a given class of duty based on its thermal 
rating with due consideration to pull-out torque capability.
5.4 
CLASSES OF DUTY AND SELECTION OF MOTOR
Three modes or classes of duty can identified for an electric motor
i. Continuous duty
ii. 
Short time duty
iii. Intermittent load cycle
5.4.1 Continuous Duty
There are two types of continuous duty—continuous duty at constant load and 
continuous duty with variable load cycle. In the former the load torque remains 
constant for a sufficiently longer period corresponding normally to a multiple of 
time constant of the drive motor. The drive motor is therefore loaded for a suf­
ficient amount of time continuously, till it attains thermal equilibrium.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
While driving such a load a motor should have a rating sufficient to drive it 
without exceeding the specified temperature. The rating of the motor selected for 
this duty is called its continuous rating or design rating. By continuous rating one 
means that it is the maximum load that the motor can give continuously over a 
period of time, without exceeding the temperature rise. Also, the motor selected 
should be able to withstand momentary overloads. Therefore, the selected motor 
may sometimes have a rating slightly greater than the power required by the load.
The load diagram and the temperature rise curve of the motor selected for the 
purpose are shown in Fig. 5.5. Centrifugal pumps, fans, conveyors and compres­
sors are some types of loads where this type of continuous duty at constant load 
is required.
Time ------>
Fig. 5.5 
Pertaining to continuous duty of a motor delivering its rated load (constant)
Selection of a motor for this class of duty is rather simple and straightfor­
ward. From the load characteristics or requirements one can determine the 
continuous input required to the mechanical load. A suitable motor may be 
selected from the catalogue of series manufactured motors. These need not 
be checked again for thermal or overload capacities. The design rating nor­
mally takes care of heating and temperature rise and the motor normally has a 
short time overload capacity.
While selecting a motor for this type of duty it is not necessary to give impor­
tance to the heating caused by losses at starting even though they are more than 
the losses at rated load. This is because the motor does not require frequent start­
ing. It is started only once in its duty cycle and the losses during starting do not 
have much influence on heating. However, sometimes it may be necessary to 
check whether the motor has sufficient starting torque, if the load has consider­
able amount of inertia.
For most types of loads where the torque and speed are known, the power 
output of the load
2.71
Pout = —  TN  W 
60
(5.26)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
If the efficiency of load and transmission is ;/ the power input to the load
P =
60 
rj
(5.27)
In case of linear motion the rating of the motor corresponds to
P = F x V
0.102/7 W
(5.28)
where 
F is the force exerted by load in kg 
V is velocity of motion in m/s 
// efficiency
Using these expressions the rating of the motor is decided. For example the rating 
of a motor for an elevator is
P =
F x V  
2 X 0.102rj
2 in the denominator is by virtue of the counter weight. 
The rating of the motor for a pump is
P =
HQp
0.102*7
W
(5.29)
(5.30)
where 
p density of liquid being pumped.
H head comprising suction, delivery, friction and velocity 
Q delivery of pump
}] combined efficiency of pump and transmission 
The rating of a fan motor
P =
QH
0.102*7
W
(5.31)
where 
Q volume of air in m3/s.
H pressure of air in mm water or kg/m2
Depending upon the work of a driven machine the rating of the drive motor can 
be determined.
Continuous Duty— Variable Load 
In this type of duty the load is not constant, but 
has several steps in one cycle. This cycle of loading repeats for a longer time. If 
the load variations are slight the motor of continuous rating of the highest load 
may be chosen from the available catalogue.
However, if the variations in the load cycle are large the machine undergoes a 
continuous change of temperature. However, after several cycles of operation the 
motor selected may attain a steady-state value. The thermal calculations of the 
motor are involved. The selection of a motor based on heating is rather involved 
and a difficult task. Therefore some simplified criteria may be evolved for select­
ing a motor for this duty.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
If for such a load cycle a motor is selected according to the lowest load, it may 
not be able to drive the load satisfactorily; the temperature rise of the motor will 
be exceedingly high and it may not have sufficient capacity to drive the highest 
load. If the motor is selected according to the highest load, it becomes overrated 
and may have poor efficiency. If it is an ac drive motor the p.f. is also poor. The 
motor is underutilised.
The choice of the motor may be based on the average power or average current. 
At the outset, this method seems to be applicable. It has, however, a disadvan­
tage in that it does not consider the variation of losses. The motor chosen will be 
smaller for the load cycle, and of insufficient capacity. This may have increased 
temperature due to overloads, where the losses increase. This happens if the load 
fluctuations are considerable. The method may give a satisfactory motor if the 
load fluctuations are relatively small.
However, a method based on average losses of the motor for the load cycle 
seems to be more appropriate for selecting a motor for a continuous duty, vari­
able load. A motor having its rated losses equal to the average of the losses of the 
motor for the variable load cycle is chosen to drive the load. In this case the final 
steady-state temperature rise of the motor under variable load is the same as the 
temperature rise of the motor with constant load. The motor therefore operates 
with permissible temperature rise.
The selection of a motor based on average losses requires an iterative proce­
dure. A motor whose losses at its rated load are equal to or somewhat greater than 
the average losses is suitable for the job. However, it may be expected that the 
motor will have short time peaks of temperature and these may not be very detri­
mental to the life of the motor. The method does consider maximum temperature 
rise of the motor under variable load.
A typical load diagram for
P3
continuous variable load is 
shown in Fig. 5.6. The follow­
ing steps are involved in the 
choice of the motor.
Load
i. The average power is 
determined. The forego­
ing discussion shows that 
a motor of this rating 
is of insufficient capac­
ity. Therefore, a motor is 
selected from the cata­
logue, which has a rating 
15 to 30% greater than the 
average power.
ii. For the loads of the load 
cycle the loss diagram is
Temp, rise
Time
determined using the effi- Fig. 5.6 
Heating of a motor having a typical vari- 
ciency curve of the motor. 
able load (one cycle of operations)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The average losses are determined using the formula
Wb- tv
Kv = - p -  
(5.32)
h
These losses are compared to the rated losses of the motor (fVr). If W is 
equal to or somewhat greater than W , the motor selected is sufficiently 
good. If Wr is very much greater or less than Wav the calculations are 
repeated for a new motor until a right motor is obtained.
A check on the overload capacity of the motor must be made. If the 
motor chosen does not satisfy the overload requirement as per the load 
cycle, a motor of higher capacity having the overload requirement may 
be chosen. The basis of heating is disregarded. The motor will however 
have the thermal rating.
Sometimes it is more convenient to base the selection of motor on equivalent 
current, torque or power. These equivalent values are the rms values.
In the equivalent current method, a motor having a rated current equal to 
the rms value of the variable current of the load cycle is chosen. Let us assume 
that I is the current rating of such motor. The losses of the motor at rated 
load are
Wr = Wc + llq.R(5-33)
When the motor operates on the given load cycle having corresponding current 
load diagram as shown in Fig. 5.7, the losses occurring in the motor with variable 
load are
=  X
which after simplification is given by
{wc + IJr )
X '*
(5.34)
w = w +
"av 
rrc '
X  ijR h
X ?k
(5.35)
Equating these average losses of the motor to its rated losses and simplifying we 
get
^eq
\
l i h R
S ' .
(5.36)
Sometimes the load cycle may have a rest period. If the rest period is very 
large, I determined in the above is on the higher side. Therefore this must 
be properly taken care of in the calculation. A load diagram with rest period 
is as shown in Fig. 5.8. The equivalent current for this case is obtained using 
the relation

The McGraw Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
Current load diagram
Fig. 5.7(a) 
Equivalent current criterion to select a motor for variable load
Fig. 5.7(b) 
Simplification of a typical variable load. The Currilinear portion of load 
diagram are presented by segments of straight lines 
1 
^
/eq = —  I 
ikdt l], l2 are the currents corresponding to Pj; P2

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 5.8
Load diagram of a load with intermittent load having rest period
l i a
1
x < k
_v^l + r ( l — /?)
where r is the loss ratio W/W and
c 
r
(5.37)
This relation may be easily obtained equating the losses of the load cycle taking 
the rest period into consideration. The derivation is left to the reader.
If there is a free running period in the cycle, the equivalent current can be cal­
culated using the relation
I y  fR t^
where tQ is the free running period. It can be seen that the motor chosen will have 
a rating which lies between the two cases discussed above.
Sometimes the loads during intervals of the cycle may not be constant and may 
vary with time. The equivalent current for such cases can be determined using
h
integration. X I^tk in the above equations is replaced by J i^dt (Fig. 5.10).
0

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
Losses
Fig- 5-9 
Load diagram of a motor having intermittent load with free running
If the load diagram shows some arbitrary variation of load during intervals, as 
shown in Fig. 5.11, some kind of approximation may be made to obtain equiv­
alent current. The diagram may be approximated by rectangular figures. The 
calculation will be more accurate if r  diagram can be drawn before applying the 
approximation.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Load
Time ------►
Fig. 5.11 
Pertaining to simplification of an irregular load
After determining the equivalent current, a motor is selected whose rated cur­
rent is equal to, or slightly greater than, this value.
The motor must be checked for its overload capacity, i.e., one should check 
that the maximum load in the cycle is less than or equal to permissible overload of 
the motor. Therefore a chosen motor should have
If the second condition is not satisfied the motor would be insufficient to drive the 
load. In this case a motor of higher capacity may be selected according to over­
load capacity required as per the second condition. The basis of heating need not 
be considered and the machine will be underutilised as far as the thermal capacity 
is concerned.
The method of equivalent current gives a right selection if the speed of the 
motor is constant over the operating cycle. If the speed changes, at lower speeds 
the cooling will be insufficient in self cooled machines and the motor may prove 
thermally ineffective to do the job. The speed variations may have to be taken 
into consideration in the selection of the motor. If, however, forced ventilation 
is used, the correction for speed variation may not be necessary. This method is 
also not applicable to motors having a variation in losses due to skin effect or any 
other reason. The losses of such motors vary sharply during starting and braking. 
The method cannot be applied if the ‘constancy’ of so-called constant losses is in
When the selection of the motor is based on the equivalent torque criterion, 
a motor is chosen whose rated torque is equal to (referring to Fig. 5.12).
7r equal to or slightly greater than 7eq 
Tbr > Tmax of the load cycle
(5.39)
question.
(5.40)
If we can assume that the shaft torque is equal to the electromagnetic torque 
developed, the motor selected as above will be sufficient for the job. If this 
assumption is not true due to friction torque or any other loss torque, the motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
Power
torque
Fig. 5.12 
Equivalent torque and power criteria
may be chosen to have its rated torque greater than T accordingly. The selec- 
tion of the motor under this criterion also assumes constant flux conditions in 
the motor. Under this assumption the torque will be directly proportional to the 
armature current. Also, this method assumes constancy of power factor at all loads 
if ac motors are employed. This method cannot be applied to motors having vari­
able flux conditions, e.g., series motors or squirrel cage motors under starting and 
braking. Proper corrections may be applied to take into consideration the variable 
flux condition. The method of equivalent torque is not applicable if the equivalent 
current method does not give the correct result.
The selection of motor may sometimes be based on equivalent power rating 
(Fig. 5.13). When this is done, the motor rating is equal to or slightly greater than
s  p jh
X he
(5.41)
The method assumes constant speed at all loads. This method cannot be applied if 
there are starting and braking periods in the load cycle.
Fig. 5.13 
Equivalent (average) loss criterion

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Continuous duty with variable loading, considered previously, has not taken 
into account the heating of the motor during starting and stopping. If the starting 
and braking losses are considerable enough to effect the final temperature rise, 
they have to be properly considered in the selection of the motor. The relevant 
load diagram is depicted in Fig. 5.6.
This class of duty may have variable speed operation also. The variable loads 
may be followed by variation in speeds. The load diagram is shown in Fig. 5.6. 
The variation of speeds if any must be taken into consideration in the selection 
of motor.
5.4.2 
Short Time Intermittent Duty
Another class of duty for normally occurring loads is short time intermittent duty 
in which the load requires a constant power for a short interval of time and rests
for sufficiently longer time. When a 
motor is used for this purpose, dura­
tion of the load on the motor is less 
than the heating time constant of 
the motor or the time required for 
obtaining thermal equilibrium. The 
period of rest is sufficient enough 
to cool the motor to the ambient 
temperature. The next cycle begins 
therefore from a cold condition. 
Such loads occur in some crane 
drives, household appliances, open­
ing and closing of weirs, lockgates, 
bridges, etc. The load diagram 
for this class of duty is shown in 
Fig. 5.14.
An electric motor, as has already 
been pointed out, will have steeply 
rising losses when it is overloaded. 
However, there is a time lag between 
the losses taking place and temperature rise. Therefore, a given machine may be over­
loaded for a time till it reaches the permissible temperature rise and then switched 
off, allowing it to cool to the ambient temperature in the rest period. A machine of 
suitable rating is chosen such that it attains its permissible temperature rise during 
the period of application of load. When a machine is overloaded this way, the inter­
nal hot spot temperatures may reach a very high value. The simplified model gives 
a rough estimate of the motor rating.
A machine of smaller capacity may be advantageously used to drive these 
loads for short time. Considering the heating of the motor over a cycle.
(a)
Fig. 5.14 
Short time duty of a motor (a)
Load diagram (b) Temperature rise
(1) Temperature rise of the motor 
for its continuous rated load < P.
(2) Temperature rise of the motor 
having load P (> rated load) for T
0 = 0m x ( l - e - ' ' /r')
(5.42)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
If a motor is selected having a rating equal to the amplitude of the power pulse 
represented by load the diagram, the temperature rise follows curve 1 of Fig. 5.14. 
From this it is very clear that at the end of duration of load t, when the motor is switched 
off its temperature rise is well below the permissible value. The motor is underutilised 
with regard to its thermal capacity. If, on the other hand, a motor of smaller capacity 
is chosen, when loaded to give an output corresponding to power pulse of load dia­
gram, it is overloaded and has a temperature rise curve shown by curve 2 of Fig. 5.14. 
From the figure it is clear that the temperature of the motor rises rapidly towards 
another maximum value, as decided by the increased losses of the motor. In so doing 
it attains the permissible temperature rise at the end of t]. The motor is switched off 
at this instant. The rating of the motor is called short time rating. The motors may 
have 10 minute, 30 minute or 60 minute rating based on this criterion. The motor 
is thermally well utilised. A short time rating of an electric motor can be defined as 
the extrapolated overload rating of the motor which it can supply for the specified 
short time without getting overheated. Now a days the machines are being designed 
and manufactured for short duration having sufficient overload torque capability.
Using the temperature rise curve the short time rating of the given motor can 
be determined. Referring to Fig. 5.14 the machine having a continuous rating of 
P is used to drive the load P so that it reaches 0 
(0 ) at the end of t, according
to curve 2 of the figure. The temperature curve of the motor is curve 1, shown in 
Fig. 5.14. The curve 2 extends exponentially toward 0'm2iX which would be the 
maximum temperature rise of the motor if the drive motor were loaded continu­
ously with P Therefore
0 = 0'max( 1 -e - '/r<) 
(5.43)
The ratio (P/P) is so chosen that at the end of t] the temperature rise of the motor 
is 0 
(6 ). Using these values in Eq. 5.43 we have
max v per7 
°  
1
0'
^iriax
^max
O'
^max
1
0,per
1 -  e
(5.44)
The heating and temperature rise of the motor are proportional to losses and therefore
O'
^max
0.max
K
WT
(5.45)
where 
^  is the total losses at the overload (P) 
W, is the losses at rated P
L  
r
constant losses 
Wc
Again using r = ----------------------- = —
variable loss at Pr 
Wv
we have 
WL -  (1 + r)Wv
W{_=[r +
(5.46)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Using these relations and simplifying, the rating P of the motor to drive load of 
P can be obtained as
P
(l + r)
_ e-t\ Ai -  r
(5.47)
Sometimes it may be required to estimate the time of operation of a given motor 
of continuous rating P to drive the load P For this we know (P/P). The value of 
t can be obtained from the equation
/
h = 
Ti log <?
( P /P r f+ r
1 + r
\
+1
(5.48)
The ratio of losses given by Eq. 5.44 represents the thermal overload and the ratio 
(P/P) from Eq. 5.47 represents the mechanical overload. These are shown in Fig. 
5.15. From the figure as well as equations, it can be seen that increase in power 
output is possible by decreasing tr
Fig. 5.15 
Typical thermal and mechanical overloads of an electric motor for short 
time duty
An overload ratio must be chosen within the available torque range. The 
machine must be capable of providing the overload without stalling, because there 
is an absolute limit for motors exhibiting pull-out effect. In commutator machines 
the commutator presents another limitation.
However, to drive high torque (power) pulses in this class of duty, the motor 
may be equipped with a flywheel having sufficient inertia. This is brought to the

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
required speed before the load is applied. The energy stored in the flywheel during 
acceleration is given to the load.
5.4.3 
Periodic Intermittent Duty
The class of duty making use of the ability of electric motors to operate with over­
load is called periodic intermittent duty. The load on the motor is a sequence of 
identical duty cycles as shown in Fig. 5.17. The drive motor is loaded at constant 
load for a period t . At the end of t the machine is switched off for a period of t _. 
The machine heats during ton and cools during i r  The time ioff is insufficient for 
the machine to cool to ambient temperature. Also one cycle comprising / and /o(r 
is insufficient for the motor to attain thermal equilibrium. This load cycle repeats 
and there is temperature fluctuation. The machine attains thermal equilibrium after 
a number of load cycles. The mean temperature attains a steady value. The load 
diagram for this class of duty is shown in Fig. 5.16 and the ratio ton/(ton + ioff) is 
called the duty factor. The effects of losses during starting on heating, are neglected.
Load
Losses
Time ------>
Such a class of duty may be identified when the losses during starting affect the 
motor heating and have to be considered. The load diagram for this duty is shown 
in Fig. 5.17. The duty cycle includes starting period, period of constant load and 
rest period. The duty factor is given by (7st + ton)/(tst + ton + to{{). In this duty 
the motor stops during toff by natural means and stopping does not include any 
additional losses. This takes place if toff is sufficiently greater than the time 
required for stopping.
When the machine has special methods of braking, the losses during braking must 
also be considered in the choice of motor rating. This is another sub class of duty. 
The duty cycle contains a braking period besides a starting period, period of constant 
load and rest period as shown in Fig. 5.18. The duty factor (At + An + A r + A ff )•

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Load
Losses
Fig. 5.17 
Periodic intermittent duty with starting
Power
Losses
Fig. 5.18 
Load diagram for intermittent duty with starting and braking

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
CPI!
Let us consider the selection of a 
motor for duty factor having ton and /off 
(no starting and braking). The starting 
losses do not influence the heating. 
The load cycle and heating curve are as 
shown in Fig. 5.18. Here again a motor 
of rating equal to the constant load 
in the load cycle would prove uneco­
nomical because it would have excess 
heating capacity. A motor of smaller 
capacity would be sufficient due to rest 
periods in between successive load­
ings, during which the machine has an 
opportunity to cool. A ratio (P/P) can 
be estimated for this class of duty also.
Referring to Fig. 5.19 let 0n b
Load
W*
Wo
Losses
Fig. 5.19(a)
Load diagram for intermit­
tent periodic loading
0n2, 0n3 be the temperature rises of the 
motor at the end of successive load 
pulses. Similarly, 0c[,0c2,0c3 are the 
temperature rises at the end of successive rest periods. If 0 
is the maximum tern- 
perature rise when the machine has a continuous load of P, the machine has a tem­
perature of rise of ()nl at the end of first pulse given by
On, = 0 raax( l- e - ''/ 1')
(5.49)
Fig. 5.19(b) 
Temperature rise for intermittent loading transient condition to steady-state 
The machine cools in the rest period to
Similarly we have
^cl
(5.50)
^n2 = 0cle-"h  +0L* (l-e-V * .)
(5.51)
^c2 = 0n2e~hlx2
(5.52)
0«3 = 
-  e ''h' )
(5.53)
oc} = e ^ e - ^
(5.54)
and so on.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Using these relations we have
0n3 = 
9!mx(1 -  e '',Al ) (1 + e"'l/r| e~hhl + e '2'lAle"2'2/l2 ) 
(5-55)
Temperature at the end of n such cycles
0nn = 
+ 
e-<,A,
+e- ( » - i ) « . A i  
e - ( n - \ ) h h i  ) 
(5.56)
The third expression on the r.h.s. is a geometric series and simplifying this sum­
mation we have
= ^ ax( i - e - ''A')
1 _  g ~ n h f c \  e ~ n t 2 l x2 
\ — Q~l\h\ £~h!X2
(5.57)
For sufficiently large number of duty cycles; n —> °o and <? 
nhlxi —> 0.
Also the value of # should be limited # of the motor having continuous load P .
nn 
per 
°  
r
Therefore
^max 
^per 
^max
1 -  £r?'/T>
1 _ e-hK e-hlx2
(5.58)
Fig. 5.20 
Thermal overload ratio for intermittent loading (Pj mechanical overload 
ratio Pm = yfa

Rating and Heating of Motors
or thermal overload ratio is
O'
l/max
\ _ e~hh\. e~h!x2 
1 -
(5.59)
The mechanical overload ratio can be determined assuming the loss ratio
r= W c/Wv
Losses at Pr = Wr( 1 + r) 
(5.60)
Losses at P -  Wv[r + (P /P \* 2]
#max _ ^ + (^/Pr)2 
(5 61)
$per 
( l + r )
Using this relation in Eq. 5.59 and simplifying we have
L  = | (r + *)(' -  e~hlx' e-,'15 T 7 r 
(5.62)
/>r 
V 
l - e - ''/ r'
From this relation the rating Pr of the motor to drive the load can be determined. 
For duty ratio > 0.6 the expression shows that a motor having a continuous rat­
ing of P may be selected. (PIP) tends to unity for load ratios > 0.6 assuming the 
same heating and cooling time constants. The motor size becomes smaller only 
for small duty ratios. Also the ‘on’ period should be very small compared to the 
time constant to get the benefit of a smaller motor.
For classes of duty where starting and braking periods are there, the motor 
selection should take these into consideration.
The motor selected must be checked for its overload capacity. If the duty fac­
tor is very small, this may pose a problem and a motor of higher capacity may be 
chosen. For larger duty ratios the value P I P x will be such that the machine does 
have overload capacity to drive the given load cycle.
Worked Examples
Q
The temperature rise of an electric motor is 40°C after 1 hour and 60°C 
after 2 hours. The motor current is 100 A. Determine approximately its 
final temperature rise when it works on load cycle of 4 minutes working, 8 minutes 
rest with a current o f 125 A. Neglect the effects of iron losses.
0 , = e m( l - e - ' l ' )
02 = e m( l -  e-V')
1 -  e~2lr
1 -  e~'lT
+ 1 + <r'/T
60
40 = 1.5
Solution

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
e-'!r = 0.5 
-  = 0.693
T
= 1.442 hrs
em = —  = 80°
0.5
With 125 A 0m = 80
/
V
125 \2
100 /
N
T
-  125‘
X = 60x 1.443
e~x = 0.955
r  = * =
8
t 
60x 1.443
= 0.912
(L = 125
1-0.955
'm
1 -  0.955 x 0.912
= 125 0.045
0.1293 
= 43.51°
a
 A motor has a heating time constant o f 90 minutes. If the temperature rise 
of the motor is 100° C when it is continuously loaded with its rated load 
determine the temperature rise of the motor after 2 hours of its rated load. If the 
temperature after 2 hours reaches the maximum permissible temperature (final 
steady-state temperature with rated load applied continuously) after it is over­
loaded, determine the permissible overloading. Assume constant losses -0 .5  of 
full load copper losses.
Solution 
Temperature rise after 2 hours of continuous loading
( 
2 \
=  100
V
/
100 = 0,m
l - e  1-5
_ J2_ >
1 -  e ~ ^
J
= 73.64°C
= 0m X 0.7364

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
135.8°
K
= a
135.8 _ Wc + x 2Wm
l ö ö ~ ~  
K  + wfu
a + x1
G + 1
1 .358(a + 1) = a + x2
0.358a + 1.358 = v2 
a = 0.5
x = 1.24
An overloading of 24% can be allowed
S
 The heating and cooling time constants of an electric motor are 100 and 
150 minutes respectively. The rating of the motor is 125 kW. I f it is working 
on duty cycle of 15 minutes on load and 30 minutes on no-load determine the 
permissible overloading of the motor. Assume the losses are Pc + x Pcu and
PjPcu = « = 0-4.
Solution 
The ratio
£ _ = )(« + 1)(1 -  e* • en 
Pr 
v 
l - e x
15
= e 100 = 0.861
30
e? = e iso = 0.819
A  = /(1.4)(0.295) 
Pr 
V 
1-0.86
-  1.596
It can be overloaded by 0.596 
The intermittent rating = 199.55 kW

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Problems
J
5.1 
A motor with a thermal time constant 
of 45 min. has a final temperature rise 
of 80°C on continuous rating.
(a) What is the temperature rise after
1 hr at this load?
(b) If the temperature rise on 1 hr 
rating is 80°C determine the 
final steady temperature at this 
rating.
(c) What is the 1 hr rating of the 
motor as a percentage of its 
normal rating?
(d) When working at this 1 hr rat­
ing how long does it take for the 
temperature to increase from 60° 
to 80°?
5.2 
(a) A motor has a heating time con­
stant of Th = 2.2 hrs and a cooling 
time constant of r = 3.5 hrs. The
c
motor has a final steady tem­
perature rise of 65°C and losses 
are proportional to (load)2. The 
motor is started from cold runs 
on duty cycle of rated load for
2 hrs and the motor is switched 
off for 1 hr and then loaded to 1.5 
times rated load for 1 hr. Deter­
mine the temperature rise at the 
end of the cycle.
(b) The above motor operates on a 
repeated duty cycle of 1.5 rated 
load for 0.6 hr followed by a 
1 hr shutdown. Determine the 
final steady-state temperature 
rise.
5.3 
A motor has a heating time con­
stant of 90 minutes and cooling 
time constant of 120 minutes and 
final steady-state temperature rise 
on full load of 60°C. The motor 
has repeated load cycle of full load 
for 30 minutes followed by station­
ary period of 30 minutes. Deter­
mine the maximum and minimum
temperatures. Determine the over­
load on the motor that can be 
allowed on this cycle such that the 
maximum temperature rise does 
not exceed the permissible value of 
60°C.
5.4 
A motor is continuously rated at 50 
kW. It has a heating time constant 
of 100 minutes. Determine the 1 hr 
rating of the motor. The motor losses 
can be expressed as
0.6 full load copper losses + x2 full 
load copper loss
where x is load as a fraction of full 
load.
5.5 
A motor has a heating time constant 
of 45 minutes and cooling time con­
stant of 75 minutes. The motor has 
final steady temperature rise of 50°C 
while delivering its continuous rating 
of 25 kW.
(a) Determine the load the motor 
can deliver for 15 minutes so 
that the temperature rise does not 
exceed 50°C.
(b) The motor delivers 35 kW for a 
period of 15 minutes followed 
by a shutdown for 15 minutes. 
Determine the maximum tem­
perature rise.
(c) If the maximum temperature rise 
is limited to 50°C determine the 
maximum load the motor can 
deliver during ON time of 15 
minutes in (b).
5.6 
A motor has a cyclic loading as given 
below:
250 Nm for 15 minutes 
350 Nm for 20 minutes 
100 Nm for 15 minutes 
No load for. 10 minutes 
The motor runs at a constant speed 
of 500 rpm. Determine the rating of 
a suitable motor.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Rating and Heating of Motors
5.7 
The following load cycle repeats 
for a particular drive having TN = 
constant.
250 Nm 15 minutes at a speed of 
600 rpm
350 Nm 15 minutes at a speed of 
500 rpm
100 Nm 20 minutes 
200 Nm 10 minutes 
Determine a suitable rating of the 
motor for the purpose.
5.8 
The heating and cooling time con­
stants of a 150 kW electric motor 
are 100 and 150 minutes respec­
tively. The motor is subjected to a 
duty cycle of 20 minutes of load­
ing followed by 40 minutes of no- 
load. The losses of the motor can be 
expressed as
(x2 + 0.5) full load copper loss 
Determine the rating of the motor.
S 3
— Multiple-Choice Questions
\
J
5.1 
The heating time constant of an elec­
trical machine gives an indication of 
its
(a) cooling
(b) rating
(c) overload capacity
(d) short time rating
5.2 
Short time rating of an electrical 
machine
(a) is equal to name plate rating
(b) is less than the name plate rating
(c) is greater than the name plate 
rating
(d) has no bearing to its name plate 
rating
5.3 
All the physical dimensions of two 
electric machines are in the ratio K. 
The iron losses of the machines are 
in the ratio (assuming constant flux 
density in both the cases)
(a) K
(b) te
(c) K>
(d) K4
5.4 
Class B insulation can withstand a 
maximum temperature of
(a) 145°C
(b) 105°C
(c) 135°C
(d) 120°C
5.5 
The rating of a motor for a given 
industrial load cycle should have
(a) sufficient thermal capacity
(b) sufficient over load capacity
(c) both of the above
(d) sufficient starting torque
5.6 
A machine driving pulsed torque load 
is equipped with a flywheel in order 
to
(a) equalise the current demand dur­
ing the operation
(b) equalise the torque requirement
(c) reduce the mechanical overload
(d) make the motor thermally suit­
able to drive the load
5.7 
Two motors of the same name plate 
details have different thermal time 
constants.
(a) The short time ratings of the two 
motors are the same
(b) The short time rating of the 
motor with large time constant 
is large
(c) The short time rating of the 
motor with large time constant 
is small
(d) Overload capacity of the motor 
with large time constant is large.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
m
^
 References
V________________________________________________________________________
\
__ >
5.1 
Leonhard, W., Control of electrical drives, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1985.
5.2 
Pillai, S.K., A first course on electrical drives, Wiley Eastern Limited, 1982.
5.3 
Chillikin, M., Electric drive, Mir Publishers, Moscow, 1965.
5.4 
Deshpande, M.V., Electric motors: Applications and control, A.H. Wheeler. 1985.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- \
Control
Techniques for
Electrical Drives
________________________________ ___________________________________ /
6.1 
INTRODUCTION
An electric drive is a well established industrial drive as it has several advantages 
and special features. Its control consists in starting, speed control, braking and 
speed reversal, and also maintaining the drive conditions required by the process 
or work being performed by the drive.
Modern electric drives employ thyristors and thyristor power converters for 
feeding the electric motor for the purpose of speed control, e.g., they provide a 
variable voltage to the armature of a dc motor; dc link converters or cycloconvert­
ers are used to provide variable voltage variable frequency supply to ac motors. 
These converters are static devices and their use makes the drive system compact, 
small in size, light weight, and less bulky. They have a high amplification factor. 
The overall efficiency of the drive improves because of insignificant losses in the 
static equipment. These drives employ automatic closed loop control. The auto­
matic control of the drive has the following advantages:
i. It permits increased productivity and improves the quality of production.
ii. It reduces running costs and hence production is economical.
iii. It reduces the expenditure on electrical energy
iv. It improves the reliability of the system
v. It provides better working conditions
vi. It simplifies the operation of the equipment
vii. It makes remote control possible, particularly when the drive is inacces­
sible and the local control is difficult.
Thyristor controlled electrical drives having automatic control of current and 
speed are very popular. They can be controlled during starting, speed control, 
regenerative braking and speed reversal. It is well known that soft starting of 
an electric motor is possible with these drives. Using proper control the drive 
can be started and accelerated at constant torque and current. The motor does 
not see its blocked rotor behaviour. In an ac motor this is possible by simultane­
ously controlling the frequency and voltage of the motor using what is called slip

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
control, in which slip frequency is kept constant. To maintain constant current 
during acceleration closed loop control is necessary. Speed control of the drive 
motor requires the simultaneous control of voltage and frequency to maintain 
constant flux conditions in the motor. This also requires closed loop control. 
During braking up to zero speed and speed reversal from thereon, the thyristor 
converters are so controlled that the kinetic energy of the motor is returned to the 
mains during braking, and soft starting is made available for acceleration in the 
opposite direction. Control during braking and speed reversal also require closed 
loop automatic control.
Therefore modern electric drive systems employ closed loop controls and 
the principles of feedback control theory. They are found to be versatile and are 
becoming very popular. They are also becoming price competitive, as the price of 
thyristors is coming down. Very sophisticated drive systems are being developed 
with excellent dynamic and steady state response.
The performance of the closed loop drive is of primary interest. A suitable 
drive system using closed loop control using speed feedback must be stable. It 
should provide acceptable transient and steady-state response to input commands. 
The system must be less sensitive to parameter variations. The steady-state error, 
which is a measure of steady-state response and ability of the control system to 
follow the input, should be minimum for the inputs. The system must be able to 
eliminate the effects of undesirable disturbances.
Even though a feedback control system is complex and costly, one of the fore­
most and fundamental reasons to employ the feedback in the drive systems is its 
improved performance with regard to reduction of steady-state error of the sys­
tem. A closed loop system has a steady-state error which is several times less than 
that of open loop systems. However it is impossible to realise an optimum control 
system having all these requirements. Some adjustments may have to be made to 
improve the performance. Sometimes a compromise may have to be arrived at 
between conflicting and demanding specifications in choosing the system param­
eters to provide acceptable performance.
Therefore, in order to assess the behaviour of these drives, the techniques of 
conventional feedback control theory have to be applied. The analysis and syn­
thesis of drive systems form a special case of conventional feedback theory. Con­
ventional transfer function methods can be applied to determine the time domain 
and frequency domain behaviour of the system. The stability of the drive which 
is a necessary but not sufficient condition may be analysed using the conven­
tional Routh-Hurwitz and Nyquist stability criteria. Based on these methods, the 
design of the controllers for stabilization of the system is possible both in the time 
domain using root locus techniques and frequency domain using Bode plots. The 
ac drive systems utilising induction and synchronous motors may be considered 
to be multivariable systems. These can be analysed using the methods of modern 
control using state space techniques to determine the drive behaviour. The con­
trollers may be designed based on these methods.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
In the following, the aspects of feedback control as applied to drive problems 
are discussed. The area of the control of electric drives is a practical application of 
feedback control theory. The following discussion gives an insight into the drive 
problems, so that simplified but sufficiently accurate procedures of control theory 
may be applied to solve them.
6.2 
BASIC FEATURES OF AN ELECTRIC DRIVE
Before applying advantageously the control principles to electric drive systems 
to adjust or improve their behaviour as a special case of control problem, it is 
necessary to have a knowledge of the specific features of the drive, which can be 
summarized as follows with reference to its electrical characteristics.
i. Electrical drive offers energy transformations. These systems have rea­
sonably high efficiency and are of special interest.
ii. The control components are used to limit the amplitude or rate of change 
of variation of individual quantities, e.g., the armature current of a dc 
motor.
iii. 
The finite inertia (element of energy storage) of the system does not 
allow the instantaneous speed changes there by resulting in a finite 
acceleration, and the drive takes a definite time to follow the speed 
changes.
iv. The characteristics of almost all the control components are more or 
less non-linear. Normally this non-linearity is introduced by saturation. 
These are approximated as linear elements or linearized about an operat­
ing point.
v. The static and dynamic parameters of control components can be 
obtained only approximately or sometimes be estimated. In many cases 
they change during operation.
vi. 
When fed from thyristor power converters, the input voltage and cur­
rent differ from the conventional input to the motors. In the case of 
dc motors the input is superimposed by ac components. In the case 
of ac motors the input is non-sinusoidal having harmonic compo­
nents. If the measuring equipment of the control system is very much 
affected by these disturbances the control properties of the drive may 
not be satisfactory. Therefore care must be exercised to reduce or 
even eliminate, if possible, the effects of these disturbances on the 
measuring equipment.
vii. The power circuit of thyristor converter receives the thyristor control 
pulses from a control unit. The operation of this may be disturbed by the 
power pulses created by the protective equipment of the drive. Necessary 
care must be exercised here also in designing the control unit to reduce 
these effects.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
viii. The control of the drive system should be designed to protect the same 
from dangerous operating conditions or overloads. In the first case the 
system must be brought to standstill and in the second case the drive 
should be able to operate within its limits,
ix. 
In many cases control of one quantity may depend on the control of 
the other. Speed control may depend on voltage control. The control 
must be simple. The system must be insensitive to parameter variations, 
reswitching operations, etc.
The above discussion makes it very clear that many of the control circuits 
offered by the conventional theory of control may be used but with a caution in the 
area of electrical drives, so that they give satisfactory dynamic and steady-state 
performance with simpler design, very little complexity, maximum reliability and 
safety, as demanded by the industrial user.
6.3 
BLOCK DIAGRAM REPRESENTATION OF DRIVE SYSTEMS
It is normal practice in control engineering to represent a control system by 
means of a block diagram, with a systematic connection of blocks in the direc­
tion of signal flow, showing the functions performed by each component of the 
system. A control system is dynamic and its performance is represented by a set 
of differential equations. Each component is represented by a block having a 
definite input-output relation. In effect a block diagram is a graphical representa­
tion of the basic equations of a physical system. The direction of signal flow is 
specified and each block is unidirectional, arrow heads in the diagram represent­
ing signal flow.
The drive system employing the principles of feedback control theory also 
have several components performing individual functions (Fig. 6.1). An elec­
tric motor drives the mechanical load. The motor is supplied from a thyristor 
power converter. The converter has necessary controls to provide the required 
supply to the motor, e.g., variable voltage variable frequency supply, if the 
drive motor is ac motor. In addition to these there are speed and current con­
trollers and limiters in the systems. Furthermore, there are devices for speed 
and current measurement. Therefore, the system can be advantageously 
divided into several parts, each part being represented by a block. All the 
blocks are interconnected. The drive system with all its components may be 
represented by a set of differential equations which describe the dynamic and 
steady-state behaviour. When once it is represented by a block diagram, each 
block having its own input-output relationship, it gives a valuable insight 
into the nature of the system. The system simplification using block diagram 
reduction techniques is very easy. The process is mechanical and yields a sin­
gle overall block to represent the performance of the system. All the blocks 
being unidirectional are connected in the direction of signal flow. The block

Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
Fig. 6.1 
Representation of a controlled drive by blocks performing individual functions
diagram, therefore indicates realistically the flow of signals, apart from rep­
resenting the system by a mathematical model. It is an easy representation to 
obtain the information regarding the dynamic behaviour. However it does not 
give any information about the physical nature of the system. A single block 
diagram may represent different dissimilar unrelated systems.
The system analysis utilising the method of block diagram reduction gives 
a better understanding of the system and the contribution of each compo­
nent to the performance of the system. It is therefore logical to expect an 
improvement or alteration in the system performance by changing the input- 
output relation of one or several blocks. Sometimes new blocks may be added 
to improve the performance. The process is rather easier than manipulating 
machine equations.
However, only linear systems may be represented by a block diagram. The 
drive systems invariably have non-linear elements. These have to be linearised 
about an operating point to be able to apply the block diagram techniques.
Figure 6.2 summarises various reduction techniques of block diagram for sim­
plification of the system. The block diagram of a typical dc motor speed control 
system is given in Fig. 6.3.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(a) Multiplication and addtion in block diagram technique
*M_
* i2
X - R
4
*n
o---►
Xi2
o--->
X9
9 X0
X
X
G1 
-^Cy* 
G
Xo 
«
X^M
x9
G1 -> 0>  G
ï - *
xn
1/G-i
Xo
G2
XiC
0-----F 1 +G1G2
X0
1/G-,
G1
1 Xo
9X0
9 Xo
xn
*0
-9>
X
X
X 
r
- -----K > "*
a 
L
>f
- Ò
X
- f — >
Fig. 6.2 
Block diagram simplifications
y X  
y X  
y X  
y X

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
Nr__ +
•---- >
> 
Controller 
—►
Converter 
—> 
DC motor
Feed back
Fig. 6.3(a) 
Speed control of a dc motor with speed loop alone
Fig. 6.3(b) 
Speed control of a dc motor having both speed and current loops
f  2:

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
6.4 
SIGNAL FLOW GRAPH REPRESENTATION OF THE SYSTEMS
The block diagram representation discussed above is adequate only for simple 
systems having components with one input and one output. When a system is 
complex, having many variables, the block diagram reduction may become a very 
difficult task to perform. In such cases it may be advantageous to have a method 
using which the overall input-output relationship of the system can be determined 
without needing to perform a reduction. Such a method is afforded by represent­
ing a system by its signal flow graph which has line segments directed in the 
direction of signal flow. A gain formula is available to determine the input-output 
relationship between the variables.
As has already been stated, a system can be represented by a set of differen­
tial equations. The pictorial representation of these equations by means of nodes 
which are interconnected by means of directed line segments called branches, is 
called the signal flow graph of the system. A node of the graph represents a system 
variable and a branch acts as a single multiplier with the multiplying factor indi­
cated on it. The branches are unidirectional elements allowing signal flow in the 
direction of arrow head and are equivalent to blocks in a block diagram.
A multivariable system is represented by state equations of the form
X = A X + B u  
(6.1)
A signal flow graph can be used to represent such a system. The state equations of 
a separately excited dc motor and its signal flow graph are shown in.
A signal flow graph gives the same information given by a block diagram, but 
has several advantages. Multivariable systems can be represented very easily. A 
gain formula is available to obtain relationships between variables. Simple flow 
graphs allow writing down of these relations by inspection. Time domain solution
Fig. 6.4 
Signal flow diagram of a dc motor. Constants Qv, Q22, Qu, Q21 can be read out 
from equations

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
of the equations of multivariable systems using signal flow is straightforward. 
There is no need for evaluating the state transition matrix and convolution inte­
grals. The effect of input is normally taken care of in the formulation of input- 
output relations of the graph.
Mason’s Gain Formula relating an output variable to an input variable is 
given by
CM  = M
V  
(6.2)
R
(
s
)
A
where Pk is the loop gain defined as the continuous succession of branches in the 
direction of signal flow, encountering a node only once.
Ak cofactor of the path Pk 
A determinant of the graph
6.5 
TRANSFER FUNCTIONS
The dynamic behaviour of a system is described by a set of differential equations. 
On many occasions the solution of these equations requires the evaluation of con­
volution integrals which may be a difficult task. In such cases a simpler analysis is 
made feasible by the use of transfer functions making use of Laplace transforms. 
A transfer function is defined for linear time invariant systems as the ratio of the 
Laplace transform of the output variable to the Laplace transform of the input 
variable, assuming all initial conditions to be zero. Non-linear systems with one 
or more time varying parameters cannot have transfer functions as the Laplace 
transform does not exist for these. However, drive systems having non-linearities 
can be linearised and linear feedback theory can be applied. These systems may 
be represented by block diagrams or signal flow graphs. In the block diagram 
approach a block represents the function of a component with its input and output. 
The transfer function of the component is written in the block. Thus the transfer 
function is of the form
G(s) =
m
X(s)
a0sm + ÆjS™ 1 H-----1- am
b 0 S n + /7]5n_1 H------h b n
(6.3)
while defining the transfer function, Laplace transform has been used because it 
transforms all the differential equations to simple algebraic equations. Fig. 6.5 
depicts a block diagram of a dc motor in a drive system. The motor has armature 
voltage as input variable and speed as output variable. The transfer function is 
written in the block.
The transfer function is derived from the set of differential equations which 
describe the behaviour of the system. It is used to determine the dynamic behav­
iour of the system as it gives locations of poles and zeros on the s-plane.
It, however is not concerned with the internal physical structure of the system. 
Dissimilar physical systems may have similar transfer functions and also similar 
dynamic behaviour. The transfer function is in terms of parameters of the system

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
o o o
N*
o--->
AN
N
Speed 
controller
Kn
Bridge
converter
1 +STm1
I As) 
—>
Km2
1+STm
N(s)
Tachogenerator
Kt
Speed controller transfer function Ks proportional controller
Ks(1+sts)
sTs
PI controller
Fig. 6.5(a) 
Block diagram of speed control with only speed loop
and is a property of the system. It does not depend on the magnitude or nature of the 
input. The highest power of 5 in the denominator represents the order of the system.
A simple example is given in the following to show the simplicity afforded by 
the transfer functions.
Example 
Two RC circuits are connected in cascade, as shown in Fig. 6.6. The 
input is a step voltage
u0 = 0 
t < 0 
u0 = 1 
t > 0
The amplifier is used to function as dc coupling between them. Determine the
w
1 e
time variation of ur We know
U\ — —— f /] dt 
u2 = — f /2 dt
0
h =
u0
Q Xp(-t/T{ ) 
i2 - «1 (0 exp(-i/r2)
n 
n
Substituting
Uy = u0( 1 -  e~‘/7>) 
u2 = Uy(t)(l -  e~1iTl) 
The ratio u2 /u0 is obtained by evaluating the convolution integral
d r
—  f (1 — e~xlT1 ) (1 -  e-(t- T)IT> )dr 
dt J
as
1 -
-r /r ,
7; - T 2
+
To
-t IT-,
T - T

AT +o
AN
AN
K
^ 1 c O"*~ST!T)) 
,y
la (S )
K m2
' xs
---------------------------^
(1 + S T m 2) 
1C
w
1 + S r m
N (s)
Simplified
Fig. 6.5 (b) 
Block diagram ofa.d.c. motor speed control having both speed and current control.
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
R
o 
VW------------ f
-o
Vi
o
Vn
o
Fig. 6.6(a) 
Two RC circuits in cascade
If one more RC circuit is added in cascade to the given circuit the evaluation of 
uJuQ is very difficult.
On the other hand if transfer function approach is used we have
ux (s) _ 
1
w0o ) 
o r, + 1)
and
u2(s) _ 
1
M, (S') 
( 1)
Using these equations, we have
u2{s)
U q
{ s
)
But 
u0(s) = u0/s  
Therefore
1 
1
(sT, + 1) 
(s T2 + 1)
u2{‘) _  L-i 1 
1 
1
u0 
s sT{ + 1 
s T2 + 1
can be very easily evaluated as
Ti
1 -
71 -  Ty
-t/T\ +
To
T\ -  T2
-t/T2
using partial fraction expansion.
6.5.1 
Transfer Function of an Armature Controlled dc Motor
The speed of a dc motor can be controlled by varying the voltage applied to the 
armature of a dc motor. A separately excited dc motor with variable armature 
voltage finds application as a drive motor in a variable speed drive. The variable

A 
CO,.
Fig. 6.6(b) 
Simplified block diagram of closed loop control of a dc motor

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
armature voltage is provided by a phase controlled rectifier. The schematic of an 
armature controlled dc motor is shown in Fig. 6.7.
ra 
ia
+ o--------- ty\A---------- '75ÜÏT'-----;----
▼ 
t
— o----------------------------------------------------------------
Fig. 6.7 
Armature controlled dc motor
The torque developed by the dc motor
7d =  K<t>ia 
(6.4)
where 
§ is air gap flux
i is armature current
a
and K is a constant
Neglecting the affects of saturation and armature reaction we have the air gap 
flux proportional to the field current. That is
(]) =  Kfif 
(6.5)
Because if is constant the torque developed is given by
Td = Ktia 
(6.6)
where K is motor constant. The armature voltage ea is supplied by the thyristor 
converter. The armature circuit equation is given by
— 
^ 
(^.7)
dt
eb in Eq. 6.7 is the rotational (back) emf induced in the armature and is propor­
tional to the product of speed and flux. But, the flux of the motor is constant. 
Therefore,
eb = Keoj 
(6.8)
The dynamic equation of the motor giving the torque balance can be written as
J^
 +  /  • 
dt
Assuming the initial conditions to be zero, Laplace transforms of Eqs 6.7, 6.8 and
6.9 can be written as
EJs) = rj.js) + s L J J s )  + Eb(s) 
Eb(s) = Keco(s) 
sJco(s) + fco(s) = KtIa(s)
(6.10)
(6. 11)
(6.12)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
Taking Ea(s) as the input and co(s) as the output, the transfer function oj(s)IEa (s) 
can be obtained by eliminating I (s) from the equations and is given by
co(s) _ 
Kt
E E )  ~ L J s 2 + ( L J  + raJ)s + ( r j  + K,Ke) 
(6’' 3)
The block diagram given in Fig. 6.8(a) represents Eq. 6.13. This can be finally 
reduced to a single block given in Fig. 6.8(b).
(a)
Vais)
? T1 d
K
1
co(s)
1
ra + sLa
Js + f
s
Eb(s)
0(s)
>
K' xe
Va (s)
K
0(s)
s[(ra + sLa)(Js+f) + KbK\
w-
(b)
Fig. 6.8(a & b) 
Block diagram of an armature controlled dc motor and its 
simplification
Normally the armature inductance L x is very small and may be neglected. The 
transfer function in this case is given by
co(s) 
Km
E*(s)
(6.14)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
where
( r J + K tKc) 
h J
( r J  +
It can be seen that the back emf affects the damping of the system. A transfer 
function between the speed and load torque can be derived by assuming the other 
input e to be zero. In this case the dynamic equation would be
TA(s) = sJco(s) + 
+ 
0 ) 
from which
Oj(s) =
sJ + f
But from Eqs 6.10 and 6.11 we have
T (s) = 
K^KM
d 
(r. +sLa){sJ + f )
(6.16)
(6.17)
Km =
T =
1 m
Substituting in Eq. 6.15 and simplifying we get
w(-y) _________(ra +sLa)______
- T J s )  
(r. + sLa)(sJ + f )  -  KtKe
Substituting 
T;1 = Z,a /ra
Tm = J l f
we have
<Q(s) _ 
(sTa + 1)(1//)
-Tcv(s) 
(sTã + 1 )(sTm + 1) -  K{Ke /(ir j )
<o{s) _ 
K{sTa +X)
-T0J(s)~  (sTl + \)(sT2 + f )
(6.18)
(6.19)
(6.20)
where K is constant. If the poles of this transfer function are complex conjugates 
the speed change for a change in the load torque is oscillatory.
6.5.2 
Transfer Function of a Field Controlled dc Motor
The speed of a dc motor can be varied by varying the field current. The speed 
can be increased beyond base speed by decreasing the field current (Fig. 6.8(c)). 
In this type of control, constant torque operation is not possible, as the armature 
current would increase to dangerous values at low fluxes. It is therefore necessary 
to maintain the armature current at a constant value at all flux levels. The field 
current is varied. The armature is also supplied by means of a phase controlled 
rectifier to maintain constant armature current. While deriving the transfer func­
tion the effects of saturation and armature reaction are neglected.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
rf 
if 
Ea 
i  a 
/a = constant
Field controlled dc motor
Block diagram
Vf (s)
''m
0(s)
o 
>
s  {Js + f) (LfS + rf)
------------- ^
Transfer function
Fig. 6.8(c & d) 
Block diagram of field controlled dc motor [Armature current 
constant]
The torque developed by the motor
Td = K(pia 
(6.21)
In a field controlled dc motor as discussed above, the armature current is constant 
and field current is variable. Therefore we have
Td = K2if 
(6.22)
The equation of the field circuit is given by
rfif + Lr(difdt) = ef 
(6.23)
The dynamic equation of the motor is
j* 2 L  + f . w = K2tt
(6.24)
The Laplace transforms of Eqs 6.22 -  6.24 with zero initial conditions are given 
by
(LfS +  rf )If ( i )  =  Ef (s) 
(Js + 
f)w(s) =
(6.25)
(6.26)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Eliminating If(s) from Eq. 6.26 and simplifying we get
co(s) _ 
K2
E + 
+
(Tfs + 1 
)(Tm + 1)
(6.27)
(6.28)
where 
Km = K2 /(rf • f )  motor gain constant 
T{ = Lf lr{ field time constant
Tm = J I f  mechanical time constant.
Since the field inductance cannot be neglected, field controlled dc motor hav­
ing speed as variable quantity is a second order system. The block diagram of the 
system and its transfer function are shown in Fig 6.8(d).
6.5.3 
A Comparison of Armature Controlled and Field 
Controlled dc Motors
Armature controlled 
Field controlled
1. Second order system can be reduced to 
first order due to negligible armature 
inductance La
2. Speed control is at constant torque up to 
based speed
3. Maintenance of z'f at constant values is 
easy. A converter on the field side is not 
necessary.
4. Back emf provides damping
5. Time constants are small. The constants 
of the power amplifier must also be 
considered.
Second order system Approximation to 
first order is not possible due to large 
value of L(
Speed control at variable torque, i.e., at 
constant power beyond base speed.
Armature current has to be maintained at 
constant value. This can be done either 
by means of a controller on the armature 
circuit or by extra resistances.
In the former case the converters are 
required on the armature as well as field 
sides. In the latter case the efficiency is 
poor.
This is not the case and necessary damp­
ing may be provided.
Time constants are large.
6.5.4 
Transfer Function of a Ward Leonard Drive
In the classical Ward Leonard, system, the dc drive motor having constant excita­
tion is supplied from a variable voltage generator, as shown in Fig. 6.9. The gen­
erator is driven at constant speed. The field current of the dc generator is varied 
by varying the field voltage to have variable voltage at the terminals, which is 
ultimately fed to the motor. A transfer function relating the speed of the motor and 
generator field voltage is required.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
Fig. 6.9 
Ward Leonard control of a dc motor
The system equations are
Lf —jf- + rf/fg = 
(6.29)
The voltage induced in the armature of the generator is given by
eg = Kcog(pg = K Jfg 
(6.30)
where K is a constant which includes the constancy of generator speed and the 
proportionality constant between field current and air gap flux. As usual the effects 
of saturation are neglected. Eliminating i from Eq. 6.30 we have
L{ Tk + ^
 = efg 
(6'31)
The transfer function between the armature voltage and field voltage of the gen­
erator is given by
[ = — Ls----  
(6.32)
Ef (s) 
(
The transfer function of the armature controlled motor is
co(s) _
Ea (s) 
( I a J s2) + ( I af + raJ)s + raf + K tK e
(6.33)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Combining Eqs 6.32 and 6.33, we have
co (s) 
_________________KaKt_________________
£fO) 
(Lfs + rf)(LaJs 2 + (Faf + raJ)s + raf + KxKe)
(6.34)
Neglecting the effects of L the transfer function simplifies in the second order to
co(s)
*g Km
(Tf s + 1 )(Tms + 1)
(6.35)
where 
Kg = (Ka/rt') generator gain constant
Tf = Lf /rf generator field time constant 
Km = Kt /(raf + KXKC) motor gain constant 
Tm = rat//(/af + KtKe) motor time constant
The block diagrams of a generator and a motor are shown in Fig. 6.10.
Ff(s)
KKb
0(s)
w 
F
(Lf s +rf) [La Js2 = {Laf + raJ) s + raf + KKb]
-----------------W-
Fig. 6.10 
Block diagram and transfer function of Ward Leonard control
Alternately The equations of the system may be derived in the state variable form 
taking ip ia and co as the state variables. A signal flow graph may be drawn to 
represent these equations. Using Mason’s gain formula the transfer function may 
be derived.
Using the schematic of Fig. 6.9 representing a Ward Feonard speed control 
system we have for the generator field circuit
difg
%  = rfhg + 
(6.36)
which can be rearranged as
difg 
6fg
~ d f  ~ 7 7  ~  T
,i8
(6.37)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
For the loop of armatures the circuit equation is given by
= rX + K ^ t  + em 
(6.37)
at
ea is the voltage induced in the armature of the generator and is given by K j fg. 
r' and La include resistance and inductance of both generator and motor arma­
tures respectively.
em is the back emf of the motor given by Kmco. Substituting in Eq. (6.37) and 
rearranging the terms we have
^
 = 
- « / X X  + (KgIX)ifg -  (6.38)
The torque balance equation gives the dynamics of the motor. It is
Tà = - J ^ -  + f-c o  + TL = 
, 
(6.39)
dt
Rearranging the terms we have
^
 = (Km tJ)4 -  (f/J)co -  (Tl U) 
(6.40)
dt
Equations 6.40 are the state equations of the system and given in matrix rota­
tion as
d_
dt
---- 1
• 
.
___1
<£? 3 ' 
1
0
K J J
Kg/L' 
—rfg /Efg 
0
0 
ML 
0
+
fg
~Km/L'
0
- f U  
0 
0
-M J
4
ffg
CD
efg
(6.41)
6.6 
TRANSIENT RESPONSE OF CLOSED LOOP DRIVE SYSTEMS
The time response of closed loop drive systems is of fundamental importance and 
must be investigated in detail. The time response of a system to specified inputs 
gives information with respect to the following characteristics:
i. Whether the system is stable or unstable. The system is said to be stable 
if it reaches a steady-state condition which has the same form as the 
input disturbance. It is said to be unstable if it does not attain an appro­
priate steady-state condition.
ii. The possible oscillatory nature of the system and the peak amplitudes of 
the oscillations.
iii. The damping of the system oscillations which is a measure of the 
speed or sluggishness of the system. An underdamped system even 
though it gives an oscillatory output has a fast response. On the other- 
hand an overdamped system is sluggish and does not have oscillatory 
behaviour.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
iv. 
Steady-state error of the system which is actually a measure of the ‘good­
ness’, indicating how exactly the output can follow the input. Closed 
loop systems have very small steady-state error and thus have an output 
following the input very closely, compared to open loop systems.
The parameters of the system actually influence the above characteristics. It 
is possible to adjust the parameters to give the desired performance with respect 
to the above characteristics. If the system has parameters already adjusted to the 
extent possible and the system is not giving the desired performance, additional 
controllers are added to the given system to improve the performance.
The time response of the system has two parts; the transient and steady-state 
response. The transient response is the time variation of the output variable while 
going from one state to the other. The steady-state response of the system is the 
time variation of the output variable as the time approaches infinity.
A stable linear time invariant system comes back to its original state of equilib­
rium when the system is subjected to a disturbance, whereas an unstable system 
has its output variable in a continuous state of oscillation or it diverges very much 
without bounds from the state of equilibrium. The characteristic nature of stability 
(either absolute or relative) of the system can be very easily assessed without need 
for determining the time response. Stability tests are available and can be applied 
to decide whether the system is stable or not.
The time domain response can be obtained by directly solving the equations 
of the system. It is normally determined for step input, because it enables us to 
determine the time response of the system for any other type of input. Thus, the 
step response of a system is very important. However, the direct solution of the 
equation is rather tedious when the order is more. The method of Laplace trans­
form can be applied to solve the equations. It has been very well utilised to obtain 
the transfer function, which is the ratio of the Laplace transform of output variable 
to the Laplace transform of input variable. The inverse transform of the output 
variable after substituting the Laplace transform of input variable gives the time 
response of the system. The procedure is illustrated with respect to a typical trans­
fer function.
Let the transfer function be
Z(s) = C(s)
m
A s )
B(s)
(6.42)
The denominator polynomial is solved and its roots are found out. These are the 
poles of the transfer function. Therefore
C(s) = R(s)
A s)
(s -  s {)(s -  s2)(s -  s3)
(6.43)
The system has step input. Therefore
A s )  = -5
(6.44)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
Using this relation
C ( 0  =  L -'
_s ( s - s , ) ( s - s 2) ( s - s 3)
(6.45)
which is the sum of the residues of the function at poles s , s , s . Assuming that 
these do not repeat, which is normally the case
C(t) =
A(O)
+
^(s,)
\ t
( “ ■Si ) ( - « 2  ) ( “ Î3 ) 
(«1 -  ^2 X-Sl -  Ai )
A( s2 )
-Sit , 
A(s})
+
<>2 -  *1 )(^2  -  ^3 )
f l >  +
(■S3 - S l ) ( s 3 ~ s2)
+
(6.46)
If the poles are real, the time response C{t) is made up of constants and a sum of 
exponential functions. The output is an aperiodic function having no oscillations. 
When the poles are complex, they appear in complex conjugate pairs. The time 
response in this case shows harmonic oscillations. The time response may result 
in a decreasing, neutral, or increasing response depending upon the nature of the 
roots. The transient response of C{t) decreases and oscillations if any are damped 
out, if the poles of the transfer functions have negative real parts. It has sinusoidal 
oscillations of constant magnitude if the real parts are zero. The transient response 
of the system, on the other hand, is unbounded in its magnitude if one or more 
roots have positive real parts. This nature of the transient response clearly defines 
the stability of the system. In the first case the system is stable, in the second case 
it is neutral and in the third case it is unstable. These are depicted in Fig. 6.11. We 
can also see that in the first case the roots lie on the left hand side of the s-plane, 
in the second case they lie on the imaginary axis and in the third the roots with 
positive real parts lie on the right hand side of the s-plane. Therefore the stability 
of the system may be related to the location of poles on the s-plane. For absolute 
stability of a control system it is a necessary and sufficient condition that all the
Fig. 6.11(a) 
Typical transient responses of systems

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
— X------ X----------------------------
-a
Real, negative
--------------------------------------- X-a
Real, positive 
Xai
Complex pair
X<72
(-ve real part)
XG1
Complex pair (+ve real part)
X02
'>/\
';
Imaginary pair 
real part zero
f
Response decreases in time stable
Response increases in time unstable
Response increases in time unstable
Fig. 6.11(b) 
Basic root locations transient response and stability of the systems
poles of the transfer function have negative real roots and lie on the left hand side 
of the s-plane.
When once the system is found to be stable having a bounded output, the qual­
ity of the time response is judged by certain time domain specifications, such 
as overshoot, rise time, peak time, swiftness of response, settling time, etc. The

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
system must have fast response so that it settles down to its new equilibrium posi­
tion quickly. As a fast response is always accompanied by oscillations this cannot 
be achieved in systems where oscillations cannot be tolerated. The system must 
also have a smaller overshoot. To achieve this it must have sufficient damping. 
Two typical time responses are depicted in Fig. 6.12. From the figure it is clear 
that a fast response is possible with smaller damping resulting in smaller rise 
time and larger overshoot. An increase in damping results in an increase in rise 
time and decrease in overshoot. Therefore any attempt to make the system faster 
it is followed by increased overshoot. The system becomes sluggish if an attempt 
is made to decrease the overshoot. It is therefore difficult to have a system with 
smaller rise time as well as overshoot. A compromise must be made between 
these two specifications.
Fig. 6.12 
Time domain specifications of a control system. The step response curve 
showing the specifications rise time, delay time, overshoot, settling time 
c2 > ^ (damping)
It is possible to determine the time domain response for any system and adjust 
its parameters to correct this easily for second order systems. As the order of the 
system increases the procedure becomes tedious. In such cases a higher order 
system is approximated to a second order system having the effects of dominant 
pole pair.
Let us consider a third order system of normalised natural frequency, in which 
case it has a closed loop transfer function given by
Z(s) = _____1_________ 1
s2 + 2 £s + 1 (ßs + 1)
(6.47)
The effect of the pole s = 
on the transient response is shown in Fig. 6.13. The 
effect of this pole is insignificant if 11/ p\ > 10 | co£ | and the system has a response 
similar to that of a second order system. The location of the pole is significant, i.e., 
as it moves nearer to the imaginary axis the time response is altered.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
X
----x----------------------------------------- 1---------------
P3
X
c (t) = 1 + Aes- ^“" [sin (con 
— c2 f + 0)] + /A3eP3t 
/\3 Value is negative and depends on location of P3 on the real axis.
Fig. 6.13(a) 
Effect of an additional real pole on the transient response
(i) Second order system or a third order system with its real pole having 
insignificant effect by being far off the imaginary axis
(ii) Addition of real pole. Transient response alters from 1 to 5 as the addi­
tional pole approaches imaginary axis
Further, the presence of a zero in the transfer function also alters the transient 
performance. Its relative position with respect to the additional pole is also impor­
tant. If this zero is to the left of the pole the system behaves as if it has only com­
plex poles but with smaller peak overshoot. If the zero is to the right of the pole 
the overshoot is greater than that of the system with complex poles.
Therefore the approximation of a higher order system must be made with cau­
tion. However they may be approximated to a system having (a) two complex 
poles (b) two complex poles and one real pole and (c) two complex poles, one 
real pole and one real zero. In the first case it is a second order system for which 
the time domain specifications can be determined. In the second case depending 
upon the location of the third pole the performance can be corrected to achieve 
the desired performance. In the third case their effect will be small if they are very 
near to each other.
The response of a second order system is therefore very important. A detailed 
inspection of this response with reference to time domain specification is given 
in the following.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
X
-x----- a
P3
x
7 , 
K(s-Z)
(S) 
(s2 + 2caj2ns+co2n) (s-P3)
C(t)= 1 + /\1e-^“ [sin (convf 1 - c;21 + 0)]+/\3eP3t
/A3 is negative for case(T) 
/\3 is zero for caseQ 
A3 is positive for case (3)
Fig. 6.13(b) 
Alteration of transient response by the location of zero
Using generalised notation the closed loop transfer function of a second order 
system is given by
C(s) _ 
col 
R(s) 
s2 + 2 £cons + col
(6.48)
where 
con is natural frequency of the system 
C is damping ratio.
Time domain response is normally defined for step input in which case
m  = s
(6.49)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The time response
C(t) = L-' _______föj?_______
,s(s2 + 2Çm„s + co2 )
(6.50)
which can be obtained as
C(t) = 1-----e c<°n? sin(conßt + 0)
(6.51)
where 
/3 = y/l -  
and 0 -  tan-1 (/?/{).
The transient response of a second order system is shown in Fig. 6.12. As 
the value £ decreases the closed loop roots approach the imaginary axis and the 
response is oscillatory and the % overshoot also increases.
% Overshoot = exp(-C7t fyjl -  £ 2 x 100) 
(6.52)
Normalised peak time contp = nlyj\ -
From these two equations it is clear that the smaller the value of { the larger the 
overshoot and smaller the peak time. The system is faster. A compromise has to be 
made between the swiftness of the response and allowable overshoot.
6.7 
FREQUENCY RESPONSE APPROACH
The previous sections show that with the time response of a system, even though it 
is a direct method of analysis, the adjustment of the parameters to give a satisfac­
tory time domain performance is rather tedious particularly with higher order sys­
tems. On the other hand methods utilising frequency response are extremely easy 
and practical for the analysis and synthesis of control systems. The frequency 
response is defined as the steady-state response of the system for sinusoidal exci­
tation over a range of frequencies. It is well known, that sinusoidal excitation 
offers advantages in the analysis that, in a linear system, the output or signal at 
any other point of the system is sinusoidal; however it differs from the input signal 
in phase and magnitude.
The frequency response method has the following advantages:
i. The experimental determination of frequency response of a system is 
very easy, because sinusoidal signal of varying frequencies and ampli­
tudes are readily available. The method is reliable and uncomplicated for 
the experimental analysis of a system. This data can be used to formulate 
the transfer function of the system. The frequency response provides 
information regarding the response of the system to noise and distur­
bance. Bandwidth can be controlled. The system can be designed so that 
the effects of these are minimum.
ii. The transfer function describing the frequency response is very easily 
obtained by substituting jco for s in its transfer function in s domain. 
It is a complex function of co having real and imaginary parts. It has a 
magnitude and phase, the plot of which gives the frequency response of 
the system.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
iii. One such plot is the Nyquist plot which gives the absolute and relative 
stabilities of the closed loop system response from the knowledge of the 
open loop frequency response. The actual roots of the system need not 
be determined.
iv. Design methods in the frequency domain are simple.
However to design a control system in the frequency domain satisfying the 
given time domain specifications, a correlation between the time response and 
frequency response is necessary. There is no such direct correlation except for 
second order systems. While designing a closed loop system we may adjust the 
frequency response characteristics by using several design criteria in order to 
obtain the desired transient or time response.
In order to utilise the frequency response approach effectively, it is necessary to 
understand the indirect correlation between the transient and frequency response. 
The indirect correlation actually interprets the desired dynamic response in terms 
of the frequency response characteristic. Changes are made in the frequency 
response, so that the modified one gives the desired time response.
6.7.1 
Representation of Frequency Response
There exist many possibilities of representing a frequency response:
One of them is the polar plot representation. The transfer function in the fre­
quency domain is obtained by substituting jco for s as complex function of co. 
It is separated into real and imaginary parts which are plotted on the real and 
imaginary axes to get the locus on the complex plane, as co is varied. It is also 
possible to transform the complex function into its polar form having magnitude 
and phase. For example
Z(Jco) = Z(s)s=Jm = R(co) + jX(co)
= Z(co) exp(j<\>(co)) 
(6.53)
where
Z(co) = (R(œ)2
(|)(cu) = tan
X(co)
R(co)
(6.54)
A typical polar plot is shown in Fig. 6.14. It can be very easily seen that this 
kind of representation has a limitation. The investigation of the effects of chang­
ing parameters or adding poles or zeros to the existing transfer function requires 
recalculation of frequency response. The adjustment of parameters for the desired 
performance is rather tedious. The effects of individual poles or zeros are not 
separately indicated by the method.
Another method of portraying the frequency response, which is relatively 
simple and is widely used, is to represent separately the magnitude and phase 
of the transfer functions as functions of logarithmic frequency. These frequency 
response plots are called Bode plots. We know that for a given transfer function
Z(Jco) = Z (c o )e ^ i(o) 
(6.55)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
F ig . 6.14 
Typical polar plots for frequency response
where 
Z(co) is the magnitude and 
<\)(co) is the phase.
The natural logarithm is
\n(Z{jco))=\n{Z(co))+j§(oj) 
(6.56)
The log magnitude transformed to the base 10 becomes
= 20 log10 Z(co) 
(6.57)
The logarithmic magnitude (gain) and phase angle are drawn as functions of fre­
quency on a separate set of axes. The frequency is represented on a logarithmic 
scale as it is the most convenient one for this case. By this magnitude the plot 
becomes a plot of asymptotic lines, each of which has a slope -2 0  db/decade of 
frequencies.
An immediate advantage that follows from these plots is that all the multiplica­
tive factors become additive ones. Therefore, by drawing the plots of individual 
factors and adding them we get the frequency response plot of the overall transfer 
function. Figure 6.15 gives the summary of the Bode plots of the important basic 
functions.
However the frequency response of a second order system cannot always be 
represented by a pair of asymptotic lines. The transfer function of a typical second 
order system in the complex frequency plane is given by
«„2
2(ju> ) = (ja>)2 + 2£a>n(jco) + co2n
(6.58)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
1/1 Or 
1/t 
10/t
(g) 
Loq, CO 
^
Fig. 6.15 
Bode diagrams for frequency response, (a) Magnitude plot (b) Phase plot 
of 1/(1 + jcor)
The magnitude and phase plots are 
shown in Fig. 6.16. From these plots 
it is very clear that the log-magnitude 
and phase plots of a second order 
system depend very much on the 
damping ratio. The system may be 
represented by asymptotic lines if 
> 0.707. The deviation of actual 
response from the asymptotic one 
is a function of £, and must be taken 
into consideration if £ < 0.707, The 
frequency at which the peak value 
of magnitude (M ) occurs is called 
the resonant frequency (cor). A rela­
tionship between cor and con can be 
derived as
cor = con^l 1 -  £ 2 
(6.59)
____________1____________
1 +  2<S 
(jco/con ) + (jco/con f
Fig. 6.16 
Magnitude and phase plots of a 
second order system

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
As the damping factor approaches zero, the value of cor approaches con. The peak 
value of response is also related to £ as
(6.60)
M is unity for L = 0.707. A clear value of <d at which M > 1 can be identified for 
^ > 0.707. As £, approaches zero the value Mpu approaches infinity. These relations 
are shown graphically in Fig. 6.16. The phase of the transfer function at resonant 
frequency is given by
(|) (coT) = -90 + sin-1 
7 =
 
(6.61)
Vw 7
We discussed and concluded in the previous section that a higher order system 
having a dominant pair of complex conjugate poles can be represented by an 
equivalent second order system. These relations are useful for determining the 
damping ratio for experimental frequency response.
From the above discussion it is clear that a second order system cannot always 
be represented by asymptotic approximation. In terms of £ we decided when this 
would be feasible. It is also helpful to decide the ratios of time constants of the 
system at which this approximation would be feasible. To solve this problem let 
us consider the normalised transfer function of a second order system in the fre­
quency domain as
Z(jco) = ------------------------------
1 +jo)Tm + (jco)2TATm
(6.62)
Let us investigate the errors involved in representing this by two first order delays 
(1 + ja>TA) and (1 + jcoTm).
Z(jco) = _________ 1_________
(1 + jcoTk )(1 + jwTm ) 
Zi (/'<»)• Z2(jco)
(1 + 
+ ./g>rm)
1 +
j o
j T
m
 
+
 ( J
(6.63)
From this Z2 (Jco) is the error involved and it provides the correction required 
when Z(jco) is approximated by Z{(jco). Let us investigate for what ratios of 
T / T  the approximation is feasible. Assuming T /T = t and introducing a vari­
able K -  TAyft ■ (jco) we have the transfer function relating to the error
Z2(K) =
\ Z A I k  + k 2
41
1 + 41 K + K
(6.64)
The magnitude and phase Z, as function of K are shown in Fig. 6.17. From the 
figure it is clear that the error in magnitude as well as phase plots increases as 
the value of t decreases. For larger values of t the deviation of the asymptotic 
approximation from the actual response becomes negligible and Z2(K) = 1. Thus

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
the ratio of T /T. decides whether the
m 
A
approximation would be valid or not.
The following procedure may be 
adopted for drawing the log-magni­
tude and phase plots to represent the 
frequency response:
i. Identify the comer frequen­
cies of the factors of the 
sinusoidal transfer function.
ii. Draw the asymptotic log- 
magnitude 
curves 
with 
proper slopes at comer fre- 
Fig 
quencies.
iii. The proper corrections are 
made to these asymptotic 
curves to arrive at the exact curve
iv. The phase angle plot is obtained 
curves of the factors.
6.17 
Error involved in representing a 
second order system by two first 
order cascaded systems
by adding the individual phase angle
The advantages of this method are obvious. It takes much less time to draw 
these curves compared to the other methods used for determining the frequency 
response. The curves of a given transfer function can be easily modified to take 
into account addition of poles and zeros for improving the performance. Once one 
becomes used to these plots, the composite asymptotic plot can be directly drawn 
doing the summing process mentally.
6.7.2 
Correlation Between Frequency and Transient Response
As has been stated, the use of frequency response for the design of control systems 
requires a correlation between the time and frequency response. Time response 
specifications are available for the performance of a system. These must be trans­
lated to frequency response. There must be frequency domain specifications also, 
corresponding to the time domain specifications, such as overshoot, settling time, 
etc. However, it is easy to have a direct correlation between the transient and 
frequency responses of a second order system. A typical magnitude plot of a sec­
ond order system is shown in Fig. 6.17. The resonant peak (maximum ampli­
tude) Mpco of the magnitude plot depends upon the damping ratio of the system. 
The resonant frequency also depends upon the damping ratio. These relations are 
given by Eqs 6.59 and 6.60 and represented graphically in Fig. 6.18. The resonant 
frequency cor and band width of the frequency response relate to the fastness of 
response. Smaller the values of bandwidth and resonant frequency smaller is the 
rise time of the transient response and faster is the response. The overshoot of the 
time response can be related to the resonant peak of the frequency response. This 
resonant peak also indicates the relative stability of the systems. The bandwidth is

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Damping ratio --------►
Fig. 6.18 
Peak of frequency response and resonating frequency of second order 
system as a function of damping ratio
related to the natural frequency con of the system. For a given 
greater the value 
co faster is the response. The value of £ must be chosen to compromise between 
Mnm andcu.
pcy 
r
The frequency domain specifications are therefore
i. The peak amplitude and the frequency at which this occurs. The peak 
amplitude must be normally less than 1.5. The acceptable range of peak 
amplitude corresponds to damping rates of 0.4 to 0.7.
ii. Relatively large resonant frequency and hence large bandwidth of the 
frequency response. The system will have relatively small time con­
stants. The system becomes faster.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
iii. The closeness of the polar plot of frequency response to (-1, 0) point 
indicates the peak overshoot of the time response. This also gives the 
relative stability.
iv. The steady-state error can be related to frequency response also. The 
gain and number of integrations involved in the open loop system indi­
cate the influence of steady-state error.
The correlation between the transient and frequency response of higher order sys­
tems is not so simple and straightforward as it is for second order systems. The math­
ematical treatment of higher order systems for such a correlation is rather involved 
and laborious. However, a higher order system can be represented by a second order 
system if it has a pair of dominant complex conjugate poles. The frequency and time 
responses of this system is influenced by this pair of dominant poles. In such a case 
the correlation existing between the transient and frequency response for a second 
order system can be very easily extended for higher order systems.
For higher order systems having a dominant pair of complex conjugate poles, 
the following correlation exists between the transient and frequency responses:
i. The peak magnitude of frequency response indicates the relative stabil­
ity. A system having a peak amplitude in the range of 1 to 1.4 would have 
a time response with an effective damping ratio in the range of 0.4 to 0.7.
ii. If the peak amplitude of the frequency response is greater than 1.5 the 
time response is oscillatory, having a large overshoot.
iii. The resonant frequency, i.e. the frequency corresponding to peak ampli­
tude, is a measure of the fastness of response. Larger the value of reso­
nant frequency, faster is the response, i.e. the smaller is the rise time.
iv. The system is highly damped if the resonant frequency and damped natu­
ral frequency are close to each other.
v. Larger values of cor characterise larger bandwidth. However, in view of 
the noise the system should not have large bandwidth. Larger the band­
width costlier is the system. A compromise is required.
vi. Cut off frequency (frequency at which the amplitude is 3 db below the 
zero frequency value) characterises the filtering characteristics of high 
frequency components.
vii. The slope of the log-magnitude curves known as cut off rate gives the 
ability of the control system to distinguish between noise and signal.
Using the above correlation, the time domain specifications can be translated to 
frequency domain specifications. The design of the control system is carried out 
in the frequency domain to meet the required specifications.
6.8 
STABILITY OF CONTROLLED DRIVES
The concept of stability is very well known. By the term stability one implies 
the ability of a system to return to its original position or attain a new steady-state 
condition when there is some disturbance or change in the input condition of the

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
system. Following changes in input, or any disturbance, a controlled drive system 
has a time response made up of steady-state and transient responses. The former is 
of the form of input or noise and does not reveal any information about the stabil­
ity of the system. The nature of the system with regard to stability is revealed by 
the transient response. If the transients are damped out and the system success­
fully takes up a steady-state operating point the system is said to be stable. It is 
always necessary that a drive system must be stable.
The stability of the system is associated with its characteristic equation. For 
the transient to die down the roots of the characteristic equation must lie on the 
left hand side of the s-plane, i.e., the roots must be negative if they are real or they 
must have a negative real part if they are complex. The presence of one or more 
positive roots or complex roots with positive real parts indicates instability, as the 
transient response associated with these roots increases without bounds with time. 
Obviously such roots lie on the right hand side of the s-plane.
One of the requirements of a controlled drive system is stability. From the 
above discussion, a linear control system is said to be stable if (a) it attains a 
steady-state condition which is unique and repeatable for a special input and is 
of the form of the input, (b) the response dies away when the input is removed. 
On the other hand it is unstable if its response increases continually with time, 
the system is self sustained and the response does not die down when the input is 
removed. Sometimes the system also shows a stable oscillatory behaviour, which 
is just the borderline case between the stable and unstable responses. This is also 
not desirable. Some systems are conditionally stable, i.e., the system is stable for 
a range of values of a parameter and for other values it is unstable.
A direct and straightforward method for ascertaining the stability of a system 
is to determine the roots of the characteristic equation and to examine them for 
the negative real parts. The nature of a system’s stability is also revealed by the 
determination of the system’s response to specified inputs.
However, these two methods are very tedious and are difficult to apply when 
the order of the system is large. It is, therefore, desirable to have some indirect 
methods leading to an investigation of the stability of a system using some criteria 
without needing to evaluate the roots. These save both time and labour. Two such 
criteria are (a) Routh-Hurwitz criterion and (b) Nyquist stability criterion. The 
Bode frequency response plots may also be used to ascertain the nature of system 
stability. Sometimes a study of the effect of variation of parameters of a drive on 
its stability may be required for a judicious choice of the parameters or for cor­
recting the parameters already existing. In such cases we may use root-locus tech­
niques, which are developed to ascertain the variation of roots of a characteristic 
equation when the drive parameters are varied. The parameter plane method due 
to Siljak, and the domain decomposition method are very powerful for this pur­
pose. These methods give the boundary between the stable and unstable operating 
regions when a pair of parameters are varied at a time.
The study of absolute stability is required in the drive technology where a 
drive motor is controlled and the control system has several components. It is also

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
necessary to study the effect of variation of parameters on the stability for a suit­
able design of controllers, to improve the performance of the system.
Before going into the details of the controller designs to improve the system 
stability, a brief outline of the stability criteria is given below.
6.8.1 
Routh-Hurwitz Criterion
The Routh-Hurwitz stability criterion states that the system is stable if the Rouths 
table has no negative elements in the first column. The roots of the characteris­
tic polynomial are negative if they are real or contain negative real parts if the 
elements of the first column of the Routh’s Table are positive. The negative ele­
ments indicate positive real roots or roots with positive real parts. The number of 
changes in the sign of the first column actually indicate the number of roots on the 
right hand side of the s-plane.
Using this method the stability of a linear system can be investigated very eas­
ily and quickly. It also indicates the number of roots, if any, on the right hand side 
of the s-plane. However, the method does not provide any information regarding 
the relative stability of the system. The method can be used to select the param­
eters which would make the system stable, mostly the gain constant of the system. 
In the case of controlled variable frequency drives this can be used to study the 
effect of variation of parameters on the stability of the drive system.
Before applying the stability criterion to the characteristic equation, the first 
and foremost condition to be satisfied is that all the coefficients of the character­
istic equation are present and positive. If any coefficient is missing or is negative, 
positive roots may occur.
The coefficients of the characteristic equation are used to write down the first 
two rows of the Routhian array using alternate powers of 5, in the order of descend­
ing powers. The missing terms are represented by zeros. These zeros cause sign 
changes in the first column indicating positive roots or complex roots with a posi­
tive real part. These two rows are used to build the complete array. The arithmetic 
manipulations in the development of the array may be made easier by dividing 
any row by a constant. The array is developed until a row of zeros appears, after a 
systematic formation of zeros in a step pattern in pairs. If the row of zeros appears 
before the array is complete, the subsidiary equation before the row of zeros is 
differentiated and substituted for the row of zeros. If the intermediate rows of the 
array has a zero in the first column, it presents a problem in developing the subse­
quent rows. This difficulty is overcome by multiplying the characteristic equation 
by (s + K). This does not alter the situation because s = -K is a negative root.
The application of the Routh’s criterion is discussed in the following by means 
of an example.
Example 
The open-loop transfer function of a unity feedback control system is 
given by
_______K_______
sisT, + 1 )(s T2 + 1)
G(s) =

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Use R-H criterion to establish a relation between K, 7j, T2 so that the system is 
stable.
Solution 
The characteristic equation of the system is
s(sTx + \)(sT2 + 1) -  K = 0
s{txt2s2 + (r, + t2 )s + 1) + k  = o 
TJ2s3 + (7] + T2)s2 + S + K = 0
i.e.,
The Routh array is
i 3
T\T2
1
s2
t1 + t2
K
o1
(T\ 
+ T2) -  K{T{T2
o
tx + t2
5°
K
For the system to be stable 
i. K > 0
Ü. (71 + T2) — KTxT2
T\ + T2
t1 + t2 > k t xt2
> 0
f
K <
1 
1
— +
\
V 
T2J
1
Therefore K > 0 and < ---- I-
7i 
n
6.8.2 
Nyquist Criterion
This stability criterion enables one to establish the stability of a system using a 
graphical procedure in the frequency domain. Here also there is no necessity for 
the evaluation of the roots of the characteristic equation. The stability of a closed 
loop system is revealed by subjecting the open loop transfer function to a fre­
quency response analysis. The stability criterion can be stated as
A closed loop control system is stable if the polar frequency locus of the 
systems open loop transfer function does not encircle the point ( - 1, 0) in 
a clockwise sense for all real values of frequency co = ± °° . If it encircles 
the point (-1, 0) the system is unstable. If the locus passes through the point 
( - 1, 0) the system is marginally stable, i.e., it is on the border line between 
stability and instability.
While drawing the Nyquist plot (polar frequency locus) it is sufficient to calculate 
the response for positive values of co only, as co changes from 0 to <*>. The plot for 
negative values of co, i.e., as co changes from 0 to -oo, is just a mirror image or con­
jugate of the above. However while establishing the system it is necessary to draw the 
complete locus for all frequency values varying from -oo to +oo (Fig. 6.19).

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
Fig. 6.19 
Nyquist plot of Ki(1 + 
s) to ascertain stability
s(s — 1)
Application of the Criterion 
In short, the following steps may be followed to apply 
the criterion to investigate the nature of stability of a closed loop system:
i. Obtain the open loop transfer function of the system.
ii. Determine the frequency response plot of the function for positive values 
of co starting from co = 0 to 00 . The locus starts on the real jc-axis and 
ends at the origin for minimum phase functions. If the transfer function 
contain factors of Ms, Ms2, the locus starts 00 on the real axis for co = 0 
and swings through ±90° to reach the appropriate axis for co = 0+.
iii. Draw the mirror image of the locus which gives the locus for the fre­
quency in the range co = -00,0.
iv. If the locus encircles the point (-1, 0) the system is unstable. The system 
is on the boundary stability if the locus passes through (- 1, 0).
Nyquist stability criterion has the following features:
i. The stability as well as performance of a closed loop system can be 
investigated using open loop data and a simple graphical procedure. The 
use of an open loop transfer function is simpler than the use of a cor­
responding closed loop transfer function.
ii. The method can be used to ascertain the relative stability of the system 
(Fig. 6.20). This enables one to improve both the transient and steady- 
state responses by properly adjusting the parameters of the system.
iii. Only a few points on the locus need to be calculated. The full plot of 
the locus can be drawn using these values. It is often necessary and suf­
ficient if the locus near the point (- 1, 0) is drawn.

Electric Drives
iv. For minimum phase functions the locus starts on the real axis for co = 0 
and ends at the origin for co =
v. The Nyquist plot can be very simply sketched if the transfer function 
has no terms containing s in the numerator. A pole or a factor in the 
denominator of nature s or (1 + sz) causes a rotation of the locus by -90°. 
One or more such factors in the denominator tend to make the system 
unstable. Based on these considerations the first and second order sys­
tem are never unstable.
vi. The Nyquist plot of a transfer function having 5 factors in the numerator 
cannot be very easily sketched. This is because the phase of the function 
need not continually change with continuous change in co. However a 
factor of the nature 5 or (1 + sr) in the numerator has the effect of nul­
lifying the effect of a similar factor in the denominator by contributing 
or rotating the frequency by +90°.
vii. The application of Nyquist criterion to a system also reveals the number 
of roots on the right hand side of the 5-plane. This is given by the number 
of times the Nyquist locus encircles the (-1, 0) point.
viii. However, for complicated systems, sometimes the encirclement of the 
point by the locus is not directly obvious. The following procedure may 
be used to check whether the locus has encircled the point ( - 1, 0).
(a) 
Draw a line in any direction from (-1, 0) to intersect the locus.
(b) 
Put an arrow on the locus touching the line in the direction of locus 
ascertained in the sense of 0+ to oo + at each intersecting point.
(c) 
If the number of anticlockwise arrows and clockwise arrows are equal, 
it may be concluded that the locus does not encircle the point (- 1, 0), 
otherwise the point ( - 1, 0) is encircled and the system is unstable.
6.8.3 
Relative Stability from the Nyquist Plots
The considerations discussed above provide information about the absolute stabil­
ity of the system, i.e., whether the system is stable or not. An equally important

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
system behaviour to be considered is the relative stability. The relative stability 
is indicative of how various poles of the system affect the transient behaviour 
of a system, in other words, how oscillatory the transient behaviour of the sys­
tem is. Because of the energy storage elements of the system, the system has 
so-called time constants and it cannot follow the input instantaneously. It exhibits 
a transient behaviour which dies down in a stable system. A practical system has 
damped oscillations before reaching the new steady-state behaviour. This behav­
iour of the system can be identified by the term relative stability.
The Nyquist plot (polar frequency response plot) of the open loop transfer 
function of a closed loop system can be used to ascertain the relative stability (or 
degree of stability) of the system, besides its absolute stability. This feature of the 
system is revealed by the nearness of the polar plot to (-1, 0) point. If the locus 
is very close to the point, the system is very close to instability and the transient 
response is oscillatory. The damping ratio of the system decreases. On the other 
hand if the locus is away from ( - 1, 0) the system has more damping and less oscil­
latory behaviour and has better stability conditions.
The nearness of the polar plot, which reveals the relative stability of the sys­
tem, is characterised by phase margin and gain margin. These definitions are used 
with simple shapes of locus which cross the x-axis only once. For complex shapes 
these are ambigious.
The gain margin of a system is used to describe the nearness of the point of 
intersection of the locus and the x-axis to (-1, 0) point. Referring to Fig. 6.21 a is 
referred to as gain margin. For minimum phase stable system a < 1 and unstable 
systems a > 1. The gain margin a is the reciprocal of the gain of the system 
( G(Jcd) ) at the frequency at which the locus cuts the x-axis or has a phase angle 
of -180°. This frequency is the phase cross-over frequency. Smaller the gain of 
the system at the phase cross-over frequency, more stable is the system, or better
(a) Stable system a > 1,0m positive 
(b) Unstable system a < 1, <pm negative 
Fig. 6.21 
Gain and phase margins from Nyquist plot

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
is the system with respect to relative stability. As the gain (at phase cross-over) 
increases, the locus comes nearer to (- 1, 0) and the system tends to be less stable. 
For a stable system the gain margin must be positive, and negative for unstable 
ones. In other words the gain margin of a stable system indicates by how much 
the gain must be increased before the system is unstable. For unstable systems it 
indicates how much it must be reduced to make the system stable. The gain mar­
gin of first and second order systems is infinite as their polar plots do not cross the 
x-axis. Therefore, theoretically speaking they cannot become unstable. In practice 
these systems may have small time lags which are neglected in the derivation 
of transfer functions. When these are taken into consideration the systems may 
become unstable. However, increase of gain constant brings the locus nearer to 
the point (-1, 0) making the transient response more oscillatory. This is depicted 
for a second order system in Fig. 6.20 which gives the Nyquist locus and transient 
response of the system for different values of gain constant.
The phase margin of the system 
is also used to describe the closeness of 
the Nyquist locus to (-1, 0) or in otherwords to describe the relative stability. The 
phase margin can be defined as the angle by which the locus may be rotated in the 
clockwise direction so that the locus passes through the point (-1, 0). The phase 
margin is, therefore, the angle enclosed by the negative real axis and the line join­
ing the origin and the point of intersection of the locus and the unit circle drawn 
with the centre as the origin. Referring to Fig. 6.21 the phase margin
<|)m = 180° + (|>o 
(6.65)
where <|)0 is the phase angle of the open loop transfer function when its magnitude 
is unity. The frequency at which the magnitude is unity is called the gain cross­
over frequency. The phase margin is the additional phase lag at the gain cross­
over frequency to make the locus pass through the point ( - 1, 0), so that the system 
is on the verge of instability. From the definition, it is clear that the phase margin 
((|)m) is positive for stable systems. As it approaches zero, the system becomes 
less stable and its transient response becomes oscillatory. When <|)m is zero the 
system is on the verge of instability. The value of (|)m is negative (< 0) for unstable 
systems.
The specification of gain or phase margin above does not indicate the degree 
of stability or relative stability of the system. The relative stability of the system 
is decided by the specification of both the margins. For a system to have adequate 
stability some minimum values of these margins have to be specified, i.e. a > 1.5 
and <\>m > 45°. These minimum values may be set depending upon the degree of 
stability required. They ensure the stability of a system against the variations in 
the parameters of the system or components of the system, e.g., open loop gain 
constant or time constants. These margins being a measure of the closeness of 
the plot to (-1, 0) indicate the effective damping ratio of the system. Closer the 
response to (-1, 0), lesser is the effective damping ratio. The phase margin and 
damping ratio are very closely related, as shown in Fig. 6.22. A phase margin of 
60° corresponds to a damping ratio of 0.6. Even though the gain margin can also

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
E■e-
cBc'a)
CD
E
CDV)
CD
(D*
C(s) _ ____________
R(s) 
+ 2s^(yn + co^n
Fig. 6.22 
Phase margin vs damping factor for a second order system
be related to the damping ratio, phase margin is the better estimate of damping 
ratio, since it influences the transient overshoot more than gain margin.
These margins can therefore be used as design criteria. They offer a means of 
adjusting the gain and time constants of the system to obtain the required behav­
iour. The design of various controllers to improve the stability performance is 
based on providing specified values of phase and gain margins. Their use in the 
design of controllers will be explained later.
The above discussion is applicable to systems which are absolutely stable. It is 
not applicable to conditionally stable systems.
It is necessary to note that the stability condition for non-minimum phase func­
tions is satisfied only if the Nyquist plot encircles (-1, 0). For these systems there­
fore, the phase and gain margins are negative.
Stability from Bode Plots of Open Loop Transfer Function 
The Nyquist criterion de­
tails how the open loop polar plot can be used for establishing the stability of a 
closed loop system. In terms of phase and gain margins it has been concluded that 
a minimum phase function should have positive values of phase and gain margins 
for stable operation.
Bode plots of open loop transfer function can also be used to ascertain the 
stability (both absolute and relative) of a closed loop system. The phase and gain 
margins can be easily determined from these plots. Referring to Fig. 6.23 the gain 
margin is the reciprocal of the open loop magnitude ratio of the transfer function 
at a phase of -180°. When measured in decibels it is the negative of the actual 
magnitude ratio at the phase o f-180° or phase cross-over. A stable system has 
positive gain margin. From the same figure it can be seen that the phase margin is 
180°+ phase of the open loop transfer function at the gain cross-over frequency 
(when the gain of the function is unity or 0 db).

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
-------90e
180e
-270e
Fig. 6.23 
Gain and phase margins from bode plots. Gain margin a = Gq. Phase margin
9m = l 80° +  (j)0
With the knowledge of these margins and phase and gain cross-over frequen­
cies, Bode plots can be used to ascertain the stability of the system. Using the fact 
that the phase margin is positive for a stable system, we may conclude that such 
a situation occurs if the gain cross-over occurs earlier than the phase cross-over 
or in other words the gain cross-over frequency is less than phase cross-over fre­
quency. The system is marginally stable if both occur simultaneously and the sys­
tem is unstable if the phase cross-over occurs before gain cross-over. The increase 
in the gain constant of a system has a tendency to raise the log-magnitude plot 
vertically upwards without altering the phase plot.
This shifts the gain cross-over to the left, or effectively the gain cross-over 
frequency decreases. The system therefore tends to become unstable.
The Bode plots are therefore used to adjust the parameters, such as gain and 
time constants of the system, to obtain the required phase and gain margins. They 
can also be used to design the controllers to improve the system performance by 
bringing the margins to the specified minima. It has been stated that for adequate 
stability the phase margin must be greater than 45° and gain margin > 1.5.
The shape of the Bode plots and its slope at the gain cross-over also indicate the 
stability of the system. A factor of the nature 1/(1 + jcoT) has a slope o f-20 db/ 
decade and an angle changing from 0° at lower frequencies to -90° at higher fre­
quencies. Several such factors affect the slope of the log-magnitude curve and the 
phase angle. A slope of-20 db/decade may be related to -90° whereas a slope of-40 
db/decade to an angle of-180°. Hence for a stable system the log-magnitude curve 
should be more gradual than -40 db/decade. The preferable slope is -20 db/decade 
at gain cross-over frequency. The system is unstable if the slope is -60 db/decade.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
The shape of the curve at low frequencies determines the type of system and 
steady-state accuracy. The speed of response of a system is indicated by the fre­
quency at phase margin.
Stability from Log-magnitude—Angle 
Diagram 
Yet another way of por­
traying the frequency response is 
to draw a curve showing the log- 
magnitude in decibels on the 7-axis 
and phase angle on the x-axis. The 
frequency co is varied from -oo to 
°° by combining the log-magnitude 
and phase plots (Fig. 6.24). Thus 
the frequency is a parameter. This 
will be a closed contour for mini­
mum phase functions. The stability 
can also be ascertained from this 
diagram, when one is interested in 
stability, it is sufficient to draw the 
curve in the range of frequencies 
from 0 to oo for minimum phase 
functions. Translating the Nyquist 
criterion (Bode plots) which states 
that the phase margin and gain mar­
gin must be positive for minimum 
phase functions, a thumb rule can be 
given for determining the stability of 
the system decided by the disposi­
tion of this curve with respect to the 
(0 db, -180°) point. As the curve is 
traced in the direction of increasing
frequency, if this point lies to the right of the curve the system is stable. The 
relative stability of the system can also be ascertained from the nearness of this 
curve to the point. Nearer the curve to this point, the gain and phase margins also 
decrease. The system approaches cross-over; phase cross-over frequencies are 
marked on the figure.
The advantages of the curve are obvious: The curve affords a quick estimation 
of relative stability and the design of compensation can be worked out easily. 
The stability of conditionally stable systems can be investigated very easily using 
these plots. Log-magnitude versus angle plots of a conditionally stable system 
cross the -180° axis more than once. Stability analysis and range of parameters 
(e.g., gain) for stable operation may be obtained using this curve. The effect of 
changing the parameters on the stability can be investigated using this curve. For 
example, increasing the gain shifts the curve upwards without changing the angle
Phase
Fig. 6.24 
Log-magnitude vs. phase plots

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Phase angle — > 
stable system
Phase angle — > 
unstable system
Fig. 6.25 
Phase and gain margins from log-magnitude vs. phase plots
characteristic. This results in a decrease of both phase and gain margins and the 
system becomes less stable.
6.8.4 
Root Locus Techniques
In the electrical drives employing closed loop control techniques, it is often neces­
sary to investigate the effects of changing the parameters of the system on its sta­
bility. The drive motor used itself has several parameters and time constants which 
affect the stability of the motor itself. The controls used also introduce some time 
lags which may affect the system stability. It is also required sometimes to inves­
tigate the sensitivity of the drive system to parameter variations. The feedback 
control used makes the system less sensitive to parameter changes. The root locus 
technique is very useful in investigating
i. the stability of the system,
ii. the effect of variati on of parameters so that the limits of these parameters 
can be determined for stable operation.
The method is particularly suitable in the design stage of the system when 
there is some latitude in the choice of system parameters.
The root locus technique can be applied to determine the dynamic response 
of the system. This method associates itself with the transient response of the 
system and is particularly useful in the investigation of stability characteristics of 
the system. It can also be used to determine the stability boundaries of the system. 
Selection of suitable parameters may be made using the root locus analysis.
It is a well established fact that the condition of roots of the characteristic 
equation governs the transient behaviour and hence the stability of the system. 
In the root locus technique which is essentially a graphical procedure, the locus 
of the roots on the s-plane is afforded by the variation of the suitable parameters.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
The root locus plots are drawn in the complex plane, as the roots may be real or 
complex.
In this technique also the open loop transfer function may be used to simplify 
the procedure. The plots drawn and the information obtained from these plots 
pertain to a closed loop system. The plots clearly illustrate the effects of varia­
tion of parameters on system stability and the nature of response. The branch 
of a root locus shows all the possible values of one root when a parameter is 
varied. All the separate branches of the root locus plot give the effect of varia­
tion of parameters.
The root locus technique is essentially a time domain technique. Frequency 
response data can be obtained from the root locus plot. Using this technique the 
open loop poles and zeros can be modified to satisfy the requirements to be met by 
closed loop poles and zeros. It may be noted here that a slight change in the pole 
zero configuration may cause a significant changes in the root locus configuration. 
The method of root locus is illustrated by an example.
6.9 
COMPENSATION AND THE USE OF CONTROLLERS 
TO IMPROVE THE PERFORMANCE
6.9.1 
Performance Indices of a Control System
From the foregoing discussion on control systems it can be seen that the behav­
iour of the control systems can be specified, based on several time domain 
specifications. To provide a basis for comparison of several types of control 
and solution, the performance indices are defined. These help as a quantita­
tive measure of the system performance in which the system specifications are 
emphasised. The practical requirements of a system can be dictated by these 
indices. One must be able to derive these indices from the requirements of 
the system and to determine them from experiments. In a linear control system 
the performance indices are normally independent of the operating point. Some­
times a compromise may be required between the parameters. The design of 
the power circuit and control depends mainly on satisfying these performance 
indices.
The time domain specifications of a control system are normally defined from 
its transient response to different inputs. These are:
i. Steady-state error: This is the deviation of the actual output from the 
desired one in the final steady-state condition. For a step input, the out­
put follows the input and hence the steady-state error is the deviation of 
the output from the input. This is also called offset. Steady-state error 
depends on gain in the case of proportional control. It is theoretically 
zero for integral control. For ramps and parabolic inputs velocity and 
acceleration errors defined.
ii. Rise time: The time period between the instants of the change in the 
input or disturbance and the output attaining the value of the input for 
the first time; x = 0 for the first instance for under damped systems. For

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
overdamped systems this is the time period between the output values 
10-90% of the input. This characterises the speed of response.
iii. Peak time: The peak time is the time period between the instants of the 
change in the input or disturbance and the first peak overshoot of the 
response.
iv. Settling time: The period of time which starts when the change in the 
input occurs and ends when the output differs from the input with 
an acceptable tolerance. This is related to the time constant of the 
system.
v. Overshoot Mp of the controlled quantity is the maximum deviation of the 
output from the desired one (input) during the control when the change 
in the input occurs. This is defined by
C(ip)-C(oo)
Maximum % overshoot = — ------------ x 100
c m
This is directly a measure of the relative stability of the system. It must be 
within 3 to 5%.
The quantity of the dynamic response which is specified by the above can be 
represented by the following performance indices (Fig. 6.26).
A
A
A
J (x(i) -  x(oo))dt
0
oo
J (x(t) -  x(°o))2 dt
J (x(0 -  x(°°)) I dt
(6.66)
(6.67)
(6.68)
Fig. 6.26 
Gain and phase margins from bode plots

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
c(t)
Fig. 6.26(b) 
Pertaining to determination 
of A,A2A3
Fig. 6.26(c) 
Performance indices
in frequency response in 
open loop operation
The first one is useful for representing a periodic behaviour, whereas the others 
are suitable for evaluating analog computer results. In the design of the required 
control the area under the first overshoot is considered and it is
h
A = J [x(t) -  1] dt 
(6.69)
h
The comparison of several performance indices is made in Table 6.1. These are 
normally useful in the design of control systems, to meet the required performance.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
B
9
 
Electric Drives
Fig. 6.26(d) 
Performance specifications of a closed loop system in frequency domain
The frequency response is advantageously employed in the design of control 
systems. A set of frequency domain specifications are also identified. A correla­
tion between the time domain and frequency domain specification is established 
for the control systems. The speed of response of a control system is characterised 
by the gain cross-over frequency of the frequency response. The phase margin 
qualifies the overshoot of the system. Therefore the frequency response specifica­
tions are
i. The limiting frequency coa at which the closed loop gain > 0.7.
ii. The frequency co() where the amplitude attains peak value.
iii. The peak amplitude of the frequency response (Mp0J).
The typical specifications of the drives are given in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2 
Typical specification of drives
Damped natural 
frequency coa
Rise time
% overshoot
alxc.
Current con­
troller
250 to 50rad/s
0.010 to 0.050 s
1%
Speed
controller
125 to 25 rad/s
0.020 to 0.100 s
0.01 to 0.5%
Position con­
troller
100 to 10 rad/s
0.025 to 0.20 s
X 0.001 mm 
... 0.01 mm
10 ...
100 rad/s
6.9.2 
Compensation
A drive system having closed loop control may not be satisfactory with regard 
to its stability characteristics, speed of response and steady-state accuracy. The 
system may be oscillatory or even unstable. It may have either extremely fast 
or very sluggish response. The errors under steady-state between the actual and

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
desired values may be excessive and not acceptable. Therefore, a necessity arises 
to modify the system or system parameters to provide the de sired performance 
with respect to the above characteristics. This has certain practical limitations, 
such as size, range, and cost of available components. Sometimes there may not 
be any room to effect the change in the parameters.
In such cases the performance of the drive is improved by adding additional 
components to it. The method of improving the performance in this way is called 
compensation. The additional component changes the transfer function of the 
overall system and gives the desired performance. In feedback systems the com­
pensation added is simple and less expensive and provides substantial improve­
ment in the performance.
The design of a compensation network to achieve the required improvement 
in the performance can be based on the frequency response plots or the root locus 
techniques discussed.
The compensations introduced in the closed loop system to improve the perfor­
mance reshapes the root locus or frequency response of the system. With this the 
system is stable, has satisfactory transient response, and has a steady-state error 
within the acceptable tolerance level, or even sometimes zero. The purpose of 
providing a compensation, either by means of reshaping the frequency response 
or root locus may generally fall into one of the following categories:
i. The system may be stable having the desired transient response but its 
steady-state error is large.
ii. The given system may be stable, having a time response which is not 
acceptable.
iii. The given system may be stable, but both the transient response and the 
steady-state error are not acceptable.
iv. The system may be unstable for all values of gain.
Ideal integral compensation increase the type of the system. An increase in 
the type of system completely eliminates the steady-state error. Therefore for a 
system having steady-state error with satisfactory transient response, a PI com­
pensation is used (proportional and integral). Proportional control improves the 
stability. The improved system will have acceptable transient response.
PD compensation is used if the transient response has to be improved. It is 
equivalent to introducing an anticipation into the system. The derivative action 
increases the speed of response when the input is rapidly changing.
It has already been shown and brought out how
i. the response of a second order system is altered by variation of damping 
ratio.
ii. the stability criteria such as Nyquist and Routh Hurwitz criteria can be 
used to study the effect of variation of parameters on the system stability.
iii. how the root locus based on open loop transfer function can be used to 
study the variation of parameters to improve the performance of the sys­
tem by investigating the sensitivity of the system for parameter variations.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The design of controllers and compensators to improve the system performance 
will be discussed in the following. The design may be based on Bode plots or root 
locus techniques. The dynamics of the control system is altered or improved by 
the adjustments of the controller parameters and not the plant parameters. The 
adjustments change the controller transfer function.
The controller providing compensation can be placed either in series with the 
plant in the forward path or in the feedback path. In the former it is called series 
(or cascade) compensation and in the latter parallel compensation. These are 
depicted in Fig. 6.27. The location of the compensation depends on the control 
system and the modifications required on the response.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
R(s) ^
Gc (s) Gp (s) 1 C (s)
~H(s)
R(s) ï
1 
Gp (s) ^ C (s)
y w 
w V w 
0
Gc
(s)
R(s) !
1 
Gp (s) Gc (s)
^ W sj W W W 
O
C(s)
-H(s)
R (s)
0— >—
1 
G (s) 
1 C (s)
-<*— >— 0— >— p— >— 0
Gp (s)
Fig. 6.27 
Methods of compensation, (i) Cascade compensation (ii) Feedback compen­
sation (iii) Load circuit compensation (iv) Input circuit compensation

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
A controller used in a feedback control system provides a corrective action 
depending upon the error between the actual and desired value of the quantity. 
The output of the control depends upon the state of the error. The controller com­
ponent is identified in Fig. 6.28. The relationship between the output and the input 
of the controller is known as controller action 6c(s)/61(s) = f {(s) where 0c(s) 
and 0i (j) are the output and input of controller respectively. The basic types of 
controllers are compared in Table 6.3.
0
o-
+
■0 -
- A
0 1
Fi (s)
Controller
Or
Regulator
F2 (s)
Plant
1=3 (S )
F4 (s)
Fig. 6.28 
Pertaining to action of a controller in a closed loop system
6.9.3 
Design of Controllers
The foregoing discussion makes it clear that there exists a possibility of improv­
ing the performance of a given control system using a controller or compensating 
network. The controller frequency response (or root locus) alter; or reshapes the 
frequency response (or root locus) of the original system to the desired one. Thus 
the ideal goal of compensation is to achieve a control system which has a desired 
performance, viz. having zero steady-state error, optimised dynamic performance, 
(which is neither too fast nor too slow) assuring the stability of the system, which 
is a necessary condition of a control system. The transient response must be 
damped out satisfactorily.
Basically employing a controller improves the behaviour by
i. compensating or modifying one or more large time constants
ii. limiting the upper frequency so that a number of small time constants 
may lose their significance as well as their effect on the control system.
A system is in general considered to be optimum as far as its dynamic behav­
iour is concerned if it transmits all the operating frequencies in a similar way. This 
can be satisfied if the system has a transfer function
r  / \ 
cio + I  avs v
[S> 
b0 +V
"
 ( 6 ' 7 0 )
whose magnitude is constant for all frequencies, or at least for a large range of 
frequencies. Further, for the transfer function to satisfy this condition it must have 
all possible derivatives with respect to co zero.

Table 6.3 
Comparison of controllers
Type o f controller
Action
Characteristics
Features
Application
1. 
Proportional
Ofs) 
K
The output of the
This provides a simple connection between the
Due to its
Ofs)
controller is propor-
error and output. It is essentially an ampli-
simplicity and
tional to the input
fier with adjustable gain, whatever may be 
the actual mechanism or operating point. The 
controller has a response characterised by me­
dium rise time, stable response and undesirable 
offset. This undesirable offset, however, can be 
decreased by increasing the gain. There is an 
upper limitation of gain. Improvement of the 
steady-state accuracy by increasing gain results 
in oscillatory behaviour. The effect can be mi­
nimised by good design. The high inertia loads 
have a tendency to oscillate. The response of 
the controller is shown in Fig. 6.29(a).
good stability 
characteristics 
it is employed 
when the 
offset can be 
accepted.
2. 
Integral controller
0C(S) 
K
The output of the
This does not provide rigid connection be-
Because of the
6-fs) 
s
controller is propor-
tween the input (error) and the output (control
un-favourable
tional to time integral 
of the input or the 
rate of change of 
control output is pro­
portional to the input. 
The output remain­
ing constant for zero 
actuating error.
action). The controller is characterised by 
a response free from offset, having a very 
large time constant making the response very 
slow or sluggish due to soft connection. The 
response is oscillatory with hunting. The addi­
tion of an integral controller to a second order 
system converts it to a third order one which 
may become unstable. The response of the 
controller is shown in Fig. 6.29(b).
characteristics 
this is not used 
alone.
m
TOn
nO
-1
TOl/l
The McGraw-Hill Companies

3. 
Derivative 
controller
II
q^° <£T
The output is pro­
portional to the rate 
of change of input
4. 
PI controller
^(■s) 
V 1 
S  J
The output is pro­
portional to the input 
as well as its time 
integral
5. 
PD controller
0°{S) = if, + K ?  
Oi(s) 
1 
3
The output is pro­
portional to both the 
input and its rate of 
change

A derivative controller has a response char­
acterised by a short rise time indicating for 
rapidly varying input. If the input is varying 
slowly, there is a drift due to surge of the 
action. The response of the characteristic is 
shown in Fig. 6.29(c).
This combines the advantages of proportional 
and integral controllers. The simple and direct 
connection between the input and output is 
present. The controller is characterised by good 
stability characteristics and offset free response. 
The proportional constant can be smaller than 
that in the case of pure proportional controller. 
The response is oscillatory. It is characterised 
by medium rise time, zero-steady state error, 
and oscillatory response without hunting. 
Proportional action stabilises the system and 
integral action removes the offset. The response 
of the controller is shown in Fig. 6.29(d).
In this also proportional action imparts good 
stability characteristics to the controller. The drift 
of the pure differential action is eliminated. The 
undesirable offset of proportional action is still 
present and is not eliminated. The controller
Because of the 
un-favourable 
drift for slowly 
varying inputs 
the derivative 
controller is 
not used alone.
Because of 
its favourable 
characteristics 
he controller 
is very widely 
used in the 
compensation.
PD controller 
is employed 
with high iner­
tia loads.
(<Continued)
no3
o_
—I
tonrr3-o'cTOl/i
a-i
TO
Ul

i
Type o f controller
Action
Characteristics
Features
Application
response is characterised by short rise time 
indicating rapid response, stable output, with 
un desirable offset. The nature of derivative 
action to rapidly changing input is however 
is present and it extends to slowly changing 
input. The derivative control stabilises the 
oscillating tendency of high inertia loads with 
proportional control. Fig. 6.29(e) depicts the 
response of the controller.
6. 
Proportional 
plus integral plus 
derivative
= *  + 
+ ^
m
A general three term 
controller having 
output proportional 
to the input, its time 
integral and its rate 
of change. The de­
gree of each action 
depends upon the 
constants Kp K7, K3
The proportional action which has direct 
physical and simple connection between the 
output and input imparts good stability char­
acteristics. The offset is eliminated by integral 
action. The derivative action imparts swiftness 
of response by providing the necessary damp­
ing for hunting. This controller is charac­
terised by short rise time imparting a very 
rapid response, non-oscillatory stable, offset 
free output. The response of the controller is 
depicted in Fig. 6.29(f).
A general pur­
pose control­
ler and finds 
application.
The McGraw-Hill Companies

Compensation using passive networks
Type o f 
network
Transfer function
Features
Remarks
Lag network
GJs) = ----------a > 1 Pole and
c 
1 + aTs
zero are close together a  is equal 
to the desired increase in gain
The compensation provided is similar to PI. The necessary gain is 
provided by the amplifier which also prevents any loading of the 
original system by providing isolation. A large increase in gain con­
stant K is provided by the compensator. This reduces the steady-state 
error. However, there is small increase in rise time due to decrease in 
con. This is basically a low pass filter. Lower frequencies are passed 
and higher ones are attenuated. This property makes it useful and 
permits increase in gain.
Schematic of the 
network and its 
frequency response 
are shown in Fig. 
6.30(a).
Lead
network
Gc(s) -  Aa 1 + Ts 
1 + a Ts
Sensitivity increases as a < 1. Very small values of a means a very 
larged. Practical value is 0.1. This result in a moderate increase in 
gain constant K which improves steady-state accuracy, co increases 
resulting in reduction in settling time. As a is 0.1 the additional gain 
K is larger than increase in K of the system. It is basically high pass 
filter, high frequencies are passed and low frequencies are attenuated
Used to improve the 
system falling cat­
egory 2. Schematic 
of the network 
and its frequency 
response are shown 
in Fig. 6.30(b).
Lag lead
Gc(s)
a\, T{T2
A( 1 + 7]s)(\ + T2s)
(l + aT{s)
T 
\
1 + J± s
a
Results in a large increase in K improving the steady-state accuracy. 
Improves the transient response by effectively decreasing the settling 
time due to increase in co . This combines the desirable characteris-
n
tics of lag and lead networks.
The response and 
the schematic 
are shown in Fig. 
6.30(c).
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Medium
(e) Proportional plus derivative
integral plus derivative
Fig. 6.29 
Response of controllers
Lt 
- f -  
\F 0 
(6.71)
Using this criterion on the transfer function indicated in Eq. 6.70, the constants 
aQ, a{, a,, 
b0, b{, b2,... etc. can be evaluated. The controller transfer function
obtained this way gives optimum behaviour and the principle is called magni­
tude optimum. This procedure optimises a system so that it can pass a range of 
frequencies.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
j co
- o ------- X-
- Z  
- P
Fig. 6.30(a) 
Lag network and its frequency response
C1 
—II
0-------- — wv—
--------- ►------------0
A 
*1
A
0, 
<>r2 
e<
Y
A  
i
Y
fc 
A
= 1/7 
1 / / 3 T
jC Q
- X ------------- O-
-P  
z
Fig. 6.30(b) 
Lead network and its frequency response
The resulting transfer function can be represented by Bode plots, or the time 
response can be determined if possible, to check whether the modified system 
gives the required performance.
Bode plots can also be employed to design a controller to impart the desired 
performance to the system. The design criteria in this case can be taken as phase

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
margin, (p -  180 -  cpc. This assures that the phase angle at the gain cross-over has 
a prescribed minimum value. The frequency, response of the original system is 
reshaped by that of the controller to the desired one.
A close examination of the methods confirms that the designs are not very 
much different. They are effective in compensating large time constants. The 
method based on magnitude optimum gives a system having a definite damping.
The ratio of the integrating time constant of the controller and uncompensated 
time constant of the system decides this damping, and has a fixed value. Conse­
quently the system has a fixed phase margin given by the damping. In the other 
method the designer has a latitude in choosing the ratio of time constants and 
hence has control over damping as well as phase margin. As it is always necessary 
for both the phase and gain margin of a system to be specified simultaneously, 
the controller designed using phase margin criterion will also have a satisfactory 
gain margin. Both the methods are also suitable if frequency response results are 
available in a graphical form from an experiment and cannot be represented by 
analytical expressions. The methods are discussed in detail in the following.
A controller used can compensate maximum of two large time constants. The 
rise time is decided by the sum of all time constants which are not compensated 
and are significant in the working range of frequencies. However if the original

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
control system has more than two large time constants the uncompensated time 
constants make the dynamic response slow and it may not be to the desired level. 
In such cases an inner subordinate loop can be employed to compensate for this 
time constant.
Generally in the control of drives, besides the outer speed loop there is also 
an inner current loop, to have improved performance. Without introducing any 
appreciable error the controller transfer function of the inner loop can be approxi­
mated to a first order system.
The compensation described above, viz. compensating two large time con­
stants, does not give satisfactory results if the system also has an integration. The 
design of controller based on the above criteria for use with such a system imparts 
an oscillatory behaviour. Hence the basis of the design of the controller must be 
changed in such a case. The controller designed in this case also must be such 
that the magnitude of frequency response is unity for a wide range of frequencies, 
i.e., the system allows a wide range of frequencies to pass through. This gives an 
optimised controller and the method is called symmetrical optimum. The method 
is given the name because the frequency response is symmetrical with respect to 
gain cross-over frequency.
The above methods are illustrated in the following discussion.
6.9.4 
Magnitude Optimum
The design of a controller based on the principle that it allows all the frequencies 
to pass through in a similar way for a simple system is shown in Fig. 6.31.
The system has an input R(s) and output C(s). The closed loop transfer function
_ c(s) _ 
Gc(s)Gp(s)
~ R(s) ~ \ + Gc(s)Gp(s) 
(6.72)
Plant
Fig. 6.31 
Typical closed loop system to illustrate the design of controller

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The system has to be optimised so that the overall system has a similar behaviour 
at all frequencies.
The plant transfer function G (s) is assumed to be having linear factors and is 
given by
V
G Js) = --------------*-------------
Y[(\ + STpk)(l + sTe )
k = \
where 
F is the gain of the plant
T k large time constants of the system 
T sum of all parasitic time constants.
These parasitic time constants of the control system are introduced by the non­
ideal nature of the devices and the elements used for harmonic elimination and 
smoothing. The value of T is of the order of 2 to 5 ms and it is very much smaller 
than the least of the large time constants.
The controller designed is a P1D controller which has a general transfer func­
tion given by
Gc(s) =
< VrsTC0 ,
(6.74)
Using Eqs 6.73 and 6.74 in Eq. 6.72 we have the overall closed loop function 
given by
( / f i n + 57;,)
G(s) =
l -
\v ,\iT’co fl *‘(1 + ^ pk)(l + sTe) 
Fsf l  (1 + sTe )
k = 1
i =
(6.75)
An optimised controller can be obtained on the principle described only if the 
large time constants are compensated and T{) and T only effect the transient 
behaviour. Hence the rules of optimization can be stated as
i. the number of large time constants in the numerator and the denominator 
must be the same.
ii. the values of time constants must be the same.
iii. The time constant of integration of controller must be fixed as T() =
(v jv r)2 r .
For a specific case of a second order system having a transfer function
G Js) = ---------------- ^ ------------------ 
,,
p 
(i + s rP1 + 52rP1rP2)(i + ir e ) 
(6.76)
the controller must have a transfer function

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
2 th2
Ge(s) = 1 + 5(2 
d)T + sl T
s T(\
(6.77)
Using the above rules of optimization
T2 = Tpi • Tp2; 2d = yjT?\T?2
To = 2T; 
Vs = Vr
d <  1
(6.78)
If the controller suits the plant with respect to its structure as well as parameters, 
typical transfer functions are given both for open and closed loops.
Go(s) = ^  
(6.79)
s2Te + s22T2
G(s) =
Go
1
1 + G0 
1 + 1/G0 
1
1 + ^27; + s22T2
(6.80)
This can be obtained directly from the transfer function by applying the criterion that 
the overall transfer function should have a magnitude which is the same for all to. 
The plant transfer function is
G M ) =
V.
p' '  
(I + sTKl)0  + sTK2)Q + sTe ) 
The controller transfer function is
(6.81)
Gc(s) = FR(1 + 57]i)(l + 57i2) 
sTn
(6.82)
The open loop transfer function is
G0(s) = sT0(l + sTOO + sT2)(l + sTe )
(6.83)
Making r  = 
T = 7", so that controller completely compensates both the large 
time constants of the plant we have
G0(s) =
The closed loop transfer function
Go (5)
VrVs
sT0(l + sTe)
(6.84)
GJs) =
VrVS
1 + G0 (5) 
FrFs +
(6.85)
Its frequency response
Gc(j(o) =
W s
vr vs + 
0'(o)To-
(6.86)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
|G c(» l2 =
(rRrs):
(VRVsy  + 
(o4TjTe2- 2  
V +
2 t2
(6.87)
must be unity to satisfy the magnitude optimum. This happens only if
co%2Tc2 -2 V RVsco2T0Te + =  0
coz ( cû2 Tq T 2 -  2Vr VsT0Tt
2 \  _
(6.88)
At oj -  0
To = 
2VRV
Gc(s) = _______I______
1 + .S27; + s22Tl
(6.89)
The compensation of the two large time constants of the plant by the controller 
is depicted in Fig. 6.32. The Bode plot of the open loop transfer function cor­
responds to a first order system with integration. The gain cross-over frequency
coc
(6.90)
The phase margin at gain cross-over is 65°.
The time response of the modified system with the controller can now be deter­
mined. The closed loop transfer function
C(s) 
1
R(s) 
\ + s2Te + s2 2T2e 
(6-91)
R(s) = C(s)(l + s2Te + s2 2T\ ) 
(6-92)
Controller 
Plant
Fig. 6.32 
Compensation of two large time constants by a converter

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
m  = 
C(t) + 2re 
^ + 2T}
at 
at
(6.92)
Assuming zero initial conditions, i.e.,
t = o, 
C(t) = 0, 
= 0
dt
(6.93)
We have the time response (Fig. 6.33)
C(Q
R{t)
/
= 1 -  e~t/2Tr
t 
. 
t 
cos------ h sin
\
271
27e /
(6.94)
i. The rise time t is the time taken by the output to attain the input value for 
the first time
t 
. 
t 
A
c o s------ 1- s in ---- = 0
2 7  
271
tr = 4.77e
(6.95)
ii. The settling time is determined using the fact that it takes several cycles 
for the output quantity to reach the steady-state value
L 
In
27
L = 117
(6.96)
Fig. 6.33 
Time response of compensated system

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
iii. The overshoot is determined using the condition
dC(t)
dt
t'
IT,
C,
= 0
= 71
P _
R
= 1 -  e n(cos ti + sin n) = 1 + e
Cn — R
Mp =
Mn =
_
R
4.3%
= 0.043
(6.97)
The resulting system will have a damping factor 0.707 as decided by the ratio of time 
constants. This damping is rather high and may not be suitable for all applications.
6.9.5 
Phase Margin Optimum
The method can be based on the phase margin in which the controller is designed 
to provide a minimum phase margin. The design makes use of Bode plots. The 
ratio of time constants can be decided depending upon the phase margin required, 
which directly influences the damping. Therefore this method has an advantage 
over the previous one. As the damping factor increases the phase margin also 
increases. Therefore a clear dependence of these quantities and the effect of the 
ratio of time constants on the time response of the system is clearly brought out 
in the following, so that a proper design of the controller to give the desired per­
formance can be made.
The same example as above is taken here also. The plant has a transfer function
___________ K___________
(i + ifpl +j2rplrp2)(i + ire)
(6.98)
A PID controller is designed to improve the performance. The transfer function of 
the controller is given by
Gc(i) =
(1 +S7j)l +^%l[p2} 
V0sT0
(6.99)
The zeros of G.(s) are the same as the dominant poles of G (s), so that they com-
C 
P
pensate the large time constants of the plant. The open loop transfer function is
G0(s) =
1
1
(1 +
s
T
e
)
s
T
0  
s
T
0
+
s
2
T
J
0
(6.100)
The design based on magnitude optimum gave a controller having its integrative time 
constant equal to twice the uncompensated time constant of the plant, i.e., T{) = 2Te.
To design a controller based on phase margin the ratio of time constants TJTt 
is assumed to be K{). Using this ratio we have
G„(J) =
1
sK0Te + 'J k j I
(6. 101)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
The closed loop transfer function
G(s) =
In the frequency domain
G(jco) =
1
1 + sK0Te + s2K0T2
1
1 + (+jco)K0Te -  oj2K{)T2q 
The phase margin of the system can be obtained as
cp = arc tan
1
! + i + 
1
2 
V 4 
K l
(6.102)
(6.103)
(6.104)
If the phase angle of the transfer function is (pc, the phase margin is
<? = 180-<pc 
(6.105)
Depending on the value of required cp the value of K() can be chosen. For a sys­
tem having a known value of K() the phase margin is fixed. The method based 
on magnitude optimum assigns a value of 2 for K and the corresponding phase 
margin is 65°.
In the present method there is a flexibility in the choice of K . The relation 
between KQ and (p is depicted in Fig. 6.34. From this it can be concluded that the 
integration time constant actually decides the system improvement or its damping
K0 ---------->
Fig. 6.34 
Dependence of phase margin on the ratio of time constants Ko

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
and this is decided from the value of K0 (ratio of time constants). Smaller the value 
of K() smaller the value of damping. At smaller phase margins the system becomes 
oscillatory.
The time domain specifications can now be related to the value of K(]. These are 
the initial rise time, the maximum overshoot and the area under the first overshoot. 
The time response of the second order system for different values of K0 is shown 
in Fig. 6.35. The time response can be given by equation
C(0
m
] _ çT1 !
cos-------- h sin
k 0tc
K J c j
(6.106)
Fig. 6.35(a) 
Time response of a second order system for different values of Ko
t
20
°10
CD
E
6
4
CD
C/)E 2
0
/
1----
V? V/V/ //// *777777771
/
1.0 
2.0
3.0 
4.0
Ko
Fig. 6.35(b) 
Rise time as a func­
tion of K 
J 0
0° 10° 20° 30° 40° 50° 60° 70° 80° 
Phase margin —>
Fig. 6.35(c) 
Peak overshoot as a function 
of phase margin

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
The damping of the response increases with the value of K(). From the time 
response it can be seen that the proper value of K0 lies between one and four. For 
a value of K < 1.5 the t < 4T . The settling time can also be determined.
The maximum overshoot as a function of K0 can be determined and is 
depicted in Fig. 6.35(b). From the figure it is clear that overshoot decreases as 
the value of K0 increases. For KQ = 1.5, % overshoot = 8.5.
The area under the first overshoot as a function of K{) is also shown in Fig. 
6.35(c). This is obtained by evaluating the integral.
The integration results in
A\ = Te yjl -  (K0 /4)(exp - ( n  + (p/tg(p*0) +  exp -  (In + (p$ 11% ■ (pi)) 
(6.108)
where tg(pl = ^(4/K 0) - \
A IT drawn as a function of phase margin is depicted in Fig. 6.35(d). The first 
overshoot dominated for the thick portion of the characteristic.
To determine a controller of suitable frequency response a detailed discus­
sion of the effects of controller amplitude characteristic on the modified system 
is required. The ratio K0 = T /T  can be freely chosen while designing a control­
ler using phase margin criterion. It has been established that the phase margin 
increases as the value of K0 increases. In other words the phase of the system 
transfer function at the gain cross-over frequency decreases. As the phase margin 
is related to the damping of the system the value of K0 and hence the value of T0 
can also be related to damping, The damping of the system is more as the value 
of K() or T0 increases.
To have an insight into the amplitude characteristics, compensation of the 
plants by PI and PID controllers is examined in the following. In the former the
(6.107)
r,
CD
o 0.4 -
-4—'
£  0.3 -
oT3
§  0.1 -
CO _ _
<  
0° 
5
10° 15° 20° 25° 30° 35° 40° 45° 50° 55° 60° 65° 70 
Phase margin
Fig. 6.35(d) 
Area under the first overshoot as a function of phase margin

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
plant transfer function has only one large time constant to be compensated and 
one small time constant to be uncompensated. A PI controller to modify the per­
formance will have a time constant the same as a large time constant of the plant. 
The integration time of the controller T0 however is at the designer’s choice. The 
transfer function of the controller is
Ge(jo>)= (1 + J”7;)r0 <rc 
JWlJ
(6.109)
Fig. 6.36
PI controller for 
compensation
The value of TQ can be chosen freely. Its effect 
on the magnitude plot of frequency response is 
similar to the effect gain. Thus change in value 
of T0 can be regarded as change in gain and the 
magnitude plot moves along ordinate. For smaller 
values of T{) it moves upward, increasing the value 
of gain cross-over frequency. The typical ampli­
tude plots of a PI controller used to improve the 
performance of the plant having one large time 
constant, are shown in Fig. 6.36. It clearly shows 
that the cross-over frequency depends upon T0 and 
hence K . The relationship between co fco0 and K{) 
is shown in Fig. 6.37.
If the plant has two large time constants and 
one small one, the two large time constants are 
compensated by a PID controller. In this case 
also the integration time of the controller is 
freely chosen. As far as the effect of T on the 
magnitude plots is concerned it is same as in 
the case of PI controller. The magnitude plot 
of a PID controller having a transfer function 
given by
Gc = (\+jcoTcl)(\ +jioTg)
j™T0
(6.110)
0.1
0.4
1.0 2.0 
6.0 
Kn->
is shown in Fig. 6.38. A close examination of 
the magnitude plots of PI anc PID controllers 
reveals that they are almost similar. The control­
ler transfer function should have a magnitude 
plot such that it has a slope of 20 db/decade up 
to the corner frequency 1 IT , where T is the 
uncompensated time constant of the plant, and later it must have a slope of 40 db/ 
decade so that the compensations of the two time constants is effective.
Therefore, while designing a controller its amplitude plot may be freely chosen 
to have the necessary gain cross-over frequency. This can be achieved by shifting
Fig. 6.37 
Dependence of cross 
over and corner 
frequencies on Ko

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
the amplitude plots along the y-axis until the gain cross-over occurs above the 
required phase angle (decided by phase margin). The phase angle characteristic is 
the resultant of the phase angle characteristics of the plant and the controller. The 
proper value of T0 is arrived at. The resultant open loop transfer function of the 
modified system can be determined. There will be a small difference between the 
value of K() determined using the asymptotic plots and the actual calculation. If the 
transfer function of the plant has a gain of KQ the controller will have a integration 
time KT0.
To summarize:
The transfer function of the plant to be modified is given by
G Js) =
K
(1 + sTe)7r(l + sTpn)
(6.111)
where Te «  Tpn, = 1,2,
T is the sum of several parasitic time constants of the system,
ii. The controller transfer function is chosen to compensate all T . There-
r  
pn
fore with respect to these time constants it has a form
GcOO
Kl + ^pn)
VssTcK0
(6.112)
G c
G o
(1 +yco10) (1 +y'2.5co)
|VS| (jcol0.87)
= ___________b4l__________
(1 +y10w) (1 +j2.5co) (1 +jcol 1.5) 
1
— Q Q — ______________
S P 
(yco/0.87) (1 +y'aj/1.5)
Fig. 6.38 
Use of PID controller for compensation. Magnitude and phase plots

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The constant KQ is decided so that the resultant open loop transfer function
G0(s) = ------------------- 
,6113x
sTeK0(i + sTc) 
(6-113)
has the specified phase margin. The closed loop transfer function has a time 
response of the second order system, having a damping ratio of <JKq/2.
6.9.6 
System Performance When the Controller Transfer 
Function Does not Match the Plant
While a controller is designed to improve the behaviour of a given control system, 
in practice it is very difficult to realise such a controller because of the availability 
of components. The actual time constant of the controller may deviate from the 
theoretically designed value. Also the operating conditions may cause a change 
in plant time constants or even controller time constants. Thus the performance of 
the system may deviate from the desired or expected one. This incorrect matching 
may cause differences in the dynamic performance also.
The large time constants of the original system are normally compensated by 
the time constants of the controller. In other words, the effect of the dominant 
poles of the plant transfer function is nullified by the zeros of the controller trans­
fer function. This compensation may not be to the desired extent when the actual 
time constants of the plant vary during operation or the time constants of the con­
troller deviate from the desired ones, for one reason or other.
We shall discuss in the following how the performance of the resulting sys­
tem gets altered in case of incorrect matching, following a variation in the time 
constants. We assume that one of the large time constants of the plant varies by a 
factor Ke leading to the incorrect matching. The transfer function is
C; (/ft)) = ---------------------- ^ ----------------------  
(6.114)
P 
(1 + jc o T ^K ' )(1 + jcoTp2 )(1 + ja>Tc)
which can be written as
GpO'ft>) = GpOto)
1 + j<oTfl 
1 + ja>Tp\Kc
(6.115)
This means that the actual transfer function is the desired transfer function mul­
tiplied by a correction factor which is the ratio of (1 +jcoT )/(1 + jcoTp]Ke). The 
magnitude plot of this ratio depicted in Fig. 6.39 clearly shows that the gain 
cross-over frequency is above the corner frequency 1 /T  , 1 IT  . The time response 
is very much decided by the cross-over frequency. Therefore, the choice of 
the cross-over frequency plays a significant role in the design of the controller. 
The frequencies coT > 1 need be considered. In this frequency range the factor 
1 + jcoTJX + jcoTp] K e can be simplified as VKq. The transfer function G' (jco) 
simplifies to
Gp(jco) = Gp(jw)IKe

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
co
(1 +j10co) (1 +j2.5co)
\VS\ (yU/0.87)
__________ h4l__________
(1 + y 30co) (1 +j2.5co) (1 +yW1.5)
K0= 3
Fig. 6.39 
Mismatching Ke > 1 
The open loop transfer function of the system is
Gö(joj) = —
1
ja>KeT0(l + jcoTe)
(6.116)
Using the ratio KQ = TJTe this can be written as
GÖ 0 '«) = -
1
jcoKtK0Te(\ + jcoTe)
(6.117)
From Eq. 6.117 it can be seen that the ratio K (ratio of integration time of the control­
ler to the uncompensated time constant of the plant) is effectively multiplied by the 
factor K . Thus the change in the time constant is equivalent to a change in this ratio.
Case (i) Ke > 1 
For this case of Kc> 1, the time constant of the plant increases by 
this factor. This is equivalent to increase in the ratio KQ to value Kq = K0Ke. This 
is equivalent to increase in the integration of the controller. The Bode plots of the 
functions of the actual and desired transfer functions are shown in Fig. 6.40(a). 
From the Bode Plots the effects of increase in the time constants can be observed 
to be the following:
i. Following an increase in the K0 the Bode plot moves to the left. This 
results in smaller values of gain cross-over frequency.
ii. The phase of the system at the gain cross-over decreases and hence phase 
margin increases.
iii. The value of K() as well as the phase margin are related to damping of 
the system. Increased phase margin results in an increased damping or 
directly damping = ^JKq/2.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
> co
Fig. 6.40(a) 
Mismatching Kg > 1
iv. 
Peak overshoot decreases. 
Some 
times 
an 
over­
damped system may also 
result.
A typical time response of the 
resulting second order system for 
Kc > 1 is shown in Fig. 6.40(b). For 
comparison the time response for 
Ke = 1, is also shown in the figure.
Case (ii) Ke < 1 
For this case of K 
< 1 the time constant of the plant 
decreases by the factor Ke. In this 
case the situation is different and it 
is equivalent to decrease in K and 
hence in the integration time of 
the controller. The effect of this on 
Bode plots shown in Fig. 6.41(a) 
can be seen to be the following:
i. The amplitude plots of 
frequency response move 
towards the right following
t/Te----- >
Fig. 6.40(b) 
Typical transient response Ke > 1

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
co —>
G c =
Gp =
(1 + 7 1 0 « )  (1 + j  2 .5 co)
(h o /0 .8 7 )
V.
(1 +73.33«) (1 +y2.5«) (1 +7«/1.5)
Ke = 1/3
Fig. 6.41(a) 
Mismatching Ke < 1
a decrease in KO. The gain cross-over for this case occurs at higher fre­
quencies. The gain cross-over frequency increases.
ii. The phase of the transfer function at gain cross-over increases. The phase 
margin, therefore, decreases.
iii. The damping of the system decreases, resulting in an oscillatory response.
iv. The peak overshoot is greater than that of the desired one.
A typical time response for this case is depicted in Fig. 6.41(b).

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Therefore the system may have its damping increased or decreased, depending 
upon whether the compensated time constants increase or decrease in the opera­
tion, causing an incorrect matching of the plant with the controller. From the time 
responses shown in Figs 6.40(b) and 6.41(b) a deviation of Kc in the range 0.5 < 
K < 2.0 can be allowed.
e
In a similar way the effect of incorrect matching due to variations in the 
controller time constants can be modified. For this case the controller transfer 
function due to incorrect matching is
G'{jœ) = (1 + jw K J v\)(\ + jioTp2)
VJcoTq
(6.118)
which can be written as
G'c (jco) = Gc(jœ)
1 + jcoKc]Tp]
1 + jcoTpl 
(6.119)
By the same argument that the frequencies of interest are such that coTpl » 1  the 
correction factor (1 + jcoKT^,)/(l + jcoTpj  can be replaced by Kc. Therefore
G'c (jco) = Gc (jco) 
Kc
The open loop transfer function of the system is
GÓ (jco) = (1 + jœTe)jœ K0Te
(6.120)
which can be written as
G'o(joj) - __________1__________
jco(K0 / Kf)Te(\ + jcoTc)
(6.121)
Thus the change in the time constant of the controller may be studied by an equiv­
alent change in the value of KQ.
A study shows that the effect of reduction in the controller time constant has 
the same effect as an increase in plant time constant.
Case (i) Kf < 1 This case is equivalent to causing an increase in K() or increase in 
the integration time of the controller. The effects that follow are the same those 
caused for K > 1. The gain cross-over frequency decreases and phase margin 
increases. The damping (d = 
12) increases. The peak overshoot decreases if
the system is still underdamped. There is a possibility for the system to become 
overdamped (Fig. 6.42).
Case (ii) Kf > 1 
The effect is equivalent to a decrease in the integration time. The 
effects for the case are the same as those caused for 
< 1, viz., the gain cross­
over frequency increases, phase margin decreases, the damping decreases causing 
an increase in peak overshoot. The magnitude plots and time responses are shown 
in Fig. 6.43 for different values of K{). These responses confirm the above conclu­
sions. A very low value of K{) results in a very lightly damped system. Allowable 
variation K() is in the range 1 -  \.5(d = 0.5).

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
i  
20
| G 0 | 
0
-20 
|  
20 
|G0| 
Q
-20 
I  
30
I Gel
0
-10 
|  
40
|G0I 20
0
-10
* 
0
|G0| -30
-60
-90
-120
-150
1
G J j c o )  = ----------------------------
° 
K j c o T ' V  + j c o T e )
0.1
Fig. 6.42
1.0 
10
coTe
Magnitude plots and
0 2 4 
6 
8 10 12 14 16
t/Te ->•
time response Kf>i, Kf < i
Fig. 6.43 
Time responses for Kf representing the mismatch of the controller
From the above discussion it is clear that the effect of incorrect matching due 
to increase in the time constants compensated is the same as those due to decrease 
in the compensating constant of the controller.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
6.9.7 
Design of Controllers for Linearly Varying Inputs
The design of controllers discussed in the foregoing sections are for the step input. 
The performance has been found to depend very much upon the value of integra­
tion time in relation to the uncompensated time constant of the plant. A control 
system is normally employed in situations where the controlled quantity (output) 
has to follow its reference value (input). If the changes in the input are very fast a 
controller having a small value of Kc (and hence small value of T0) is prohibited, 
as this results in a lightly damped system with a large overshoot. The oscillatory 
behaviour does not provide the necessary requirement if the input changes very 
fast. Also in some drive applications, the input is not a fast changing quantity. 
The effect of varying inputs must be analysed in detail, so that their variation 
can be taken into consideration in the design. The dynamic behaviour of the load 
influences the operation of the controller. The dynamic performance of load is, 
however, taken to be very fast. From the above considerations, the rate of change 
of the input is limited for the system having a poor damping, i.e., very steep varia­
tion of the input is prohibited. A constant variation of the input to the controllers 
is achieved by means of limiters. A limiter is provided before the controller to see 
that the input to the controller does not change very fast but provides a suitable 
rate of change. The block diagram of such an arrangement is shown in Fig. 6.44. 
The transfer relation of the limiter is
Ax
ÃÃ
= t/Tw 0 < t < Tw 
= 0 for t > Tw
The transfer function is
Ax(s) 
A R(s)
i/s 2rw
The transfer function of the total system is
C(j)
R(s)
—--------------!------------- — 
for 0 < t 
T„
s
2
T
w
( l  +
 s
K
0
T
e  
+
s
2
K
J
l
)
------------- !---------- — 
for t > rw
(1 +
 s
K
0
T
e
+
s
2
K
0
T
2e
)
(6.122)
(6.123)
(6.124)
Fig. 6.44 
Limiting the variation on the reference value (Block diagram)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
Using the convolution integral the output of the system is
and
C(0 
Te
m
 
tw
(
V
T +
re 
J \ - ( K 0/4)
sin yjl -  (K0 /4) — e
7 ^  t ^
2
for 
t < Tw
(6.125)
c(Q
*(0
/
T
1+ 
e
r.w
/c
sin II -
o
t 
- 
— e 
4 
u
\
2 
T1 u,
(6.126)
The damped periodic transient term of the response depends upon TJT . From 
the expression it can be seen that the transient term is absent if the input value 
changes very slowly. In this case the controlled quantity follows the input very 
closely. The oscillatory behaviour of the system is completely eliminated. The 
system can be designed for low damping if the input changes slowly. Thus, a 
lightly damped system can be made to have a linearly changing input to the con­
troller. The controller thus designed has a lower phase margin, is generally sen­
sitive to errors and is always in stability limits. The time responses of a typical 
system for step as well as linearly varying inputs are shown in Fig. 6.45. The 
effect of variation of Ty (in relation to T) is very clear from the figure. A proper 
choice of T controls or even eliminates the overshoot and the output is made to 
follow the input. If the variation of the input is slow the transient conditions in the 
system are the least.
6.9.8 
Exponential Variation of the Input to the Controller
The linear variation of the input to the Controller, discussed in the foregoing sec­
tion, is too involved to achieve by means of circuits using discrete elements. On 
the other hand a simple RC circuit connected at the input of the controller provides 
an input which varies exponentially. This RC circuit functions as a limiter having 
a time constant T . The cascading of this with the modified system, designed using 
the above criteria, is shown in Fig. 6.46 by a block diagram.
The closed loop transfer function of the total system is
G(ja>) =
1
(1 + 
ja>Tc)(\ + ja>K0Te + 
-)
(6.127)
The magnitude plots of this function drawn for a given value of K{) and different 
value of T are shown in Fig. 6.47(a). For comparison, the plot for RC = 0 is also 
shown which corresponds to a step input. The value of K is chosen to provide 
a lightly damped system. So, the magnitude plot shows a resonant peak which

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 6 .4 5  
Typical time domain response of the system for varying input Effect of the 
shape of the input on the response
1st order delay 
Closed loop system
(R C circuit)
Fig. 6 .4 6 (a ) 
Cascading of RC network to the system to delay the input variation

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
Fig. 6.46(b) 
Experimental variation of the input to the system by cascaded RC network
is representative of overshoot in the transient response. As T > 0 the resonant 
peak disappears and the slope beyond the comer frequency increases. The time 
response is similar to that having increased damping. The time responses of the 
system for different 7 , shown in Fig. 6.47(b), support the conclusion. The over­
shoot as a function of K()f 7c being the parameter is depicted in Fig. 6.47(c). The 
offer helping tools in the suitable choice of 7 for given KQ or vice versa. For a K0 
of 0.8 the value of T can be in the range of
1.6 to 1.3.
Hence from the above discussion 
it may be concluded that the transient 
behaviour of a lightly damped system can 
be improved by having a variation in the 
input to the system. The variation can be 
linear or exponential. The latter is easier 
to realise with simple RC circuits. The 
time of variation of the input quantity, as 
decided by the limiter in the former and by 
the time constant T in the latter, influence
c 
7
the transient response very much.
0.1 
1.0 
10.0
coTe — ►
Fig. 6.47(a) 
Magnitude plot of the 
control circuit
Fig. 6.47(b) 
Improvement of the time response of a poorly damped system by expo­
nential variation of the input. The effect of the time constant of RC net­
work on the system output

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
6.9.9 
Uncompensated Large 
Time Constants
It is possible to compensate only one large 
time constant using a PI controller. A PID 
controller is used to compensate for two large 
time constants. On technical grounds, com­
pensation of more than two constants using a 
PID controller is not possible, as only simple 
differentiation can be performed.
Therefore if a transfer function has more 
than two dominant poles, only the effect of 
two poles can be compensated and the rest of 
the dominating poles do not assure desired performance.
It is therefore necessary to suggest modifications to the controller design, 
which takes care of this uncompensated large time constant and still provides a 
desired performance. This section deals with considering such uncompensated 
time constants.
Before suggesting the modifications the effect of these constants on the perfor­
mance may be studied in detail.
The transfer function of the plant requiring the compensation is
0 0.2 
1.41.6
K o ^
Fig. 6.47(c) 
Peak overshoot with 
delayed input
Gp (jco)
_________________ K_________________
(1 + j c
o
T
e  )(1 + j c
o
T
{ )(1 + j c
o
T
2  )(1 + j c
o
T
3  )
(6.128)
The controller transfer function is
Gc {jco)
(1 + jcoT{)( 1 + jcoT2) 
K juT0
(6.129)
Hence in the simplest case the time constant T3 cannot be compensated by the 
controller. The open loop transfer function of the cascaded plant and control­
ler is
G0(jco) =
1
(1 + jcoTç )jcoT0 (1 + jcoT3)
(6.130)
The time constant T3 would be the least of all the large time constants of the plant. 
T has already been taken to be the sum of all parasitic time constants of the plant. 
The time constant 72 can also be considered one such, and can be added on to T 
so that the new value of T is
rc' = (re + r3)
with this modification the open loop transfer function is
1
(6.131)
(1 + jco(Te + T3))jcoT0
G0 (jco) =
(6.132)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
The ratio Ke would now change to K'e where
To
K  = T +T y
(6.133)
Substituting these relations in Eq. 6.132 we have
Go O'“ ) = 
1
jco(Te + T3)K'(\ + M T e + Ty))
(6.134)
The value of K'e is less than that of AT The effect of T3 as a parasitic time con­
stant adding on to T is to effectively decrease the ratio Ke to K J The effects of 
decreasing the value of AT, have already been discussed. The effects due to T3 are 
as follows:
i. The gain cross-over frequency increases.
ii. The phase margin decreases. The damping of the system is less than the 
desired one.
iii. The peak overshoot will be more than the desired one.
The investigation of these effects as caused by the uncompensated time con­
stant may be done assuming that TJT = g and jcoT = q. The open loop transfer 
function given by Eq. 6.130 may be written as
G 0 (J<o) = 
1
(1 + gq)Ke(g)( 1 + q)
(6.135)
The block diagram of the system with uncompensated time constant 
is shown 
in Fig. 6.48. The Bode plots (magnitude and phase plots) of this function are 
shown in Fig. 6.49 for different values of g. Assuming a given value for T , the 
integration time of the controller, and the controller constant, the effect of T3 can 
be seen to be to decrease the phase margin. For this case the gain cross-over fre­
quency remains the same and phase margin decreases as shown by the vertical 
line for different values of g (= TJT’). This falls in line with the effects of change 
in the value of AT to AT, listed above. Therefore the effect of 71 can be considered 
as a change in T to T'. The value of T'e = Te( 1 + g). Using this the open loop 
transfer function can be written as
Ke0(\ + g)q(\ + (\ + g)q)
Rico).o
1
---------->
1
1 +j(oTKU
jcoT (1 +jcoTK) Kr0
(6.136)
C(co) 
------►
Fig. 6.48 
Block diagram of a system having an uncompensated time constant

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
1
1
1 +jcoT3 —►
jcoT0 (1 +j(oT3)Ke
«—>
Fig. 6.49 
Magnitude plots qasa parameter
The actual transfer function given by Eq. 6.135 can be approximated by the trans­
fer function of Eq. 6.136.
For the damping to be the same as the desired one the phase margin must be 
maintained at the value corresponding to q -  0. The Bode plots are drawn so 
that the phase and magnitude plots for q ^ 0 are such that the phase margin is 
maintained at the value corresponding to g = 0. The effect of this is to shift the 
magnitude plots towards the left (Fig. 6.49), i.e., the gain cross-over frequency 
decreases. This amounts, effectively, to increasing the controller constant to main­
tain the value of phase margin at a reduced value of gain cross-over frequency. 
This can be achieved by increasing the integration time of the controller. If on 
the other hand the integration time does not change, the phase margin decreases, 
causing reduced damping and increased peak overshoot. Hence the performance 
is poorer than the desired one.
Therefore the controller designed to compensate only two large time constants 
does not give satisfactory performance. To get the desired performance its design 
must be modified. The above discussion gives the direction in which the modifica­
tion may be oriented. As the damping is decided by the phase margin, the various 
constants of the controller must be chosen such that phase margin does not change 
when T3 is taken into consideration. This can be easily achieved by introducing a 
correction by which the phase of the function changes, bringing the phase margin 
to the desired value. Using this factor the open loop transfer function of Eq. 6.136 
is given by
Ga(q) = V : c0(l + g)<7(l + (l + g)<?) 
(6.137)
It is equivalent to changing to the value of gain cross-over frequency to V(Kg Kc0
(1 -l- g)). The value of K can be chosen such that the magnitude and phase plots
§

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
for the value of g are such that the phase mar­
gin of the transfer function is same as that 
of the transfer function for g = 0. A relation 
can be derived between g and K to achieve 
the desired phase margin. Typical curves are 
shown in Fig. 6.50 with the phase margin as 
a parameter. This is equivalent to changing 
the integration time of the controller. The gain 
cross-over changes to l/(ATg(l + g)Ke0).
Typical time responses of the system are 
shown in Fig. 6.51. Curve 1 indicates the time 
response of the system with its uncompen­
sated time constant. This shows a character­
istic increase in peak overshoot due to Ty Curve 2 indicates the time response of 
the system with the correction factor. Curve 3 indicates the desired time response, 
or time response with T3 = 0. A close examination shows that the correction intro­
duced improves the performance so that the peak overshoot is within the desired 
value. This is because the phase margin decides the damping and the overshoot 
very much and it is maintained constant by a proper correction. However the rise 
time changes. Therefore, while designing a controller for a system having three 
time constants of which two can be directly compensated, the integration time 
should be properly chosen so that the effect of the third time constant is minimal. 
The integration time of the controller is
T0 = Kg(\ + g)Ke0Tk 
(6.138)
and 
K = K e(\+ g)K ^
The value of K t can be read from Fig. 6.50.
Fig. 6.51(a) 
Typical time response of the system with uncompensated time constant 
(constant phase margin)
Fig. 6.50 
Relation between g 
and the correction 
factor K

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 6.51(b) 
A typical control system with integrating element and compensation by PI 
controller
6.9.10 
Symmetrical Optimum
Sometimes automatic control systems contain integrating also besides first order 
delay elements, proportional elements and deadzones. Such a system when com­
pensated on the basis of magnitude optimum discussed in the previous sections 
will become oscillatory with zero damping. As has already been explained the 
magnitude optimum utilises a PI controller to compensate the effects of largest 
time constant of the system. The other first order delays present are replaced by a 
single delay which is the sum of all the other uncompensated delays. The rise time 
of the system decreases. The amplification of the proportional element is
2VJe
(6.139)
If this principle is employed to compensate the system with integrating element, 
the integrating element of the compensator combines with that of the system 
resulting in a double integration. The characteristic equation of the closed loop 
system contains only s2 and constant terms showing that the system has no damp­
ing. The system has sustained oscillations.
This can be illustrated by considering a system having an integrator and a first 
order delay in cascade. A closed loop with PI controller is shown in Fig. 6.51.
The open loop transfer function of the system is
G0(s) = VK 1 + sTn 
1
sTn 
sT0 l + s7i
(6.140)
Using the principle of magnitude optimum Tn = Ty Therefore,
1
Go CO = VrK
(6.141)
The closed loop transfer function is
Gc(s)
s %  71 + 1
(6.142)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques for Electrical Drives
assuming VR V = 1 (as a special case). The term containing s is not present in the 
characteristic equation which clearly shows that the damping is zero.
Also we know that
x(s) _ 
1
w(s) 
s 2TqT{ +  1
The differential equation representing the system is
ToTy 
+ 
=
d r
For a step input the response of the system is given by
(6.143)
(6.145)
t 
. t
x{t) = e ^
 + e
(6.146)
is representative of sustained oscillations.
Therefore the controller design to compensate the effect of the dominant 
poles of the system is based on the principle of symmetrical optimum. The fre­
quency response of the compensated system is symmetrical about gain cross 
over frequency.
The criteria for this optimum are derived in the following. The system contains 
an integration time of T0 and a first order delay of T{ (Fig. 6.52). A PI controller 
is used to compensate the system. In magnitude optimum the criteria have been 
developed assuming that the amplitude of transfer function is unity in the com­
plete range of frequencies. In the present case, the criteria for symmetrical opti­
mum are developed so that the transfer function has an amplitude of unity over a 
restricted range of frequencies.
The open-loop transfer function of the compensated system
G0(s) = VR } + sTji 
sTn
K
l + sr,
(6.147)
F ig . 6 .5 2  
P e rta in in g  to  s y m m e tric a l o p tim u m

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The closed loop transfer function is
Gc(s) =
rRr,(i + srn)
VrK + sVRvsrn + s2r j 0 + s X W  
The amplitude of frequency response
(6.148)
Gc (joj)
(VrVs)2( 1 + T2co2)/((Vr Vs)2 -  co2 (2VRVsTnT0 -  (VRVJ0f )
+{coA){T2J l - 
(VrKTXr,)2) + 
]*
(6.149)
The system has apparently a damped response as the characteristic equation has 
all powers of s present and the coefficients are positive. The amplitude is unity at 
zero frequency. However, it approaches unity in a certain frequency range if the 
following conditions are satisfied.
(VRVJ0)2 = 2 VrVJ„T0
TlTl = 2 VrVsT2J0Tx
(6.150)
These lead to a result that the reset time of the integrator.
II
(6.151)
and the proportional amplification is
vR = T°
2VJX
(6.152)
The integration time constant will always include the amplification of the integrator 
T
also. Therefore —  can be considered as T., the integration time.
Thus.
2L
2 r,
The closed loop transfer function of the system is
Gc(s) = _______ 1 + s47j_______
1 + S47] +s 2STf + 5 38T?
(6.153)
(6.154)
This is the general form of the transfer function of the compensated system based 
on symmetrical optimum.
The amplitude plot of the open loop transfer function of the compensated 
system is shown in Fig. 6.53. The plot shows a symmetry about the corner fre-
1
1
1
quencies---- and — with respect to gain cross over frequency------on the 0-dB
471
71
271
axis. This property justifies the name symmetrical optimum.
The system compensated by this principle has its behaviour decided by the 
time constant T{ (the sum of all parasitic time constants).

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
The time response of the system is given by solving the differential equation
(6.155)
Aril dcodt) 
. . 
dx(t) 
d2x(t) 
„ 
d3x(t)
471 — —  + co(t) = x(t) + 47] — — + 8r f ---- ^  + 8T? 
w
dt 
x ' 
x ' 
dt 
‘ 
dt2
For a step input the time response of the system is given by
dt3
x(t)
co(t)
= 1 + e-t/2T ,
2e- t  I4T\
COS 47]
(6.156)
and it is shown in Fig. 6.54. It has a rise time of 3.1 Tv a peak overshoot of 43.4%, 
and a settling time of 16.5Tr
This large overshoot of the system is due to the factor 1 + s4T} in the numera­
tor. If the reference input to the controller is delayed by a first order delay of
1
transfer function
the overshoot can be reduced to 8%. This is shown
(*47] + 1)
in Fig. 6.55. The rise time in this case increases to 7.67]. The PI controller with 
delay in the reference input is shown in Fig. 6.56.
If the system contains delay elements such that the largest time constant is 
greater than the four times the sum of all other small time constants this method 
can be employed for compensation. If 7], 7], 7], T4 ... are time constants of the 
system such that
7] > 4(7], +T3+T4 ...)
(6.157)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 6.54 
Time response of a symmetrically optimised system
Fig. 6.55 
Use of first order filter in the reference circuit to reduce the peak overshoot
R -1 
C-1
Fig. 6.56 
PI controller with a filter in the reference value
the first order delay with time constant T7, can be considered an integration in the 
system compared to the other time constants.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
Worked Examples
A Ward Leonard System has the following parameters:
Generator: Armature resistance -  0.4 LI
Armature inductance -  negligible 
Field resistance = 80 Q 
Field inductance -  50 H 
Rotational inductance = 1.0 H 
Speed is 120 rad/s
Motor: Field current 2.2 A, Armature resistance r -  0.7 LI,
a
armature inductance is negligible.
Rotational inductance = 0.5 Ft, Moment of inertia 2 kg nr 
Determine expressions for the motor speed co„ and armature current i following 
an application of 50 V to the generator field winding with the motor initially at 
rest and unloaded. Neglect rotational losses.
Solution 
The dynamic behaviour is mainly decided by the speed voltage of the 
generator and motor, The armature current is given by (e -  em)/(ro + r j.
The rotational voltage of the generator
eg = Mg/fcog = 120/f
The rotation voltage of the motor
em = M mifCom = 1.1m,.'m
120
4 = (120/f -  1. lmm)/(l. 1) = -----i{ -co
The torque is J
dt
LI
nv
ifm  4 
J
dcom
Mmi(m 
dt
0.5 x 2.2
2 „Poo
Poom
1.1
= 1.82pm,
m
m
Substituting for 4 in equation for / 
or
1.82Pmm = 109.14 -  mm 
109. lif = (1 + 1.82P)m]
But
Vf
k =
Vf/Lf
com
Rf + Lfp 
p + Rf / Lf
109.1 x 50/50 x 1.82
60
mm
A =
s(s + 1 .öXs + 0.549) 
5(5 + 1.6)(s + 0.55)
= A + Be~L6t +Ce~°-55t
60 
_  _ 
^ 
60
1.6 x 0.55
= 68.2 
C =
-0.55 x 1.05

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
B =
The current is zero at t =
---------------= 35.71 = -103.9
+1.6 X 1.05
68.2 + 35.71e-L6/ -  103.9^“° 55i
1.5(—1.6 X 35.7e~L6t + 103.4 x 0.55éT°-55')
85.305éT°-55' -  85.68e"1 6i 
0.
The forward loop transfer function of an induction motor whose speed is 
controlled by a voltage regulator is
G(s) =
K
5(1 + sz)
Typical values of z and K are 0.20 and 15. Draw the Bode diagrams showing 
Amplitude vs co and phase angle vs co. Determine the cross-over frequency for 
\G(jco\. How can this frequency be increased?
Solution 
The block diagram of the system is shown in Fig. E6.2(a) The transfer 
function is
G(s) =
K
^(l + sz)
The frequency response is represented by
Fig. E6.2(a) 
Block diagram pertaining to example

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
G(jco) = -
K
jco{\+ j  cot) 
Substituting the values of K and x
r e  
t 
15 
15
G(jco) =
jco -co 2T 
jco -  0.2CO2 
15
jco ( 1 + jO.lco)
G{jco) has a break over frequency
1 
1
T 
0.2
= 5 rad/s
Ata> = l 
\G(jco)\ = 15 
The gain in db at co = 1 is 20 log \G(jco)\ -  23.522
Fig. E6.2(b) 
Straight line approximation of magnitude plate
The straight line approximation to Bode diagram shown in Fig. E6.2(b) has a slope 
of 20 db/decade till it reaches the frequency of 5 rad/s. Thereafter the slope is 40 db/ 
decade. Drawing these approximations, the gain cross-over frequency is 8.5 rad/s.
Sketch the Nyquist diagram to represent the frequency response of the 
motor of Problem 6.3.
Solution
G(s) 
G(jco)
K
s(l + sr)
K
j(o ( 1 + 
)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Rationalising we get
G
 (
j
a
)
-
K
T
J
K
~  1 +
 m
2
T
2  
tu I(l + c
o
2
T
2  )
Substituting the numerical values for K  and T
G
 (  j
w
)
 
=
-3
y 15
1 + 0.04m2 
c o  j(l + 0.04«2)
c
o
-
0
Real part - 3 
Im. part °°
Magnitude °°
Phase -  90°
1
-2.885
-  14.42
14.7
-  101.32
5
-  1.5
-1.5
2.121
-  135
7
-  1.014
-  0.724
1.246
-  119.915
8
-  0.843
-0.527
0.994
-  147.90
10
-0 .6
-0.3
0.671
-  153.43
20
-0.176
-  0.044
0.1814
-  165.96
00
0
0
0
-  180
The Nyquist plot is shown in Fig. E6.3. The curve moves towards the left and 
becomes more oscillatory if the constant K increases. However it does not 
embrace (- 1,0).
Fig. E6.3 
Nyquist plot

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
A closed loop control system o f an induction motor fed from a thyristor 
power controller is represented in Fig. E6.4. The open loop transfer func­
tion of the motor is given by
G(s) = U) ( s )
KcKcKm
e{s) 
(l + sTc ) (1 + sTc) (
K represents the overall gain of the amplifier, control unit and thyristor control­
ler configuration, and is adjustable to give the desired performance. Ke — 3.0 
and K -10.  The time constants are T = 0.002 s, T -  0.05 s, T -0.15s. The
m 
c 
e 
m
tachometric feed back has a gain constant o f 1 V/rad/s. Determine the maximum 
permissible K .
Solution 
The value of Kc can be found out by drawing the Nyquist diagram. 
A Nyquist plot drawn represents the stability frequency response of a closed loop 
system. If the frequency response of open loop transfer function encloses (- 1,0) 
the closed loop system becomes unstable.
G ( y ® )  =  7- - - - :—
-
 
- - - - - - -- - - - - - -
(1 + j<oTc ) (1 + j(oTc ) (1 + jcoTm)
Rationalising we get
G(ja>) =
KcKeKm
= 
KcKeK
[l -  m2 (.TcTm + TcTe + TeTm )] -  jco [oo2TcT Jm -  Tc -  Te -  Tm )
[l -  o f (TcTm + TcTe + T Jm )] + jco(co2TcTeTm -  Tc -  Te -  Tm)
[l -  o f (TcTm + fifi + T Jm )] + o f (o f TcTeTm -  Tc -  Te -  Tm )
The locus of G(Jcd) as oo changes from 0 to oo is drawn. The value of Kc is found 
out when it crosses (- 1, 0). Therefore
KcKcKma> 
(co2TcT Jm ) = 0
from which
co2 _ Tc + 
+ Tm
T T T
± c x e ± in
The real part is -  1
1 -  o f ( Tc Tm + Tc Te + T J m) 
substituting for oo* 1 and the numerical values we get
= -1
0.429ATC = 1
K„ =
1
0.429 = 2.33

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. E6.4 
Closed loop control system of example 6.4
For stable operation of the system Kc is chosen to be 0.5 to 0.8 times this critical 
value. Typical Nyquist locus is shown in Fig. E.6.4.
fl|VB A control system has four cascaded single delay elements having time con- 
WMM stants ofT] = 400 ms, T7 = 80 ms, T? = 15 ms, T4 = 5 ms. This system has to 
compensated by a controller. Compare the behaviour of the compensated system 
with (a) integral (b) proportional and integral control and (c) proportional, inte­
gral and differential (PID) control.
Solution 
The four delay elements in cascade are shown in Fig. E6.5. Con­
sider the effect of integral control. The integration time constant of the integral 
controller
Ti = 2A Jt
where T is the equivalent time constant of the system .
T.a = f  + T2 + T3 + T4 ~ 500 ms
The rise time is
tT= 4.7Ta= 4.7 X 500 -- 2350 ms
Fig. E6.5 
Control system of example 6.5

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
A PI controller on the other hand can be used to compensate the largest time con­
stant. The other three time constants which are not compensated only contribute 
to the behaviour. The reset time constant of the controller is the largest time con­
stant being compensated. The sum of the small time constants
Tb = T2 + T2 + T4 = 100 ms 
The proportional amplification of the controller
2AsTb 
A, '
The rise time t in this case
r
tT= 4.77j,= 470 ms
which is 1/5 of the rise time of integral use.
A PID controller improves the performance further by introducing a differenti­
ating phase advance to compensate for one of the time constants. Thus two large 
time constants are compensated. The reset time of the controller is T{ where as 
the phase advance provided by the controller is T2, i.e., second largest among the 
time constants.
The equivalent time constants of the compensated system is
Te = T3 + r4 = 20 ms
The proportional amplification is
Ti
2A J q
10
The amplification is increased and the rise time is reduced.
The rise time = 4.7 T = 94 ms
e
This seems to suggest that introduction of another differentiating element 
would make the response faster by compensating third time constant. This is not 
advantageous as the double differentiation would not allow a stable control.
A proportional controller has a characteristic feature of steady-state error. The 
steady-state error depends upon the proportionality constant (proportional ampli­
fication) of the controller. Larger the value of this amplification smaller is the 
steady-state error.
T
AR for this case = — -—
2 AsTe
where T is the largest time constant and T is the sum of all the other small time 
constants. AR would be sufficiently large if As is small and T} IT is large.
A proportional controller would be effective if TJT is very large. For the case 
illustrated
2AS 
As

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
As As increases AR decreases and the steady-state error increases. Further second 
large delay may be compensated by phase advance. A P controller is justified if 
T IT is very large. Therefore a PD controller is used in such cases. Other wise 
controller with integrating action may be used.
A 400 V, 2800 rpm, 80 A dc motor is fed from a phase controlled converter 
for speed control. Its electrical and mechanical time constants are 50 ms 
and 580 ms respectively. Design current and speed controllers for the closed loop 
speed control system.
Solution 
The closed-loop speed control system is depicted in Fig. E6.6(a). 
It has an outer speed loop and an inner current loop. Besides armature time 
constant there are other parasitic time constants in the current control loop such 
as converter dead zone, the delay in the current etc. In the speed loop besides 
mechanical time constant the delay in the speed measurements etc will be pres­
ent. With these parasitic time delays the block diagram of speed control is 
shown in Fig. E6.6(b). Once the current controller is designed, the current loop 
can be simplified as one first order delay and this is used in the design of speed 
controller.
Design of current controller:
The dead zone of the converter depends on the number of pulses of the con­
verter. It is determined from the relation
T - - -  
c ~ 2 P
where T is the time period of the input voltage and P is the pulse number. The value of 
T = 1.7 ms assuming a 6 pulse converter being fed from a 50 Hz supply. A delay 
of 2.5 ms due to filtering of the measured value of current is considered. The cur­
rent control loop has three time constants 50 ms, 2.5 ms and 1.7 ms. The controller 
compensates the largest time constant of 50 ms. Sum of other time constants is 
1.7 + 2.5 = 4.2 ms.
If an integral controller is used, it suffers from a large rise time of 54.2 ms 
whereas a proportional controllers has a disadvantage of large offset. A PI con-
Speed
controller
(O r
Current
controller
Fig. E6.6(a) 
Closed loop control of dc motor with outer speed loop and inner current loop

Speed 
Current 
dc motor
Fig. E6.6(b) 
Block diagram representation of dc motor with closed loop control
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
troller is used. Using the criteria of the design based on magnitude optimum, the 
proportional amplification of the controller is
r A 
50
VR =
2  VsTe
2V. X 4.2
Assuming a gain of V -  10
VR = 0.6
The transfer function of the controller
VR (1 + j T;) 
0.6 (l +0.05s)
sTn
0.05s
The PI controller parameters are such that (Fig. E6.6(c)).
A
Vr = R<
7] = R &
The maximum value of Vx -  10 V Assuming a controller current of 0.5 mA. We
have Ro = ----------- 7  = 20KQ. This divides equally as Rn. = Rn = 10 KQ. The
0.5 x 10'3 
M 
J 
01 
02
time constant of RC filter
2 5 _ An ' R02 c  _ 10 x IQ Q
The value of R{ = VR 
and
A)1 + A)2
C0 = 0.5 11F 
R0 = 12 K Í
„  _ 50 x 10"3 
^
C] — 
4.2fir .
2 x 1 0
0
Speed controller
The speed control loop comprises an integration time between current and 
speed and also the time constants such as the delay due to filtering of the measured
Fig. E6.6(c)
PA. controller

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
speed, the equivalent time constant of the current loop etc. These are 2 ms and
8.4 ms respectively. Symmetrical optimum is used. The criteria are
2Ks7i
Tn = 47]
As the integration time constant includes the amplification is
h
K
The value of T is fixed at 500 ms.
l
• 
„  
500 x10“3 
„„
The amplification V = -------------- = 24.
2x10.4
The reset time of the integrator
Tn = 47] = 4 ■ 1.6ms.
The PI controller is shown in Fig. E6.6(d) with a delay in the reference input. 
The constants are
R0 = 20 KT2, 
R{ = VkR0 = 480 KQ
R= 20 KQ, 
L] = ^ -  = 86.7nF
R{
Cn = ^ Q1 + ^°2 r = 0.4 ms with r = 2 ms 
*01 ' ^02
C _ ^ s)_  ^s2 z = 8.3// F where,
h 
D 
D 
^ 
r
' Ks2
Ts = 47].
Fig. E6.6(d) 
P.l. controller with filter in the reference circuit

The McGraw Hill Companies
m
m m ÊM  
Electric Drives
Problems
6.1 
A separately excited de motor has an 
emf constant 1.2 Vs/rad. The motor 
is controlled by variation in armature 
voltage. The resistance and induc­
tance of the armature are 0.5 Q and 
0.2 H. The inertia of the motor and 
coupled load is 0.5 kg m2. The coef­
ficient of viscous damping is 0.050 
Nm/rad/s.
(a) Determine the transfer func­
tion relating the armature angu­
lar velocity to armature applied 
voltage.
(b) Determine the step response 
when a voltage of 20 V is applied 
when the machine is at rest.
(c) Determine 
the 
response 
to 
a sinusoidal input of 20 V 
(rms) over a range of 0-5rad/s 
of co.r
6.2 
A separately excited motor has its 
armature fed from a constant cur­
rent. The resistance and inductance 
of the field circuit are rf = 40 Q and 
Lf = 20 H. The torque of the motor is 
K I( where the constant 
is 65 Nm/A 
of field current. The damping coef­
ficient is 0.04 Nm per rad/s and the 
inertia of the motor is 0.3 kg m2 and 
that of load is 50 kg m2. The load has
\
___________________________________________________
a torque speed characteristic repre­
sented by
T = 50 co Nm
The control of the motor is effected by 
field voltage. Determine the transfer 
function coJVf when direct coupled to 
the load through a matched gearing to 
give maximum acceleration.
6.3 
A conventional Ward Leonard system 
has the following parameters: 
Generator: provides variable voltage 
to the armature ofthe drive motor. Field 
resistance 120 Q, field inductance 
65.0 H. The armature resistance = 
0.5 Q rotational inductance 0.9 H 
Speed coo = 120 rad/s.
Motor: variable speed motor. Field 
current = 2.5 A; armature resistance 
r = 0.75 £1, L = 0.0035 H, rotational 
inductance 0.6 H, inertia 2.0 kg m2. 
Determine how the motor speed var­
ies when a step voltage of 50 V is 
applied to the generator field assum­
ing the motor is initially at rest and 
on no-load. Determine also the motor 
current variation.
6.4 
In a Ward Leonard system shown in 
Fig. P6.4 a field controlled dc genera­
tor driven at constant speed feeds the
Fig. P6.4 
Field controller dc motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
armature of an armature controlled 
dc motor for speed control. The 
motor speed is co. T , J, B are the load 
torque, inertia and friction coefficient 
of load. Develop the state equations 
of the system. Determine the transfer 
function relating the motor speed and 
field voltage V(.
The values of parameters are: R{ = 15 
Q, Lf = 120 mH; ^ = 1 1 0  V/A, 
=
2.5 Q -L = 12 H; K = 3.5 V/rad/s, 
J = 8.0 kg m2, B = 7.5 Nm/rad/s.
6.5 
Two systems A and B have unit 
step responses 1 -  e ~ 3 t and 2(1 -  e~{) 
respectively. These two systems are 
connected in cascade using a unit 
gain buffer amplifier such that there 
is no loading effect. Determine the 
step response of the combination.
6.6 
A Ward Leonard system which is a 
combination of a generator and motor
is used to control large powers of the 
motor using relatively low power at 
the field of the generator.
(a) r, = 5 and L,. = 2.5 determine 
the generator voltage efo for V = 
100 u ( t ) .
(b) The motor in the combination 
is armature controlled, having 
constant excitation. Determine 
its transfer function relating the 
angular position 0m (s)/Vm (s) in 
terms of the parameters of the 
motor and its torque constant.
(c) Determine the overall transfer 
function 0m(s)/Vt(s) for repre­
sentative values of r , r , AT
ag7 
am5 
c2
and K{.
(d) What is the difference between 
this example and example 5?
20
(e) If Vf(s) = —  determine co(t) as 
a function of time.
rfg
o-----VWVW\A
tO-
r 
I 
l_
'ag 
L ag 
L am
Fig. P6.7 
Closed loop controlled Ward Leonard System

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
6.7 
A closed loop Ward Leonard con­
trol system is shown in Fig. P6.8. 
Draw the complete block diagram 
of the system indicating the transfer 
function of each block. Identify the 
state variables and write down the 
system equations in state variable 
form in matrix notation. Determine 
the characteristic equation of the 
system.
6.8 
A 10 hp armature controlled dc motor 
drives a load of viscous friction coef­
ficient 2 lb ft/rad/s and angular inertia 
is 17.5 lb ft s2. The field is sepa­
rately excited and is constant. The 
motor parameters are ra = 0.762 Q, 
L = 12.5 mH. The motor constant = 
3.0 V/rad/s.
(a) Compute the steady-state speed 
for a step input to the armature 
of 220 V.
(b) Determine the time taken by 
the motor to reach within 95% 
steady-state speed.
(c) What is the total value of the 
effective viscous damping coef­
ficient of this motor-generator 
combination?
6.9 
The motor of Problem 8 is field 
controlled, the armature being fed 
with a constant current. The motor 
field parameters are R( = 60 Q and 
Lf = 20 H. The motor operates at 
constant torque. The torque con­
stant = 60 Ib.ft/ampere of field cur­
rent or 80 Nm per ampere of field 
current.
(a) Draw the block diagram of the 
motor.
(b) Determine the steady-state speed 
of the motor for a step input to 
the field circuit of the motor 
equal to 120 V.
(c) Determine the time taken for the 
motor to reach a speed of 95% of 
the final speed.
(d) Write down the system equations 
in matrix from
6.10 Determine the transfer function 0(s)f 
V(s) of an armature controlled dc 
motor. Assume <?a = 25 V, ra = 0.09 
Q, La = 2.5 mH, J  = 1.82 kg m2, F = 
0.275 Nms/rad
Determine the variation of speed as a 
function of t.
6.11 Determine 
the 
transfer 
function 
6{s)lEf{s) of a field controlled dc 
motor. Assume that ef= 120 V, / = 20 
A, coss = 0ss = 1300rpm, R( = 100 Q, 
Lf = 20 H,V = 2 kg m2, F = 0.275 
Nms/rad.
Determine the variation of speed as a 
function of time.
6.12 Write down the basic equations of a 
three-phase induction motor in space 
phasor notation. Convert these equa­
tions into state variable form. Deduce 
the signal flow graph of the motor. 
Assuming the motor is fed from a 
square wave inverter determine the 
transfer function of the motor relating 
the speed to input voltage of variable 
frequency.
6.13 Show that the dynamics of a volt­
age 
source 
inverter 
fed 
induc­
tion motor can be represented by 
a 
second 
order 
system. 
Deter­
mine the transient response of the 
motor.
6.14 Consider a CSI fed induction motor. 
Show that the dynamics of this motor 
can be completely described by a first 
order differential equation. Deter­
mine the speed response of such a 
motor. Based on the results discuss 
how the transient response is affected 
by the rotor frequency of the motor.
6.15 Derive a transfer function of an 
induction motor fed from a CSI in 
flux weakening mode. Discuss how 
the dynamic behaviour of the motor 
can be improved.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Control Techniques fo r Electrical Drives
2 =0
Multiple-Choice Questions
\
J
6.1 
A system has a transfer function given 
by G(s) = l/(s2 + 3s + 6). When it is 
excited by a step input of 4 u(t), the 
steady-state output of the system is
(a) 0.5
(b) 2/3
(c) 1
(d) 3/2
6.2 
The response of a system in 5-domain 
to a unit impulse input gives
(a) gain of the system
(b) transfer function of the system
(c) time response of the system
(d) error under steady-state conditions
6.3 
A system has a transfer function 
given by G(s) = 25/(s2 + 65 + 9). 
When it is excited by a step input, it 
reaches its final steady-state response
(a) immediately after the input is 
applied
(b) after going through a set of oscil­
lations
(c) after a very long time without 
going through any oscillations
(d) after a very short interval of time 
however without oscillations
6.4 
The imaginary part of the conjugate 
poles of a second order system rep­
resents
(a) natural frequency of the system
(b) overshoot of the system
(c) damped frequency of oscillation
(d) damping factor of the system
6.5 
The transfer function having least 
steady-state error is
(a) 5/(52 + 35 + 5)
(b) 10/O2 + 35+ 10)
(c) 25/(.v2 + 35 + 25)
(d) 15/(52 +  35 +  15)
6.6 
Integral control of a system
(a) improves the transient response 
of the system
(b) improves the steady-state stabil­
ity of the system
(c) increases the order of the system
(d) decreases the order of the system
6.7 
The derivative action of a PD controller
(a) increases the rise time
(b) decreases the rise time
(c) decreases the steady-state error
(d) has no effect on the rise time
6.8 
Routh’s stability criterion gives
(a) the degree of stability of a given 
system
(b) the indication of stability condi­
tion of a linear system without 
actually finding the roots of the 
characteristic equation
(c) the indication to improve the sta­
bility of a system
(d) the indication of stability condi­
tion only if the roots of the char­
acteristic equation are known.
6.9 
Bode plots of a certain transfer 
function show that gain cross-over 
frequency is greater than phase cross­
over frequency. This system is
(a) stable
(b) unstable
(c) marginally stable
(d) the information is not sufficient 
to indicate stability condition.
6.10 A third order system is compensated 
by a PI controller. The ratio of the con­
troller time constant to the uncompen­
sated time constant of the system is 
Kn. When the value of K is increased
(a) phase margin of the overall sys­
tem increases
(b) phase margin of the overall sys­
tem decreases
(c) phase margin remains the same
(d) the damping of the system is 
unaffected.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
References
J
6.1 
Dorf, R.C., Time domain analysis and design o f control systems, Addison-Wesley, 
1965.
6.2 
Ogata, K., Modern control engineering (International Edition) Prentic-Hall of India, 
New Delhi, 1974.
6.3 
D’Azzo, J.J., and C.H. Houpis, Feedback control system analysis and synthesis, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., New York, 1966.
6.4 
Dransfield, R, Engineering systems and automatic control, (International Edition), 
Prentice-Hall of India, New Delhi, 1974.
6.5 
Kuo, B.C., Automatic control systems, Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs N.J., 
1962.
6.6 
Kümmel, F., Elektrische antriebstechnik, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1971.
6.7 
Das Gupta, S., Control system theory, Khanna Publishers, New Delhi, 1983.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
\ 7
\
Drives for Specific
Applications
l
The discussions in the previous chapters were oriented towards determining the 
torque-speed characteristics of the electric motors during motoring, braking and 
starting; the choice of a motor for a given loading condition; the characteristic 
features of the solid state converters employed in the drive practice and also the 
various dc and ac drives with their characteristics while operating on these power 
converters for speed control, reversing and braking.
The industrial applications of electrical drives are numerous. To arrive at a par­
ticular motor of suitable size for a given application, a knowledge of the following 
is very much necessary:
i. The torque-speed curve of the industrial load is required. This fixes up 
the type of motor required to drive the load.
ii. The environmental conditions in the industry where the motor is 
located. This also decides the ambient temperature at which the motor 
operates.
iii. Duty cycle of the load, and the frequency of starting and braking. The 
kW rating of the motor is decided by the load cycle, taking into con­
sideration both the thermal as well as mechanical overload capacity of 
the motor. The starting and braking of the motor, if employed very fre­
quently alters the kW rating of the motor because of heating of the motor 
due to extra losses ocurring during these conditions. The methods of 
starting and braking must also be known. The motor rating must be so 
chosen that it is capable of driving the highest loading in the duty cycle 
without getting thermally overloaded, providing the necessary torque at 
all conditions.
iv. The speed control needed also decides the type of motor. Smooth speed 
control over a wide range is not a problem with dc motors but had been 
a problem with ac motors till the advent of thyristor power converters. 
With the recent developments in the area of these power converters, the 
ac motors also are becoming popular as variable speed drive motors. The 
economics involved in the methods of speed control employed also need 
due consideration.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
v. 
The necessary information is required to decide between the individual 
and group drive. In a group drive, as has already been mentioned, one 
single machine is used to do several jobs. It is therefore economical to 
employ a group drive. In a group drive there are serious disadvantages, 
viz., servicing or repair of the motor requires complete stoppage. Trans­
mission losses occur and efficiency is poor. Line shaft makes the place 
untidy. In an individual drive on the other hand, separate motors are 
employed to perform separate jobs. Basically it is very costly. But it 
has facility for overtime working, complete shut down or stoppage is 
not required, in case of repair and absence of line shaft makes the place 
clear. Hence taking into consideration all these factors, a proper choice 
between these two types may be made,
vi. To meet certain specific duties in a particular application special designs 
of the motors may be required. Special controls and protection circuits 
may be needed. The motors may require protection against single phas­
ing, overloading, overheating, etc. The rating of the motor must be suit­
able to do the job under the worst conditions available. Based on the 
above information it is possible to decide the requirements of a drive 
motor to suit a given application. Of the numerous industrial applica­
tions in which electric motors are employed as drive motors, only a few 
are discussed here:
(a)
Textile mills
(f)
Sugar mills
(b)
Steel rolling mills
(g)
Machine tool applications
(c)
Cranes and hoists
(h)
Coal mining
(d)
Cement mills
0)
Centrifugal pumps
(e)
Paper mills
O')
Turbo compressors
Some industrial applications may have several stages by the time the end 
product is ready from the basic raw material. While selecting motors for opera­
tions in these stages, one has to give due consideration to the above factors, such 
as environmental conditions of the stage of operation, electrical features of the 
motor, i.e., starting torque, braking, speed control, etc., and the ambient tempera­
ture. The requirements of the drive must be very well defined to properly select 
the motor.
7.1 
DRIVE CONSIDERATIONS FOR TEXTILE MILLS
There are several processes involved by the time the finished cloth comes out of 
a mill from its basic raw material, cotton picked up from the fields. The require­
ments of the motors are different for different processes. These mainly depend on 
the nature of the process. The several stages in the textile mills and the require­
ments of a drive motor for each stage are discussed in the following:
Ginning The process of separating seeds from the raw cotton picked from the 
field is called ginning. This may be done in the mills located near the fields or in 
the industrial location itself. In the former the ginned cotton is transported to the

The McGraw-Hill Companies
industrial area in the form of bales. The ginning motors must have speed ranges of 
250 to 1450 rpm. The load speeds are fairly constant. No speed control is required.
Commercially available squirrel cage induction motors may be employed.
Blowing The ginned cotton in the form of bales is opened up and is cleaned up 
very well in a blowing room. Normal three-phase induction motors may be used 
for the purpose. No speed control is required. The motors having synchronous 
speed of 1000 or 1500 rpm may be employed.
Cording The process of converting cleaned cotton into laps is done by lap ma­
chines which are normal three-phase standard squirrel cage motors. These laps 
are converted to slivers by a process called cording. A motor used for cording is 
required to accelerate a drum having a large moment of inertia. It is required to 
withstand prolonged accelerating periods. To meet these requirements the motor 
selection must be made. The motor selected must have a very high starting torque 
and low starting current so that starting losses are kept to a minimum. The motor 
must have sufficient thermal capacity to withstand the heat produced by the losses 
occurring during prolonged acceleration. These cord motors are standardised in 
IS:2972 (part II) 1964 which gives the specifications for cord motors.
Normally, three-phase totally enclosed or totally enclosed fan cooled squirrel 
cage induction motors with high starting torque may be employed. The rating of 
the motor depends upon the type of fabric. Smaller rating motors in the range 1.1 
to 1.5 kW may be used for light fabric. For heavy fabric the rating increases to
2.2 to 5.5 kW. The operating speeds of these motors are in the range 750-1000 
rpm. Squirrel cage motors (8/6 poles) having synchronous speeds in the range of 
750-1000 rpm are normally employed. The motors may be started directly from 
the line to achieve good starting torque. Slip ring motors may be advantageously 
used with rotor resistance starters as they give high starting torque at low starting 
currents. Once started the operation is continuous and uninterrupted.
These slivers are converted to uniform straight fibre by means of drawing 
machines. These are also normal standard motors. However, the motor selected 
must be capable of stopping instantaneously, in case of sliver breaking. The draw­
ing machines are sometimes self brake motors which satisfy this requirement. 
The motor is subjected to inching to place up the broken sliver again. The inching 
operations may amount to 20. When the brake forms an integral part of the motor 
there is no necessity for a clutch and the motor becomes compact.
Combing and lap operations take place after slivers are straightened in a draw­
ing machine. The motors used for these operations are also normal squirrel cage 
motors. The combing process upgrades the fibre. The slivers are converted into 
laps before combing.
The next process is spinning. Before the thread is ready for final spinning it 
is thinned down in two or three stages by processing it on a fly or speed frame. 
A motor with smooth acceleration is necessary to drive this frame. The drive motor 
should be capable of working in high ambient temperatures. The motor must be 
totally enclosed, with a clean floor construction. This is to prevent the cotton fluff 
from getting deposited on the motor surface, which may lead to poor cooling of
Drives for Specific Applications 
^ ^ 9

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
the motor as well as burning of fluff due to motor heating. The motor must have 
uniform acceleration having thermal reserve.
During spinning process the yarn is twisted and made to have sufficient strength. 
These spinning motors are standardised in IS:2972 (part III) 1965, which gives the 
specifications for spinning motors. The strengthened yarn is wound on bobbins. 
The spinning motor must be capable of drawing, twisting and winding operations. 
The breakage must be minimum and the yam produced must have uniform ten­
sion. These motors also must have uniform acceleration to avoid yarn breakage. 
For a motor to have uniform acceleration, its speed-torque characteristic must be 
as shown in Fig. 7.1. Its starting torque must be 150-200% and the peak torque 
200-250%. The difference between these torques must be constant as the motor 
speeds up and must be small to ensure uniform acceleration. The acceleration is 
also slow and smooth. This is to avoid yarn breakage. A normal motor is, there­
fore, not suitable for this process. The motor must have an acceleration time of 5 
to 10 s. The operating speed is 500 rpm. The kW rating of the motor is decided by 
ring frame; number of spindles, ring diameter and spindle speed. When once the 
initial build is over the motor may run at a higher speed. A two speed pole change 
motor may be used. It must have constant torque operation at both the speeds so 
that uniform tension is assured both at starting and running. One can employ two 
different motors, one for starting and low speeds and the other for high speeds. 
In either case the motors are costly. Two speed pole change motors are bulky and 
costly. However, the increased uninterrupted production may compensate for the
Fig. 7.1 
Typical speed-torque of spinning motor for uniform acceleration ©  Normal 
motor (2) Spinning motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
cost. A two motor drive is also costly but has several advantages. It allows setting 
of any speed difference by adjusting the pulley diameters and speed ratios. The 
yam tension can be adjusted independently. There is no interruption in production 
even when one motor fails.
For mule spinning, a group drive may be employed. The motor employed 
should have high starting torque as well as high operating slip. A slip ring motor 
with rotor resistance control or high torque cage motors may be employed for the 
purpose. When an individual drive is used, the motor chosen should be able to 
take care of peak power demands and must have higher slip.
For operations like winding, warping and sizing, normal motors may be 
employed. Low speed motors are required. Reduction in speed using a gearing 
unit may be accomplished. When the yarn is transferred from the bobbin, a speed 
drop of nearly 100 rpm is required. So for these operations high slip motors are 
preferred.
Looms 
The weaving of yam into cloth is done in looms. The drives may be either 
semi group drives or individual drives depending upon the quality of the cloth 
required. The speed of operation is normally 600 to 750 rpm. Requirements of a 
loom motor are:
i. 
Starting torque must be high to complete the pick up job in a very short 
time.
ii. The duty cycle consists of frequent starting and stopping. The load on 
the loom motor is variable and intermittant. To avoid frequent starting 
and stopping the motor may be decoupled (or coupled) from the load by 
means of a clutch.
iii. The operation requires a reciprocating mechanism. Actually rotary 
motion must be converted to linear reciprocating motion. The current 
and torque pulsations are present. A flywheel is required for smoothing.
iv. These are also located in places where dust accumulates on the motor. 
The cotton fluff should not get collected on the motor surface to avoid 
burning of the same due to motor heating.
v. Loom motors must withstand the effects of humidity.
To suit to the above requirements the loom motors are normally totally enclosed 
three-phase induction motors with high starting torque. Fan cooling of the motors 
is also employed. The fan cooling helps to avoid the collection of cotton fluff on the 
motor surface. The motor must be designed, taking into consideration the possible 
torque and current pulsations due to reciprocating motion. The surface of the motor 
must be such that it does not collect any cotton fluff. The kW rating of the motor 
selected must be decided taking into account the frequent starting and stopping in 
the duty cycle. The size of the loom motor depends upon the fabric. For light fabric, 
motors of rating up to 1.5 kW and for heavy fabrics motors of rating 2.2 to 3.7 kW 
are employed. Speeds of motors are in the range of 100 to 750 rpm. Brake motors 
may be used here so that motor stops automatically in case the thread breaks.
The loom motors are standardised under IS: 2972 part I (1964).
Drives for Specific Applications

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
7.1.1 
Control of ac Motors to Have Torque Control
From the foregoing discussion it is clear that the motors used for textile applica­
tions must have
i. high starting torque
ii. torque control providing uniform acceleration so that the breakage of the 
yam is minimum and the quality of the product is improved.
The production increases if the down time of the process and drive is reduced.
In conventional drive systems the torque control is achieved by variation of 
applied voltage to the squirrel cage motors. In slip ring induction motors torque 
control is possible by means of rotor resistance control. The variation of applied 
voltage is realised by series connected reactors on the stator side. The torque 
control in stepless. The accelerating energy keeps the constant tension in the yarn. 
The resistances, even though they have advantages, are not employed as their 
heating may cause fire hazards.
With the development of thyristor power converters the applied voltage varia­
tion to an induction motor for torque control is accomplished by means of ac volt­
age controller in the supply circuit. Closed loop control can be employed (Fig. 7.2).
Fig. 7.2(a) 
Ac voltage controller feeding a high resistance rotor
R 
N
Fig. 7.2(b) 
Closed loop control of speed

The McGraw-Hill Companies
This method of using reduced voltage for torque control, however, has disad­
vantages of poor power factor at reduced voltages.
The torque control as well as speed control is obtained using induction motors 
fed from variable frequency inverters. The inverter is controlled such that the 
motor operates with constant flux, to achieve the best possible torque capability of 
the motor. Both voltage source and current source inverters can be employed. Slip 
controlled drives assure uniform starting torque. For smooth low speed operation 
cycloconverters are preferred (Fig. 7.3).
With slip ring rotors, chopper controlled resistance may be used for torque 
control.
Converter fed synchronous motors are also becoming very popular. They have 
the advantages that the converter can employ machine commutation, in which 
case the inverter configuration is simple. A self control of the motor converter 
imparts dc motor characteristics, where the problems of hunting and stability are 
not there. For low speeds cycloconverters are preferred. Voltage source and cur­
rent source link inverters can also be used for control of synchronous motors.
For other processes, such as bleaching, drying, printing, finishing, etc., in tex­
tile mills, the normal motors are used. When very low speeds are required, gearing 
may be employed. Ward Leonard dc drive, ac commutator motors are employed. 
The thyristor control may be used where efficient, smooth speed control over a 
wide range is required.
Special design of textile mill motors are required owing to the location of 
the motor, running conditions and also the torque requirements while starting. 
In textile mills the motors are located in places where there is a lot of dust. The 
cotton fluff may be deposited on the motor, which affects natural cooling of the 
motor. Consequently the temperature rise of the motor is more, which may heat 
the cotton fluff leading to fire. To prevent this situation and also prevent the dust 
and fluff entering the interior of the motor the motors must be totally enclosed 
and fan cooled (to keep the surface clean). Also the motors employed for the 
job of bleaching, etc., must have proper enclosure to prevent any possible dam­
age. If a group drive is employed the motor may be located outside the room. 
The motors must be designed to withstand thermal variations under the worst 
conditions.
Drives for Specific Applications 
^ ^ 3
7.2 
STEEL ROLLING MILLS
Steel rolling mills are either hot rolled or cold rolled. These may be either revers­
ing type or continuous type. The motors used for reversing mills need operation 
in both the directions of rotation. A four quadrant operation of the motor may be 
required. In the continuous type the motor rotates only in one direction.
Steel rolling mills, where the cross section of steel is transformed to required 
sizes, are classified depending upon the end product required. The choice of the 
motor to meet the requirements and the choice of the mill-stand depends upon 
the products required. In blooming mills the end product is steel blooms—steels 
bars of any length with a definite cross section. The slabbing mills produce slabs

Speed
Slip
Current
function
Current
mn>n
n0
<'ro
01
Fig- 7-3(a) 
Closed loop slip controlled drive with current control
The McGraw-Hill Companies

The McGraw-Hill Companies
D rives fo r Sp ecific A pp lications
o
o
o
Start up 
process 
using an 
sfc for 
several 
motors
Fig. 7.3(b) 
S.F.C. for synchronous motor (a) 6-pulse operation (b) 12-pulse converters 
(c) start up converter
which are rolled metals of rectangular section. The blooms of reduced cross sec­
tion are called billets which can further be rolled into bars, squares and angles. 
The mills that produce these materials of different sizes are called merchant 
mills. Slabs are converted to plates in plate rolling mills. These plates have less 
thickness than width. Strip mills convert these plates into strips which are trans­
formed to sheets in a sheet mill. Cold rolling is normally used for producing 
sheets of good quality of uniform gauge. Hot rolling is used to make blooms, 
slabs and billets.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
In reversing mills the steel is passed in the mill-stand in both directions alter­
nately, till it reduces to the required size. In continuous mills, steel is passed in one 
direction through several stands which press the sheet simultaneously.
The finished sheets from cold rolling reversing mills may have a thickness 
ranging from 0.15 to 2 mm and more. Black plate produced in these mills may be 
of the order of 0.07 to 1.3 mm. The bands have a thickness of 0.0015m and width 
1 m. The production of sheet steel in a cold rolled mill is limited by low sheet 
speed because of the forward acceleration and retardation and adjustments of gaps 
in the mill-stand as the sheets are pressed. The production rate can be increased by 
passing the sheet in one direction.
The billets, strips, and the products of merchant mills are produced in continu­
ous mills. Blooming and slabbing mills are of reversing type.
7.2.1 
Reversing Hot Rolling Mills
Hot ingots from the soak pits or from steel making shops are rolled in these mills. 
These are transported to mill body by means of a car. A crane is used to load the 
car with these ingots. The mill receives these ingots and processes them. The mill 
bed comprises a series of rolling mills.
The ingots are fed on the receiving table of the mill bed wherein they are 
weighed. Ingots travel on rolling mills. They reach the main mill-stand after 
passing through several tables, such as approach table, intermediate table, and 
front work tables. After the mill-stand there are tables such as hackwork table, 
intermediate table and runout table. The finally finished steel is cut in a spear 
table to standard sizes. The length of the mill bed is decided by the length of the 
product.
The ingots are passed in the mill-stand in both the directions till they are 
pressed to desired thickness. As the thickness decreases, automatic adjustment 
of the gap is required, which is carried out by screwing down machanism. This 
adjustment is made when the mill is made ready for reverse motion.
The metal at entry positions of the mills is aligned by means of manipulator 
slide guides.
Based on the process discussed above the nature of the drive is as follows:
i. A wide range of speeds of operation is required. The duty cycle of the 
load has frequent starts and (stops) speed reversal. The motor and its 
control must be selected taking this into consideration. To increase the 
production rate the dynamic behaviour during speed reversal must be 
fast.
ii. The direction of rotation must be reversible without causing serious dis­
turbances to power handling circuits. The method employed should be 
such that the starting and speed reversal take place without any large dip 
in the terminal voltage.
iii. Reliability and accuracy are imperative.
The transport of ingots from the hot chamber to the car, conveying of the fin­
ished blooms or slabs, and the mechanical adjustments of the mill-stand are also

The McGraw-Hill Companies
D rives fo r Sp ecific A pp lications
carried out by several drive motors. These may be integrally controlled with the 
above mill-stand.
A motor selected should meet the above requirements. Its speed must be 
controlled over a wide range. The kW rating must be sufficient to drive the inter- 
mittant continuous load having the definite duty cycle with frequent starts and 
reversal. Braking may be required to stop the mill bed if required. Regenerative 
braking may not be advantageously employed. Plugging may not be suitable here 
due to peaks of current during speed reversal. These peaks cause voltage dips 
and hence must be avoided. Accurate speed control using principles of automatic 
control is also possible and is a reliable method.
Ward Leonard control of dc motors is very much suitable here. The regenera­
tive speed reversal is possible. Armature current control can be employed for fast 
retardation. Armature voltage variation in a smooth manner enables a wide range 
of speed control. Flux weakening of the motor increases this range on the upper 
side. Load equalisation is possible by means of a flywheel. The speeds can be very 
accurately set and the system has a very high reliability. This allows closed loop 
automatic speed control.
Ac motors with conventional methods of speed control are not suitable. An ac 
commutator motor may be used. But braking may have to be employed using the 
methods of plugging; dc dynamic braking has been done for normal three-phase 
motors. This may result in dips of supply voltage.
The advent of thyristor power converters has made the speed control of both 
induction and synchronous motors very simple. Ac motors employing a variable 
frequency supply for speed control may be employed. These are becoming com­
petitors to dc motors. The cycloconverters have advantages at very low speeds 
over the dc link converters. So, cycloconverter fed synchronous motors are used 
very commonly for driving steel mills. The converters facilitate four quadrant 
operation. These drives meet all the requirements mentioned above.
7.2.2 
Continuous Hot Rolling Mills
Billets or strips are produced in these mills. They operate in the forward direction 
only. The mill-stands are of two kinds here, roughing mills-stands and finishing 
mill-stands. These stands are also two or four high depending upon the number of 
rolls the stand has. In a four high stand inner rolls are smaller than the outer ones. 
The gap of rolling is maintained by the outer ones. The metal is worked simulta­
neously in the finishing stands. The roughing operation is not simultaneous.
The basics of the process described define the requirements of the drive 
required for continuous hot rolling:
i. When a mill has to produce billets of different sizes the gap between 
working rolls of the mill-stand must be adjustable.
ii. To be able to reduce the thickness of the metal gradually the motors of 
consecutive mill-stands must have differing speeds. This requires that 
the motor must be capable of speed control in the range 1.5:2. Speed 
control should be accurate.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
■■■ 
Electric Drives
iii. The sag of the metal between two stands must be avoided. This sag may 
occur when there is a slight difference in the operating speed. The speed 
drop may occur due to sudden application of load, which normally hap­
pens when the metal comes into contact with the rolls. A closed loop 
control must assure quick restoration of the speed of the motor. The 
motor must have a very fast dynamic response to avoid sag.
Based on the above, a motor to suit the job may be selected. The motor must 
have a constant speed at a given setting. It must have its speed controlled over a 
given range. The dc motors controlled by Ward Leonard control, ac commuta­
tor motors and ac motors fed from thyristor converters may be advantageously 
employed here.
7.2.3 
Reversing Cold Rolled Mills
In these mills the metal in the form of a reel is used to feed the mill-stand. On 
one side of the mill-stand there is a delivering reel and on the other side there 
is a receiving one. The mill-stand may be two or four high. When the receiving 
mandrel is empty, the threading of the metal on to this empty one is done manu­
ally. The speed of the motor should increase with uniform acceleration, ensuring 
the required tension and pressure. Otherwise the sheet would break. The sheet is 
allowed through the mill-stand in both forward and backward directions till the 
metal of desired thickness is obtained.
The drive, requirements immediately following the above process are the 
following:
i. The drive must be capable of reverse rotation. A four quadrant operation 
must be possible.
ii. One or two individually driven motors may be used. The work rolls may 
be driven directly. The back up rolls are provided with motion whereas 
the working rolls move by friction.
iii. The coiling motors besides the driving coilers ensure the desired tension 
of the strip between the coilers and mill-stand. This is necessary to pre­
vent looping of the strip and/or breaking.
iv. The gap adjustment must he made simultaneously with the reversing. 
The latter is accomplished by screwing down the upper rolls.
v. The inertia of the motor must be kept low and lower than that of the rollers.
vi. Torque control as well as speed control must be possible to maintain 
constant tension of the strip. In a dc motor the torque control is possible 
both by field control as well as armature current control. As the diameter 
of the roller decreases the torque must also decrease. This is achieved by 
field weakening. However, field weakening in dc motors is limited by 
commutation and armature reaction effects. It is also limited by stability 
conditions of the motor. The armature current control may be employed 
beyond this limit.
vii. The acceleration of the drive must be uniform to avoid breaking.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
D rives fo r Sp ecific A pp lications
The motor selected for this purpose must have its torque developed, causing a 
smooth acceleration. It should be capable of four quadrant operation with smooth 
speed reversal. Torque control at different speeds must be possible. To suit these 
requirement, a versatile motor is a dc motor controlled by Ward Leonard con­
trol with flywheel effect. Static Ward Leonard control may become economical 
with the availability of thyristors at reasonable rates. Three-phase ac commutator 
motor or cycloconverter fed synchronous motors are suitable for the job.
7.2.4 
Continuous Cold Rolling Mills
These work only in the forward direction and no reversing is required. The metal 
passes in one direction only in different stands till the product has the required 
thickness. The mill may be two high or four high. The coiler roller requires accu­
rate torque and speed control. The strip tension must be constant and large. Low 
speed operation is required while threading the steel into the rolls. Immediately 
after the threading the speed of the motor must be increased. The speed must be 
brought down while the metal leaves the mill-stand. A large variation in the speed 
of the mill drive is required.
7.2.5 
Motors for Mill Drive
Dc motors are very versatile as motors for mill drives due to their characteristics 
of high starting torque, capability for wide range of speed control, precise speed 
setting, large overload capacity and pull-out torque. Care must be taken to have 
satisfactory commutation in the complete working range. They can be acceler­
ated, braked and reversed very fast. Further, the inertia of the motor must be very 
small. The motors for mill operations are normally TEFC motors with a high class 
of insulation.
The speed control of dc motors is accomplished by Ward Leonard control 
with flywheel effect. Dc dynamic braking may be employed for quick stop­
ping and braking at a controlled rate. Sometimes mechanical brakes are also 
employed. Conventional Ward Leonard systems may be replaced by thyristor- 
ized units.
When smooth speed control is required, ac motors with conventional methods 
of speed control are not suitable. Ac commutator motor, such as Schrage motor 
may be employed. The thyristor power converters provide a variable frequency 
supply which can be used for speed control of ac motors. Both torque control and 
speed control are possible. For low speeds, cycloconverters can be used to give a 
smooth speed control. Thyristorized dc drives can be used in the place of Ward 
Leonard dc drives.
7.3 
CRANES AND HOIST DRIVES
7.3.1 
The Requiremtents of the Drive
i. The motion of the crane hook is in all three dimensions.
ii. In crane drives, the acceleration and retardation must be uniform. This is 
more important than the speed control.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
iii. For exact positioning of the load creep speeds must be possible.
iv. When the motion is in the horizontal direction braking is not a problem. 
This is a problem if the load overhauls the motor in vertical motion. In 
the case of vertical motion the movement of the empty cage has to be 
carefully considered. The speed must be constant while lowering the 
loads. The steady braking of the motor against overhauling must be 
possible.
v. The drive must have high speeds in both the directions. The motor must 
have high speeds at light loads.
vi. Mechanical braking must be available under emergency conditions.
vii. Power lowering may be used when an empty cage or light hooks are 
lowered.
The duty cycle of cranes depends upon some requirements. These are:
i. 
it must be able to perform strenuous duty
ii. it must withstand high ambient temperature
iii. it must be able to work in a dusty atmosphere
iv. 
it must provide trouble free operation
v. it should have rigid safety measures.
Cranes are classified depending upon the nature of duty they have to perform 
and also the duty cycle.
These are light duty, medium duty, heavy duty and continuous duty and are 
tabulated in Table 7.1, along with their applications.
7.3.2 
Drive Motors for Cranes
The crane motors can be either dc or ac motors.
They are compared in Table 7.2.
Even though the electrical characteristics make dc motors suitable as crane 
motors, the lower inertia and simple and economical construction of cage 
motors favour them as crane motors. With the advent of thyristors and associ­
ated power converters it is possible to have torque control during starting, run­
ning and braking.
7.3.3 
dc Systems for Cranes
Speed control is achieved by means of Ward Leonard system with all facilities of 
speed control in forward and backward directions with regeneration.
Among the dc motors, series motors are extremely suitable for crane operation. 
They have the following features:
i. They have very good starting torque, high torque capability at low speeds 
and light torques at high speeds.
ii. 
Simple arrangements for braking of the motor.

Table 7.1 
Summary of requirements of motors for different industrial drives
Starting torque
Overload capacity
Acceleration
Speed range
Speed control method
Type o f motor
l . Textile mills 
ginning
Standard
Standard
Operating speed 
range 200 to 
1500 rpm. The 
operation is 
however at con­
stant speed.
No speed control is 
required as the op­
eration is at constant 
speed and load.
Standard TEFC 
squirrel cage mo­
tor.
Cording
High starting 
torque. 2.75 to 3.5 
times rated value.
High overload 
capacity 3.75 to 
3.00 times rated 
value.
Should be capable 
of prolonged 
acceleration as the 
starting period is 
large proper rating 
must be there for 
the motor due to 
losses at starting.
Operating speed 
is 600 rpm 
or 700 rpm. 
Constant speed 
operation.
No speed control.
Slip ring rotor with 
rotor resistance 
starting. High 
torque motors with 
DOL starting.
Spinning
150-200% of 
rated value
200- 275% of rated 
value.
Acceleration must 
be constant or 
uniform so that 
there is no 
breakage of thread.
Constant speed 
operation.
Two speed motors 
are preferred.
Ring frame motors.
Looms
2 to 2.3 times the 
rated torque.
2.3 to 2.7 times 
rated torque.
Frequent starts and 
stops.
Constant speed 
of operation.
No speed control.
Totally enclosed 
high torque squirrel 
cage motors 0.3 to 
2.2 kW.
(iContinued)
D rives fo r Sp ecific A pp lications

Starting, torque
Overload capacity
Acceleration
Speed range
Speed control method
Type o f motor
2. Cranes
Acceleration and
Speed control of
Ward Leonard dc
retardation must 
be suitable for 
accurate position­
ing. Creep speeds 
should be possible.
1:20.
systems.
3. Steel mills
High starting
3.00 times the rated
Frequent starts
Wide range of
Ward Leonard, static
Ward Leonard sys-
reversing hot
torque.
torque.
and stops. Speed
precise speed
frequency control
terns with flywheel.
rolling mills
reversal.
control.
of ac
Fast response
motors.
drives with preci­
sion speed control. 
Thyristor converter 
controlled prefera­
bly cyclo converter 
fed ac motor.
Continuous hot
High starting
Fast response sys-
rolling mills
torque
terns. Thyristorized 
power converter 
controlled induction 
motor, cyclo con­
verter fed ac motor.
Reversing cold
High starting
Fast response
rolling mills
torque
systems. Thyristor­
ized power converter 
controlled ac mo­
tors, preferably 
cyclo converter fed 
ac drive.
The McGraw-Hill Companies

4. Sugar mills
Depends upon 
centrifugal action. 
High starting 
torque.
Standard
5. Compressors
High starting
Should be suf-
Controlled
torque. Onload 
starting soft 
starting may be 
employed as the 
conventional 
methods cause 
peaks of starting 
current and 
voltage dips.
ficiently good.
acceleration.

500-1000 rpm
Stator voltage varia-
Two speed pole
tion, rotor resistance
change motors.
control, pole chang-
Solid rotor
ing methods. As
induction motors
the speed control is
controlled from ac
frequent there may
voltage controller,
be possibilities for
dc link inverter, ro-
regeneration. Static 
frequency control of 
induction
motors. Normal V/f 
control giving due 
consideration to high 
starting torque if nec­
essary.
tor chopper control.
Speed range
Static frequency
SFC controlled
700-1000 rpm
variation for speed
induction motors
control. Slip energy
or synchronous
recoveiy schemes if
motros. These
slip ring induction
provide soft
motor is used.
starting facilities.
0Continued)
Drives for Specific Applications

Starting torque
Overload capacity 
Acceleration
Speed range
Speed control method
Type o f motor
6. Pumps and 
The torque is pro-
Standard
Speed range 1:5
Slip energy
Three phase slip
blowers 
portional to square
recovery schemes,
ring induction
of speed. Standard
stator voltage control
motor, solid rotor
requirements of
SFC feeding.
induction motor,
starting torque are
SFC fed induction
200 to 300% of
or synchronous
rated torque for
motor.
small motors and
150-200% for
large motors
7. Cement mills 
125% of rated
250% of rated 
Frequent starts
Mill speed is
Speed reduction by
Slip ring rotor with
Raw mills and 
torque with
torque. The motor 
and stops in a duty
about 15 rpm.
gearing. Gear-less
rotor resistance start-
cement mill 
relatively small
should be able to 
cycle.
drives use SFC with dc
ing, synchronous
drives 
starting current
withstand 50% fre-
link converter or cyclo
motor with SFC.
to avoid voltage
quently oc-curing
converter. Use of Twin
Squirrel cage motors
dips.
overload in an hour.
motor may eliminate
fed from SFC hav-
huge gear boxes.
ing soft start facility.
Kiln drives 
200-250% of
200-250% of rated 
Full load accel-
1:10
Ward Leonard
Thyristorized dc
rated torque
torque 
eration in about 15
control. Static Ward
drives, Twin motor
seconds.
Leonard using thyris-
dc drives.
tors has advantages.
Crusher motors 
160% of rated
200-250%; 15%
Slip ring motor
torque. The motor
overload for 15
with rotor resis-
must withstand
seconds.
tance control.
locked rotor current.
Fan drives 
120% of rated
200-250%
1000 to 750 rpm
Rotor resistance
TEFC slip ring mo-
torque
control, thyristorized
tor, thyristorized dc
control.
drives.
mn>n
nO
rol/l
The McGraw-Hill Companies

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Drives for Specific Applications
Table 7.2 
A comparison of dc and ac drive for crane applications
DC drive 
AC drive
1. Fast acceleration and smooth speed 
control
2. Speed-torque curve can be modified 
to suit the purpose in a simple manner 
with resistance in the armature or field 
circuit.
They reduce the time cycle.
3. Dc series motors have very high torque 
at low speeds particularly at zero speed, 
which is more attractive for crane 
operation.
4. Frequent maintenance of the motor is 
required due to commutator
5. The drive motor and its control are 
costly
6. Dc source is required. A rectifier may 
be used to convert ac to dc
7. Inertia of the motor is high.
All ac motors are not self starting
Induction motors are self starting. Squirrel 
cage motors require special designs for 
improved starting performance. Slip ring 
induction motors can be made to have 
improved starting performance by means 
of rotor resistance control.
They have large time cycle.
Less maintenance.
Squirrel cage motors are cheaper, simple 
in construction and robust.
Inertia of cage motors is less.
iii. Power demand under highly loaded conditions decreases due to fall in 
speed.
iv. Electrical braking is possible even at low speeds due to low critical 
speeds.
v. Very light conditions are not possible. Suitable changes may be made in 
the circuitry to make it to run at low speeds and light load conditions.
vi. The lowering speeds increase with the load. Regenerative braking is not 
possible to limit this speed. The speed of the empty cage can be limited 
by limiting the current to full load value.
However, the speed-torque characteristics of dc series motors may be modified 
to suit all the phases of crane control, and are depicted in Fig. 7.6.
7.3.4 
ac Systems for Cranes
Among ac motors, squirrel cage motors are normally used. They have the follow­
ing features:
i. 
No speed control is required. However with the development of vari­
able frequency converters which solve the problems of speed control 
of induction motor, inverter fed motors are used in situations requiring 
wide range of speed control.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Stator
Diode
Stator
Fig. 7.4 
Chopper controlled resistance in the rotor circuit (a) circuit (b) closed loop 
speed control
ii. They have fast acceleration and a fixed sequence of operation.
iii. Regenerative braking is not a problem. This occurs automatically when 
the load overhauls or the empty cage is being raised.
iv. The motor is simple and robust.
These are not suitable when a large number of startings and brakings are 
required. A starting torque up to 250% of full load torque may be obtained. In 
cases of very high starting torque these are not suitable. Non-uniform sequence of 
operation cannot be handled and conventional methods of speed control are not 
suitable if precise speed control is necessary.

3-phase AC
The McGraw-Hill Companies
Drives for Specific Applications
Variable
. 
Change of connections
Two quadrant drive 
, 
..
M 
for regeneration
Fig. 7-5 
Ward Leonard control of a dc motor (a) conventional circuit (b) static power 
converters
Slip ring induction motors for cranes and hoists have the following features:
i. The speed-torque curve can be modified by suitably altering the rotor 
resistance. The starting torque can also be varied to the required value.
ii. Regeneration is possible. Reverse current braking can be employed lim­
iting the current to the desired value by rotor resistance. DC dynamic 
braking may also be employed.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Rs2
o
+
V A r
-------- 'Ü Ö Ü Ü 'v
^s3
AMr o
While selecting a motor for crane duty the following points require consideration:
i. Breakdown torque must be greater than 250% (in the range of 
275-300)
ii. The inertia must be small.
iii. It must withstand large frequency of starts.
iv. The motor must have sufficient running torque, starting torque and ther­
mal capability for the given duty cycle.
v. The duty cycle must be specified.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Drives for Specific Applications
7.4 
CEMENT MILLS
7.4.1 
Stages in Cement Production
The raw materials of cement are lime and silica. Alumina and ferric oxide are 
used as fluxing agents.
i. Collection of raw materials such as lime stone. This is transported to the 
mill site and crushed there if the quarry is far off. If the quarry is nearer 
it is crushed at the quarry itself and transported to the mill site.
ii. 
Grinding of this crushed lime stone after the addition with baux­
ite, iron ore, etc. By passing air through bottom the lime powder is 
homogenised
iii. This is fed to the cement kilns where the cement clinker is made at 
high temperature. The process where dry powder is used is called dry 
process.
iv. Wet processes of cement making are also popular. Here the slurry is 
made by crushing or grinding the lime stone, bauxite with water. This is 
then fed to the kiln through the kiln feed tank.
v. Dry process is preferred to wet process due to the reduced quantity of 
fuel required. However the latter becomes economical if the materials 
are already wet and drying them may not be economical.
vi. The hot clinker is then air cooled in special types of coolers and made 
ready for storage.
vii. After storing for a few days gypsum is added in required quantities and 
ground to the required fineness.
Every stage has its own drive. Several drives in cement making are raw mill 
drives, cement mill drives, kiln drives, crusher drives, waste gas fan drives and 
compressor drives.
7.4.2 
Requirement of Mill Motors
i. They should have high starting torque. The starting current must be lim­
ited to a maximum of two times full load value to minimise voltage dips. 
The breakdown torque should also be high so that sufficient overload 
capacity is available.
ii. An overload capacity of 50% for one minute may be necessary, occur­
ring for four times in an hour.
iii. Three starts from cold conditions and two consecutive starts from hot 
conditions per hour against full load.
These are very well met by a three-phase slip ring induction motor. Suitable 
starting torques may be accomplished at reduced starting currents by means of 
rotor resistance. The motor must have sufficient thermal rating to have frequent 
starts both under cold as well as hot conditions. The power factor may be improved 
by capacitor bank.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 7-7 
A typical load cycle of a centrifuge A—Charging; B—Intermediate spinning; 
C—Spinning; D—E—F—Regenerative braking; G—Plugging for ploughing
The power rating of the motor is rather high. As the motors have large power 
ratings and power transmission using gear boxes at this power level is not practi­
cal, two motors of identical capacity are used. Both of them may be equipped with 
identical rotor starters.
Gearless drives are preferable here. Gearless drives using the principle of levi­
tation may be employed. Variable frequency drives using either cycloconverters 
(Fig. 7.7) or dc link converters may also be used. As the price of thyristors is 
becoming less, these thyristorized drives are becoming very popular.
7.4.3 
Kiln Drives
The rotary kiln drives depend upon the type of cement making process (wet or 
dry). These are, in general, tubular tilted from the horizontal position with a ring 
fitted around them. This ring gear engages with one or two pinions. A variable 
speed motor drives the pinion.
The requirements of a kiln motor are the following:
i. Power requirement is very high.
ii. 
Speed control ratio is 1:10. Very low creeping speeds of 1 rpm may be 
required.
iii. 
Starting torque should be in the range 200 to 250% of full load torque.
iv. The acceleration of the drive should be completed in about 15 s.
v. For small periods an overload capacity of 200-250% may be required.
vi. 
The motor must have suitable control for inching and spotting during
maintenance.
The motors that meet the above requirements are ac commutator motors and 
Ward Leonard controlled dc motors. These have the disadvantage that the highest 
rating is limited by the commutator. Speed range is 1:2 in ac commutator motors 
whereas a speed range of 1:10 with crawling speeds is possible with dc motors. 
Capital outlay, lower efficiencies and limitations due to commutator, either in 
the Ward Leonard or ac commutator motors, may be overcome by the use of

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Drives for Specific Applications
thyristorised drives. These have a wide range of speed control as against ac com­
mutator motors.
When two motors are used to deliver the power they must be designed to have 
equal load sharing without overloading any one of them. They must maintain the 
same speed. They may be series connected or parallel connected with closed loop 
speed control.
Converter fed dc motors in static Ward Leonard control have limitations on 
maximum operating speed and power rating due to the presence of a mechanical 
commutator. The ripple content in the armature current and possible discontinu­
ous conduction further affect the commutating capability of the motor. Therefore 
for power ratings beyond this value, ac drives are suitable. Tubular mills for 
cement are very slow speed high power loads. A cycloconverter fed synchronous 
motor meets the requirements of a drive motor. The salient features of this sys­
tem are:
i. The drive can be controlled to have an excellent dynamic behaviour with 
fast regenerative reversal.
ii. The converter can be used for synchronous starting by varying the fre­
quency with smooth acceleration up to desired speed. The disadvan­
tages, such as peak starting current and consequent voltage dips in the 
supply, can be completely eliminated.
iii. A continuous gearless drive is possible at crawling speeds.
iv. A motor with self control has the characteristics of a dc motor with 
respect to both steady-state and dynamic behaviour. It is free from 
hunting. It is mechanically strong, requiring little maintenance and 
can be built to have a rating several times that of converter fed dc 
motors. The low inertia of the motor is also responsible for the fast 
response.
v. A four quadrant operation is simple and straightforward.
vi. Poor line power factor similar to that of converter fed dc motor.
vii. Field weakening is possible above base speed.
viii. The smooth speed control with minimal torque pulsations particularly at 
low speed is an added attraction, mainly when compared to synchronous 
motors or dc link converters.
7.4.4 
Crusher Drives
The requirements of a crusher drive are as follows:
i. The starting torque is of the order of 160% of full load torque.
ii. The breakdown torque is of the order of 200-250% of full load torque.
iii. The rotor must be capable of withstanding a locked rotor current without 
any limiting equipment, for one minute. This kind of situation may occur 
in case of jamming of the crusher due to very big boulders.
iv. Adverse conditions of loading may be encountered.
v. Overload capacity of 15% for 15 s and 20% for 10 s may be required.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Slip ring induction motor with rotor resistance starters and speed control may 
be suitable for crusher drives. A dc chopper can be used to control the resistance.
7.4.5 
Fan or Blower Drives
The drive motors are located in outdoor or semioutdoor locations. Totally enclosed 
fan cooled motors are suitable, depending upon the location of the motor. The 
torque requirements are: Starting torque is 120% full load torque; breakdown 
torque 200-250% full load torque. The speeds are in the range of 1000-1500 rpm.
Slip ring induction motors with rotor resistance control are suitable as drive 
motors. A subsynchronous converter cascade in the rotor circuit may also be 
employed for speed control. The latter has improved efficiency of operation. The 
following are the features of this drive:
i. The design rating of the converter depends on the speed range required. 
The converter must be capable of handling high currents at high speed 
and high voltages at low speed. Using a switchable converter cascade the 
rating may be decreased.
ii. When the lowest speed is other than zero, starting equipment is required. 
Under emergency conditions the motor may be required to operate with 
this resistance as a conventional motor. The resistance must be able to 
withstand the operation under running conditions.
iii. The torque developed has pulsations and harmonics causing heating. 
A 12 pulse converter may be used to reduce these effects. The line side 
inverter presents several harmonics to the line which may cause the dis­
tortion of the input voltage to the stator.
iv. It has a very poor power factor. Methods are available to improve the 
line p.f.
7.4.6 
Compressor Drives
The drive motors for compressors have a rating in the range of 300-450 kW. 
Compressors have to be started on load or sometimes there may be means of 
unloading for starting. For starting on load, high starling torque is required. Nor­
mally care must be taken while choosing a starting equipment to limit the starting 
current. Starting current peaks are not permitted as they cause disturbances such 
as voltage dips. Totally enclosed fan cooled motors capable of operating in the 
speed range of 750-1000 rpm are employed.
Conventional squirrel cage motors may be used if starting on no-load can be 
accomplished. The starting method may be reduced voltage starting, to limit the 
starting current. If the compressor has to start on the load, high starting torque at 
reduced starting current may be required. A slip ring induction motor with rotor 
resistance starter may be used.
The ac drives making use of an induction motor or synchronous motor whose 
speed is controlled by means of a static frequency converter may also be used. 
These converters can be used for starting purposes also. They provide better start­
ing conditions. A sufficient amount of accelerating torque with a current of 1.5

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Drives for Specific Applications
times full load current may be achieved. Locked rotor current and torque loose 
their significance and it is just sufficient to have reserve torque for acceleration. 
Consequently, voltage dips and the severe burden on the mains may be avoided. 
When synchronous motor are used, the line side converter uses line commutation 
and the machine side converter uses machine voltages for commutation. There­
fore a simple converter is sufficient. Only at low speeds is the commutation assis­
tance required.
Four quadrant operation is straightforward. Very high speeds may also be 
obtained. Direct coupling to load is possible. The operation of compressor is vari­
able torque operation. At low speeds torque required is very low and simple con­
trol of V/f may be sufficient. No voltage offset for stator resistance compensation 
is required.
7.5 
SUGAR MILLS
The sugar crystals are separated from the syrup by means of a centrifuge. The 
separation is accomplished by the centrifugal forces set up. The centrifuge is 
started to a speed of around 200 rpm at which the charging of syrup takes place. 
During charging the motor is disconnected from the supply. The centrifuge is 
spun at speeds of 500 and 1000 rpm. The speed is then reduced in steps to about 
50 rpm, at which ploughing takes place. To reduce the energy lost during starting 
and braking of the motor the centrifugal action is performed at different speeds. 
A typical load cycle of a centrifuge is shown in Fig. 7.7.
The motor used to drive the centrifuge must be a variable speed motor. The 
centrifugal action is performed to reduce the energy loss due to acceleration and 
braking. The regenerative braking may be advantageously employed. Normally 
two stage acceleration and braking are employed. While reducing the speed the 
regenerative braking is employed till the lowest speed is obtained, where plough­
ing takes place.
Pole changing induction motors are suitable for the purpose. A large pole wind­
ing is switched on to get a speed of 200 rpm, at which charging takes place. After 
the charging the next pole winding is switched on to get the next higher speed. In 
two stages the highest spinning speed is achieved. The motor can then be switched 
on to lower speeds and the regenerative brakings may be obtained in stages. Thus 
pole change motors give definite speeds of operation. Also, when switched from 
higher speed to lower speed regenerative braking may be accomplished.
A high resistance rotor induction motor with stator voltage control is suitable 
to drive the centrifuge. Due to high rotor resistance, stable operation of motor 
is possible in the complete speed range from zero to rated (synchronous) speed. 
The voltage control is used for speed control in the first quadrant. Solid rotor 
induction motors have high inherent rotor resistance and are economical when 
employed as drives for centrifuges. The stator voltage control can be accom­
plished by means of an ac voltage controller using antiparallel thyristors. The 
motor can be controlled in speed and run at desired speed; it can be accelerated 
and braked (Fig. 7.2).

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
sensor
Fig. 7.8 
Cycloconverter feeding a synchronous motor
The high rotor resistance of a squirrel cage motor, even though it provides a 
stable characteristic, has poor efficiency. Hence slip ring induction motors with 
variable resistance in the rotor circuit and variable voltage on the stator are a satis­
factory drive system giving a reasonable efficiency under running conditions. The 
schematic and features of this drive have been discussed in Chapter 4. The brak­
ing when these drives are employed can be dc dynamic braking. No regenerative 
braking is possible since the energy is lost in the external resistance and cannot be 
regenerated to the mains.
With all the types discussed above an automatic speed control system to suit 
the duty cycle can be employed.
Alternately, converter fed induction or synchronous motors may also be used. 
A static frequency converter (dc link or cycloconverter) may be employed to con­
trol the drive motor. By this, soft starting and operation at definite speeds are pos­
sible. The speed control range is wide and regenerative braking is possible.
A/lotor Design 
When pole change motors are used, they require special design to 
withstand the fluctuations of current when switching over takes place. The line 
also is subjected to disturbances. Special starting equipment is required. When 
pole change motors or high resistance cage motors are used the current fluctua­
tions may cause heating of the motor. Protective devices may be required against 
overheating. Special starting current peaks may be there when an induction motor 
controlled from a voltage controller is employed. Because of low flux levels at 
lower speeds, considerable derating of the motor is required. The derating is also 
due to non-sinusoidal currents. A considerably large size motor is required. Spe­
cial starting may not be required as the voltage controller employed can be used 
for starting also. A slip ring induction motor with rotor resistance does not have 
high peak currents at starting. No special design may be required.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Drives for Specific Applications
When fed from a variable frequency supply using static frequency controller, 
the motor is versatile and free from all the difficulties stated above. The motor 
does not require any special design. No protective devices are required if there is 
no overheating.
The mounting of the motor is vertical. As oscillations are present on the rotor, 
the air gap must be large. The oscillations may be present in pole change motors 
due to switching. In motors supplied from thyristor converters these are presented 
by the non-sinusoidal current waveforms.
The motors must have humid proof insulation.
7.6 
MACHINE TOOLS
The requirements of motors used for machine tools are:
i. The motors must be reliable and low cost, requiring less maintenance.
ii. They must be capable of speed control. Some applications may require 
operation at fixed speeds. Sometimes stepless and smooth speed control 
is required for better machining timings and surface finish.
iii. 
Starting torque may vary from about 10% to 250% of full load torque 
depending upon the type of machine tool.
iv. The acceleration of the motor should be sufficiently fast to avoid motor 
heating during starting. The braking must also be effective and fast. 
This is because frequent starting and stopping are required. In view of 
safety reasons, braking must be such that exact stopping of the tool is 
assured.
v. The duty cycles are specified for the machine tool operations. The design 
of the machine tool depends upon the duty cycle.
vi. Peak loads of short duration may alternate with light load in certain oper­
ations. A smaller size motor may be selected if a flywheel is used. The 
motor should have sufficient speed regulation to make use of flywheel. 
High slip induction motors or cumulatively compound motors are used.
vii. Variable speed operation with constant torque at all speeds may be 
required in machine tools, such as grinder, planer, polishing, rapid 
reversing, etc. Variable speed operation with constant power also finds 
application.
viii. 
Some machine tools require very high speeds of operation. These are 
high speed grinders.
ix. Numerically controlled machine tools are being preferred to conven­
tional machine tools. These have increased utilisation of the machine. 
The production rate can be increased. These are costly at present, but are 
expected to become economical.
x. The requirements of the drive motor are fast response, wide range of 
speed control, low vibrations, better thermal capacity, low maintenance, 
etc. To have fast response the inertia must be low. They must give precise 
positioning.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
A choice of the motor must be made to meet the above requirements.
Due to the simple, economical and robust construction, realiability and less 
maintenance, squirrel cage motors are suitable for driving machine tools. Till the 
advent of thyristor power converters which are capable of providing variable volt­
age, variable frequency supply, the speed control of these motors was a problem. 
Using power transmission equipment, such as gears, speed variation in steps is 
achieved. Fixed speeds of drive are possible. The vibrations caused affect the 
accuracy of the output. A four pole or six pole motor may be used. A motor with 
larger number of poles has poor power factor, smaller starting torque and lesser 
efficiency. Two pole motors are noisy and have vibrations.
Pole change multi speed motors are available when definite stepped speed 
operation is allowed. These connections are available for constant torque as well 
as constant power operation. They provide high and low speeds.
When smooth speed control is required for better finishing and machine tim­
ing, suitable controls are necessary. The advent of thyristors and associated power 
converters has paved the way for the smooth speed control of ac motors. Both 
constant torque as well as constant power operations are possible. The variable 
frequency converter used for speed control may also be used for starting pur­
poses. Variable frequency starting has advantages and imparts a very good starting 
behaviour. The starting or accelerating torque can be controlled. These are also 
costly at present. The availability of thyristors at reduced prices and in higher rat­
ings may make these drives popular in future.
The kW rating of the motor is decided by the duty cycle. A suitable rating of 
the motor must be selected, having sufficient mechanical overload as well as ther­
mal overload. The motors for duty cycles S1-S6 are listed.
51 Hydraulic pump motors, lubrication pump motor, coolant pump motor.
52 Rapid transverse motor.
53 Main motor for gear shaper, and for drilling machine.
54 Main drive motor in lathes without clutch in the drive, work head motor 
in grinding machine, main drive motor in gear nobbing machine, coolant 
pump motor with frequent starting and stopping.
55 Work head motor in grinding machine with electric braking.
56 Main and feed drive motors with clutch in the drive.
The frequency of starting and stopping decides the type of starter as well as 
the braking method. Slip ring induction motors with rotor resistance starting are 
desirable. If plugging is employed for frequent stopping the motor gets thermally 
overloaded. The motor must be disconnected at zero speed. DC dynamic braking 
can also be employed. This takes more time for braking compared to plugging, 
but the heating is decreased. For safety reasons, along with electrical braking, 
mechanical brakes must also be provided as a standby.
High slip motors are required for use with a flywheel, to drive a load which 
alternates with no-load conditions. When the load is applied the speed should fall 
by 8-10% so that the flywheel can provide a part of power required by the load

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Drives for Specific Applications
from its stored energy. During no-load condition the speeds goes up and flywheel 
stores this energy. Slip ring motors with additional rotor resistance are advanta­
geous. The resistance causes necessary slip. The motor does not get heated. The 
inertia must be specified. When dc motors are employed compound motors with 
cumulative compounding are used.
Motors for numerically controlled machine tools may be specially designed dc 
motors, inverter fed motors or permanent magnet motors.
7.7 
PAPER MILLS
The raw materials for paper making undergo two processes before the paper is 
available: The pulp is made from the raw materials. This pulp is converted to 
paper in paper making machines. The drives required for making pulp are differ­
ent from those required for paper making.
The conversion of raw materials to pulp is accomplished either completely by 
mechanical process or by a combination of chemical and mechanical processes.
When the pulp is made by purely mechanical means, the logs of wood cut to 
1 m length are ground in big grinding machines. The grinders operate at a con­
stant speed, the speed of operation being in the range of 200-300 rpm. No speed 
control is required. No load starting of the grinders is possible. The power ratings 
of the motor required are relatively large. The grinders require a very large power 
and low speed. For such operation, synchronous motors are useful. Geared drives 
may be used for reduction in speed. A cycloconverter fed synchronous motor can 
be operated at low speeds and the gears can be completely dispensed with. The 
problems of starting can also be avoided. A converter fed synchronous motor is 
also suitable. The motors can drive the load from a separate chamber and are pro­
tected from the humid atmosphere.
In the second process, which combines mechanical and chemical processes, 
the logs of wood are first chopped into smaller pieces. These are treated with suit­
able chemicals, simultaneously beating the pieces to pulp by means of beaters. 
The beaters require starting on load and against a large inertia, due to a large disc 
on which the knives are mounted. The load characteristics of the beaters are also 
random. The speed of operation is less than 200 rpm.
The rating of the motor ranges to thousands of watts. For driving beat­
ers, slip ring induction motors are suitable. The desired starting torque of the 
motor can be achieved by a proper rotor resistance. For processes, such as 
chipping and refining, synchronous motors are employed as they are available 
in large power ratings. An s.f.c. fed synchronous motor may be employed for 
beaters.
The conversion of pulp is effected in several stages or sections. In these sec­
tions the water is removed from the pulp and it is pressed to sheets of paper which 
are finally wound up on a mandrel. These sections are wire (couch) section, press­
ing section, dryer, calender and reel section.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The paper making machine should satisfy the following requirements.
i. The speed of the paper machine must be constant in view of economy 
while forming the sheets of paper.
ii. A speed control range of 10:1 is required so that it is suitable for per­
forming several jobs.
iii. The speeds of individual sections should be varied independently to 
allow an elongation of 5% of the web on the wet end of the paper. The 
quality of the paper is decided by this elongation. To allow free hang­
ing of the web between sections, at the dry end of the paper a definite 
amount of tension is required and it must be regulated. The successive 
sections must be run at speeds with a definite difference. This relative 
speed between the sections also affects the pull on the paper. It must be 
regulated so that there is no tearing of the paper.
iv. The arrangement should be capable of taking up sag.
v. Even with correct speeds in the last two sections, uneven drying of the 
paper may cause variations in tension, which must be taken care of by 
suitable tension control.
vi. The motor must be capable of inching in order that the wire be cleaned up.
vii. Every section must be able to run at crawling speeds.
viii. The starting and acceleration of the sections must be smooth as well as 
quick. The starting system should be such that peaks of starting current 
may be avoided, besides obtaining sufficiently high accelerating torques 
for fast acceleration.
The paper making may employ either group drive or individual drive for sev­
eral sections. In the group drive a line shaft is driven by the motor with different 
gear arrangements or belts as power transmitting equipment to drive different 
stages of paper making.
The drive motor may be either a dc motor or ac motor. DC motors having 
Ward Leonard speed control provide a lossless smoothly variable speed for the 
sections. Ac motors controlled from variable frequency sources are available 
now-a-days and they can provide the required lossless smooth speeds. In con­
ventional ac systems an ac commutator motor may be used for stepless speed 
control. This is more compact when compared to a Ward Leonard controlled dc 
motor. The constancy of speed required for a paper mill cannot be maintained 
with an ac commutator motor, as the speed of the motor falls with load on the 
motor. The speed range is limited. It has sluggish transient behaviour compared 
to a dc drive.
With dc motors, static Ward Leonard control can also be employed.
In the case of individual drives each section has its own drive motor. The 
speeds of these motors are varied by means of voltage variation. The changes 
in the speeds of a motor with respect to the others can be achieved by field 
control.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Drives for Specific Applications
A comparison of group drive and individual drive for paper making is given 
below:
Group drive 
Individual drive
1. Only one motor to do all the jobs. Cost 
is low as far as the motor is concerned. 
But the additional transmitting devices 
affect this saving.
2. Automatic closed loop control for 
correcting the speed variations is not 
possible. The speed variations may be 
caused by the slipping of belts.
3. The speed difference between sections 
(draw) must be constant in paper mills. If 
the speed difference changes due to any 
of the reasons the correction is difficult.
4. Draw actually decides the quality of the 
paper. Or depending upon the quality of 
the paper draw is set. It is difficult to set 
the draw repeatedly.
5. In case of formation of loop it can be 
removed only by means of repeated 
trial and error correction by affecting 
draw setting. The rate at which the loop 
is removed depends on speed.
6. Crawling speeds for checking up re­
paired sections are difficult.
7. Inching reverse facility to clear fanning 
of paper in dryer is not there.
8. Dangerous for the operator.
9. Overloading of a particular section 
overloads the drive motor continuously 
till the motor breaks down.
Every section has its own drive motor. 
Cost is more as far as the motors are 
concerned.
Automatic control is possible for correct­
ing any speed variations.
This can be accomplished very easily.
It is possible to set the draw setting 
required for a desired quality of paper 
repeatedly.
It can be removed by changing the speed 
of one section without affecting draw set­
ting. It is constant at all speeds.
Are easily accomplished.
It is possible to have this facility.
The protection of each section can be very 
easily accomplished. The section cannot 
be put into work unless it has sound safety 
conditions. Only that section which is 
faulty needs shut down.
Overloading of a section affects that sec­
tion only and can be switched off once it 
goes beyond safety conditions.
7.8 
COALMINES
The motors used for coal mining must be flame proof. They operate at high ambi­
ent temperatures. Sometimes the environment may be humid and the motors 
should have humid proof insulation. The motor must satisfy very stringent speci­
fications.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The motors used in coal mines can be classified into two groups. The motors 
in the first group are drives for mine auxiliaries such as compressors, pumps, etc. 
The motors of the second group are used to drive the cutters, drillers, etc., which 
are directly used in the process of mining.
To determine the rating of the motor the load diagram must be known. One of 
the criteria discussed in Chapter 5 may be used to determine the rating.
The motors used for direct mining process must satisfy the following require­
ments:
i. Coal cutting or drilling machines do not require any speed control.
ii. High starting torque may be required. High torque squirrel cage motors 
(double cage) find application as drives for coal cutting equipment.
For haulage purpose the motors must be able to start a large drum. They also 
require a high starting torque. The load is hauled up a gradient. The motor must be 
capable of frequent starts and stops. The hauling takes place in stages. If a clutch 
is used, a heavy starting torque may not be required. Constant torque and constant 
power operations of the motor may be required. To meet these requirements the 
best suited motor is a slip ring motor started with rotor resistance starter, which 
limits the starting current, besides giving a high starting torque.
As mine winder (motor) the following motors find application:
Ward Leonard controlled dc motor. Slip ring motor with rotor resistance control.
The drive speed of the mine winders must be precisely controlled. The choice 
of the motor rating is based on the load diagram or duty cycle of the mine winder. 
A typical load diagram of a mine winder is shown in Fig. 7.9. The duty cycle is 
such that the mine winder starts from zero speed. It is accelerated to rated speed, 
which is maintained constant for a period of time. The motor is braked to deceler­
ate the load to zero speed. The next cycle starts after a rest period. The drive motor 
should have sufficient starting torque to start the winder on load. This torque has 
a constant component and accelerating torque. Some regeneration is possible dur­
ing braking. The torque due to the rope weight must be balanced. The torque/time 
diagram in Fig. 7.9 is simplified and does not consider this. The power diagram 
can be determined, using which the rating of the motor can be determined, based 
on the methods described in Chapter 5. While deriving this power diagram, speed 
changes must be taken into consideration. The typical power curve shown in Fig.
7.9 assumes constant speed and hence it is made up of striaght lines. Based on this 
also, a slip ring motor with rotor resistance starter is best suited.
The centrifugal pumps are used in mines for several jobs. The drive motors 
used for these pumps have been discussed in detail. For fan drives normal squirrel 
cage motors may be used.
7.9 
CENTRIFUGAL PUMPS
Centrifugal pumps are used as boiler feed pumps and for pumping water in water 
pipe lines. The former must be adapted to the variable output of the steam genera­
tor. In the latter, varying water requirements of an area decide the delivery rate.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Drives for Specific Applications
Fig. 7.9 
Typical duty cycle of mine hoist (winder)
The delivery rate of a pump is regulated by its speed. A variable speed drive 
system is required to drive the centrifugal pumps.
The requirements of a centrifugal pump load are:
i. 
Starting: A smooth starting of the load may be imperative so that no 
pressure surges exist in the hydraulic system. Also, the starting of the 
motor must avoid current peaks in the supply system while providing 
starting torque required by the load.
ii. 
Operating safety— Flexibility: The system used should have operating 
safety and flexibility. In case of any failure in the system the system must 
be able to drive the load so that continuity is maintained.
iii. 
Available power and speeds: The centrifugal pumps are developed for all 
powers and speeds. Speeds up to 1800 rpm are there. In some excep­
tional cases speeds of 3600 rpm, 6000 rpm are required.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
iv. 
Power Consumption: The drive motor used is based on the power 
requirement. The speed control is required over a wide range. The power 
consumption must be optimum.
Based on the above requirements, wound rotor induction motors with sub- 
synchronous converter cascade in the rotor circuit and converter fed synchronous 
motors are used very widely as the drives for centrifugal pumps. Even though 
dc motors fed from converters are versatile in smooth starting and smooth speed 
control they cannot be developed for high power and high speeds due to the com­
mutator. Hence they are very seldom used as drives for centrifugal pumps.
7.9.1 
Suitability of a Wound Rotor Induction Motor with Subsynchronous 
Converter Cascade in the Rotor Circuit
The following points favour the application of a slip ring motor having static 
slip energy recovery scheme in the rotor circuit, to drive a centrifugal pump 
(Fig. 7.10).
i. The delivery rate control of the pump is accomplished by speed control 
of the pump. The speed control of the motor is done by recovering the 
slip energy to the mains. The system has no slip losses, i.e., losses occur­
ring due to drop in speed. Therefore the power requirement of the drive 
is to drive the load, plus converter and motor losses only. Based on the 
power consumption the system is preferred as it is very efficient.
ii. A very smooth stepless control is possible, to avoid surges in the hydrau­
lic system due to switching the pump sets on and off.
iii. Design capacity of static converter; the advantage of subsynchronous 
converter cascade in the rotor of an induction motor over the stator fed
Fig. 7.10(a) 
Closed loop control of slip energy recovery schemes

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Drives for Specific Applications
converter drives is that the static converter cascade need not be rated 
for full rating of the motor. The rating of the converter depends upon 
the range of speed control required below synchronous speed. As the 
speed range is limited to 30-50% the converter cascade also needs to be 
rated for 30-50% of the full rating. However the converter should be so 
designed that it is capable of conducting the highest possible current at 
high speed and withstanding the highest possible voltage at the lowest 
speed. To accomplish this the actual design rating of the converter cas­
cade is slightly greater than the slip power.
As the highest current and highest voltage do not occur simultane­
ously, the design rating of the converter cascade can be reduced by 
switchable cascades.

The McGraw Hill Companies
S6
Fig. 7.10(c) 
Static Kramer control with a possibility for reversal and regeneration
iv. 
Starting: Smooth starting of the motor is possible. The torque can be 
regulated by means of link current of cascade. The starting current peaks 
are not there.
v. 
Operating safety and flexibility: The system has increased operating safety 
and provides flexible availability of the installation. In case of cascade 
converter failure and in any other emergency condition, it is possible 
to run the motor having speed control by means of varying the rotor 
resistance employed for starting. However the rotor resistance must have 
been designed to serve both the jobs. This possibility is not there with 
other systems.
There is another flexibility of operation in using a converter cascade. 
A given unit can be used with several induction motors and hence fewer 
converter cascades than pumps may be used. This is feasible if all pumps 
do not require speed control at the same time. Only that pump which

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Drives for Specific Applications 
^ ^ 3
requires speed control is used with the cascade and the pump which does 
not require speed control is used with normal induction motor. The pump 
to be regulated can be chosen at will and consequently the installation 
has a very highly flexible control.
vi. The system can be developed for all power ranges and speeds of cen­
trifugal pumps. The highest speed that is available is 1800 rpm and in 
exceptional cases this can be extended to 3600 rpm. Subsynchronous 
converter cascade is superior to converter fed dc motors with respect to 
this criterion. It is however inferior to converter fed synchronous motors 
which are available for speeds up to 6000 rpm.
vii. To improve the performance, the following modifications are made in the 
development of the converter. A 12 pulse converter (Fig. 7.11) may be 
used to decrease the amplitude of pulsating torques and harmonic losses 
in the motor. The 12 pulse inverter presents only higher order harmonics 
and the line voltage distortion will be small. The pulsating torques are 
affected by the number of pulses of the rectifier. The 12 pulse arrange­
ment of the inverter decreases the torque pulsation by decreasing the 
stator current and voltage distortion. 12 pulse inverters are required if the 
short circuit rating of the mains is lower than that of the motor. It is also 
required if the line is such that the harmonics of the inverter are capable 
of causing distortion.
viii. The main disadvantage of converter cascades is poor power factor due to 
phase control of the line side inverter. Methods have been developed to
Stator
-d
Starting equipment
Fig. 7.11(a) 
Twelve pulse inverter in the rotor circuit for slip power recovery

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
¥
_
0
Í "
A ï
T Î Î
£
 
Í
I
ï <
>
t
1
—
____
i
■
r
I f f
Fig. 7.11(b) 
Schematic of a 12-pulse converter to be used with ac drives
improve the power factor. One of these methods is the sequential control 
of the inverter on the line side. Sequential operation improves the power 
factor by requiring reduced reactive power.
7.9.2 Converter Fed Synchronous Motor Drive for Centrifugal Pumps
Converter fed synchronous motor satisfies all the above discussed criteria and has 
application to driving centrifugal pumps. Compared to the slip ring rotor with 
converter cascade this has advantages of:
i. higher speed of operation up to 6000 rpm
ii. the simple converter due to machine commutation (with commutation 
assistance only at low speeds)
iii. the line power factor is better than converter cascade
iv. The features of soft starting and possibility of achieving a gearless drive 
both at very low and high speeds.
7.10 TURBOCOMPRESSORS
The turbocompressors and blowers in the industry require drives rated up to 40 
MW. Drives of large rating are also required
— in steel industry blast furnace blowers
— in natural gas pipelines and liquefaction processes
— in wind tunnels
— chemical process industry.
in the upper power range a converter fed synchronous motor is a suitable drive 
for compressors. The application fields of synchronous motors as variable speed 
drives are increasing due to variable frequency converters.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Drives for Specific Applications
When used with turbocompressors the frequency converter may be used for 
performing one or more of the following:
i. only starting the compressor
ii. for operating the compressor at a speed higher than the one correspond­
ing to rated frequency.
iii. for speed control of the motor.
Dc link converter fed synchronous motor can be used for the above applica­
tions. A dc link converter performs the function of a variable frequency converter. 
Two converters one on the line side and the other on the motor side are connected 
by a dc link inductance which keeps the current constant and acts as a decoupling 
agent between the converters. The converter on the mains is a line commutated 
phase controlled converter. The machine side converter is simple in its structure, 
as it makes use of machine voltages for its commutation. Thus the forced com­
mutation circuit is dispensed with. The converter facilitates power flow in the 
reverse direction also, i.e., from machine to line. In this case the functions of the 
converters interchange.
The features of this drive are:
i. Four quadrant operation is straightforward. Speed and torque available 
in both directions.
ii. At low speeds the machine commutation is not possible. Special meth­
ods of commutation may be required up to 5 Hz. Beyond 5 Hz machine 
commutation takes over.
iii. 
Smooth variable frequency starting of the motor is possible. Frequency 
variation in the range 0-100 Hz is possible.
Large synchronous motors are required to drive the compressors. Problems 
arise with synchronous motors as their power ratings increase, especially when 
the motor rating is greater than the short circuit rating of the power system. These 
are more significant when synchronous starting is employed. These problems and 
disadvantages of a synchronous (line) starting can be eliminated using a static 
frequency changer. When the load torque is high, a very high starting torque is 
required. This high value of starting torque is achieved with a very high value of 
starting current, e.g, five times full load current may be required. In synchronous 
starting using static frequency converter (s.f.c), the required starting torque can be 
obtained at relatively low value of current (1.5 times full load value). The accel­
eration starts from zero speed and the stator frequency is gradually increased so 
that rotor is always in synchronism with the stator field. The voltage dips on the 
mains are automatically eliminated.
/
In asynchronous starting the energy stored in the rotating parts
1
\
- J W 2 
% 2
calls for increased thermal rating of the rotor due to difference in the speeds of 
rotor and stator field. When this type of starting is used for synchronous motors 
driving turbocompressors or blowers, very high rotational energy is stored and 
hence the rotor of the motor is heavily thermally loaded. But the rotors of salient

The McGraw-Hill Companies
WUMm 
Electric Drives
pole motors have limited thermal capacity. Starting by means of s.f.c. is suitable 
here.
Another advantage gained by s.f.c. is that one unit can be used to start several 
motors if speed control is not required (Fig. 7.12). The s.f.c. brings the motor to 
rated speed and the motor is synchronised to mains and the motor continues to run 
at synchronous speed. The s.f.c. can be used to start other motors.
When used for starting purposes on s.f.c. should be designed according to
i. number of startings required
ii. starting time
iii. starting torque
If the load torque of the compressor can be by disconnected by some means 
during starting the converter becomes very compact.
A static frequency converter can be used to provide a frequency which gives 
operating speeds of 6000 rpm at power ranges of 10 MW. The motors are avail­
able for this speed. Direct driving without gears is possible. The s.f.c. used per­
forms both starting and running at high speed.
The s.f.c. can also be used for speed control. The speed can be varied over a 
wide range (0-base speed). Above base speed there is flux weakening. The speed 
control varies the delivery rate of the pump or blower. The power consumption by 
this method of regulation is low. A constant delivery rate can also be achieved by 
running the motor at constant speed.
Fig. 7.12 
Closed loop control of CSI fed synchronous motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Drives for Specific Applications
To summarize, an s.f.c. eliminates starting problem, makes a motor run at 
a speed higher than base speed, avoids power transmission equipment such as 
gears, and permits speed control over a wide range. An s.f.c. provides favourable 
start-up and acceleration so that the disturbances on the power system are least. 
The s.f.c. also prevents a synchronous motor from delivering fault or surge current 
when short circuit occurs on the mains. This saves switchgear.
When a synchronous motor uses s.f.c. for speed control, some reactions occur 
on the network:
i. 
Power factor: Although the machine side converter receives its reactive 
power from the motor, the line side converter receives its reactive power 
for commutation and control from the mains. The line power factor is 
poor as the firing angle increases. The mains power factor deteriorates as 
the speed is varied. The power factor is low at low speeds. At the rated 
speed only a reasonable power factor is possible.
ii. 
Harmonics: The mains and motor current are rich in harmonics.
iii. Twelve pulse circuits (Fig. 7.11) may be employed to eliminate lower 
order harmonics and consequent pulsating torques. However the higher 
order harmonics are present and they have negligible effect. This also 
has the advantage that the outlay of thyristors decreases as two convert­
ers feed the motor.
iv. The torque pulsations may cause torsional vibrations. These may be pre­
vented by suitable shaft design.
The system has a high degree of reliability. The availability of thyristors at 
reduced prices and higher voltages and current ratings makes the s.f.c. very popu­
lar. Modular construction is also possible, in which repair and fault finding are 
easy and quick. In the case of applications where the interruption of equipment 
would cause very grave consequences, the principle of redundancy may be used. 
Extra equipment such as thyristors may be used which permit the continuity of 
service in case of failure.
In short, a synchronous motor with static variable frequency converter using 
thyristors is becoming very popular. The s.f.c. functions as starting equipment as 
well as unit for speed control. This is used with compressors, blowers and pumps.
7.11 
SUMMARY OF THYRISTORISED AC AND DC DRIVES
A detailed discussion of dc and ac drives has been provided with respect to indus­
trial applications detailed in the previous sections. An evaluation of dc and ac 
drives leads to the following conclusions.
At present the converter fed ac drives are competing with converter fed dc 
drives. The highest installed capacity and highest speed of operation are lim­
ited by the commutation of the motor. The commutation of a dc motor dete­
riorates when supplied from a converter, due to ripple content of the armature 
current as well as possible discontinuous conduction. The speed control of an ac 
motor over a wide range in a smooth manner has become an easy task, with the

Table 7.3 
Thyristorised AC Drives: A Swnmary
Drive system (1)
Type o f 
Converter (2)
Direction of 
rotation (3)
Regen­
eration
(4)
Power factor
(5)
Max
Speed
(6)
Max. of 
conv. freq.
(7)
Speed range 
(8)
Field 
weaken­
ing (9)
Application (10)
Cycloconverter fed 
synchronous motor 
(cycloconverter 
induction motor)
Line commu­
tated cyclocon­
verter
2
2
Lagging, 
similar to 
converter fed 
dc motor 
drive
1/3 to 0.5
supply
frequency
0 to (0.33 
to 0.5) «s
Yes
1. Gearless drive for large 
tube and bowl mills
2. Mine winders
3. Reversing rolling mills
4. Ship propellor
5. Large reciprocating 
compressors
Wound rotor induc­
tion motor with sub/ 
super synchronous 
converter cascade
Line commu­
tated
2
2
Lagging to 
leading
1/3 to 0.5
supply
frequency
0.9 to 1.1
n_
0.5 to 1.5
n
S
No
1. Network interconnect­
ing converters
2. Flywheel converters
3. Drivers with high rat­
ings in the low speed 
range
Wound rotor induc­
tion motor with sub/ 
supersyn-chronous 
converter cascade
Indirect con­
verter DC Link 
converter Line 
commutated
1
1
Lagging 
similar to 
converter fed 
dc motor
Supply
frequency
1  
"
 °-7 n
s
1 -  0.3 n
S
No
1. Centrifugal pumps
2. Blowers
Converter fed syn­
chronous motor
DC link 
converter Line/ 
machine 
commutated
2
2
Lagging 
similar to 
converter fed 
dc motor
120 Hz
0.05 -1 n 
0 - 1  n S
S
Yes
1. As start up converter 
for large synch, ma­
chines
2. Boiler feed pumps
3. Turbocompressors
4. Continuous rolling 
mills
mn>n
nO
ID
l/l
The McGraw-Hill Companies

Cage induc­
tion motors 
with voltage 
source in­
verter
DC Link converter 
with dc voltage link 
forced commutation 
at motor end with 
pulse duration modu­
lation. Non-controlled 
at line side.
2
Approx. 
0.85-0.92 
lagging over 
complete 
speed range
200 Hz
0-/7
s
Diverse drives primarily 
where several motors con­
nected to the same converter 
are running at coordinated 
speeds, up to approx. 2 MW.
Reversible converter at 
line side.
2
2
Controlled at mains 
end forced commuta­
tion
2
2
Lagging to 
leading
At present traction drives.
Cage motor 
with cur­
rent source 
inverter
DC Link converter 
with dc current link 
forced commutation 
at motor end
2
2
Lagging 
somewhat 
worse than 
converter 
fed dc drive
120 Hz
(.05 to 1.0)
n 0-/7
S 
S
Yes
Pumps blowers test-beds up 
to 2 MW.
Open.end.drives
Column 3: ‘2’ indicates continuous change over to other direction of rotation without switching. ‘ 1 ’ the possibility of changing direction 
of phase switching.
Column 5: Lagging to leading indicates reactive power absorption/supply possible acting as a motor and as a generator preferably with 
cos (J) = 1.
Column 6: Max. speed limited by converter in case of converter fed syn motor and by motor in other systems. Max. speed decreases as 
power increases.
Column 8: Top values are preferred. Supersynchronous braking possible.
Drives for Specific Applications

Table 7.4 
Comparison of performance of Electrical Drives
S.No.
Ward
Static Ward Leonard
Rotor
resistance
control
Armature
voltage
control
Slip energy
Stator frequency control
Cyclo-
converter
CS1
Sychronous motor
Cyclo-
Leonard
Chopper
Phase
controlled
recovery
PWM
Square
wave
Cyclo­
converter
Self-
control
converter
1.
Speed
1 : 10
1 : 20
1 : 20
1 :2
1 : 5
1 : 5
1 : 00
1 : 20
1 : 20
1 : 4
1 : 20
1 : 4
range
2.
Speed
below
belo w
belo w
poor
poor
below
belo w  5 %
below
below
below
n il.
n il.
regulation
5%
5 %
5 %
5 %
5 %
5 %
5 %
3.
Con stan t
above
above
above
suitable
suitable
above
above
above
suitable
below
pow er load
base
base
base
above
base
base
base
speed
speed
speed
base speed
speed
speed
speed
4.
Con stan t
below
below
below
suitable
suitable
suitable
below
below
below
below
below
below
torque load
base
base
base
base speed
base
base
base
base
base
speed
speed
speed
speed
speed
speed
speed
speed
5.
V ariab le
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
not
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
torque
loads
suitable
6.
So ft starting
p o ssib le
p o ssib le
p o ssib le
p o ssib le
p o ssib le
p o ssib le
p o ssib le
p o ssib le
p o ssib le
p o ssib le
7.
Frequent 
starts and 
stops
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
8.
Frequent
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
speed
w ith
w ith
w ith
reversals
regen-
regenera-
regenera-
eration
tion
tion
m
TOn
nO
<'
TO
l/l
The McGraw-Hill Companies

9.
P e rio d ic 
accelera­
tion and 
retardation
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
10.
Better e f­
ficie n cy
Y e s
Y e s
Y e s
N o
N o
Y e s
11.
A c c u ra c y  
o f speed 
control
up to 1%
up to 1%
up to 1 %
2 .5 %
2 to 5 %
less than 
1 %
12.
F o r opera­
tion in co n ­
tam inated 
atm osphere
p o ssib le
w ith
reserva­
tion
p o ssib le  
w ill res­
ervation
p o ssib le
w ith
reserva­
tion
Su itab le
Su itab le
suitable
13.
M ainte­
nance
co stly 
due to 
frequent 
m ainte­
nance.
frequent 
m ainte­
nance is 
required.
Frequent 
m ain te­
nance is 
required
less
easy
easy
14.
po w erfac-
tor
does not 
arise
go od  i f  
diode 
rectifier 
is em ­
ployed .
poor but 
can be 
im pro ved
good
poor
poor but 
can be 
im proved
15.
B ra k in g
D y n a m ic
D y n a m ic
D y n a m ic
a ll
p lu g -
a ll
m ethods
and
regen­
eration
and
regenera­
tion
and
regenera­
tion
k in d s o f
electric
b ra k in g
g in g
k in d s o f
electric
b ra k in g

suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
Y e s
Y e s
Y e s
Y e s
Y e s
Y e s
less than
less than
less
less than
less
less
1 %
1 %
than
1 %
than
than
1 %
1 %
1%
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
suitable
easy
easy
easy
easy
easy
easy
go od  i f  
diode 
rectifier is 
used
poor
poor
poor
poor
poor
d yn am ic
d yn am ic
d yn am ic
regen-
regen-
regen-
and regen-
and
and
eration
eration
eration
eration
regen-
regen-
eration
eration
Drives for Specific Applications

The McGraw Hill Companies
e g
Electric Drives
development and sophisticated control of thyristor power converters. With this 
possibility, the tendency to make use of simple, economical and robust squir­
rel cage motors as variable speed drives is increasing. Therefore in industrial 
applications the inverter fed induction motors have become real competitors to 
converter fed dc drives even in the range of speeds and ratings where dc drives 
are still applicable. Beyond this range, which is substantially wider, only ac 
drives are employed. The synchronous motor, when self controlled, has proper­
ties of a dc motor and is free from its hunting and stability problems. Further it 
has an advantage that its power factor can be varied by varying the excitation. 
When operated at unity power factor the inverter size decreases as the current to 
be handled is minimum. When over excited the motor operates at leading power 
factors and machine voltages can be used for the commutation of the inverter. 
The commutation circuit is not necessary. Accordingly the inverter configura­
tion is simple. For high speeds and large power ratings synchronous motors are 
suitable. For low speed, large power reversible drives, cycloconverter fed ac 
drives are widely employed.
Therefore within the range of speed control where a dc drive or an ac drive 
can be employed, they satisfy the functional requirements of a drive. The choice 
between the two must therefore be based on some other criteria, generally econ­
omy. The other criteria such as environmental conditions, maintenance consider­
ations, location of the motor and network reactions will also influence the choice 
of the drive system.
The features of dc and ac drives along with their applications in industry are 
summarized in Tables 7.3 and 7.4.
H
— Multiple-Choice Questions
“■X
J
7.1 
A spinning motor in a textile mill
should have
(a) a very good peak torque capability
(b) moderate starting torque and 
uniform acceleration
(c) high starting torque and peak 
torques
(d) a very good starting torque
7.2 
To have uniform acceleration the
motor should have
(a) flat speed torque curve
(b) a speed torque curve with a small 
difference between peak torque 
and starting torque
(c) very high starting torque
(d) very high peak torque and low 
starting torque
7.3 
Dc drives in the steel rolling mills are
slowly being replaced by
(a) variable 
frequency 
induction 
motors with torque and speed 
control
(b) variable frequency synchronous 
motor fed from a load commu­
tated CSI
(c) variable frequency ac motors 
with regeneration capabilities
(d) variable speed induction motor 
with chopper controlled resis­
tance in the rotor circuit.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
7.4 
A drive motor for continuous mills
(a) must be capable of two quadrant 
operation
(b) must be capable of four quadrant 
operation
(c) operates only in one direction, 
reverse rotation is not necessary
(d) must be a very high speed motor.
7.5 
For applications in cranes
(a) differentially compounded motors 
are suitable
(b) cumulatively compounded motors 
are suitable
(c) dc shunt motors are suitable
(d) dc series motors are suitable.
7.6 
A kiln motor in a cement mill
(a) must be a constant speed motor
(b) must be able to have creeping 
speeds
(c) need not have very large over­
load capacity
(d) has very low power requirement.
7.7 
For fans and blowers in cement mills
(a) variable 
frequency 
induction 
motor may be employed
(b) three phase induction motor with 
chopper controlled resistance is 
suitable
(c) DC motors with field control are 
suitable
(d) the three phase slip ring induc­
tion motors with slip energy 
recovery schemes are very well 
employed with advantages.
7.8 
To drive a centrifuge in sugar mills
the most suited system is
(a) a solid rotor induction motor 
with stator voltage control
(b) a normal commercially available 
induction motor fed from a volt­
age controller
Drives for Specific Applications
(c) a slip ring induction motor with 
slip energy recovery scheme
(d) a slip ring induction motor with 
rotor resistance control.
7.9 
When an oversized motor is used the 
energy saving can be accomplished 
on light load portion duty cycles 
when
(a) the motor is controlled from a 
variable frequency variable volt­
age converters
(b) the motor is controlled from a 
constant frequency variable volt­
age converter such as three phase 
voltage controller
(c) the motor is fed from conven­
tional speed control systems
(d) the motor is controlled on the 
rotor side
7.10 For a mine winder the suitable 
choice is
(a) an induction motor with stator 
voltage variation
(b) a self controlled CSI fed syn­
chronous motor
(c) a dc motor with Ward Leonard 
control
(d) a squirrel cage motor with ac 
voltage controller
7.11 For centrifugal pumps the most suit­
able drive system is
(a) wound rotor induction motor with 
slip energy recovery schemes
(b) wound rotor induction motor 
with rotor resistance control 
using a chopper
(c) vector controlled three phase 
induction motor
(d) self controlled CSI fed synchro­
nous motor.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
References
7.1 
Pillai, S.K., A first course on electrical drives, Wiley Eastern, 1982.
7.2 
Mukherjee, K.K., DC drives and controls and application in rolling mills, Electrical 
India, XIV, p. 13, 1974.
7.3 
Sarkar, B.P., ‘Electrical equipment for main drives of reverse cold rolling mills’, 
Journal o f IE (India), 56, Pt.E1.2, p. 57, 1975.
7.4 
Wurgler, H.V., ‘Electrical drives for rotary cement kilns’, Brown Boweri Review, 58, 
p. 106, 1971.
7.5 
Harverydrake, W., and H.L Prescott, ‘Controlled torque starting of textile machin­
ery’, IEEE Trans, on Ind. and Gen. Appl., IGA-7, p. 267, 1971.
7.6 
Pabidri, M.S., ‘Electric motors for textile industry’, Electrical India, XVII, No. 24, 
p.35, 1977.
7.7 
Wagle, A.V., ‘Electrical Drives for coal mining’, Electrical India, XIX, No. 16, p. 17, 
1979.
7.8 
Stemmier, H., and A. Meyer, ‘Variable speed converter fed three phase drives’, 
B.B.C. Review, 1982, p.l 14.
7.9 
Temes, L., J. Bommeli, and K. Peters, ‘The cycloconverter fed synchronous motor’, 
ibid, p. 122.
7.10 Sharpenberg, H., and A. Streck, ‘Subsynchronous converter cascade for large cen­
trifugal pumps’, ibid, p. 142.
7.11 Meyer, A., El. Schweickhardt, and P. Strozzi, ‘The converter fed synchronous motor 
as a variable speed drive system’, ibid, p. 151.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
M icroprocessors
and Control of
Electrical Drives
___________________________________ ___________________________________ /
8.1 
INTRODUCTION
Conventionally, control of thyristor converter fed electrical drives (both dc and 
ac) is performed using analog discrete components. In the drive control, conven­
tional speed control systems have been improved continuously and gradually in 
terms of their control performance, as the control devices have changed from 
magnetic amplifiers to transistors and IC amplifiers. This hardware oriented con­
trol of drives becomes more and more complex with the increase in sophistica­
tions required, i.e. the requirements of high precision, performance and reliability. 
The various controllers, the control circuits for the power converters are realised 
using hardware oriented circuits. The control suffers from the drift and parameter 
variations of the components due to temperature and the improvement is rather 
limited. However, the control has the advantage that it is capable of processing the 
signals almost simultaneously.
Because of the involved complexity and the limitations of improvement in per­
formance due to drift problems, several sophisticated methods of controlling ac 
motors, such as vector control of induction motors, did not become popular until 
the developments in the area of drive technology, which have been very rapid 
in the recent past. With these the control is possible with fewer components with 
the advantages of easy maintenance, economy, serviceability and general appli­
cability. Also this rapid and fast development of digital technology has been the 
opening for new concepts of control using microprocessors and associated digital 
components, A/D converters, etc. These have resulted in compact control systems 
for drives which effectively replace the complex hardware oriented control using 
analog discrete components.
The digital processing of speed and angular position is more exact and less 
expensive than analog processing, which makes use of tachogenerators and posi­
tion transducers. The control is free from drift and parameter variations. The main 
feature of digital control with microprocessors stems from the fact that it is mainly 
software oriented. When once the necessary algorithms are developed, the soft­
ware can be used for different plants with only a few modifications. This is not 
possible with dedicated hardware control.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The drive technology using thyristor converter fed dc or ac motors, as 
expected, has become very popular owing to the developments in the area of 
thyristor technology, high speed digital systems, microprocessors and, micro­
computers. The future has already begun for the use of microprocessors and 
microcomputers in the area of drives. Sophisticated controls of these drives with 
high performance and reliability, complicated hardware oriented controls, such 
as four quadrant operation of dc motors using dual converters, field orientation 
or vector control both in constant flux and flux weakening modes of induction 
motors and margin angle control of synchronous motors can be realised with 
software programs on the microprocessor and microcomputers with least pos­
sible hardware. This hardware includes the interfacing of the microprocessor to 
the system. Sometimes to reduce the burden on the microprocessor and to make 
it available to perform other functions effectively, the firing circuits with neces­
sary pulse transformers are realised in terms of hardware. The sensor measuring 
the terminal quantities must be interfaced through proper A/D converters. The 
controls become economically feasible. Various controllers in the closed loop 
controls can be realised on the microprocessor by means of software programs. 
Optimised PWM strategies for the ac motor can be realised. Advances of new 
digital techniques make it possible to manage different operating conditions. 
Microprocessors can be very easily adopted in the parameter identification and 
adaptation problems using machine models. A slip energy recovery scheme for 
both super and subsynchronous operation using vector control can be realised 
using high performance processors.
Various sophistications in the control of synchronous motors have also become 
feasible. One such sophistication is on-line determination or estimation of the 
rotor position without any rotor position sensor on the shaft. The identification 
and state estimation processes involved are very easily implemented using micro­
processors.
An attempt is made in this chapter to describe the role of microprocessor and 
its function in the control of electrical drive. The architecture and the types of 
microprocessors are not discussed here. A few applications of the microprocessor 
in the dc and ac drives are discussed to bring out clearly the stages involved in the 
design of the control system.
8.2 
DEDICATED HARDWARE SYSTEMS VERSUS 
MICROPROCESSOR CONTROL
The microprocessor control of electric drives offers the following advantages 
when compared to the dedicated hardware control.
As has already been discussed, the use of microprocessors reduces the com­
plexity of the system. The software supported control using microprocessors to 
perform the functions of controllers, feedback, decision making, etc., will eventu­
ally result in the least hardware making the system economically viable. The pres­
ent day developments in this area will make the system cost effective.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
The reliability of the control of the drives is higher with microprocessors than 
with dedicated hardware systems. The number of parts is reduced. Software programs 
are employed for various controls. The control equipment can be realised as a 
unified hardware.
The control is free from drift and parameter variations due to temperature 
while in operation using microprocessors whereas the control is affected by these 
when the control is implemented with dedicated hardware. The calculations are 
exact except for the errors in the A/D converters.
The information can flow in both forward and backward directions. This prop­
erty is very important and has significance in the control using microprocessors. 
Proper shielding may minimise the EMI problems. The control may be extended 
as it is compatible with the host computer.
The speed detection schemes are completely digital, avoiding the errors of 
measurement. This improves the accuracy even at very low speeds. Control effi­
ciency is more. The concepts of modern control theory can be used in the control.
A generalised hardware supported by a flexible software can take care of a 
particular application. The software will have possibilities of addition, deletion 
and upgrading.
Microprocessor control is capable of performing the control functions, such 
as decision making, complicated computations, etc. These enhance the power 
of the microprocessors and are not possible with dedicated hardware. The role 
of a microprocessor is to replace the logic circuits that control the firing angle of 
SCRS. In some instances it performs, in addition, the control computations. Since 
a control cannot be applied until it is calculated or computed, there is invariably 
a delay between the beginning of computation and application of control. In the 
case of SCR control, if the delay is too long the time corresponding to a particular 
firing time may have already passed. The controller must then fire at a different 
instant of time in the present cycle or wait for the correct time in the next cycle. 
A suboptimal control will result in both cases. Thus in order to avoid long delays 
and particularly with slow microprocessors, the control law, if to be implemented 
by a microprocessor, must be simple. Ideally determining the necessary controls 
should require only table look-up operations and any computations should be kept 
to a minimum.
Microprocessor control also permits several other functions, such as data 
acquisition, monitoring and warning, diagnosis, etc. The fault diagnosis of digital 
control systems is easier than that of a dedicated hardware system. It is easy to 
maintain the system. However, the microprocessor control has also certain disad­
vantages.
The communication between the microprocessor and the analog circuitry is 
accomplished by A/D or D/A converters. There are sampling or quantizing errors. 
These, however, can be minimised by increasing the bit size. Care must be taken 
to see that the signal resolution does not suffer.
The response is more sluggish and slower than that of a dedicated hard­
ware. This is mainly because the dedicated hardware can handle the signals

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
and process them almost simultaneously, without any time delay. The micro­
processors on the other hand can process the signals only in a sequence or in 
a serial manner, causing a delay in processing. Higher sophisticated systems, 
using microprocessor control to perform different functions may exhibit stabil­
ity problems. Special techniques are required to enhance the speed and assure 
stable operation.
The development of necessary software may be costly and time consuming. 
The cost may be justified depending on the size of the production.
The variables are not accessible for measurement using instruments. The 
parameters cannot be easily monitored or changed under operating conditions.
Modifications in the system are possible to overcome several of these disad­
vantages. Multiprocessor control increases the speed of the system. Resolution 
can be increased by increasing the bit size. A microprocessor based digital control 
system, which is priced at the same level as an analog control system but com­
pares favourably with the latter in terms of controlability, reliability and available 
functions, has become practical.
8.3 
APPLICATION AREAS AND FUNCTIONS OF MICROPROCESSORS 
IN DRIVE TECHNOLOGY
With the remarkable progress in the area of microelectronics, reliable and power­
ful microprocessors have come to be more widely used in the control of electrical 
drives. A few of the applications of microprocessors in the area of drives can be 
listed as follows:
i. 
Static Ward Leonard control of dc motor using dual converters
ii. Four quadrant control of dc motor using multiphase choppers
iii. Control of PWM inverter for ac motors
iv. Four quadrant operation of CSI fed ac drives
v. Four quadrant operation of cycloconverter fed ac drives
vi. Static motor starters
In variable speed drives using thyristor power converters and electric motors 
(ac or dc) the functions of a microprocessor are the following:
i. Generating and providing firing pulses to the converters
ii. Generation of necessary waveforms to feed the motors
iii. Nonlinear function generation. Estimation of feedback signals. Imple­
mentation of software supported controllers in the feedback control, 
such as current controllers, speed controllers, etc. The limiters are also 
implemented to limit the control variables to safe values
iv. Processing the measured signals, such as voltage, current and speed
v. 
Storing and processing the information of controlled quantities
vi. Estimation of feedback signals and computation of reference quantities 
which cannot be directly measured, such as torque and flux
vii. Identification and adaptation of variable parameters

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
viii. Adaptive control and optimisation
ix. General sequencing control
x. Monitoring and warnings
xi. Diagnostics and tests
8.3.1 
Speed Detection
One important factor in the closed loop control of variable speed drives employ­
ing solid state converters is the speed detection. In the dedicated hardware con­
trol using analog components, the speed sensing is accomplished by means of 
tachogenerator. For control of the drive using a microprocessor, this analog speed 
signal can be converted to digital signal by an A/D converter. This method evi­
dently does not possess the accuracy expected of a digital system. The speed 
measurement must be qualified by high resolution, high accuracy, fast response 
over a wide range of speeds and quick sampling. Such a measuring system can 
be obtained only by using digital techniques. Therefore, in systems employ­
ing microprocessors the speed measurement is carried out by means of a shaft 
encoder or pulse generator, which generates a train of pulses depending upon the 
speed.
The shaft encoder is a circular light aluminium disc mounted on the shaft 
with equidistant holes drilled along the periphery. On the opposite sides of 
the disc are placed a light source and photosensitive electronic device, e.g. a 
phototransistor. These are aligned such that the phototransistor gets light when 
there is a hole across. Light activated phototransistor generates a pulse. Thus 
a pulse train is produced. These pulses are not very sharp and must be shaped 
using suitable circuitry. These pulses are processed in a microprocessor to get 
the actual speed of the motor. There are two methods of determining the speed 
(Fig 8.1).
i. The pulses are counted in a given period of time. This is suitable for high 
speeds.
ii. The interval is measured between two consecutive pulses. Suitable for 
low speeds.
When the speed is determined using these methods, special care must be taken to 
see that the problems such as delay in detecting time at low speed are not there. 
Only with such precautions can low speeds be measured with reasonable accu­
racy. Thus speed control is possible over a widened range.
The high resolution of the speed sensing signifies the stable control over a wide 
range of speeds. The high accuracy of speed measurement improves the steady- 
state control accuracy. The detecting time in the measurement of speed influences 
the sensing of instantaneous speed. If the time is large the results give only aver­
age speed during the time. So, in order to sense the instantaneous speed in the 
transient and dynamic conditions this detecting time must be as small as possible. 
A larger detecting time increases the lag in the speed control system, making it 
difficult to realise stable high speeds.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Encoder disc
ÍÜW ÜUUU1
|<--------------m pulses--------------->|
Train of pulses from 
shaft encoder
Sampling time 
(a)
--------Tl----------------------------------------Tl---------- Clock
\<----------n clock pulses------->1 
...
n 
(b)
Fig. 8.1 
Processing of the encoder pulses to obtain the speed, (a) For high
m
speed N = 6 X 104 -------  M total pulses per revolution (b) For low
MTS
speed N = 6 x 104 ——
Mn
8.3.2 
Gate Firing of the Converters
The firing pulse control unit constitutes the heart of any thyristor power converter. 
The gate pulses required by the thyristors are often derived from the digital pulses 
using a simple buffer unit. Analog firing controllers are used in systems with 
dedicated hardware. They are recommended for constant low frequency operation 
where the firing precision is not critical. They are simple.
However, in variable frequency applications, especially at high frequencies, 
the implementation of firing angle control using analog means is not appropri­
ate. The firing pulses would depend highly on the precision and stability of ana­
log components used, such as resistors, capacitors, linear and nonlinear devices 
responsible for time lags, etc.
The firing pulses cannot be realised with adequate symmetry. The all digital 
controller is free from these drawbacks. Further, a digital controller can be made 
programmable to generate accurate gate pulses in various configurations and to 
perform triggering of thyristors at accurately repeated intervals, independent of

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
frequency with desired symmetry. It is also possible to alter the firing angle on 
line without affecting the symmetry of pulse train.
The requirements of a firing angle controller are:
i. A synchronised triggering output
ii. Thyristor bridge must provide the desired output. Suitable techniques 
such as linear ramp or cosine wave crossing may be employed.
iii. The transients and distortions of the supply voltage waveform should not 
have any effect on the firing angle delay.
iv. The firing angle must be varied in the range 0 to 180°
v. The firing angle control should be smooth and precise. The resolution 
of firing angle decides the sampling frequency when generating firing 
pulses.
vi. The scheme should have enough flexibility to accommodate variation in 
circuit parameters in order to obtain the best performance.
vii. The response of the controller must be very fast.
viii. The controller must have self regulating property when the amplitude of 
supply voltage varies.
ix. A unified or generalised hardware circuit which can be adaptable to any 
type of converter or cycloconverter operating under large variations of 
frequency.
x. The controller must be developed with low hardware content so that it 
can be integrated into a chip. This would reduce the cost and increase the 
potential field of application.
Depending upon the application, suitable software may be written to obtain the 
firing pulses. The method of obtaining the firing pulses to suit a given purpose, 
e.g., for dual converter will be discussed later.
8.3.3 
Feedback Control
A closed loop control of a variable speed drive system employing thyristor 
power converters is normally a discrete time system when a microprocessor is 
implemented for control purposes. The system may be linear or non-linear. The 
power converter itself is a discrete time system due to switching of the thyristors. 
Just as a continuous system is represented by differential equations and Laplace 
transform, a discrete data system can be represented by difference equations and

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Z-transform. The state space equations are difference equations. The speed loop 
and current loop have their own time constants and sampling frequencies. The 
system has multirate sampling. Compared to these the sampling rate of the con­
verter is negligible. The state variable feedback may be employed using the state 
space techniques which can be applied to both linear and nonlinear systems. The 
controllers for such feedback control of a variable speed system are shown in Figs
8.3 and 8.4.
Fig. 8.3 
P./. Controller
Fig. 8.4 
Lag-lead compensator
The microprocessor may be programmed to implement the necessary control­
lers and limiters. These also have their own sampling rates. The compensators in 
the current and speed loops are introduced to improve the behaviour of the sys­
tem. The various controllers and their characteristics are discussed in Chapter 6. 
These are normally PI, PID, or lag-lead compensators. In the hardware oriented 
system using discrete analog components, a controller is specified by its transfer 
function in Laplace transform. In digital control using either digital components 
or microprocessors, a controller is developed based on its time domain difference 
equations. The Laplace transfer function of an analog controller must be suitably 
transformed to time domain difference equations to develop an equivalent digital 
controller. A microprocessor based compensator has the following features:
i. It is cheaper than its analog counterpart.
ii. It offers advanced control capacity. Adaptive control is possible.
iii. It offers significant flexibility. The control parameter or even control 
algorithm can be changed.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives 
■
■
■
iv. It is more compact and lighter than its analog counterpart. Its power con­
sumption is also small.
v. It is highly reliable because the number of components is less and mainly 
supported by software. The noise is also less.
The digital implementation of PI, and lag-lead compensators is shown in Figs
8.3 and 8.4. The equivalent analog compensators are also shown.
The analog compensators limit the output to a safe value as desired due to 
the inherent saturation present. This limiting of the control variables is required 
in the closed loop control system so that the overloading of the components is 
prevented. The control variables are not allowed to have excursions beyond these 
limits. In a microprocessor based controller these limits are stored in the memory. 
Thus the limiting properties of a microprocessor based compensator are adaptable 
to any operating conditions by changing the values in the memory.
8.3.4 
Function Generation and Linearisation
An important aspect of the closed loop control system is the use of non-linear 
functions, e.g. in the control of induction motors there exists a definite non-linear 
relationship between the stator current and slip frequency to maintain a constant 
air gap flux. The function generation can be easily carried out using a micro­
processor. This task is very difficult to implement using discrete analog compo­
nents. Multidimensional functions can also be generated on the micrfoprocessor. 
This function generation can be accomplished by means of a look-up table in the 
computer memory. If the microprocessor is sufficiently fast the function genera­
tion can be implemented using linear segment computations or curve fitting tech­
niques. The necessity for function generation arises also in the dc motor control 
and synchronous motor control. In the former it may be required to represent the 
non-linear magnetisation curve and in the latter to represent the relation between 
the link current and margin angle in the constant margin angle control.
The linearisation techniques can be very well employed when a microproces­
sor is used in the control. The non-linear transfer characteristics of the system 
can be linearised using standard techniques of producing an inverse non-linear 
function in the processor. The gain of the system varies in the control of a dc 
motor in the field weakening mode as well as when the converter is in the discon­
tinuous mode of operation. The reduction in the gain causes sluggish operation. 
The gain compensation in terms of firing angle as a function of Id is a non-linear 
function. This is shown in Fig. 8.5. This may be linearised by the microprocessor. 
The inverse non-linear function for linearisation may be developed using function 
generation techniques discussed above, e.g., using a look-up table. The necessary 
corrections may be made to maintain the gain at a constant value.
During discontinuous conduction the converter voltage does not follow the 
cosine function. At a given firing angle the converter voltage is more if the con­
duction is discontinuous. A necessary correction to the firing angle is made to 
bring the voltage to a value corresponding to continuous conduction. A detailed 
discussion is given in the dc motor control.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
8.3.5 
Processing the Feedback Signals
Some feedback signals can be determined by sensing. These are the signals of 
voltage, current and speed. These are analog signals when measured, and have 
to be converted to digital quantities by suitable A/D converters. The speed, how­
ever, can be measured digitally using a shaft encoder and A/D conversion can 
be avoided. These signals must be processed by the microprocessor for use in 
feedback loops. Further, the microprocessor should be capable of synthesising the 
feedback signals, such as torque, flux, etc., which cannot be easily measured. The 
microprocessor should perform the necessary arithmetic, including multiplication 
and division, while performing the function of estimating the feedback signals.
8.3.6 
Implementation of PWM Techniques
The principles of PWM are employed in the control of inverter for the neces­
sary voltage control in the inverter. These techniques are also used in the control 
of harmonics in the output voltage. The microprocessor can develop the PWM 
waveform using all the principles of PWM. These are sinusoidal modulation, or 
trapezoidal modulation. The necessary reference and carrier waves may be gen­
erated in the microprocessor by software programs to determine the points of 
triggering the thyristors. The technique of look-up table to generate the PWM 
waveform is very much suited for selective harmonic elimination. The computa­
tions to determine the firing instants in any of above methods become time critical 
at higher frequencies. Therefore at higher frequencies, a look-up table is desir­
able. The major application of microprocessor finds in the control of ac motors 
using PWM inverters.
8.3.7 
Programmable Time Delay
One of the functions of a microprocessor in the control of variable speed drives 
is to provide an adjustable delay, e.g., delay angle in the gating of thyristors. This

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
can be accomplished in a microprocessor by means of up or down counters. These 
are used to increment or decrement a digital word stored in the memory (periodi­
cally) until the memory location reaches the final count (in the former) or clears 
(in the latter). A pulse or an interrupt may be generated at the end of counting to 
execute the necessary event.
Digital filters can be implemented using a microprocessor. These correspond 
to analog transfer function and improve the performance of the system. The com­
pensators explained before are simple digital filters. The microprocessors monitor 
various signals of the system and also give warning signals in case the variables 
exceed safe values. They finally issue a signal to shut down the system in case 
there is no response from the operator. The microprocessor may be programmed 
to provide the necessary protections against faults. Overcurrent protection, pro­
tection against single phasing, etc., may be provided with suitable software in the 
microprocessor.
A microprocessor performs the functions of data acquisition, sequencing of 
control for smooth transition from one mode of operation to the other, tests and 
diagnostics. It can be programmed to conduct evaluation tests on drive system and 
no load tests on the motors to determine the parameters. It may be supported by a 
powerful software to identify the faults. This software may be used if the system 
is down with a complex fault.
8.4 
CONTROL OF ELECTRIC DRIVES USING MICROPROCESSORS
Before discussing the aspects of design of control systems for variable drives 
using a microprocessor a few of the application examples are discussed in the 
following. These are:
i. 
speed control of dc motors using dual converters.
ii. field oriented control of three-phase induction motor.
iii. speed control of synchronous motors.
The specific functions of the microprocessor in the above applications can be 
recognised after knowing the specifications of the performance. These serve in 
formulating the stages involved in the design.
8.4.1 
Control of dc Drives Using Microprocessors
The dc motors fed from thyristor converters for variable speeds are being exten­
sively used in general industrial applications. A dual converter, which is a combi­
nation of two antiparallel connected three phase/single phase bridge converters, 
provides a reversible dc drive with regenerative facilities. The response of the 
drive is fast. The speed control systems of the drive using the dedicated hard­
ware with discrete components as well as a microprocessor, are shown in Fig. 8.6. 
Figure 8.6 clearly specifies the functions of a microprocessor in such a system. The 
scheme requires a number of parts or components and careful adjustment when 
based on analog techniques. However, by proper selection of counters to perform 
several jobs, the number of components can be reduced. The microprocessors

Fig. 8.6(a) 
Block diagram of a thyristor converter fed separately excited dc motor using hardware

Fig. 8.6(b) 
Block diagram of a separately excited dc motor drive using a microprocessor
I
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
effectively replace these schemes for dc motors of high performance because of 
their varied functional capabilities. At the outset it may seem that the interface 
circuits between the microprocessor and the system tend to increase the overall 
cost and decrease the advantage of microprocessors. However the improvement 
in the functions, reliability, size of the control equipment, and rapid reduction in 
manufacturing costs are possible with the fast growth and developments of digital 
systems and A/D and D/A converters, to make the system economical and cost 
effective. Among the functional capabilities of a microprocessor are higher level 
reliability, availability, and serviceability, which are instrumental in the increase 
of productivity of a drive.
The following are the functions of a microprocessor in the control of a dc 
motor fed from a dual converter:
Speed Sensing As has already been explained, a digital speed encoder provides 
the information concerning the speed to a microprocessor. The train of pulses 
from the shaft encoder are processed in the microprocessor to estimate the speed.
Feedback Control 
The closed loop control here has an inner current loop and an 
outer speed loop. The necessary reference values are stored in the memory of the 
microprocessor. The current is measured and converted to a digital quantity using 
an A/D converter. After conversion the signal is fed to the microprocessor based 
control system. The speed signal is available in digital form. The necessary con­
trollers and limiters can be implemented on the microprocessor, as has already 
been explained. The controllers implemented on a microprocessor are adap­
tive. These improve the performance and flexibility of the microprocessor. The 
system must be capable of taking care of variable gain during field weakening 
mode as decided by the operating condition to obtain the desired speed-torque 
characteristic.
A converter feeding a back emf load (as in the control of dc motor) operates 
in the discontinuous mode of operation under certain conditions of loading. The 
converter possesses a non-linear transfer characteristic with variable gain. The 
performance of the drive is sluggish. The non-linearity must be compensated by 
a proper feedback loop or linearising the operation using an inverse non-linear 
function. This function of the microprocessor must be supported by a suitable 
software. When the conduction is continuous the converter voltage is a constant, 
independent of load. In the discontinuous conduction, the angle of conduction 
and hence the converter voltage depend on the load. When once the discontinuous 
current limit is reached at a firing angle (Fig. 8.7), the converter voltage increases. 
To bring the value of Vd to the value corresponding to continuous conduction the 
firing angle must be increased by A a. From the external characteristic of the con­
verter the change in A a as a function of /  at a given firing angle a can be stored 
in a look-up table. The firing of the converter is controlled so that the gain of the 
converter is invariant. The non-linear characteristic of A a vs I at a given firing 
angle is shown in Fig. 8.7, and the block diagram implementing the correction is 
shown in Fig. 8.7(b).

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
Controller 
Converter
Fig. 8.7(b) 
Implementation of firing angle correction at discontinuous conduction
The feedback signals are limited by the proper limiters supported by the soft­
ware of the microprocessor.
Gate Firing Signals 
A microprocessor is programmed to generate the firing pulses, 
depending upon the information available from the feedback signals. The digi­
tised ac power signals are used to determine the firing delay with respect to the 
natural firing instant. The firing scheme must provide high dynamic performance 
to the drive, besides reducing the number of components.
The dual converter has two modes of operation. They are non-circulating 
current mode and circulating current mode. In the former only one converter is 
conducting whereas the other is in a non-conducting state. In the latter both the

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
converters operate simultaneously with suitable firing angles. The firing pulse 
generation and the control logic depend upon the mode of operation. In the non­
circulating current mode of operation the transition from one converter to the 
other takes place when the current passes through zero. The zero current persists 
for a short interval so that the outgoing (thyristor) converter is completely blocked 
before the pulses are given to the incoming one. In the circulating current mode, 
however, the current is continuous and transition problems are not there, as both 
the converters conduct simultaneously. The circulating current mode of operation 
is employed when zero current intervals cannot be tolerated. There are structural 
differences in the power circuits of these modes of operation. Similarly, software 
development for generation of the firing pulses must consider these aspects care­
fully. In the non-circulating current mode of operation zero detection of the current 
is required during the transition from one converter to the other. Also, there may 
be discontinuous conduction in this mode of operation. The program must be able 
to distinguish between the actual zero crossing and the discontinuous conduction. 
The firing circuit for non-circulating current mode is rather involved because of 
the features described above, whereas the circuit for circulating mode is simpler.
The digital firing angle controller should be programmable, should generate 
accurate gate pulses in various configurations discussed above, and should per­
form gating at accurately repeated intervals with the desired symmetry and inde­
pendent of frequency. If must also be possible to alter the firing angle on line, 
without disturbing the symmetry of pulse train.
The interface between the supply line and microprocessor is required to pro­
vide the necessary synchronisation of the firing pulses with the ac voltages. This 
converts analog ac signals to digital signals for feeding to the microprocessor. The 
converter receives the firing pulses in intervals of 60° as per the firing sequence. 
The microprocessor may be made to perform the function of generating firing 
pulses by means of an interrupt signal. This signal has a frequency double that of 
the line. The interrupt signal occurs at 0°, 60°, 120°, 180°, 240° and 300°. A new 
firing sequence may be started at the falling edge of the interrupt. The hardware 
implementation and the signals are shown in Fig. 8.8. A microprocessor control­
ling the processes of a general servo system may be used to generate the firing 
pulse by going through the pulse generation program by means of the interrupt 
signal. After successfully completing the job the microprocessor will return to 
the normal function. The program should take care of performing the firing range 
selection, protection, etc. The firing angle range can be detected using the infor­
mation of the line voltages of 1/6 cycle. This information must be sufficient to 
cover 0 to 180° in both the directions of current flow. This simplifies the system. 
The firing signals may be demultiplexed and amplified before they are fed to 
the thyristors. By this a saving of the hardware of the processor and I/O may be 
accomplished, which can be used effectively for other purposes. The necessary 
hardware and truth table for generating firing pulses are shown in Fig. 8.9. The 
gate firing program must handle both continuous and discontinuous conductions 
if the converter operates in the non-circulating mode of operation. The appropriate

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
Interrupt
Fig. 8.8(a) 
Generation of interrupt from digitised power signals
converter must be fired depending upon the 
current direction. The discontinuous conduc- 
Source 
tion must not be confused with zero of the 
volta9e 
current during transition, in order to assure 
the reliable firing of the converter. The neces­
sary logic must be designed considering the 
following:
i. When the load current is positive 
converter A conducts and when it is 
negative the converter B conducts.
ii. If there is no discontinuous conduc­
tion sensing of either load current or 
thyristor conduction may be used.
iii. Zero current does not mean that tran­
sition should occur.
iv. When the load current is fetched to assess the condition of zero current it 
does not always mean that the transition should occur.
v. Gain compensation during discontinuous conduction or field weakening 
mode.
Fig. 8.8(b) 
Power source voltage 
signals

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Inputs
Output
Source
Angle
D ,
DQ
<t>A
Q -i
Q 2
q 3
q 4
Q 5
q 6
range
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
'/ab
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
Vac
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
'/b e
0
0
CD
I
0
O
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
Vca
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
v ba
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
'/c b
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
'/c b
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
'/ab
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
cr
60*-120°
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
'/be
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
Vba
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
Vca
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
Vca
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
Vcb
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
cr
120° - 180°
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
Vac
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
Vbc
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
Vba
Fig. 8.9 
Truth table for firing angle control
The current direction can be sensed by the so-called current direction signals. 
These signals are delayed by a definite time period, normally greater than the 
turn off time of the thyristors, to make sure that the thyristor has turned off. The 
simultaneous zero values of the signals indicate that no thyristor is conducting. If 
one of the signals is zero, the converter with non-zero signal is conducting. The 
other converter cannot get firing pulse so that a short circuit is avoided. This logic 
is depicted in Fig. 8.10. The line voltages of l/6th cycle provide the information of 
the direction of current in a given range of firing angle.
To summarise, in a non-circulating current mode of operation the following 
points need consideration while developing software.
i. When the thyristors in one converter are conducting at any instant of time 
the other converter cannot be fired. During transition from one converter

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
Fig. 8.10(a) 
Block diagram of the control of dual converter
Fig. 8.10(b) 
Current direction detection

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
to the other it must be ensured that the outgoing converter is completely 
blocked before the incoming one is fired.
ii. When once the zero crossing of the armature current is sensed, a definite 
delay must be provided to ensure that the thyristors have regained their 
positive blocking capability.
iii. To arrive at proper logic, the state of load current is checked but not that 
of an SCR.
In some applications, such as servo drives, the delay cannot be tolerated during 
transition, however small it may be. The circulating current mode is employed. 
A reactor is used to limit the circulating current. The firing logic is very simple 
here, as there is no zero current to be detected and no discontinuous conduction 
at all.
The microprocessor must also provide suitable protections against failure of 
any of the phases, commutation failure, cross over condition, etc. The system reli­
ability increases with multilevel protection.
Selection of a Microprocessor From the above discussion the criteria for the selec­
tion of microprocessor for the control of a dual converter may be derived:
i. The main function of the microprocessor is generating the firing pulses 
with least possible asymmetry. The asymmetry level is decided by the 
resolution of the firing angle. To get a resolution of the order of \°-2° 
the sampling frequency must be 10-20 kHz while generating the firing 
pulse. The microprocessor chosen must be capable of small cycle and 
computing time to allow for high rates of sampling control.
ii. The accuracy in the calculation of current and speed loops. The sampling 
periods of these loops are however larger than those of the generating 
pulses. The error in computation must be limited.
iii. If extra accuracy is required in the speed loop the microprocessor must 
be capable of floating point arithmetic in order to handle large numbers. 
For this purpose a fast microprocessor with optimised programs may be 
required.
From the data available on microprocessors (Table 8.1) the 8 bit microproces­
sor would be sufficient to perform the above job.
Table 8.1
Time
constant
Sample rate
Accuracy
Resolution
8 bit
16 bit
Firing angle
10-20 kHz
0
01
0
7.8%
control
1.8°
Current loop
10-20 ms
500-1000
0.37%
Hz
Speed loop
100-200 ms
50-100 Hz
0.78%
0.3%

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
Some other applications of microprocessors in the area of dc drives are
i. chopper controlled four quadrant dc drives using separately excited dc 
motor or dc series motor.
ii. multiphase chopper controlled dc drives
iii. pulse width controlled dc drives
iv. The multiple firing schemes for improving the performance of dc drives, 
e.g., TRC and CLC.
8.4.2 
Field Oriented Control of a Three Phase Induction Motor
The stator current of an induction motor has the functions of producing the required 
air gap flux (magnetisation) as well as developing the required torque to drive the 
load. An induction motor will have its operation similar to that of a dc motor if 
the stator current components (viz., flux producing and torque producing) can be 
separately controlled. This kind of control is possible in a separately excited dc 
motor where the torque and flux can be separately and independently controlled 
by varying the armature current and field current respectively. An inherent decou­
pling would exist between them, but for the effects of armature reaction. These 
effects can be eliminated by armature compensation. A perfect decoupling can 
be achieved in a compensated separately excited dc motor. This versatile control 
imparts a very good dynamic behaviour to a dc motor. Thus a high performance 
drive using an induction motor is achieved by attempting a decoupling of the sta­
tor current components. This principle is called field orientation control or vector 
control. This control improves the dynamic behaviour and a drive of very good 
performance can be obtained even at low speeds. The two components of the 
current are identified and they are oriented properly in orthogonal ordinates with 
respect to flux vector.
The current components can be oriented with respect to any of the three fluxes, 
viz., stator flux, air gap flux or rotor flux. The analysis shows that the dynamic 
performance of the drive is not up to the desired level if the orientation is carried 
out with respect to the stator or air gap flux. This poor dynamic behaviour stems 
from the delay of the torque in following the slip. A natural and efficient decou­
pling is possible if the orientation is carried out with respect to the rotor flux. This 
leads to a high performance torque control of the drive with a very fast response. 
The implementation of the principle of field orientation is illustrated in Fig. 8.11.
When the principle of field orientation was suggested, it did not receive the 
attention of the industry and was not very popular because of complicated hard­
ware. With the developments in digital components and microprocessors by way 
of LSI, and miniaturisation of the components, this high performance control of 
induction motor is becoming popular. One main area of application and effective 
use of high speed microprocessors is the vector control of induction motors. This 
control requires
i. the exact information about the rotor flux.
ii. the precise adjustment of the stator current components according to the 
reference.

DC
v
m
nin
n0
<'
to
01
Fig. 8.11(a) 
Implementation of the principle of field orientation
The McGraw Hill Companies

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
Td= * t V a
Vr 
"c 
T= Kt/ds/qs
Stator voltage
Fig. 8.11(b) 
Illustration of principles of field orientation
The functions of a microprocessor in the vector control of induction motor are as 
follows:
i. Processing of the signals obtained from the shaft encoder to determine 
the rotor speed and also the rotor angle. This rotor angle has to be used 
in the transformations from one frame to another.
ii. The flux estimation using the terminal voltages, currents and speed, 
based on one of the machine models.
iii. The computations with respect to phase and coordinate transformations 
to identify the two components of the current. After the necessary con­
trol these components must be transformed to provide the reference 
values for comparison with actual phase currents.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
iv. The speed and current loops in the feedback control. The implementation 
of controllers in these loops.
v. To produce gate signals for both machine side converter and line side 
converter. The machine side converter decides the frequency whereas 
line side one decides the current/voltage. The firing signals to the line 
side converter are obtained in the same way as described for a dual con­
verter. The firing delay is decided by the current/voltage required in the 
dc link. The firing signals to the machine side converter decide the fre­
quency. The speed of the motor is added to the output of the slip con­
troller to decide the frequency of the inverter output. The addition must 
be precise because a large quantity is added to a small one. The digital 
addition in a microprocessor is accurate. So the microprocessor must be 
capable of providing or generating the firing signals to the machine side 
converter also.
vi. Data acquisition The microprocessor must acquire the feedback signals 
in the digital form. A transfer of the data to CPU is required. A flow of 
the data both from and to the processor is required.
vii. Limiting the control Variables Linearisation of non-linear functions used 
in the control as well as non-linear behaviour of the converter during 
discontinuous conduction. The compensation of variable gain during 
discontinuous conduction and field weakening modes.
The mathematical operations include multiplication, division, addition and 
subtraction. The arithmetic processing unit of the microprocessor must be capa­
ble of performing these operations. The flux estimation may be done by numeri­
cal integration using the well known Simpson’s rule or trapezoidal rule. But the 
results suffer from loss of accuracy due to truncation errors in eight bit proces­
sors. These errors lead to instability of operations. Use of floating point arithmetic 
with double precision improves the performance of the processor. This however 
requires a long time of computation. To reduce the burden on the microprocessor 
the flux estimation may be carried out by analog models external to the processor. 
The computed flux may be processed in the processor. The reference values of the 
currents and fluxes are developed by the processor. Depending upon the speed of 
the processor and its capacity to perform the above functions a boundary may be 
drawn between the local hardware and the microprocessor, to perform the func­
tions. Sometimes multiprocessor control may be accomplished depending upon 
the speed and quality of control required.
Field orientation is possible with both voltage source inverter as well as cur­
rent source inverter fed induction motors. The current source inverter is widely 
employed due to the simplicity of its power circuit. The features of field oriented 
control employing CSI are discussed here (8.12(a)). Sometimes a PWM inverter 
may be controlled suitably to provide the reference currents (Fig. 8.12(b)). This 
control can be accomplished using a microprocessor.
The flux may be measured directly using search coils or Hall probes. The ana­
log signals are converted to digital ones for feeding into the microprocessor for

o
p
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
3-phase 
supply 
o------
o
o
Rectifier
/ÖÜ0V
PWM
inverter
A 
A 
A
- f ò
-
I b
o
. *
Firing
control unit
Fig. 8.12(b) 
PWM inverter with current control
further processing. This direct measurement, even though theoretically exact, has 
the following limitations or difficulties: The presence of sensitive Hall probes or 
search coils make the induction motor more sensitive but its inherent robustness 
is lost. The measured signal is superimposed by slot harmonics requiring filtering. 
The errors of measurement and A/D conversion make the results rather unreli­
able. Therefore, normally the computation of the flux using machine models is 
employed (indirect estimation).
These machine models for computing the flux make use of the motor param­
eters determined from no-load and blocked rotor tests. The inaccuracy of the mod­
els in the estimation of the parameters, the variation of machine parameters due 
to temperature and saturation must be exactly considered in the estimation. The 
accuracy gets impaired if there is any integration involved in the estimation. This 
happens if voltage and speed are used in the computations. At low speeds the 
integration introduces considerable errors in the estimation. The estimation using 
stator currents and rotor speed is free from these errors and reliable performance 
can be achieved over a wide range of speeds down to standstill.
To improve the performance the machine parameters used in the model must 
be as accurate as possible. Otherwise they can be corrected using a correction 
process, so that the exact coupling is possible. The correction process upgrades 
the parameter. The indirect flux estimation along with the so-called parameter

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives 
^ ^ 3
identification or adaptation is used to obtain an induction motor with perfect cou­
pling. The flux estimated from the actual sensed variables of current and speed 
together with the parameters, is compared with the reference value (determined 
from the reference quantities). The difference is used to correct the machine 
parameters entering into the calculations. The most influential parameter is the 
rotor resistance or rotor time constant and it is corrected until the required value of 
flux is given by the model.
The only solution for field oriented control with parameter adaptation is 
the use of microprocessors or microcomputers. Several techniques are available 
in the literature for parameter adaptation. One such scheme is shown in Fig. 8.13. 
The microprocessor has to perform the mathematical operations to estimate the 
flux both from the reference values as well as measured variables.
Ved s * ---->
,-e
1 ds •——>
Calculation of F
•e
(from rotor flux estimator)
' qs°—--->
(Oe 0—--->
^d so ------>
V/* 0 
v
Calculation of F*
v qs 0 
> from the reference values
' 6ds 0------>
representing the true
je 
0------>•
' qs
value of F and hence flux.
0----- >
Q
F* A
A F
Calculation 
of A(1/7%)
A (i/rr)
A
1/7*rO
Fig. 8.13 
Adaptation or identification of rotor time constant
The selection of a microprocessor for the above application may be based on 
the following considerations:
i. Resolution of the firing of the phase controlled rectifier. The resolution 
decides the asymmetry in the firing.
ii. The mathematical operations that can be performed. It should be capable 
of binary and decimal arithmetic, including multiplication and division
iii. The memory capacity required
iv. The internal clock generation
v. 
Software support for implementing the controllers, limiters, etc.
vi. The interrupt capability
Some other applications of a microprocessor in the control of induction motors are:
i. 
A microprocessor may be used to control the speed using a voltage 
controller

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
ii. It may be used to control the speed using slip energy recovery scheme. 
Vector control can be employed here also.
iii. It may be used for the control of slip controlled drive with flux and torque 
control in CSI fed drives.
iv. Can be used to implement PWM techniques to control the voltage and 
harmonics both in VSI and CSI fed induction motors.
v. It may be used for cycloconverter control.
8.4.3 
Microprocessor Control of Synchronous Motor Drives
Variable speed drives employing synchronous motors are becoming very popu­
lar in industrial applications. They are an immediate solution for high power 
reversible drives and are becoming competitors to dc and induction motor drives. 
The synchronous motor operates at leading power factors when overexcited. 
The armature voltages can be used to commutate the inverter thyristors on the 
machine side. This is possible over a reasonably wide range of speeds. However, 
at very low speeds up to about 10% of base speed, the machine commutation is 
ineffective and therefore forced commutation is required. The inverter may be 
equipped with forced commutation circuit which operates up to 10% of the base 
speed, and above this speed the machine commutation takes over. The assistance 
in commutation may be provided by means of interrupting the dc link current. 
A thyristor across the dc link is used. When the commutation is required the cur­
rent is diverted to this thyristor, so that the current in the inverter thyristors falls 
to zero. The line side converter is forced into inverter operation so that the polar­
ity of voltage changes. After the thyristors in the machine side converter have 
attained their positive blocking capability, the next thyristor pair in the sequence 
is fired. The line side converter is forced back to rectifier action. The current 
is now transferred to the inverter and the thyristor across the inductance stops 
conduction automatically. One of the starting schemes must be employed. The 
machine commutation is possible only with current fed operation. The cyclo­
converter may also be used to control the speed of the synchronous motors. 
Machine commutation is possible here also. However, in the low speed range 
the line voltages may be used for commutation. The starting problem does not 
arise here.
The control of the inverter or cycloconverter feeding a synchronous motor can 
be accomplished using the position of the rotor with respect to stator. A rotor posi­
tion sensor on the shaft senses the position of the rotor with respect to the stator 
and sends the firing pulses to the thyristors of the inverter. The six inverter thyris­
tors are fired in a sequence once, by the time the rotor moves by two pole pitches 
or 180°. This provides synchronism between the frequency and rotor speed. The 
motor is said to be in self controlled mode.
The self control of the motor is also possible by sensing the stator induced 
voltages which effectively eliminates the mechanical rotor position sensing. In 
one cycle of stator voltages all the six thyristors are fired once in a sequence. Self 
control is possible with VSI, CSI and cycloconverter.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
A synchronous motor in its self controlled mode has a performance similar to 
that of a dc motor, both in steady-state and dynamic conditions. It, therefore finds 
application where dc motors cannot be employed. It is also called commutator 
less motor (CLM).
When a naturally commutated converter operates in the inverter mode the over­
lap limits the range of firing angle. The upper limit of firing angle called inverter 
limit is decided by the turn off time of the thyristors and the overlap. The limit 
is set such that there is enough margin for ( t ) the turn off of the thyristor taking 
overlap into consideration, so that the commutation failure does not occur. A mar­
gin angle is defined as the difference between the lead angle of firing and overlap 
angle. A control is evolved to see that under no circumstances does this margin 
angle go below the turn off angle of the thyristor, so that commutation failure does 
not occur. This is called margin angle control. It has certain advantages:
i. Commutation failure is prevented.
ii. The maximum power output can be increased by simultaneous control of 
the field current to compensate for armature reaction. This improves the 
overload capacity of the motor.
iii. There is improvement in the power factor
iv. The torque pulsations under the load conditions are reduced. The ripple 
content of the dc current also decreases.
However, there are certain disadvantages. The upper speed is limited and hence 
the range of speed control is limited. To overcome this disadvantage, margin 
time control is employed, which improves the performance also. Microprocessor 
implementation of the synchronous motor is discussed in the next section.
Microprocessor Control of a Current Source Inverter Fed Synchronous Motor As dis­
cussed above, a drive system employing a CSI fed synchronous motor has the 
following features:
i. A four quadrant drive can be accomplished very easily.
ii. A self control, which synchronises the gating pulses of the inverter with 
rotor position, provides an improved steady-state and dynamic perfor­
mance.
iii. The natural commutation using machine voltages is possible in a speed 
ranging from 10% base speed. At starting and low speeds forced com­
mutation is required, which may be provided by additional commutation 
circuit of the inverter or by interrupting dc link current.
A typical block diagram implementation of a microprocessor for the control 
of a CSI fed synchronous motor is shown in Fig. 8.14. The system consists of a 
dc link converter which is made up of two six pulse bridge converters intercon­
nected by a high smoothing inductance. The dc link inverter feeds a synchronous 
motor whose field may be controlled by a chopper or a phase controlled rectifier. 
In the normal operation, the line side converter operates as a rectifier and the

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 8.14(a) 
Block diagram of a microprocessor based synchronous motor control
machine side one as an inverter. The control pulses to the rectifier are provided by 
the microprocessor with proper interface between the ac lines and microproces­
sor, to provide the proper interrupt signal, to synchronise the firing pulses with 
frequency and to vary the firing angle with respect to the natural firing instant. The 
synchronous motor is fitted with a shaft encoder. This is an aluminium disc with 
slots on the periphery (Fig. 8.15) mounted on the shaft. A combination of photo­
transistor and light emitting diode aligned across the slots provides the necessary 
train of pulses. These pulses are processed to obtain the rotor position as well as 
the speed. The forced commutation is available during starting until the machine 
accelerates to a speed where natural commutation can take over. The stator and 
field currents are also sensed and converted to digital form before they are fed to 
the microprocessor for further processing.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
Self controlled SM
Fig. 8.14(b) 
Microprocessor based control system of a CSI fed self controlled 
synchronous motor
The functions of the microprocessor are now obvious and can be listed as under:
i. The microprocessor should perform the main functions of monitoring 
and control of the system variables to obtain the desired performance. 
The other functions are protection, diagnosis, and display.
ii. It must be supported by proper software to ensure the necessary com­
mutation of the inverter at low speeds where the machine voltages are 
not effective.
iii. It receives the data concerning the system variables, stator and field cur­
rents, and processes them to issue the desired control signals to the rec­
tifier and inverter to achieve the desired performance at all operating 
conditions.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
I
Pi
P2
"PS
inmuin______ juuinnr
S4
(b) Output waveforms 
Fig. 8.15 
Shaft encoder
iv. The link current control is obtained by controlling the firing angle of the 
line side converter. The firing angle control with proper synchronisation 
with line voltages and with respect to the natural firing instant may be 
obtained by implementing the method described above with the control 
of dual converters. Another scheme using phase locked loop is depicted 
in Fig. 8.16, the details of which are available in the literature.
v. The microprocessor receives the information regarding the rotor position 
and processes it to control the firing of the inverter.
vi. It must be software supported and have necessary hardware to accom­
plish the feedback configurations of the control. It must perform the 
generation of necessary feedback signals, necessary controllers, limiters 
and function generators using look-up tables. The controllers must be

The McGraw Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
b 
a 
c
Fig. 8.16 
Digital firing circuit for the converter using phase locked loop
software oriented so that they can be readily modified to suit a particular 
application.
vii. It processes the information from the rotor position sensor to determine 
the speed, which is one of the feedback signals.
Starting It has already been made clear that from zero to about 10% of base speed 
machine commutation is not effective. To accelerate the rotor to the speed where 
machine commutation can take over, forced commutation of the inverter thyristors

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
is necessary. This can be achieved by an auxiliary circuit in the inverter with the 
facility of being cut off when natural commutation takes over. It is also possible 
by interrupting dc link current with a thyristor across the link inductance. Soft­
ware programs should be available for the microprocessor to follow the sequence 
of operations. The second method is described here. On starting the inverter the 
thyristors are fired in pairs, as the quenching is obtained by making the link cur­
rent zero. The information must be stored in the address registers. The initial rotor 
position is decided by the phase reference signals. A pair of thyristors is fired to 
obtain the maximum torque. At each change of state of the reference signals, com­
mutation is executed by the microprocessor. The thyristor across the link induc­
tance receives the gate signal. Simultaneously the line side converter firing angle is 
retarded beyond 90° to make it inverter. This changes the polarity of dc link volt­
age and decreases the link current to zero extremely fast. The current through the 
thyristor pair also becomes zero. The thyristors switch off. The line side converter 
is brought back to rectifier mode and the next pair of thyristors of the inverter are 
fired. The process is repeated till the motor accelerates to the desired speed.
i. The necessary software to perform the speed regulating and current regu­
lating routines must be provided.
ii. A typical shaft encoder to provide the rotor position and to control the 
inverter firing angle must be provided. A typical shaft encoder is dis­
cussed separately as it can be used as a generalised hardware for any 
speed control employing microprocessor.
iii. During regeneration the firing angle control should be such that the line 
side converter operates in inverter mode and the machine side one as a 
rectifier.
Rotor Position Sensing A shaft encoder used for the purposes of both rotor 
position sensing and speed measurement is slightly different from the one dis­
cussed under the section speed detection. A typical sensor is explained in the 
following.
i. The shaft encoder used in the control of a synchronous motor is required 
to provide the triggering pulses to the converter, which are synchronised 
to the rotor position. The required firing angle delay must also be pro­
vided. These pulses must be available to the thyristor during starting 
employing forced commutation with link current interruption, as well as 
in the normal operation.
ii. It is required to provide the information to determine the speed.
iii. The firing pulses must be such that every 60° one thyristor is fired in 
sequence. The width of the firing pulses may be 120°. The delay angle 
information to provide the necessary phase difference between the volt­
age and current must be available.
iv. To be able to obtain the above information, the shaft encoder must give 
the necessary phase reference signals and one high frequency signal.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
The shaft encoder is a light aluminium disc with a sufficiently large number of 
slots drilled at the periphery of the disc. The resolution of the firing angle delay 
depends upon the number of slots. A resolution of 1° may be obtained if there are 
360 slots. A high frequency signal is obtained when the disc rotates through an 
optical sensor. This consists of a light emitting diode aligned with a phototransis­
tor. Whenever a slot comes in between these two the transistor gives out a pulse. 
A train of pulses is obtained, which can be used as a high frequency signal to 
determine the firing angle delay as well as speed. The disc also has two more slots, 
the angle of which depends upon the number of poles, e.g., 90° slots for a four 
pole machine. Three sensors are placed with a phase shift of 120° electrical so that 
the sensors produce phase reference signals.
The waveforms of voltage and current during motoring and regeneration are 
shown in Fig. 8.17. The phase reference signals P r P2, P3 and the high frequency 
signal S4 are also shown in the figure. These signals are processed to provide the 
firing pulses. The information of the mode of operation, i.e., motoring or regen­
eration is assigned to the first and the remaining delay information is assigned 
to the remaining seven bits of an eight bit digital word. The delay angle is a or 
(180 -  a) depending upon motoring or regeneration. The firing angle controller 
comprises three delay circuits, a thyristor address register and a pulse distribution 
circuit (Fig. 8.17). The digital control input is converted to the corresponding 
delay angle.
At the beginning of each half cycle of phase reference signal the delay infor­
mation a is fed into the counter. This is converted to provide the required delay 
using linear digital ramp techniques. The pulses of the high frequency signal are 
used to increment or decrement the count. At the terminal count a pulse is gener­
ated, which operates as a clock to the D-type flip flops of the thyristor address 
register. The output signals having a delay of a with respect to phase reference 
signals are fed to a decoder, where they are combined to produce the modulated 
firing pulses for all the six thyristors. The pulse trains, shown in Fig. 8.17, are 
120° wide and displaced by 60° from each other.
The firing of the inverter must take place during starting also, when there is no 
machine commutation. The thyristors are actually fired in pairs. For this the delay 
counters are disabled. The thyristor pairs to be gated are directly addressed by 
CPU through the thyristor address registers. The phase reference signals are avail­
able at the starting of the signals. The appropriate thyristors are fired to provide 
the torque in the required direction. At the change of state of the phase reference 
signals, the forced commutation is executed by the microprocessor in the follow­
ing steps:
i. The thyristor across the link inductor is fired.
ii. The line side converter is forced into inverter operation. This reverses 
the dc link voltage and effectively makes the dc link current zero. The 
current in the conducting thyristors of the inverter is also zero, making 
them switch off
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 8.17(a) 
Terminal voltage sensing and frequency multiplication
iii. The next pair of thyristors of the inverter is fired using the command 
from the CPU to the thyristor address register. The line side converter is 
brought back to rectification.
The necessary changes during starting are indicated on the schematic diagram 
of the firing angle controller. The forced commutation is continued till the motor 
accelerates to 10% of speed, where the machine commutation takes over.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
j*—Delay angle—>-|
Phase reference signal
Delayed output signal
Terminal count pulses
120°
L—
 120° 
--------»►
«------- 120° -------- >
Firing pulses to the thyristors
Fig. 8.17(b) 
Firing pulse generation for motoring
The high frequency signal S4 can be used to compute the speed, as described 
previously, either by counting the number of pulses in a given time or by mea­
suring the time between two pulses. The advantages and disadvantages of these 
methods have been already described.
Inverter Control Using Terminal Voltage Sensing The self control of the synchro­
nous motor is obtained using the triggering pulses to the inverter which are syn­
chronized with the rotor position. These signals are obtained by processing the 
phase reference signals P , P2, P3 and a high frequency signal S4 obtained from a 
shaft encoder. This shaft encoder is a mechanical device fitted to the motor shaft. 
It therefore impairs the mechanical ruggedness of the system. The shaft encoder 
can be dispensed with, if the synchronizing of the trigger pulses with rotor posi­
tion is accomplished by sensing the stator voltages. The thyristors can be trig­
gered with minimum turn off angle to avail of the advantages of higher torque 
and improved power factor. The method can be implemented on a microprocessor 
used to perform the functions of monitoring and control. The control configura­
tion and characteristics are supported by the necessary software, as described in 
the foregoing, so that the control strategies are adaptable to modifications without 
making any changes in the hardware. The only difference between the foregoing

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Phase reference signal
Delay
' angle ’
Delayed output signal
Terminal count pulse
Firing 
pulses to 
thyristors
120°
120c
Fig. 8.17(c) 
Firing pulse generation for regeneration
Fig. 8.17(d) 
Voltage and current waveforms
implementation of the microprocessor and the present one is the sensing of volt­
ages in place of a rotor position sensor to provide the phase reference signals for 
determining the delay of firing and speed signal, which is also used as a firing 
signal.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives ^^3
Control input 
address
h
t2
t3
t4
t5
Te
Fig. 8.17(e) 
Schematic inverter firing angle controller
Similar to the case of rotor position sensing (Fig. 8.17), signals identical to 
phase reference signals Pr P 9 P3 are obtained by detecting the zero crossings of 
the voltages (Fig. 8.18). The polarity of voltage between two phases is obtained. 
A frequency multiplier (Fig. 8.18) is used to obtain the high frequency signal 
S4, similar to that obtained with a shaft encoder. The purpose of this signal is to 
provide the necessary delay angle in firing the thyristor so that the armature cur­
rent has a definite phase difference with respect to the phase voltage, as well as to 
provide the information about the speed. The multiplication involved decides the 
resolution of firing angle. The signals P , Pv P3 and S4 are processed in the same 
way as has been described in the previous section dealing with the shaft encoder.
However voltage sensing is not possible at standstill. The forced commutation 
routine must be involved to start the motor. A pair of thyristors addressed by the 
CPU are fired so that maximum torque in the required direction is developed. The 
pair of thyristors can be identified by measuring the induced voltages of the arma­
ture at the instant of applying the field voltage. The induced voltages depend upon 
the rotor position. The sign of the highest voltage is determined. This information 
is accessed and processed to identify the correct pair of thyristors to be fired. The 
starting process using forced commutation is implemented until the rotor acceler­
ates to the speed at which natural commutation takes over.
Margin Angle Control of Synchronous Motors 
The commutation margin angle is 
defined as the angle measured from the end of commutation to the crossing of the 
phase voltage which was under commutation (natural firing instant). For satisfac­
tory operation, without commutation failure, this margin angle must be greater

Electric Drives
1
2
h
t2
t3
t4
t5
t6
Delayed output
Reference
Terminal count 
pulse
Fig. 8.18(a) 
Inverter firing control circuit
than the turn off angle (cot) of the thyristors. In the constant margin angle control 
it is always observed that the margin angle does not go below a minimum value. 
Referring to Fig. 8.19 the margin angle is
ijj -  y — u
where y is the lead angle of firing and 
u is the overlap angle.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
Fig. 8.18(b) 
Microprocessor based control of a synchronous motor using terminal 
voltage sensing
Among the factors, which influence the angle of overlap is the dc link current. 
Increase in the value of dc link current (7d) results in an increase in u. Under tran­
sient conditions u increases. The value of y also increases so that i/j remains the 
same. Obviously the performance improves as commutation failure cannot occur. 
On the other hand, in the constant lead angle control the margin angle decreases 
with increase in u, resulting in a commutation failure.
In the control, therefore, the firing angle changes such that the necessary lead 
angle of firing is available to keep iff constant in case u changes. The overlap angle 
of the converter must be known and fed to the microprocessor. Microprocessor 
control of self controlled synchronous motor, discussed previously, may be used 
if the necessary changes are made in the firing of the converter, based on the

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
Fig. 8.19 
Definition to margin angle
information available on the margin angle and overlap. The method of implement­
ing the margin angle control is discussed in the following.
There are two ways of implementing the constant margin angle control:
i. The margin angle t/y is detected and controlled directly.
ii. Control is effected invoking the relationship between the link current I 
and the margin angle ifj. The margin angle is controlled using a function 
generator or a correction as a function of I .
In the first method the value of margin angle can be controlled to be constant 
at a value which gives a satisfactory transient and steady-state performance. How­
ever, the direct detection of margin angle is difficult over a wide range of speeds, 
due to ripple present in the machine voltage. This ripple causes difficulties in the 
detection of zero crossing of the voltages. The second method does not require the 
detection of margin angle and hence is very practical in the control of synchro­
nous motors. The overlap angle is detected and is used in the control.
The method of control depicted in Fig. 8.20 is as follows. For a given value 
of margin angle, the relation between the lead angle of firing y= 180 -  a and the 
link current is calculated. The relation is stored in the memory as a look-up table 
(function generation). This table is used by the microprocessor to correct the lead 
angle of firing in terms of I and u.
There are several difficulties with the margin angle control which require care­
ful study, so that the control can be made advantageous. The constant margin 
angle control results in an intrinsic instability due to a voltage drop associated 
with overlap. Investigations show that the motor has unstable operation at heavy 
currents and high speeds. The motor can be stabilised by compensating the volt­
age drop due to overlap. A loop providing counter emf compensation corrects the 
voltage drop using the relation between I and loop gain in K in volts per rpm 
(Fig. 8.21).
The second difficulty arises from the transient behaviour of the margin angle,
i.e., variation of iff with I in transient conditions. The lookup table used for 
steady-state conditions may not be satisfactory under transient conditions due to

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives ^^9
Fig. 8.20 
Implementation of margin angle control of a synchronous motor on a 
microprocessor
Table I Compensation for voltage drop.
Table II {fi0-u /2) v.d.c. current in the constant margin angle control
Fig. 8.21 
Block diagram of a self controlled synchronous motor with constant margin 
angle control

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
change in ip. Commutation failure may occur. The margin angle depends upon 
the overlap u which increases with rapid increase in the dc current. Therefore, the 
transient behaviour of i/j affects the commutation, which may fail if I increases 
very rapidly. A long time delay in gate pulses may also cause this failure. There­
fore, a digital simulation of the system must be carried out to study the behaviour 
of the margin angle. The reference value is set at a safe value taking the variation 
of i/j with I into consideration so that in any case there is no commutation failure.
The microprocessor control of a synchronous motor incorporating margin 
angle control is shown in Fig. 8.22. The control is achieved as a four quadrant 
drive with regeneration facilities. The error of the speed controller decides the 
mode of operation, e.g., acceleration, regeneration or motoring. If the speed error 
e is greater than a set value n2, the mode of operation is regeneration. The line side 
converter operates as an inverter reversing the polarity of link voltage. Accord­
ingly regeneration is performed. This error also decides the acceleration (s>-nl). 
The acceleration is obtained with maximum current. The constant margin angle 
control is employed and care is taken to see that there is no commutation failure at 
the maximum current. In the region of errors -  nx < s < n2 the normal PI compensa­
tion takes place with a current reference to current controller.
The current control processing routine comprises compensation of induced 
voltage, PI control and arc cosine compensation.
The margin angle control routine is shown in Fig. 8.23. This control takes place 
in the accelerating mode. When the drive is in this mode and the transition index
Fig. 8.22 
Speed control routine of a margin angle controlled synchronous motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives 
^ ^ 9
Fig. 8.23 
Flow chart of margin angle control
is set, the margin angle is maintained at a proper value so that the commutation 
failure due to rapid increase in I is prevented.
The speed control routine in PI mode is performed with steady-state if/ control.
Selection of Microprocessor The criteria for selecting a microprocessor for con­
trolling a synchronous motor discussed as above, are more or less the same as 
those discussed in the examples of dc motor and induction motor. The resolution 
of firing angle, instruction and cycle time, interrupt capability, and arithmetic 
operations, including the capacity to support multiplication and division, are sev­
eral of the criteria based on which the selection can be made. The type of micro­
processor selected should have sufficient memory capacity. It may be selected 
based on the number of bits, memory access time, interrupt I/O interface, kinds 
and number of instructions, reliability, cost and productivity. The future needs for 
development also may be considered. The local hardware design must consider 
the capacity of the microprocessor chosen. In a single microprocessor control, 
the boundary between the software and hardware is decided by the complexity 
of the functions of the microprocessor. The necessary interfaces are required in 
the form of A/D converters or others to convert the measured analog signals to 
digital quantities for processing by the microprocessor. The necessary software 
supports may be provided to generate firing pulses. If the capacity is limited 
these pulses may be generated by the necessary hardware to save the processor 
time for other jobs.
The microprocessor may be employed to control a synchronous motor using a 
cycloconverter, PWM inverter, etc. The cycloconverter fed synchronous motor can 
be used for low speed reversing mills. Both machine commutation and line com­
mutation may be employed. The PWM inverter operation provides the necessary

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
voltage and harmonic controls, so that the low speed operation of the motor is 
smooth with least torque pulsation.
8.5 
SOME ASPECTS OF CONTROL SYSTEM DESIGN
OF MICROPROCESSOR BASED VARIABLE SPEED DRIVES
Based on the examples of drives discussed in the foregoing, general outlines may 
be drawn for designing the control systems of variable drives using a micropro­
cessor. It is evident that it is rather involved and time consuming to design and 
develop a microprocessor based variable speed drive. The control system design 
starts once the detailed specifications of drive are available. The main stages in 
the design are
i. system analysis
ii. computer simulation
iii. hardware design
iv. software design
v. system integration, debugging and performance.
A brief account of these stages follows:
System Analysis 
In this stage the complete structure of the system is formulated. 
All the components of the system are specified and their functions are identified, 
e.g., the power circuit configurations analysis of their commutation to decide 
the optimum values of commutation circuit components, etc. The performance 
specifications also decide the type of converter to be employed. If regeneration 
is not required half controlled converters with advantages of improved power 
factor, reduced ripple, etc. can be employed. If a PWM inverter is employed the 
line side converter can be a diode rectifier if no regeneration is required. The 
analysis also gives the details of the voltage waveforms, feedback signals, their 
generation and estimation. It is also useful in writing the algorithms for control 
purposes.
Computer Simulation 
If the system is complicated with several control loops and 
variables, a computer simulation of the system may be useful, to arrive at the opti­
mised system and at the variables at every stage of control.
Hardware Design 
In this stage a decision is made, before selecting a microproces­
sor, about the boundary between the local hardware and microprocessor software. 
The functions to be carried out by the dedicated hardware circuits external to the 
microprocessor and by the microprocessor itself must be clearly defined. If the 
microprocessor is sufficiently fast, it may be assigned to perform the functions 
necessary for the control. On the other hand, if it is slow the hardware oriented 
circuits may be used to cover the jobs of signal generation for the inverter, high 
speed protection, firing angle generation for the converter, etc. The microproces­
sor can be saved to perform the other jobs. While selecting a microprocessor the 
following points need consideration:

The McGraw-Hill Companies
i. 
Suitability of the performance of the microprocessor for the intended 
purposes. This is identified by the bit size, operating time, memory 
capacity, memory access, etc. The resolution required determines the 
bit size of the microprocessor. The sampling time of the processor is a 
measure of the resolution. The bit resolution to sampling time is identi­
fied as the figure of merit.
ii. Suitability of the functions of the processor for intended purpose: The 
functional capacity of a microprocessor is identified by the kind and 
number of instructions, microprocessor control, I/O interfaces, periph­
eral LSI, number of microprocessor devices, etc. Direct multiplication/ 
division capability, functional integration, etc. show the effectiveness of 
the microprocessor in the computation of feedback signals in the control.
iii. The reliability of the system under operating conditions and temperature.
iv. Cost of the equipment.
v. 
Software and hardware support.
vi. Possibility for the expansion of the system to meet future needs.
Depending upon the program and data size ROM and RAM memory size 
may be designed conservatively. EPROM may be preferred to ROM in the initial 
stages. In many cases a single chip microprocessor with built in memory capacity 
may be sufficient, if aided by external hardware, to perform a few of the control 
functions in order to increase the speed. In case of multitasking a careful partition­
ing of the tasks may be necessary. Suitable methods may be used to increase the 
speed of operation.
Software Design 
Many of the functions of the microprocessor are software sup­
ported. The implementation of compensators, generation of PWM signals of a 
PWM inverter, etc. are carried out by suitable software. This makes them adapt­
able to various operating conditions. This is an important stage in the design of 
the system. The design of powerful software actually improves the adaptability 
and reliability of the system. The principal factors that decide the effective design 
are the language, bit size, sampling time and the identification of the function of 
the microprocessor. The resolution required in the operation decides the sampling 
time and bit size of the processor.
Once the above stages are completed, all the components are systematically 
integrated and the system may be tested for its performance.
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives 
^ ^ 9
8.6 
STEPPER MOTORS
8.6.1 
Introduction
The microprocessors are employed for the control of stepper motors which are 
generally used as position actuators. Some other applications of these stepper 
motors are to drive floppy discs, numerical control of machine tools, X-Y plotters 
etc. The ease with which these can be controlled using microprocessor has made 
them very popular in the applications cited above. The speed and position control

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
using the stepper motor can be achieved without expensive feedbacks. A typical 
stepper motor has several stator phases. The rotor is a toothed structure. It may be 
sometimes a permanent magnet. Energising the phases in a sequence by direct cur­
rent imparts the rotor a discrete step motion. The resolution of a typical motor is 
good if only it has large number of teeth on stator and rotor. The phases of a stepper 
motor are excited by pulses, each pulse being capable of providing rotor motion in 
smaller angles. The angular rotation depends on the steps of the motor per revolu­
tion. If a motor has 400 steps/rev, the angle by which it moves in a step is 0.9°.
Electronic circuits are used to excite the stator phases from dc supply. Now a 
days, semiconductor devices such as thyristors and transistors are slowly replac­
ing the mechanical and electronic controls using vacuum tubes. The necessary 
logic which was expensive even with the introduction of semiconductor devices 
and electronic circuits has become easy and economical using microprocessors 
and digital circuits. The microprocessor has actually made a stepper motor and its 
control economically feasible.
Open loop control of stepper motor is the simplest method accomplished by 
means of step command pulses obtained from an external source. The motor is 
excited by these pulses and is expected to follow every pulse. This kind of con­
trol of stepper motor is very attractive and has wide acceptance in applications 
of speed and position control. The method has economic advantages. However 
it has its own limitations. The response of the motor to a given input command 
may become oscillatory or even unstable in some speed ranges. The control of the 
motor is not very fast due to this behaviour. To make the motor widely applicable 
it is necessary to improve the performance. A stepper motor may fail to follow 
the pulse when the frequency of the pulses is high or the load inertia is very large. 
Because of these reasons the open loop operation is only limited. The open loop 
control of the motor is depicted in Fig. 8.24(a). For most of the application open 
loop control is suitable.
(b) Input controller
Fig. 8.24(a) 
Open loop control of a stepping motor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
On the other hand a closed loop control of stepper motor is also possible where 
the switching of the motor takes place by means of the input pulse train using the 
position or speed feedback from the rotor. The closed loop control improves 
the performance of the stepper motor. The disadvantages of open loop control 
are not present. No step failure occurs, the response is quicker and the motion is 
smoother. The control is free from instability and capable of quick acceleration. 
A position sensor senses the rotor position and provides the information necessary 
for the control of the motor. A mechanical rotor position sensor with an optical 
encoder coupled to the shaft is used. The rotor position may also be determined 
using the machine voltages and currents. The motor position is monitored and a 
step completed. The closed loop control is employed when the maximum torque 
is required of a given motor and also when absolute step integrity is required. The 
cost of the system depends on the type of position sensor used. A closed loop 
control of the motor is shown in Fig. 8.24(b).
(a) Simple closed loop system
(b) Use of microprocessor 
(c) wjth current control
Fig. 8.24(b) 
Closed loop control of stepper motor 
8.6.2 
Applications of Stepper Motors
The stepper motors find applications in situations where two or more motors are 
required with independent or interactive running. The former is the simplest case. 
Every motor has its own control circuit. The open loop controllers are available 
commercially. The controllers may employ microprocessors.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
The interactive control of the stepper motor is typically employed in places 
where the speed of the motors must be the same. One such example is the glass 
industry. If the speeds are not equal stretching of glass takes place. In the textile 
industry also the stepper motors are used in the interactive control to run at con­
stant speed to avoid fabric tension and damage when fabrics are wound. Careful 
synchronisation of the running of the motors is required.
Another example of interactive control is in robotics. The control of the robot 
manipulator requires simultaneous control of several motors. Here the motors may 
not run at the same speed. The operation of one motor affects the other motors. 
Therefore there can be interactive control where no synchronisation is required, 
but a control is required to make the operation satisfactory with mutual effects of 
several motors.
The open loop control can be easily employed for interactive control of the 
motors also. The operation of the motors is however limited by the considerations 
of stability. When the load conditions are varying open loop control of several 
motors in interactive mode becomes difficult when stability is also to be assured. 
The possible solution is closed loop control with a common feedback control of 
the motors.
The synchronisation of two motors using single closed loop control strategy 
leads to instability. However a motor can be made to follow the velocity profile of 
the other with a suitable delay. This kind of operation however has l imited applica­
tions. The closed loop control of robot motors in the interactive mode requires the 
knowledge of robot geometry. Microprocessors can be advantageously employed 
in complicated controls.
The stepper motors find application in computer peripherals. A few of the 
devices employing stepper motors are
i. 
Serial printers in typewriters or word processor systems
ii. Linear stepper motors to printers
iii. X-Y plotters
iv. Floppy disc drives
v. Numerical control of machine tools such as X-Y tables and index 
tables, milling machines, automatic drafting machine driven by a linear 
motor etc.
An X-Y table is a device operated by two motors working to move the object 
in two perpendicular directions independently. These are used to position the 
object for machining. In milling machines the movement of the object is required 
in three different directions which is accomplished by the stepper motors. Due 
to the oscillatory behaviour of the stepper motor the finish of the surface is not 
comparable to that obtained with dc servomotor control. The drafting machine 
is similar to the X-Y table. A separate minicomputer is used to control these 
motors. The oscillatory motion of the motor in the open loop mode must be given 
due consideration to have satisfactory control. Closed loop control may also be 
necessary.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
The other applications of stepper motors are in space crafts launched for 
scientific exploration of planets. These are used to point the instruments such as 
T.V. cameras, ultra violet spectrometers at the desired objects. The scan actua­
tor shaft position must be very precisely known to control the motors. This is 
obtained by means of feedback and telemetry potentiometers. The shaft and 
these potentiometers are geared together. The gear is highly precise with anti 
backlash.
8.6.3 Features of Stepping Motors in View of Application
For satisfactory operation of a stepper motor, it should have the following fea­
tures:
• 
small step angle
• 
high positioning accuracy
• 
high torque to inertia ratio
• 
stepping rate and accuracy
Small Step Angle The angle by which the rotor of a stepper motor moves when 
one pulse is applied to the (input) stator is called step angle. This is expressed in 
degrees. The resolution of positioning of a stepper motor is decided by the step 
angle. Smaller the step angle the higher is the resolution of positioning of the 
motor. The step number of a motor is the number of steps it makes in one revolu­
tion. The stepper motors are realisable for very small step angle. Some precision 
motors can make 1000 steps in one revolution with a step angle of 0.36°. A stan­
dard motor will have a step angle of 1.8° with 200 steps for revolution. The step 
angles of 90°, 45°, 15° are not uncommon in simple motors.
High Positioning Accuracy The quality of a stepper motor is decided by its position­
ing accuracy. This accuracy of positioning is a significant factor. In any applica­
tion the stepper motors are expected to rotate by step angle when a pulse is given 
as input. It should come to rest in a precise position. Care must be exercised in 
the design and manufacture of a stepper motor as the accuracy at no load depends 
on the physical accuracy of the rotor and the stator. The positioning accuracy 
depends only on the machine characteristics and the driving circuit, while other 
electronic parameters have no effect on positioning accuracy. The stepper motors 
are designed to have very high restoring torque when the rotor is displaced fol­
lowing load torque.
High Torque-to-inertia Ratio 
A stepper motor must move fast response to a pulse or 
a train of pulses. Fast response is also associated with quick start and quick stop 
of the motor. The motor must be capable of stopping at a position specified by 
the last pulse of the pulse train if the train is inhibited when the motor is running 
uniformly. A stepper motor must have a large ratio of torque to inertia so that it 
would fulfil the above condition.
Stepping Rate and Pulse Frequency The speed of a stepper motor is indicated by 
the number of pulses per second. Stepping rate of the motor is therefore used to

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
indicate the speed. As the motor moves by one step for a pulse the speed can also 
be indicated by pulses per second as pulse frequency. The absolute rotational speed 
and stepping rate are related by n = 60 f/S , S = step number, f = stepping rate
(rpm)
8.6.4 
Classification of Stepper Motors
The stepper motors are classified based on the construction and principle of opera­
tion. These are
i. Variable reluctance motors
ii. Permanent magnet motors
iii. Hybrid stepping motors
iv. Claw pole motors with permanent magnets
The stepper motors are used for linear motors also. These are also classified as 
‘variable reluctance motors’ and ‘permanent magnet motors’.
Variable Reluctance Motors The principle of operation of variable reluctance motors 
is based on the property of the flux lines tending to occupy low reluctive path. 
The stator and rotor therefore get aligned such that the magnetic reluctance 
is minimum. This type of motors being basic type, have a stator with different 
sets of winding which are excited by dc alternately. Each set may be called a 
phase. A simple motor may have six teeth on the stator. On each of the teeth 
there is a winding. The windings on the diametrically opposite teeth are con­
nected in series and the resulting one is called the phase of the motor. Thus a 
motor with 6 slots will have three phases. The rotor on the other hand is simply 
made of magnetic material. It also has a slotted structure but no winding. This is 
capable of movement inside the stator whenever a phase of the stator is excited. 
Both the stator and rotor are made up of high quality magnetic materials having 
very high permeability so that the exciting current required is extremely small. 
A three phase variable reluctance stepping motor with four rotor slots is shown 
in Fig. 8.25. The principle of operation of the motor is explained with reference 
to Fig. 8.25.
The coils on the teeth AA' are excited by the dc voltage by closing the switches 
Sr The stator and rotor constitute the magnetic circuit and a magnetic flux is set 
up. The nature of the flux lines being to occupy the path of least reluctance tries 
to move the rotor to align with the stator as shown in Fig. 8.25. The rotor stops 
at a position where the reluctance is minimum and this position is said to be the 
equilibrium position. The next equilibrium position is obtained by exciting the 
next phase. The angle between two successive equilibrium positions is known 
as the step angle. The rotor moves by one step when a winding is excited. If 
any displacement is likely to occur in the rotor due to application of load or any 
disturbing forces, the rotor has a tendency to be in the equilibrium position. To 
accomplish this a torque is developed which is called the restoring torque. The 
external or load torque and restoring torque are of opposite nature. (Fig. 8.25), if 
one acts in the clockwise direction the other acts in the anticlockwise direction.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
Winding
(a) Cross sectional view 
and equilibrium 
position with Ph1 excited
Curving lines 
of magnetic 
field
External torque
Restoring torque 
^ d u e  to tension in 
magnetic lines of 
intensity
Magnetic lines offeree developing torque
S2-ON
Step motion when excitation is switched from Ph1 to Ph2 
Fig. 8.25 
Variable reluctance stepper motor
This restoring torque is due to the property of the flux lines to align the stator and 
rotor such that they have the least reluctive path.
Any switching operation to change the position is accompained by an increase 
in the reluctance which brings in a torque (or force) to seek the alignment of the 
rotor and stator, and the rotor is in equilibrium in the new position. Thus the rotor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
moves by one step or step angle at every new excitation. In the present example 
when S2 is closed, opening S, the rotor moves by 30° in the acw direction. 30° is 
step angle in this case. The rotor will come to its original position after completion 
one rotor tooth pitch rotation which may take 3 steps. These are detailed in 
Fig. 8.25.
The accuracy of positioning which is a desired quality of a stepper motor 
requires a high torque from a given volume of rotor (which is normally small). 
To get the high torque capability a small air gap may be required. A small air gap 
means low reluctance and high flux providing a good torque. The restoring torque 
developed is also sufficiently high so that the displacement from an equilibrium 
position is rather small.
The resolution of stepper motor will be very high if the step angle is smaller. 
This can be made smaller by increasing the number of stator and rotor teeth. This 
depends actually on the stator phases and how the stator teeth are divided into 
phases. For example 12 teeth in the stator can be divided as 3 phases, or 6 phases. 
If rotor teeth are 8 in the former case the step angle is 15° and in the latter it is 
7.5°. The step angle is therefore given by
_ 360 _ 360 
s ” 5 
mNr
where m is the number of phases 
N is rotor teeth.
r
To reduce the step angle the rotor teeth must be increased. The stator teeth is not 
a direct factor in determining the step angle or step number. A four phase motor 
with 50 rotor teeth has 200 steps/revolution or a step angle of 1.8°.
The rotor must be made to have low inertia, so that its torque/inertia ratio is 
higher for quick response of the motor.
Permanent Magnet Stepper Motors 
The rotor is made of a permanent magnet 
in permanent magnet motors. The stator is similar to that of variable reluctance 
motor. The coils on the stator teeth form the phases of the motor. The permanent 
magnet is cylindrical and housed in the multiphase stator. A four phase machine 
with cylindrical permanent magnet motor is shown in Fig. 8.26. The stator has 
four teeth around which coils are wound. The phases are excited by dc voltages 
using the switches. The excitation of phases in the sequence 1 2 3 4 moves the 
rotor in the clockwise direction. The step angle in the present case in 90°. To 
increase the step angle the number of stator phases and number of rotor poles 
must be increased. This method has limitations.
The rotor comes to rest at a fixed position even if excitation of stator 
ceases. The mechanism by which the rotor comes to rest is known as detent 
mechanism and the predetermined position is called the detent position. This 
is defined as the position at which a permanent magnet motor comes to rest 
at no load without excitation. A permanent magnet motor has the following 
disadvantages:

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
Fig. 8.26 
Permanent magnet stepper motor
i. The motor is costly due to permanent magnets.
ii. The level of the magnetic remanance fixes the maximum flux density 
level. This being very low the torque capability of the motor is not high.
Hybrid Stepping Motors 
One main limitation of the permanent magnet motor is 
the step angle. It cannot be reduced because of the limitations on the phases of the 
stator. To increase the step rate and have a small step angle a hybrid motor work­
ing on the principles of variable reluctance motor and permanent magnet motor. 
The construction of stator of a hybrid motor is almost similar to that of a variable 
reluctance motor (Fig. 8.27). However there is a difference in placing the wind­
ings of the stator poles. In a hybrid motor two coils of different phases are wound 
on the same pole whereas in a variable reluctance motor only one coil of a phase 
is placed on a pole. In a hybrid motor the excitation of the coils cause different 
magnetic polarities.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Electric Drives
(2)
N
S
N
s
N
s
X X ‘T
r
m
m
N 
S 
N 
S
S 
N 
S 
N
s
N
s
N
S
N
m
T Y .T T T T V 'T T
m
m
S 
N 
S 
N
Fig. 8.27 
How steps occur in a claw-poled PM motor
The rotor of a hybrid motor also has a different structure. The cylindrical rotor 
structure is magnetised to produce unipolar field. Each pole is covered by toothed 
soft steel. There is a misalignment between the teeth of two sections by half a 
tooth pitch. In some motors the stator core has misalignment. The toothed sec­
tions are made of silicon steel laminations. The stator coils generate heteropolar 
field.
The toothed structures of the stator and the rotor are designed to reduce the step 
angle in a hybrid motor. The permanent magnet is significant in producing a driv­
ing force. The torque is developed by the interaction of the two types of magnetic 
fields in the toothed structures in the air gap. Sequential switching on and off of 
the stator phases will result in the rotor motion in steps. The torque production and 
movement of the rotor is due to the superposition of the fields of stator phases and 
permanent rotor magnet. The superposition is such that the flux is strengthened 
on one side and weakened on the other side causing the motion of the motor. The 
rotor moves until the driving force is zero. At this point it has its equilibrium posi­
tion. Multistack motors are used to raise the torque.
Claw Pole Motor A claw pole motor is also a permanent magnet stepper motor. 
It has the advantage of low manufacturing costs and has applications as the paper 
feed prime mover and head drive motor in floppy disc drives.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Microprocessors and Control of Electrical Drives
— Multiple-Choice Questions
8.1 
The centre of operations and control 
in a microcomputer is
(a) Memories
(b) Microprocessor unit (MPU)
(c) Address decoders
(d) Interfaces
8.2 
The OR operation in a microproces­
sor is classified as
(a) arithmetic instruction
(b) data transfer instruction
(c) logical instruction
(d) decision making instruction
8.3 
A subroutine in a microcomputer 
program is
(a) a set of branching instructions
(b) a set of logical instructions
(c) a set of transfer operations
(d) a special group of instructions 
that perform a commonly used 
specific task in a program
8.4 
The CPU of a microcomputer typi­
cally contains a variety of storage 
devices called
(a) ROM
(b) RAM
(c) instruction decoders
(d) registers
8.5 
A microprocessor responds basically 
to a listing of operations called
(a) high level language
(b) machine language
(c) assembly language
(d) to all the languages above
8.6 
An assembler
(a) is a special computer program 
for translating from assembly 
language to machine language
(b) is a special computer program 
for translating from high-level
language 
to 
machine 
lan­
guage
(c) a unit used to connect several 
parts of pp
(d) is a computer program which 
translates machine language to 
assembly language
8.7 
Interconnection of parts within a pp 
based system is called
(a) interrupt
(b) assembly
(c) interfacing
(d) programming
8.8 
Keyboard is an
(a) output peripheral device
(b) input peripheral device
(c) output interface adapter
(d) input interface adapter
8.9 
The 8085 microprocessor uses a
(a) +5 V power supply
(b) -5 V power supply
(c) +10 V power supply
(d) +15 V power supply
8.10 A dual converter is operating in 
non-circulating current mode. The 
microprocessor software must be 
capable of
(a) detecting discontinuous conduc­
tion
(b) sensing zero crossing of current
(c) identifying actual zero crossing 
of the current and it should not 
confuse with the discontinuous 
conduction
(d) identifying 
the 
discontinuous 
conduction and it should not 
confuse with the natural zero of 
the current.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Electric Drives
References
~\
J
8.1 
Bose, B.K., Power electronics and ac drives, Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, 1986.
8.2 
Subrahmanyam, Vedam, Thyristor control o f electrical drives, Tata McGraw-Hill 
Publishing Company Ltd., New Delhi, 1988.
8.3 
Athani, V.V., and S.M. Deshpande, Microprocessor control of a three phase induc­
tion motor speed control system, IEEE Trans. IECI, IECI-27, pp. 291-298, 1980.
8.4 
Buja, G.S., and P. Florini, ‘Microprocessor control of PWM inverters’, IEEE Trans. 
IE, Vol. IE 29, pp. 212-218, Aug., 1982.
8.5 
Plant, J.B., S.J. Norma, and Y.T. Chan, ‘Microprocessor control of position or speed 
of an SCR DC motor drive’, IEEE Trans. IECI, Vol. IECI-27, pp. 228-234, 1980.
8.6 
Tang, P.C., S.S. Lu, and Y.C. Wu, ‘Microprocessor based design of a firing circuit for 
three phase full-wave thyristor dual converter’, IEEE Trans. Ind. Elec., Vol. IE-29, 
pp. 67-73, 1982.
8.7 
Sathiakumar, S., S.K. Biswas, and J. Vithayathil ‘Microprocessor-based field- 
oriented control of a CSI-fed induction motor drive’, IEEE Trans, on IE, Vol. IE-33, 
pp. 39-43, 1986.
8.8 
Gabriel, R., W. Leonhard, and C.J. Nordby, ‘Field-oriented control of a standard ac 
motor using microprocessors’, IEEE Trans, on IA., Vol. IA-16, pp. 186-192, 1980.
8.9 
Kenji Kubo, Masakiko Watanabe, Tsutomo Shamee, Kenjo Kamiyama, ‘A fully 
digitalised speed regulator using multiprocessor system for induction motor drives’, 
IEEE Trans. IA, Vol. IA-21, pp. 1001-1008, 1985.
8.10 Shmae, T., et ai, ‘A microprocessor controlled high accuracy wide range speed regu­
lator for motor drives’, IEEE Trans. IE, Vol. IE-29, pp. 207-211, 1982.
8.11 Bowes, S.R., and M.J. Mount, ‘Microprocessor control of PWM inverters’, Proc. 
1EE, Vol. 128, 1981, pp. 293-305.
8.12 Oliver, G., V.R. Stefanovic, and G.M. April, ‘Microprocessor controller for thyristor 
converter with an improved power factor’, IEEE Trans. IECI, Vol. IECI-28, 1981, 
pp. 188-194.
8.13 Harashima, F., H. Nontoh, H. Taoka, ‘A microprocessor-based PLL speed control 
system converter-fed synchronous motor’, IEEE Trans. IECI, Vol. IECI-27, Aug., 
1980, pp. 196-201.
8.14 Ishida, K.., K. Nakamma, T. Izumi, and M. Ohara, ‘Microprocessor control of con­
verter fed dc motor drive,’ Conference Record, IEEE IAS, 1982, pp. 619-623.
8.15 Bose, B.K. and H.A. Sutherland, ‘A high performance pulse-width modulator for an 
inverter drive system using a microcomputer’, Conference Record, IEEE IAS, 1982.
8.16 Le-Huy, H., R. Perret, and D. Roye, ‘Microprocessor control of a current-fed syn­
chronous motor drive’, Conference Record, IEEE IAS-79, pp. 873-880.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
FED INDUCTION MOTOR
(V Subrahmanyam *)
A method is presented for the analysis of a current-fed induction motor via state transition 
signal-flow graph technique. The input current waveform is neither stepped nor trapezoi­
dal. It has a sinusoidal variation during commutation of the current in the inverter as well 
as in the phases of the motor. The equations developed are used to determine and compare 
the performance of the motor at two different slip conditions. At very large slips, it is found 
that the torque pulsations have larger amplitude owing to the departure of rotor flux wave 
from sinusoidal variation.
1 
List of symbols
lA> lrv I
h’1 
I
i
B ’ 
C
b’ L
aslr’ ^ßslr 
LroC ^/hoi
L , (A V  (J)
L „ L  ,
M
P 
Rstr Rrot
W«str’ U jislr 
arot’ 
//rot 
«sir’ 
//str
(i), 
(i)
(i). 
(-5)
//rot
OJn
CO
rot
line currents of induction motor 
phase currents of induction motor 
dc link current
two axis components of stator currents in the stationary reference frame
two axis components of rotor currents in the stationary reference frame
Laplace transforms of /nstr, ///s(r
self-inductance of stator and rotor
mutual inductance between stator and rotor
pairs of poles
resistances of stator and rotor per phase 
Laplace operator 
torque developed
two-axis components of stator voltage in the stationary reference frame
two-axis components of rotor flux linkages
two-axis components of stator flux linkages
Laplace transforms of two axis
components of stator and rotor flux linkages
rotor speed
oscillating frequency of commutating circuit
A.t 
INTRODUCTION
It has been well established during the last few years that the current source inverters pos­
ses a variety of advantages over the voltage source ones. Therefore, the drives utilizing 
current source inverters are becoming very popular. The output current waveform of a cur­
rent source inverter is nonsinusoidal. When the commutation of the current in the inverter 
is instantaneous the waveform tends to be rectangular and it can be described as piecewise
D r. H a b il V edam  Su b rah m an yam  is A ssista n t P ro fesso r at the D epartm ent o f E le c tric a l E n g in e e rin g , 
In d ian  Institute o f T e ch n o lo gy, M adras/India.
M an u scrip t received: 23.7 .19 82

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Appendix A
constant over a period. The analysis of current-fed induction motors operating on rectan­
gular currents is discussed in detail [1,2, 3].
The commutation of the current from one phase to the other of an induction motor fed 
from a current source inverter is sometimes assumed to be linear rather than instantaneous 
in which case the current waveform tends to be trapezoidal. A method for analysing the 
performance of a current fed induction motor using state transition signal flow graphs for 
trapezoidal currents has also been discussed [4, 5].
In practice, the commutation of the current in the inverter as well as in the phases of 
the induction motor is neither instantaneous nor linear. The current during commutation 
follows a damped sinusoid as the machine inductance and resistance form the commuting 
circuit along with the commutating capacitance. Neglecting the motor resistance the cur­
rent variation can be taken to be sinusoidal during commutation.
The present paper aims at calculating the performance of a current source inverter fed 
induction motor with sinusoidal variation of current during commutation. The method 
developed using signal flow graphs has been used to obtain a closed form solution for the 
performance during interlude as well as commutating periods.
A.2 
COMMUTATION PROCESS IN THE INVERTER AND STATOR 
CURRENTS OF THE INDUCTION MOTOR
To enable one to write the equations of the current during commutation, a brief description 
of the commutation process is given below. The following assumptions are made during 
the discussion:
— the diodes and thyristors are ideal switches,
—the link current is constant and ripple free, and 
—the commutation overlaps do not occur.
The current source inverter feeding a three phase induction motor is shown in Fig. A.l. 
The inverter is of the auto sequential type according to Ward [6],
+
Fig. A.t 
Current source inverter feeding a three phase induction motor

The McGraw Hill Companies
Appendix A
To start with it is assumed that thyristors 
T\ and T6 are conducting. The thyristor 73 
is fired to commutate T\ at the instant t = ta
Fig. A.2 shows the variation of current in the 
incoming as well as outgoing line feeding the 
induction motor. The commutation process 
initiated by firing 73 at ta can be divided into 
three parts:
— t to tb is the period in which the cur­
rent gets commutated from T\ to 73.
This period is very small compared to 
the total commutation time and it can 
be neglected, i.e. it can be assumed that 
the transfer of current from the outgo­
ing thyristor to the incoming one is 
almost instantaneous.
— t to td (ta to f ) is the first part of the 
commutation interval. 
During this 
period D3 is in blocking state. The 
capacitor voltages vary linearly and the 
machine currents remain unaltered. At 
td, D3 gets forward biased and starts conducting.
— t to te is the second part of the commutation interval (i ). During this interval current 
is transferred from one phase to the other of the induction motor. The commutation 
of the current is influenced by the machine resistance, inductance and capacitance 
of the commutating circuit of the inverter. The current actually follows a damped
Fig. A.2 
Variation of line currents i
and iB of a three phase induc­
tion motor fed from a current 
source inverter during com­
mutation
Fig. A.3 
Line (a) and phase currents (b) of a delta connected induction motor fed from 
a current source inverter

The McGraw Hill Companies
Appendix A
sinusoid. But when the resistance is neglected the commutating circuit becomes 
a simple LC circuit and the current variation can be approximated by a sinusoid. 
Therefore the current can be written as
zA= /  cos (coc t) 
(A4.1)
in the outgoing line, and
iB = I . [  1 -  cos (mc 0] 
(A4.2)
in the incoming line. The phase currents can be determined depending upon the 
connection of the machine. The commutation is complete when al the current is 
transferred to the incoming line. eoc is determined by L and C.
The current waveform at the input terminals z A of the induction motor over a period can 
now be determined as shown in Fig. A.3 where the phase current for delta connection of 
the stator is given too.
A.3 
MACHINE EQUATIONS AND FORMULATION 
OF SIGNAL-FLOW GRAPH
The performance equations of a three phase induction motor are well known. These equa­
tions derived with respect to stationary reference frame can be written as
^«str — ^str 4tstr 
Wastr
(A4.3)
^/îstr — ^str 9?str 
ßstr
(A4.4)
0 — ^rot *arot 
^ a v o ^  ®rot
V  /irot
(A4.5)
0 — ^rot iß rot 
W ßrot~ ^rot Wa rot
(A4.6)
t//( str and y/ 
in eqs. (A4.3) and (A4.4) are the direct axis and quadrature axis flux linkages 
of the stator wherea 
rotor. These are given by
arot
/irot in eqs. (A4.5) and (A4.6) are the flux linkages of the
= A , A , + M
(A4.7)
= A , V „+ M  V«
(A4.8)
v .M = A , A  + M A ,
(A4.9)
Vßrot“  ^rot V» +  ^  Vlr
(A4.10)
The stator current waveform is known in the case of an induction motor fed from a cur­
rent source inverter. The analysis problem reduces to the solution of rotor equations only. 
The stator voltage can be calculated from the known values of rotor quantities and stator 
currents.
Substituting for iam and / 
in tenns of z'us(r, / , i//am and y/ 
in eqs. (A4.5) and (A4.6) 
from eqs. (A4.7) to (A4.10) and rearranging the terms, we get
^arot 
(^ ro t^ ro t) A f Zastr 
(-^rot^rot ) */A.rot 
^rot V^/îrot 
V ßrot ~  (^ ro t^ ro t) ^
 ^/istr — (^rot ^ r o t ) ^/?rot 
^rot^arot
(A4.11) 
(A4.12)
For a constant speed eqs. (A4.11) and (A4.12) become linear differential equations with 
constant coefficients which can be solved for if/am and y/ 
. Using eqs. (A4.9) and (A4.10) 
the rotor current components z'aro( and ifjm[ can be evaluated. The two axis flux linkages of the

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Appendix A
stator can be evaluated using eqs. (A4.7) and (A4.8). The instantaneous torque developed 
is determined using equation
<A4-13)
Equations (A 4.ll) and (A4.12) can be solved using the signal flow graph. The method 
offers a variety of advantages [4, 5]. Taking Laplace transforms of eqs. (A 4.ll) and 
(A4.12) we get
* Y'™ W - 
(0) = K t 
iaalr(s)-Q „ 
( 
5 V .  
-  v
. (0) = K < V
(s) ” 
V ' ™. '  @ 22 
CO- 
<A4-15)
The constants AT and Q can be very easily identified from eqs. (A4.11) and (A4.12). y/ 
(0) and ip 
(0) are the initial values of rotor flux linkages. Equations (A4.14) and (A4.15) 
can be represented by a signal flow graph as shown in Fig. A.4.
Using the general gain formula derived by Mason [7] to obtain a functional relation­
ship between the input and output variables expressions for y/avoi (s) and y//koi (s) can be 
obtained as
K m (s ) = [l/(s2A] [AT, (s + Q22) / .  (s) -  K t Qn 
(,)
+ (s + Q„) 
(0) -  Qa VtM (0)]
V .  CO = 
t~K , Q„ 
( 0  + K, (i + Q„) V  ( 0
-  Q21 v«,« (°) + (s + 6„) 
(0)]
where s2A is the characteristic equation which can be obtained as
s2A = s2 +(2 awt) 5 + (a20t + oj2oi) = 0
where a =R JL ; s. and s. are the roots of this characteristic equation.
rot 
rot 
rot7 
1 
2 
1
As stated earlier, the input current waveform can be described as shown in Fig, A.3. For 
a portion of one sixth cycle the current is constant and during tde it varies sinusoidally. From 
the known waveforms the a, ft components of stator currents over one period are tabulated 
in Tab. A. 1. The two axis components also are constant during interlude period and they are 
sine functions during commutation. Therefore Laplace transforms of the currents during 
interlude period are
U  (J) = U s> 
(A4-19)
v  (j) = V 5- 
(A4-20)
(A4.16) 
(A4.17) 
(A4.18)
Fig. A.4 
Signal flow graph of a current fed induction motor

The McGraw Hill Companies
A p p e n d ix A
Table A.1 
Expressions for the two axis components of the currents during interlude 
and commutating periods over a cycle (the machine is delta connected)
Interlude
Commutation
7/str Ostr
- 7 - / 3  -7_ / £
(7_/3) [1 -2  cos (cu f)] (-7_ A/3)
Ustr 0str
- 7 - / 3  -7_/V 3
(- 7 _ /3) [ -  2 + cos (eo*)] 
(-7_/V 3) cos (w 0]
1 . h .
astr /fstr
27-/30
(7 _ /3) [ 1 + cos (cuc i)] 
(7_/V3) [1 -  cos (coc 0]
7/str Ostr
7 -/3  I _ a/3
(—/  — /3) [1 -  2 cos (fflc 0] /_/V3
kcstr lßstr
- 7 - / 3  7_/>/3
(7 _ /3) [ -2 + cos (coc /)] 
(7_/v3) cos (mc 0
1 . h,,
astr /istr
-2 7 -/3 0
(—7_/3) [ 1 + cos (mc 0]
(-/_ A /3 ) [ 1 -  cos (cuc 0]
The time-domain solution for the rotor flux linkages during interlude period can be 
written as with k as running variable
ycivox
4 o  +  I  4 *  e x p  0 * 0  #io +  I  B ]k e xp  0 * 0
^astr
_ ¥ ß rot _
_ A o  +  s  ^ 2* e xp  0 * 0  ^20 +  I  B 2k e xp  0 * 0  _ _ Ostr
+
I  C,* exp (.skt) X Dlk exp (skt) 
I  A 2k exp 0*0 X D2k exp 0*0
^rot(°)
W ß r o X  (0)
(A4.21)
i//moi (0) and i////roi(0) in Eq. (21) are the initial values of flux linkages at the start of the 1 /6th 
period.
General expressions during tdc for the two axis components of the currents are given in 
Tab. A. 1. Their Laplace transforms will be
'«sir ( 4 =  I- lK J s  + K a2 s/(s2 + o>c2)], 
(A4.22)
iß s,r 
(s)= I - [ K ß i  
/s + 
K ßl 
s/(s2 + 
Using these the time domain expressions for rotor flux linkages during tde can be written as 
with k as running variable
Waxot
4(0 + X 4^.exp (.sy ) ßj'o + X 
exp
X i  C
W ß rot
.420 + 1 
exp (j*0 S20 + X Sm exp 0*0. _Fßi 7_
X E lk exp 0*0 + 
exp(jmc0 + E u  exp(-jmc0 
X  E2k exp 0*0 + E23 exp(jooc0 + F24 exp(-jmci
X 0* exp 0*0 + ^i3 exp(jmc0 + F
l 4  exp(-jcoc0 
X F2k exp 0*0 + f23 exp(jmc0 + F
2 4  exp(-jwc/
r * a2/_ 1
_1_ ’ I  Ci» exp 
(skt) + X 0,'t exp ( s
t t )  '
V 0 r o t( 0 )
|_ Fß2I- J 1
I  C
' l k  exp ( s
k t )  + X D'lk exp ( s
k t ) _
Yß r o t( 0 ) _
(A4.24)

The McGraw Hill Companies
Appendix A
t in eq. (A4.24) takes value from 0 to 
tde- 
V'irotWand ^ rot(0)are the initial 
values of flux linkages at start of com­
mutation.
The values of constants A, B, C and D 
in Eq. (A4.21) andH', B', E, F, C  and D' 
in Eq. (A4.24) are obtained using partial 
fraction expansion, for instance
A w = K i Q22/(S]s2), etc.. 
(A4.25)
Using the symmetry relations the initial 
values and final value of rotor flux link­
ages over one sixth cycle can be related 
as (Fig. A.5)
Fig. A.5 
Rotor flux vector at the begin­
ning and end of one sixth cycle
PawtiT/6)
"0.5
-0.866
>«rot(0)
J/^rot (T16)
0.866
0.5
V /irot (0)
(A4.26)
Equation (A4.26) is used to determine the initial values of flux linkages. Using these values 
the flux linkages over one sixth of one cycle are determined.
With the known values of rotor flux linkages the other quantities such as rotor cur­
rents, stator flux linkages, stator induced voltages and the torque developed can be 
determined.
A.4 
RESULTS
The performance equation derived above via state transition signal flow graph are used 
to determine the steady state performance of a three phase slip ring induction motor the 
details of which are given in Table A.2. The steady state performance of the machine is 
calculated for two different slip conditions.
The locus of the tip of the rotor flux vector for one sixth cycle is shown in Fig. A.6 for 
two speeds of the rotor, one at 1460 min"1 and the other at 50 min"1. The corresponding sta­
tor frequencies are 50 Hz and 3 Hz respectively. In both cases the link current is kept at 15A
Table A.2 
Details of the induction motor used for the investigation (rating 5.5 kW; 
n = 1410 min'1; type: slip ring)
Stator
Rotor
Number of poles
4
4
Connection
delta
star
Voltage
220 V
170V
Resistance per phase
0.98 Q
0.90 Q
Self inductance per phase
0.14 H
0.138 H
Mutual inductance between sta-
0.132 H
0.132 H
tor and rotor

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Appendix A
- 0.8 
- 0.6 
- 0.4 
- 0.2 Wb 
0
V'q. rot
Fig. A.6 
Rotor flux vector over one sixth
cycle at different frequencies (rotor 
frequency 1.33 Hz; link current 15 A)
( a)  fstr =  5 °  Hz; 
( b)  fstr =  10 H Z '> 
( C)  fstr =  3 HZ
and rotor frequency at 1.33 Hz. From 
the figure it can be seen that the locus is 
almost the arc of a circle at 1460 min-1 
(low slip operation) whereas it devi­
ates from the arc of a circle for opera­
tion at 50 min-1 (high slip operation). 
From this, it can be concluded that the 
rotor flux waveform is almost sinusoi­
dal for the former operating conditions 
whereas it deviates very much from 
sinusoidal for the latter operating con­
ditions. Therefore for a given rotor fre­
quency and link current the harmonic 
content of the rotor flux increases as the 
frequency of operation decreases.
The induced voltages in the stator 
phases are evaluated from the known 
values of rotor flux linkages and sta­
tor currents (Fig. A.7). The wave­
form corresponding to 1460 min~' is 
almost sinusoidal but distorted due 
to stator resistance and has spikes 
during commutation. At large slip 
operation a further distortion in the 
waveform can be expected because of 
the harmonics in the rotor flux wave­
form. The oscillogram of the voltage 
waveform is also shown in the fig­
ure. There is a very close agreement 
between the test and the calculated 
results.
Figure A.8 depicts the torque devel­
oped by the motor over one cycle for 
both the operating conditions described 
above. The steady state torque contains 
sixth harmonic torque pulsations. The 
amplitude of the torque pulsations is 
larger at larger slip conditions; here in 
this case at low frequency of opera­
tion. This can be expected because of 
the increased harmonic content of the 
rotor flux linkages at lower operating 
frequencies; or in other words the rela­
tive magnitude of the torque pulsations 
becomes larger as the slip increases for 
a given rotor frequency and link cur­
rent.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Appendix A
(a)
500
v
400
300
200
t
100
i
0
-1 0 0
-2 0 0
-300
Fig. A.7 
Stator voltage waveform of a current fed induction motor (link current 15 A;
speed 1460 min"’; frequency 50 Hz) (a) Computed waveform (b) Oscillogram
0 
776 
773 
t 772 
27/3 
57/6 
7
Fig. A.8 
Torque M developed by a current fed induction motor (I = 15 A)
-----------n = 1460 min~1(fstr = 50 Hz)
......... n = 
50 min~1(fstr -  5 Hz)

The McGraw-Hill Companies
An analysis of the commutation of a current source inverter feeding an induction motor 
shows that the current during commutation follows a damped sinusoid. When the resis­
tance of the commutation circuit is neglected, it can be approximated by a sinusoid. With 
such an input current waveform which has a sinusoidal variation during commutation a 
closed form solution for the performance of the induction motor is developed via signal 
flow graph technique. These equations are used to compare the operation at two different 
stator frequencies with the same rotor frequency and link current. The comparison shows 
that the rotor flux deviates very much from sinusoidal variation at low frequencies. This in 
turn distorts the voltage waveform and increases the magnitude of torque pulsations.
jgi|
References
v___________________________________________
\
______________________ J
A.l 
Naunin, D.\ Berechnung des Drehmomentverlaufs einer Asynchronmaschine bei 
Speisung mit Rechteckströmen. ETZ-A Elektrotech. Z. 90 (1969) no. 8, p. 179-182 
A.2 
Klautscheck, H.\ Das Verhalten der Induktionmaschine bei Speisung über Strom- 
Zwischenkreis-Umrichter. ETZ-A Elektrotech. Z. 95 (1974) no. 5, p. 283-287 
A.3 
Lipo, T.A.; Cornell, E.P.: State Variable steady state analysis of a current controlled 
induction motor. Conf. Rec. IEEE IAS, 1974
A.4 
Subrahmanyam, V; Subbarayudu, D.; Rao, M.V.C.: On the utility of signal flow 
graphs in the analysis of current controlled induction motor. Conf. Rec. IFAC sym- 
pos. Düsseid., 1977
A.5 
Subbarayudu, D.; Subrahmanyam, V: On the steady state analysis of a current fed 
induction motor. Arch.f.Elektrotech. 61 (1979)
A.6 
Ward, E. \ Inverter suitable for operation over a wide range of frequency. Proc. IEEE 
111 (1964)no. 8 ,p.1423-1434
A.7 
Dorf, R.C.: Time domain analysis and design of control systems. London: Addison 
Wesley, 1963

The McGraw-Hill Companies
^  Appendix B
LARGE POWER VSI DRIVES
A voltage source inverter possesses the following disadvantages as limiting factors 
restricting its application areas.
• 
Relatively poor efficiency; limited switching frequency due to high switching 
losses.
• 
Current harmonics leading to torque pulsatins.
• 
The maximum speed of operation is limited.
• 
Series, parallel operation of GTO’s still poses a problem. With commercially avail­
able GTOs, the maximum power rating of a GTO inverter is around 2 MVA.
di 
dv
GTOs also require snubbers to protect against —  and ~
. Energy stored in these 
if i 
i/v
snubbers (both ~  and ~
) has to be dissipated in the snumbber resistors.
These losses should be included in the snubber losses. However, the current during turn 
off should be considered but not the maximum value. These losses depend on the switch­
ing frequency. A study of these losses shows that the snubber losses form a larger part of 
the total losses. These increase in direct proportion to switching frequency. The upper limit 
on the nothing frequency is placed in view of these losses only. Maximum switching fre­
quency with GTO converter is less than 300 Hz to limit these losses to a reasonable value. 
This is the case with RLCD snubbers with their disadvantages. Even the improved snubber 
circuits with reduced losses (about 60%) the problems are not solved effectively. The use 
of energy recovering snubber circuits lead to further improvement, however this is a very 
expensive solution.
Therefore, with the large power drives and their configurations the main objective 
should be to reach the maximum speed of operation with the lowest frequency, lowest pos­
sible current and torque pulsations.
The voltage control and harmonic neutralization in a voltage source inventer have been 
accomplished chiefly by the PWM methods. The research and development of the systems 
leading to efficient methods of modulation generating the pulse patterns of output voltage 
have been innumerable.
These methods are
• 
carrier frequency modulation techniques with sinusoidal reference
• 
space vector modulation
• 
offline optimisation of modulation using look up tables
• 
direct self-control techniques based on the signals of torque and flux
A variety of methods are developed where the devices used are IGBTs or MOSFETS 
and a very high frequency can be used as switching frequency. These are suitable for a volt­
age source inventer for small and medium power levels.
At large power levels, the GTOs are used. High switching frequencies render the system 
inefficient as discussed above due to high snubber losses. As has already been stated, the 
chief aim of these investigations is to have a VSI for large powers with least power loss, 
the lowest switching frequency and highest speed of operation. For this, a sinusoidal PWM

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Appendix B
w1a,b,c
Inverter output voltages
Motor current (top: harmonics)
Inverter output voltages
1
0
---- 1------- 1-------r
F = 63 Hz
Un
-1
F, = 63 Hz
_J_________I________ L_
Motor voltage
- \
\
------- 1----------
A
---------1--------
u u
/ 
-
f
1
-
1
\y
____ 1____W
-
Motor current (top: harmonics)
Fig.Bi 
Three-phase two-level inverter. A: circuit. B: PWM mode 50 Hz. C: square-wave 
mode 63 Hz.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Appendix B
using triangular wave of high carrier frequency and sinusoidal reference is employed. The 
points of intersection of these waves are the instants of voltage reversal at the output of 
the inventer Uabc. The carrier frequency is the actual switching frequency of the inventer.
Large induction motors have their magnetising current at 25% of the rated current of 
the motor. The rated current lags the applied voltage by about 25° to 30°. The harmonic 
equivalent circuit may be simplified and it can be assumed to be containing only leakage 
inductance. This simplification (leads or) results in the total harmonic (content) current 
independent of load. This harmonic current may be superimposed on the fundamental cur­
rent, which is divided by the load. The harmonic current depends on the leakage factor; 
larger the leakage factor, smoother the current.
Considering from the viewpoints of high speed, low harmonic content, low switching 
frequency, the total harmonic component of the no-load current waveform can be taken as 
the representative. For large machines, the leakage factor is around 5%. This makes the 
THD to as high as 93%. By this, one means that the rms value of the harmonic content in 
the no-load current is 93% of the fundamental no-load magnetising current. It is rather dif­
ficult to get simultaneously lowest possible switching frequency and lowest THD. Taking 
for granted a switching frequency of 300 Hz and a THD of 0.93 as the upper limit, one has 
to strike a compromise between these two while going for high-speed drives with maxi­
mum reference frequency within the limits giving due consideration to normal frequency 
of operation.
When a VSI-fed induction motor drive is investigated taking these factors into con­
sideration, two-level configurations (Fig. B.la) for high power and high speed operation 
cannot be built with lowest THD and lowest switching frequency. Switching frequency can 
be greater than 300 Hz and THD in the range 0.93 for normal speed drives with a reference 
frequency of 50-60 Hz.
B.1 
THREE-LEVEL DRIVES
Compared to two-level drives, these can be operated with twice the dc voltage and hence 
the rated power can be twice. A three-point change over switch (Fig B.2b) is placed in each 
phase of the motor. The output of these switches can be connected to positive, negative or 
zero potential of the input dc source. One three-level inverter can be regarded as an inverter 
which can be operated with two independent pulse patterns.
In the lower speed range, the inverter is operated in the PWM mode. Both the pulse 
patterns I and II (Fig. B.2) provide the same fundamental voltage. The harmonic content is 
however reduced by using staggered switching instants. The sinusoidal reference decides 
the fundamental component of the inverter voltage. The staggered switching is realised by 
means of 180° phase shift between the triangular control signals.
In the upper speed range, the inverter may be operated in the square wave mode. The 
pulse patterns here have a switching frequency equal to the reference frequency with a 
phase shift to provide or control the fundamental voltage (proportional to frequency).
Three-Level VSI Shows the Following Improvements
i. 
For normal speeds with reference frequency at 50 or 60 Hz, the switching fre­
quency of 300 Hz reduces the THD of the motor current. Torque ripple decreases. 
The PWM mode can be extended to reference frequency close to normal value of 
50 or 60 Hz as the case may be.
ii. 
For high-speed operation, this frequency can be increased to 130 Hz without 
exceeding the switching frequency beyond 300 Hz and without using field

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Appendix B
Inverter output voltages
Motor current (top: harmonics
Inverter output voltages
Fig.Bz 
Three-phase three-level inverter. A: circuit B: PW/VI mode 6oHz. C: square-wave 
mode 90 Hz.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Appendix B
weakening. The control method should be changed a t/' = 65 Hz from PWM 
switching mode (f = 300 Hz) to switching mode with fundamental frequency 
/= /; = 65 to 130 Hz.
B.2 
lo w  in d u ctan ce design
Taking into consideration the size of the components, the space needed for insulation and 
the increased distance of hot snubber resistors, the current loops may be regarded as hav­
ing parasitic inductances. Even small leads may have such parasitic inductances at high 
frequency. The switching off of the current in these loops may result both di/dt and voltage 
stress. These may reduce the attainable rated power. Low inductance designs are therefore 
required.
A two-level inverter circuit with RLCD snubber is shown in Fig. 5 with four loops 
where currents are switched off with high di/dt. These loops must be kept as small as pos­
sible. Low inductance configuration is shown in Fig. 5. This is achieved basically by
— Low-inductance capacitors Cdc with sandwiched connections to the semiconductors.
— Snubber capacitors c and diodes (6,, b2)are placed as closely as possible to the GTOs.
— Snubber resistors R with low inductance design and sandwiched connections to other 
semiconductor elements.
B.3 
CONTROLS
For good dynamic behaviour of the torque control and speed sensorless operation vector 
control using field orientation may be used advantageously both in low and medium power 
drives.
Large power drives use speed sensors. In most of the applications, high dynamic perfor­
mance may not be required, e.g., pumps, fans and compressors.
High perfonnance may be required in applications like steel mills along with regenera­
tive speed reversal. For these applications, VSI drives are not competitive because they 
require additional convertor on the line side for regeneration. The FOC can still be used 
with VSI fed motors. But its advantages have not been found useful till now in this field.
B.4 
FUTURE TRENDS
VSI-fed induction motors have increased potential for real high-power, high-speed drives. 
This potential is connected with the developments and advances in the semiconductor tech­
nology and also new motor-converter configurations:
These include the following:
i. 
Improved gate control of GTOs to reduce the turn-on and turn-off delay differ­
ences of individual GTOs. This may result in easier series-parallel operation 
of the units. Series-parallel operation with an additional GTO in each branch 
allows to introduce a new quality, fault tolerance.
ii. 
Higher power VSI at a justified cost. High-power, high-speed drives may be pos­
sible with VSIs at all power levels with twin configurations.
Looking further into the future, MOS-controlled high power GTOs (MCTs) may be 
expected with much simpler and economical gate control.

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Appendix B
The introduction of IGBTs in the place of GTOs may open up a new trend in building 
cheaper and better inverters with reduced harmonics. IGBTs have specific advantages of 
higher switching frequency, simple gate control and perhaps no need for snubbers. It also 
offers high flexibility of operation and might also open the way for multiphase motor with 
high torque/volume ratio.
This transition is practicable for low and medium power drives. The transition at high 
power levels takes some more time till the developments of IGBTs to handle large power 
at high voltages and high currents as present-day GTOs do; series-parallel operation of 
GTBTs at the device level. It may be expected that IGBTs may be introduced at the low 
power end of large power drives.
B.5 
co n fig u ra tio n s o f vsi
Present-day GTO inverters have limited power and frequency capabilities, e.g., two-level 
inverter up to 2 MW/60 Hz and three-level one 4 MW/130 Hz parallel or series connection 
of VSIs may obviously increase the power rating but not operating frequency.
Developments of motors having different 3 phase wingdings fed from different VSIs. 
These have improved voltage waveforms impressed across the windings unlike CSI which 
have impressed currents. The magnetic coupling between the windings may cause interact­
ing current harmonics due to voltage of both the VSIs. It is difficult to provide dc coupling 
between these coupled voltage systems to the extent that they do not produce high interact­
ing current harmonics.
The power-factor limitations can be extended to twin configurations which are in con­
ventional motor and inverter configurations. However, the existing VSIs and motors with 
conventional 3 phase stator winding with access to both ends of the phases may be used 
with two VSIs feeding on both the ends. The rated power can be increased to 8 MW, extend­
ing the frequency to 300 Hz (fundamental) develop high-speed motors (18,000 rpm). Low 
THD can also be combined at low switching frequency F  < t 
without exceeding the 
maximum fundamental frequency.

The McGraw Hill Companies
Index)
Drive motors 
2 
ac drives 
3 
dc drives 
3 
Drive technology 
3 
Speed-torque curves 
9 
Speed-torque characteristic 
11 
dc shunt motor 
11 
Ward Leonard control 
11 
Speed-torque characteristics 
13 
Series motor 
13 
Field weakening 
14 
Modifications 
15 
Compound motors 
18 
Speed control 
20 
Three-phase induction motor 
29 
Modifications to the speed-torque 
characteristic 
32 
Induction motor 
32 
Additional rotor resistance 
32 
Variation of applied voltage 
34 
Pole change motors 
34 
Slip power recovery schemes 
38 
Injection of voltage into the 
rotor circuit 
41
Variation of supply frequency 
43 
Speed control of induction motors 
46 
Synchronous motors 
46 
Power developed 
52 
Modifications to the speed-torque 
curve 
55 
Speed control 
56 
Electric motors 
57 
Methods of braking 
58 
Regenerative braking 
59 
Shunt motors 
59,61 
Series motors 
61,63 
Dynamic braking 
61 
Counter current braking 
64 
Braking of induction motors 
67 
Regenerative braking 
67 
Dynamic braking 
68 
Counter current braking 
72
Braking of synchronous motors 
73 
Regenerative braking 
73 
Rheostatic or dynamic braking 
74 
Plugging 
74 
Energy relations 
74 
Direct on line starting 
76 
Low voltage starting 
76 
Rotor resistance starting 
76 
Low frequency starting 
76 
Special rotor construction 
76 
Energy relations 
79 
Starting dynamics 
80 
DC shunt motor 
80 
Induction motor 
81 
Electric drives 
102 
Group drive 
102 
Shaft drive 
102 
Individual drive 
103 
Multimotor drive 
103 
Basic elements 
103 
Mechanical system 
104 
Viscous friction 
105 
Windage torque 
106 
Continuous constant loads 
112 
Continuous variable type loads 
112 
Pulsating loads 
112 
Impact loads 
112 
Short time intermittent loads 
112 
Short time loads' 
112 
Equivalent systems 
112 
Steady-state stability 
119 
Transient stability 
122 
Two quadrant converters 
143 
Two pulse mid point 
143 
Two pulse bridge converter 
152 
Three pulse midpoint 
156 
Star point converter 
157 
Six pulse midpoint 
165 
Fundamental displacement factor 
167 
Six pulse bridge 
168 
Six pulse converter with interphase 
transformer 
173

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Converters with large 
pulse number 
179 
General comparison 
181 
One quadrant converters 
182 
Two pulse half controlled bridge 
182 
Three phase half controlled bridge 
circuit 
187
General features of half controlled 
converters 
191 
Two pulse converters with free 
wheeling diode 
192 
Three pulse converters with free 
wheeling diode 
193 
Bridge rectifier with free wheeling 
diode 
195
Series connection 
197 
Sequence control of converters 
200 
Series control of 3-phase bridge 
circuits 
200
Series connection of two bridge 
converters with sequence control of 
both 
201
Series connection of two bridge 
converters with sequence control of 
individual converters 
201 
Optional free wheeling 
203 
Four quadrant converters 
204 
Performance of chopper 
215 
Time ratio control 
217 
Current limit control 
217 
Multi quadrant choppers 
219 
Regenerative chopper 
219 
Two quadrant chopper 
220 
Four quadrant chopper 
221 
Chopper controlled resistance 
222 
Three phase inverters 
226 
Variable voltage inverters 
227 
Constant link voltage 
232 
Current source inverters 
233 
Voltage control of inverters 
235 
Within the inverter 
237 
Harmonic neutralisation 
238 
Single phase ac voltage controller 
248 
Total power factor 
257 
Three phase ac voltage controller 
257 
Thyristor voltages 
270 
Pure inductive loads 
272 
Chopper resistance 
308
Speed control 
311 
Braking 
317
Four quadrant operation 
317 
Static Scherbius drive 
317 
Speed control 
319 
Induction motor drive 
323 
Cycloconverter fed 
323 
Voltage source inverter fed 
325 
Pulse width modulated inverter 
fed 
329
Current source inverter fed 
332 
Field oriented control 
339 
Flux weakening mode 
343 
Synchronous motor drive 
354 
Voltage source inverter 
354 
Cycloconverter 
359 
Current source inverter fed 
361 
LCI fed 
364
Discontinuous armature current 
374 
Commutation 
374 
Additional losses 
377 
Low speed operation 
377 
Single phase drives 
378 
Half wave drives 
378 
Full wave drives 
378 
dc series motor drives 
383 
Three-phase drives 
386 
Three-phase half wave drive 
386 
Full wave drive 
388 
Extinction angle control (EAC) 
392 
Symmetrical angle control (SAC) 
392 
Chopper fed dc drives 
395 
Chopper drives using TRC 
398 
Separately excited dc motor 
398 
Series motor 
399 
Chopper drives with CLC 
402 
Reversible drives 
403
Using phase controlled converters 
404 
Using armature current reversal 
405 
Using dual converter 
406 
Using field reversal 
409 
Using choppers 
410 
Permanent magnet synchronous 
motor 
413
Commutator less motor (CLM) 
413 
Pmsm 
413
Mathematical modelling 
414 
Park’s transformations 
416

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Index
Current control methods 
417 
Voltage ratio k 
418 
Demagnetising coefficient 
418 
Power factor 
418 
Torque angle 
418 
Interior magnet motors 
419 
Exterior magnet motors 
419 
Brushless dc motor (BLDC) 
420 
Sensorless control 
423 
Extended Kalman filter 
424 
Electric motor 
468 
Heating 
469 
Cooling 
469 
Heating time constant 
472 
Cooling curve 
472 
Continuous duty 
474 
Variable load 
476 
Short time intermittent duty 
484 
Periodic intermittent duty 
487 
Electric drive 
499 
Specific features 
499 
Block diagram representation 
500 
Signal flow graph representation 
504 
Transfer functions 
505
Armature controlled dc motor 
508 
Field controlled dc motors 
512 
Ward Leonard drive 
514 
Frequency response 
524 
Representation 
525 
Correlation between frequency and 
transient response 
529 
Routh Hurwitz criterion 
533 
Nyquist criterion 
534 
Relative stability 
536 
Nyquist plots 
536 
Bode plots of open loop transfer 
function 
539
Log magnitude—angle diagram 
541 
Root locus techniques 
542 
Performance indices 
543 
Steady state error 
543 
Rise time 
543 
Peak time 
544 
Setting time 
544 
Compensation 
546 
Magnitude optimum 
557 
Phase margin optimum 
562 
Symmetrical optimum 
582
Ginning 
604 
Blowing 
605 
Cording 
605 
Looms 
607
Reversing hot rolling mills 
612 
Continuous hot rolling mills 
613 
Reversing cold rolled mills 
614 
Continuous cold rolling mills 
615 
Mill drive 
615 
Cranes 
615 
Hoist drives 
615 
Cranes 
616
Drive motors 
616 
dc systems 
616 
ac systems 
621 
Kiln drives 
626 
Crusher drives 
627 
Fan or blower drives 
628 
Compressor drives 
628 
Centrifugal pumps 
636 
Starting 
637 
Operating safety 
637 
Available power and speeds 
637 
Power consumption 
638 
Microprocessors in drive technology 
656 
Speed detection 
657 
Gate firing of the converters 
658 
Feedback control 
659 
Function generation 
661 
Linearisation 
661 
Processing the feedback signals 
662 
Implementation of PWM 
techniques 
662 
Programmable time delay 
662 
Control of dc drives 
663 
Field oriented control of a three phase 
induction motor 
673 
Control of synchronous motor 
drives 
680
Control of a current source inverter fed 
synchronous motor 
681 
Inverter control using terminal voltage 
sensing 
689
Margin angle control of synchronous 
motors 
691
Control system design of microprocessor 
based variable speed drives 
698 
System analysis 
698

The McGraw-Hill Companies
Index
Computer simulation 
698 
Hardware design 
698 
Software design 
699 
Stepper motor 
703 
Small step angle 
703 
High positioning accuracy 
703
High torque-to-inertia ratio 
703 
Variable reluctance motors 
704 
Permanent magnet stepper 
motors 
706
Hybrid stepping motors 
707 
Claw pole motor 
708

